Ben S Bernanke: Fedspeak  
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, 3 January 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 There was a time when central bankers did not talk to the public. Montagu Norman, the Governor of 
the Bank of England for a quarter of a century after the First World War and a highly influential figure 
in  his  time  in  central  banking  circles,  was  notorious  for  his  reclusiveness,  both  personal  and 
professional. According to his biographer, Norman lived by the maxim, “Never explain, never excuse” 
(Boyle,  1967,  p.  217).  Norman  was  hardly  unique.  Central  bankers  long  believed  that  a  certain 
“mystique” attached to their activities; that making monetary policy was an arcane and esoteric art that 
should be left solely to the initiates; and that letting the public into the discussion would only usurp the 
prerogatives of insiders and degrade the effectiveness of policy.  
In contrast to this tradition of secrecy, central banks around the world have become noticeably more 
open  and  transparent  over  the  past  fifteen  years  or  so.  Policymaking  committees  have  adopted 
various mechanisms to enhance their communication with the public, including more informative policy 
announcements,  post-meeting  press  conferences,  expanded  testimony  before  the  legislature,  the 
release of the minutes of policy meetings, and the regular publication of reports on monetary policy 
and the economy.  
This increased openness is a welcome development, for many reasons. Perhaps most important, as 
public  servants  whose  policy  actions  affect  the  lives  of  every  citizen,  central  bankers  have  a  basic 
responsibility  to  give  the  public  full  and  compelling  explanations  of  the  rationales  for  those  actions. 
Besides  satisfying  the  principle  of  democratic  accountability,  a  more  open  policymaking  process  is 
also likely to lead to better policy decisions, because engagement with an informed public provides 
central bankers with useful feedback in the form of outside views and analyses. Yet another benefit of 
full and timely release of information about policy decisions and their rationales is a reduced risk that 
market-sensitive information will dribble out through inappropriate channels, giving unfair advantage to 
some financial market participants.  
Admittedly,  for  many  central  banks,  including  the  Federal  Reserve,  progress  toward  greater 
transparency  has  come  in  halting  steps  and  not  without  trepidation.  For  example,  the  decision  to 
announce changes in the target for the federal funds rate immediately after meetings of the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  was  implemented  only  in  phases  and  after  considerable  soul-
searching by FOMC members. In retrospect, however, I think that most central bankers, both in the 
United States and abroad, would agree that greater openness has been beneficial to central banks as 
institutions and for the advancement of their policy objectives.  
Although  the  presumption  today  is  that  - absent compelling  reasons  to  the contrary - central  banks 
should strive for transparency, some basic questions about what, how, and to what end central banks 
should communicate with the public remain decidedly open. In my talk today I will put aside broader 
considerations such as democratic accountability and consider these questions as they bear on the 
ability  of  central  banks  to  make  monetary  policy  more  effective  and  to  improve  macroeconomic 
performance.  Before  proceeding,  I  should  emphasize  that  the  views  I  will  express  today  are  not 
necessarily  those  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Board  of  Governors  or  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee.  
Why central bank communication matters for policy effectiveness 
Can central bank talk - Fedspeak, in the vernacular of the U.S. media and financial markets - make 
monetary policy more effective and improve economic outcomes? To see why communication may be 
an integral part of good monetary policymaking, recall that the Federal Reserve directly controls only a 
single short-term interest rate, the overnight federal funds rate. Relative to the enormous size of global 
financial markets, the market for federal funds - the market in which commercial banks borrow and 
lend  reserves  on  a  short-term  basis  -  is  insignificant.  Control  of  the  federal  funds  rate  is  therefore 
useful only to the extent that it can be used as a lever to influence more important asset prices and 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 1
yields - stock prices, government and corporate bond yields, mortgage rates - which in turn allow the 
Fed to affect the overall course of the economy.  
Of course, basic financial theory implies that a link does exist between short-term interest rates, such 
as the federal funds rate, and longer-term rates, such as Treasury bond yields and mortgage rates. In 
particular, longer-term yields should depend in part on market expectations about the future course of 
short-term  rates.  For  example,  with  the  current  setting  of  the  funds  rate  held  constant,  any  arriving 
news that leads bond market participants to expect higher future values of the funds rate will tend to 
raise  bond  yields  and  lower  bond  prices.  The  link  between  long-term  bond  yields  and  market 
expectations of future monetary policy actions is familiar to all financial-market participants and has 
been  well  supported  by  recent  empirical  research.  For  example,  Antulio  Bomfim  has  demonstrated 
that  the  shape  of  the  term  structure  of Treasury  yields can be  effectively  described by  a  two-factor 
model,  in  which  the  first  factor corresponds  to  the current  setting of  the  funds rate  and  the  second 
factor closely approximates medium-term monetary policy expectations (Bomfim, 2003).  
The fact that market expectations of future settings of the federal funds rate are at least as important 
as the current value of the funds rate in determining key interest rates such as bond and mortgage 
rates suggests a potentially important role for central bank communication: If effective communication 
can help financial markets develop more accurate expectations of the likely future course of the funds 
rate,  policy  will  be  more  effective  (in  a  precise  sense  that  I  will  explain  further  soon),  and  risk  in 
financial markets should be reduced as well.  
It  is  worth  emphasizing  that  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy  actions  has  both  short-run  and 
long-run  aspects.  A  central  bank  may,  through  various  means,  improve  the  market's  ability  to 
anticipate its next policy move. Improving short-term predictability is not unimportant, because it may 
reduce risk premiums in asset markets and influence shorter-term yields. But signaling the likely action 
at the next meeting is not sufficient for effective policymaking. Because the values of long-term assets 
are affected by the whole trajectory of expected short-term rates, it is even more vital that information 
relevant to estimating that trajectory be communicated. As I will argue later, this can usually be done 
only  by  providing  information  about  the  central  bank's  objectives,  assessment  of  the  economy,  and 
policy strategy.  
Communication, asymmetric information and learning 
Ideally, what should central bank communication try to achieve? In an important analysis of the issue 
of central bank transparency, my FOMC colleague William Poole laid out a benchmark case in which 
the potential benefits of communication would be fully realized (Poole, 2003). In this benchmark case, 
the central bank has well-defined objectives and pursues regular and systematic policies consistent 
with those objectives. More important for our purposes, in this idealized world, financial markets are 
highly  efficient  and  well  informed.  In  particular,  financial-market  participants  have  access  to  all  the 
information  that  the  central  bank  uses  in  making  policy  decisions.  Let  us  call  the  premise  that  the 
central  bank  has  no  significant  information  advantage  over  the  private  sector  the  assumption  of 
symmetric information.  
If the conditions of systematic policymaking, financial-market efficiency, and symmetric information all 
held, then one might hope that the economy would converge to a rational expectations equilibrium, in 
which  participants  in  financial  markets  would  need  only  to  analyze  incoming,  publicly  available 
economic data to make efficient forecasts of future Federal Reserve actions.1 In this benchmark case, 
there would be no marginal benefit to central bank communication, beyond whatever was necessary to 
support this equilibrium in the first place.  
Of course, to describe this idealized benchmark case is to recognize that it is at best an approximate 
description of the economy in which we live. In practice, financial-market participants generally do not 
have as much information as monetary policymakers do about a number of key inputs to policymaking, 
including  the  policymakers'  own  objectives,  their  (possibly  implicit)  model  of  the  economy  and  the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism,  their  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  (including  both 
forecasts and the risks to the forecast), and their policy strategy. To the extent that this asymmetry of 
                                                      
1   As  my  discussion  later  will  make  clear,  convergence  to  a  full  rational  expectations  equilibrium  may  also  require  that  the 
economy's underlying structure be “learnable” by both the central bank and the public.   
2 
 BIS Review 2/2004
information between the central bank and the financial markets is quantitatively important - and I will 
present some evidence on this point shortly - financial markets will not price bonds and other assets 
efficiently (relative to the information possessed by the central bank), and scope may exist for central 
bank communication to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the overall performance of 
the economy.  
A  skeptic  might  argue  that  noise  and  other  sources  of  pricing  inefficiency  pervade  the  financial 
markets,  so  that  improving  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy  is  of  limited  importance  in  practice, 
except  perhaps  to  a  few brokers  and  traders.  To  the  contrary,  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that 
information asymmetries between the central bank and financial markets may matter a great deal for 
economic welfare. A theoretical basis for this view is provided by the lively recent literature on adaptive 
learning and monetary policy. This work has shown that, when the public does not know but instead 
must estimate the central bank's reaction function and other economic relationships using observed 
data,  we  have  no  guarantee  that  the  economy  will  converge  -  even  in  infinite  time  -  to  the  optimal 
rational expectations equilibrium.2 In general, the problem is that the public's learning process itself 
affects the behavior of the economy - for example, as when expectational errors by bond traders affect 
interest rates and thus a wide range of economic decisions. The feedback effect of learning on the 
economy, this literature has shown, can in principle lead to unstable or indeterminate outcomes. More 
generally,  the  dynamic  behavior  of  an  economy  with  asymmetric  information  and  learning  may  be 
radically  different  from  the  behavior  of  the  same  economy  in  the  optimal  rational  expectations 
equilibrium.  
A particularly interesting analysis of the implications of learning for monetary policy and central bank 
communication  has  been  provided 
in  a  series  of  papers  by  Athanasios  Orphanides  and 
John C. Williams  (2003a,  2003b).  Orphanides  and  Williams  study  model  economies  in  which  the 
public  is  assumed  to  know  the  general  nature  of  the  economy's  underlying  structure  but  not  the 
precise quantitative magnitudes describing that structure. Specifically, these authors consider a model 
in which the public is assumed to know the form of the equation describing the dynamic behavior of 
inflation  but  not  the  parameters  of  that  equation,  which  depend  on  the  (unobserved  by  the  public) 
objectives  and  preferences  of  the  central  bank.  Orphanides  and  Williams  assume  that,  to  learn  the 
parameters of the process that generates inflation, people must apply standard statistical methods to 
observed data on inflation and other macroeconomic variables.  
Obviously, in assuming that people know the true economic structure with certainty, and that they infer 
the underlying parameters of that structure using formal statistical methods, Orphanides and Williams 
and  others  in  this  literature  are  attributing  much  greater  knowledge  and  sophistication  to  the  public 
than exist in the real world. Nevertheless, the behavior of their model economies with learning can be 
quite different from that of the rational expectations analogue, in which the public is assumed to have 
full  and symmetric  information.  For  example,  these  authors show  that  the economy with  learning  is 
prone  to  episodes  of  stagflation,  or  combinations  of  high  inflation  and  low  output.  The  logic  is  as 
follows: When people are learning about the inflation process, an increase in inflation that would be 
only temporary and would leave expectations unaffected in a rational expectations world, may instead 
lead the public to infer that the long-run average rate of inflation is higher than previously thought. The 
rise in the public's inflation expectations affects wage- and price-setting and other economic decisions 
and thus raises actual inflation. In a vicious cycle, the higher rate of realized inflation further increases 
inflation  expectations,  forcing  the  central  bank  to  tighten  policy.  The  result  is  inflation  that  is 
unnecessarily high and output that is unnecessarily low.  
Several  insights  come  from  this  and  other  contributions  to  the  literature  on  adaptive  learning  in 
macroeconomics.  First,  the  fact  that  the  public  must  learn  about  underlying  economic  relationships 
changes the nature of the optimal monetary policy. In general, with learning, the central bank's optimal 
policy  involves  exerting  a  tighter  control  on  inflation  than  it  might  otherwise  exert,  to  avoid  the 
possibility  that  inflation  expectations  will  drift  randomly  higher  (or  lower).  Thus,  this  approach 
formalizes the idea that a central bank should work actively to “anchor” inflation expectations within a 
narrow  range.  Second,  efficient  policy  in  this  world  requires  that  policymakers  pay  attention  to 
information (for example, from surveys) about the public's expectations of inflation and other variables; 
if  these  appear  not  to  be  converging  toward  the  desired  levels,  then  a  policy  response  may  be 
                                                      
2   See Evans and Honkapohja (2003a) for a survey of relevant results. Evans and Honkapohja (2001) provide an extensive 
analysis  of  macroeconomic  models  with  learning.  Kaushik  and  Mitra  (2002)  argue  that  central  banks  should  restrict 
themselves to policies that are “learnable” by the public.   
BIS Review 2/2004 
 3
warranted.3 Finally, and most important for my purpose today, communication by the central bank may 
play a key role in helping improve economic performance. For example, in the models analyzed by 
Orphanides and Williams, the provision of information by the central bank about its long-run inflation 
objective  or  its  economic  forecasts  generally  leads  to  more  favorable  policy  tradeoffs  and  better 
economic outcomes.  
The work on adaptive learning by Orphanides and Williams and others is largely theoretical, but in my 
view  it  is  highly  relevant  to  understanding  modern  U.S.  monetary  history.  A  leading  example  is  the 
stagflationary period of the 1970s, in which astute observers recognized that high and unstable public 
expectations of inflation, themselves generated by poor macroeconomic policies that allowed inflation 
to get out of control, greatly increased the complexity and cost of restoring stability.4 More recently, 
Marvin  Goodfriend  (1993)  has  identified  several  instances  of  what  he  calls  “inflation  scares,” 
apparently  autonomous  increases  in  inflation  expectations  that  raised  long-term  bond  yields  and 
forced a tightening of monetary policy that could have been avoided if expectations had been better 
anchored.  The  view  that  adaptive  learning  and  asymmetric  information  are crucial  to  understanding 
recent  monetary  history  is  apparently  shared  by  the  developers  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  primary 
econometric  model,  the  FRBUS  model,  which  relies  heavily  on  these  assumptions  (Brayton  et  al., 
1997).  Simulations  of  that  model  suggest  both  that  adaptive  learning  is  needed  to  explain  the 
observed  responses  of  the  financial  market  and  the  economy  to  monetary  policy  actions,  and  that 
asymmetric  information  and  adaptive  learning  lead  systematically  to  inferior  macroeconomic 
outcomes, as implied by the work of Orphanides and Williams and others.  
Of course, the situation in the United States is much better today than in the 1970s; both inflation and 
inflation expectations are much more stable, and better economic outcomes have been the result. But 
is there still scope for improvement? I will present some evidence to suggest that there is and then 
conclude by discussing how communications policies could help anchor and stabilize the system more 
firmly.  
Evidence on the effectiveness of Fed communication 
In  the past  decade,  the  Federal Reserve  has  taken  a number  of  significant  steps  toward  increased 
transparency,  including  announcing  decisions  about  the  federal  funds  rate  promptly  after  FOMC 
meetings,  indicating  first  a  policy  “bias”  and  then  a  “balance  of  risks”  assessment  in  post-meeting 
statements,  and  making  the  minutes  of policy meetings publicly  available (with  a  lag of  about  eight 
weeks).  Members  of  the  FOMC  have  also  made  greater  use  of  vehicles  such  as  testimony  and 
speeches to convey their assessments of the economy and their policy inclinations to the public. How 
effective have these efforts been?  
I earlier distinguished between short-run and long-run  predictability of policy. Fairly strong evidence 
supports the conclusion that the short-run predictability of policy has increased in recent years. For 
example, Joe Lange, Brian Sack, and William Whitesell (2003) have shown that, since the late 1980s 
and early 1990s, monetary policy actions over short horizons have been predicted increasingly well by 
financial instruments such as three- and six-month Treasury bills and federal funds futures contracts. 
These authors attribute at least part of this improvement to greater transparency on the part of the 
Federal Reserve. Poole, Rasche, and Thornton (2002) reach a similar conclusion.5  
However, the more important question is whether the Federal Reserve has improved the ability of the 
public to forecast its policies at long horizons. Long-horizon forecastability of policy has a number of 
dimensions, of course. One that has received particular attention in the literature, and which is closely 
                                                      
3   Evans and Honkapohja emphasize this point in a series of papers; see, for example, Evans and Honkapohja (2003b). Sack 
(2003) provides evidence that U.S. monetary policy does respond to inflation expectations, as measured by the yields on 
nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities.   
4   Erceg  and  Levin  (2003)  model  the  disinflation  process  of  the  early  1980s  using  the  assumption  that  the  public  learns 
optimally about inflation. They show that learning and the consequently slow adjustment of inflation expectations help to 
explain the severe economic contraction of the period.   
5   Kohn and Sack (2003) studied the effect of the release of post-meeting FOMC statements on the term structure and found 
that the release of statements generated a response in short-term interest rates (up to two years' maturity), independent of 
the effects of any accompanying policy actions. They interpret this finding as supporting the view that statements contain 
information  (over  and  above  that  inherent  in  the  policy  action)  for  near-term  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  a  fortiori,  their 
findings are also evidence against the view that information relevant to monetary policy is approximately symmetric.   
4 
 BIS Review 2/2004
related to theoretical models that assume adaptive learning, is the question of whether the public is 
able to infer the Federal Reserve's implicit long-run inflation objective.6 Uncertainty about this objective 
bears directly on the market's ability to price long-term assets, as well as on the capacity of wage- and 
price-setters to strike efficient long-term agreements and of firms and households to make long-term 
economic plans.  
Various types of evidence bear on this question. For example, some recent research has considered 
expectations  of  inflation  and  other  variables  as  measured  by  surveys.  One  clear  finding  is  that,  as 
inflation  has  come  under  control  and  has  stabilized  in  the  United  States  in  recent  years,  long-term 
inflation expectations have stabilized as well, suggesting reduced uncertainty about the Fed's ultimate 
inflation  objective.  For  example,  a  cross-country  study  of  inflation  expectations  by  staff  of  the 
European Central Bank found that, since 1990, both the average level of expected inflation and the 
volatility  of  reported  expectations  of  inflation  in  the  United  States  have  declined,  the  latter  quite 
significantly (especially since 1999).7 However, as an aside, it is interesting that both surveys and the 
inflation compensation priced into the yields on indexed bonds suggest that today long-term inflation 
expectations  in  the  United  States  remain  in  the  vicinity  of  2-1/2  to  3  percent,  above  the  range  of 
inflation  that  many  observers  believe  to  represent  the  FOMC's  implicit  target.  Possibly,  this 
observation indicates an ongoing process of adaptive learning.  
A  subtler  issue  is  the  degree  to  which  inflation  expectations  in  the  United  States  are  anchored. 
Specifically,  to  what  extent  would  inflation  expectations  rise  if  actual  inflation  increased  for  some 
reason? To address this question, Andrew Levin, Fabio Natalucci, and Jeremy Piger (2003) examined 
U.S. private-sector forecasts of inflation since 1994. They found that medium- and long-term forecasts 
of  inflation  in  the  United  States  are  strongly  correlated  with  three-year  moving  average  of  lagged 
inflation, a finding that suggests that inflation expectations are not entirely anchored but are instead 
subject to adaptive learning. As a supporting piece of evidence, Levin, Natalucci, and Piger show that, 
compared to other industrial countries, shocks to inflation tend to be relatively persistent in the United 
States, an implication of models with adaptive learning.8  
Bond  markets  provide  fertile  ground  in which  to  search  for  evidence  on  the  importance  of  adaptive 
learning  and  the  degree  to  which  expectations  are  well  anchored.  For  example,  Refet  Gurkaynak, 
Brian  Sack,  and  Eric  Swanson  (2003)  show  that  distant  forward  rates  (e.g.,  the  implied  one-year 
forward rate ten years in the future) move significantly in response to the unexpected components of 
both monetary policy decisions and a number of macroeconomic data releases. Because they do not 
find the same result for inflation-indexed securities (that is, real forward rates do not respond to policy 
or data surprises), they conclude that long-term expectations of inflation must not be tightly anchored 
in  the  United  States.  Kevin  Kliesen  and  Frank  Schmid  (2003)  support  these  findings  by  showing 
directly  that  ten-year  inflation  expectations,  as  derived  from  inflation-indexed  bonds,  respond 
significantly  to  policy  surprises  as  well  as  to  the  unexpected  components  of  macroeconomic  data 
releases.9  
Interesting work by Sharon Kozicki and Peter Tinsley (2001a, 2001b) bears directly on the importance 
of asymmetric information and learning in financial markets. Kozicki and Tinsley incorporate alternative 
specifications of the evolution of inflation expectations in a standard model of the term structure (see 
Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay, 1997). Kozicki and Tinsley show that by far the best fit is obtained when 
inflation  expectations  are  modeled  as  evolving  by  adaptive  learning,  in  which  inflation  expectations 
adjust slowly to actual inflation. When inflation expectations are modeled this way, and only when they 
are modeled this way, the expectations theory of the term structure performs well and estimated term 
premiums  are  relatively  small.  In  related  research,  Glenn  Rudebusch  and  Tao  Wu  (2003)  show 
empirically  that  a  two-factor  model  of  the  term  structure  can  be  closely  linked  to  monetary  policy 
                                                      
6   The working assumption here is that U.S. monetary policy is conducted “as if” there were a numerical inflation objective, 
even though there is no explicit agreement on the FOMC as to what that objective should be.   
7   Castelnuovo, Efrem, Sergio Nicoletti-Altimari and Diego Rodriguez Palenzuela (2003). Kohn (2003) notes that the volatility 
of long-term inflation expectations in the United States has declined and is similar to that of industrial countries, including 
those that formally target inflation.   
8   For example, the model of Erceg and Levin (2003) has that implication.   
9   Some  care  must  be  taken  when  using  inflation-indexed  bonds  to  measure  inflation  expectations,  however.  These  bonds 
were introduced in the United States relatively recently, and the secondary market remains less liquid that those for other 
Treasury  securities.  Changes  in  measured  inflation  compensation  drawn  from  this  market  may  thus  sometimes  reflect 
changes in liquidity or risk premiums as well as changes in market expectations of inflation.   
BIS Review 2/2004 
 5
fundamentals, but only on the assumption that the medium-term inflation expectations held by market 
participants are time-varying. All the cited findings apply to recent data, as well to earlier observations. 
The evidence for asymmetric information and adaptive learning, at least in regard to the Fed's inflation 
objective, thus seems quite strong.  
this 
forecasts.  Using 
its  economic  models,  data,  and 
Implications for central bank communication 
So far I have discussed why central bank communication is important for financial market efficiency 
and good macroeconomic performance, and I have presented a few pieces of evidence that suggest 
that  asymmetry  of  information  between  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  public  may  be  an  important 
phenomenon. What implications does all this have for the communication policies of the Fed?  
In an ideal world, the Federal Reserve would release to the public a complete specification of its policy 
rule,  relating  the  FOMC's  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  to  current  and  expected  economic 
conditions,  as  well  as 
information, 
financial-market participants would be able to forecast future values of the policy rate and efficiently 
price  long-term  bonds  and  other  assets.  Unfortunately,  as  stressed  by  Poole  (2003)  as  well  as  by 
Chairman  Greenspan  (2003)  in  his  talk  at  the  most  recent  Jackson  Hole  conference,  specifying  a 
complete  and  explicit  policy  rule,  from  which  the  central  bank  would  never  deviate  under  any 
circumstances, is impractical. The problem is that the number of contingencies to which policy might 
respond is effectively infinite (and, indeed, many are unforeseeable).  
While specifying a complete policy rule is infeasible, however, there is much that a central bank can do 
-  both  by  its  actions  and  its  words  -  to  improve  the  ability  of  financial  markets  to  predict  monetary 
policy  actions.  With  respect  to  actions,  the  central  bank  should  behave  in  as  systematic  and  as 
understandable  a  way  as  possible,  given  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment.  That  is, 
although monetary policy cannot be made by a mechanical rule, policy can and should have “rule-like” 
features.  Obviously,  the  more  systematic  and  the  more  consistent  with  a  few  basic  principles  the 
conduct of monetary policy becomes, the easier it will be for the public to understand and predict the 
Fed’s  behavior.10  However,  because  the  world  is  complex  and  ever  changing,  policy  actions  alone, 
without explanation, will never be enough to provide the public with the information it needs to predict 
policy actions. Words are also necessary.  
What then should the Fed talk about? In general, the research I have discussed today suggests that 
the  central  bank  should  do  what  it  can  to  make  information  symmetric,  providing  the  public  to  the 
extent  possible  with  the  same  information  that  the  FOMC  uses  in  making  its  decisions.11  More 
specifically, the strongest implication of the adaptive learning literature is that the Fed should be as 
explicit as possible about its policy objectives. Without clear information about policy objectives, the 
public's problem of predicting future monetary policy actions becomes extremely difficult. For example, 
without this information, it would be hard for the public to know whether an unexpected policy move 
signals a change in the policymakers' objectives, a change in their economic outlook, or both. As also 
suggested by the adaptive learning literature, a potential advantage of having an explicit objective for 
inflation in particular is that it may help to anchor the public's expectations.12  
Besides  its  policy  objectives,  the  central  bank  can  make  other  useful  information  available  to  the 
public,  including  its  economic  forecasts,  its  assessment  of  the  economic  risks,  and  (if  possible)  the 
models  or  analytical  frameworks  that  underlie  its  diagnosis  of  the  economy.  The  Federal  Reserve 
currently  provides  information  on  each  of  these  elements.  For  example,  the  so-called  “central 
tendency”  forecasts  of  the  FOMC  are  released  twice  a  year,  as  part  of  the  Chairman's  semiannual 
testimony  before  Congress;  the  statements  following  FOMC  meetings  provide  some  assessment  of 
the perceived risks to the forecast; and the active research programs conducted at the Board and the 
Reserve banks, including publications and conferences, provide observers insights into the underlying 
analytical frameworks that inform monetary policymaking.  
                                                      
10   “Rule-like” policies may also improve the central bank's credibility and ability to commit to future actions.   
11   Note that this suggestion brings us full circle back to Poole's (2003) benchmark case of rational expectations and symmetric 
information, discussed earlier.   
12   See Bernanke (2003a, 2003b) for discussions of the case for an explicit long-run objective for inflation.   
6 
 BIS Review 2/2004
We should continue to seek improvement in each of these areas. For example, FOMC forecasts might 
be released more frequently and for a longer horizon. Additional variables could be forecasted, notably 
core inflation, a key factor in FOMC policy decisions. More controversially, the FOMC might consider 
forecasting future values of the short-term interest rate, as is currently done by the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand. The difficulty would be to make clear that an interest-rate forecast is not the same as a 
policy commitment. The use of “fan charts” to indicate the range of uncertainty would be helpful in this 
regard; and indeed, providing more information about the range of uncertainty for all FOMC forecasts 
would be a useful innovation.  
In my talk today I have often adopted the common convention of speaking of the central bank as if it 
were  a  single  actor.  In  reality,  policymaking  at  most  central  banks  is  done  by  a  committee.  In  the 
United States, nineteen people (twelve of whom get to vote at any given meeting) have seats at the 
FOMC  table.  The  diversity  of  views  and  opinions  likely  to  exist  among  the  members  of  a  large 
committee create further challenges for effective communication. However, vehicles do exist to help 
convey  the  breadth  of  opinion  on  the  Committee.  For  example,  the  minutes  of  FOMC  meetings 
describe the range of viewpoints and many of the key considerations underlying policy decisions. In 
my  view,  releasing  these  minutes  more  promptly  than  is  now  done  would  provide  useful  and  more 
timely  information  for  the  public.  Although  at  times  it  feels  cacophonous,  the  willingness  of  FOMC 
members  to  present  their  individual  perspectives  in  speeches  and  other  public  forums  provides  the 
public  with  useful  information  about  the  diversity  of  views  and  the  balance  of  opinion  on  the 
Committee.  
Other  possibilities  for  improved  transparency  may  exist.  Importantly,  as  we  think  about  these,  we 
should  not  simply  take  the  view  that  more  information  is  always  better.  Indeed,  irrelevant  or  badly 
communicated  information  may  create  more  noise  than  signal;  and  some  types  of  information 
provision - an extreme example would be televising FOMC meetings - risk compromising the integrity 
and  quality  of  the  policymaking  process  itself.  Rather,  the  key  question  should  be  whether  the 
additional  information  will  improve  the  public's  understanding  of  the  Fed’s  objectives,  economic 
assessments,  and  analytical  framework,  thus  allowing  them  to  make  better  inferences  about  how 
monetary  policy  is  likely  to  respond  to  future  developments  in  the  economy.  Communication  that 
meets this criterion will lead to better monetary policy and better economic performance.  
BIS Review 2/2004 
 7
