Paulo Sergio Cavalheiro: Regulation of capital and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Paulo Sergio Cavalheiro, Deputy Governor for Supervision of the Central Bank of Brazil, 
at  the  International  Seminar  “The  New  Basel  Capital  Accord:  Challenges  and  Opportunities  for  the 
Americas”, held jointly by “Centro de Estudios Monetarios Latinoamericanos - CEMLA”, “Association 
of  Supervisors  of  Banks  of  the  Americas  -  ASBA”  and  “Federación  Latinoamericana  de  Bancos  - 
FELABAN”, in Mexico City, Mexico, 12-13 July 2004. 
 The final version of the Capital Accord, also known as Basel II, has just been released. The document 
maintains  the  basic  framework  initially  proposed,  that  is,  three  pillars,  the  first  one  dealing  with  the 
calculations of the capital requirements per se, comprising market, credit and operational risks (this 
last  being  the  real  novelty),  the  second  describing  the  supervisory  review  process  and  the  third 
detailing the market discipline to be achieved via disclosure. 
In  Brazil,  capital  requirements  were  introduced  by  Resolution  2099,  in  August  94,  which  specified 
8% of  risk  weighted  assets  as  the  minimum  capital  required.  Following  Resolution  2099,  in 
October 94, Circular 2500 modified some values for minimum capital and net worth required for the 
establishment  of  banks,  in  accordance  with  the  location  and  size  of  institution.  The  supervisory 
authority  raised  the  minimum  capital  required  to  10%  of  risk-weighted  assets  in  June  97.  In 
November 97, Circular 2784 again raised this value, this time to 11%, which is still the minimum ratio. 
The requirements set by the authority are in line with those prescribed by Basle, including the risk-
weight approach to assess capital adequacy, with weights of 0%, 20%, 50% and 100%, the division of 
the constituents of capital in tiers 1 and 2 and capital required to cover exchange risk and interest rate 
risk.  
Additional  measures  to  strengthen  prudential  rules  in  Brazil  included  regulations  issued  in  1998 
(internal controls), 1999 (credit risk classification) and 2000 (liquidity risk). As a result of the internal 
controls regulation (Resolution 2554), the board of directors is considered responsible for the smooth 
functioning  of  the  internal  control  system,  internal  auditors  must  present  semi-annual  report  on  the 
quality  and  effectiveness  of  internal  controls  and  supervision  can  restrict  activities  and  operations 
where  the  internal  controls  are  not  satisfactory.  Resolution  2682,  on  credit  risk  classification, 
introduced a forward-looking approach, specifying that loans must be classified not only according to 
their past due status, as it was previously done, but also based on the creditworthiness of borrower 
and  on  the  nature  of  the  transaction.  Banks,  according  to  Resolution  2.804  must  follow  specific 
liquidity management policies, such as: sound liquidity practices, the use of alternative scenarios and 
the application of stress tests (reviewed by supervisors).  
Returning to the implementation of Basle II, supervision in Brazil is as yet undecided with respect to 
the  date  of  implementation  or  the  timetable  to  be  followed,  as  this  will  depend  very  much  on  the 
intentions and readiness of the banks and on the existence of robust and consistent databases and 
models.  The  intention  is  to  achieve  implementation  as  closely  as  possible  to  the  G10  schedule. 
Examples of tricky issues to be considered with care are: how to (or whether to) apply operational risk 
requirements for smaller institutions; how to carry out the validation of internal models for both market 
risk (we still do not allow banks to use them for capital purposes) and IRB; how to encourage more 
complex banks to adopt IRB. 
There  are,  however,  more  pressing  priorities  for  Brazilian  supervision  at  present,  such  as  the 
improvement of recently implemented processes of risk focused supervision, the consolidation of the 
New  Credit  Information  System,  the  studies  underway  for  the  introduction  of  a  supervisory  rating 
system geared towards the determination of the adequate frequency and intensity of supervision for 
each  particular  financial  institution/conglomerate  and  the  definition  of  strategies  for  consolidated 
supervision and international co-operation. 
The  New  Accord  will  be  most  likely  implemented  in  Brazil  in  a  gradual  manner,  the  new  rules 
co-existing for a while with the old ones. This will be the case, for example, of the smaller banks, to 
which will be applied either the simplified standardised approach, which does not depend on external 
credit assessment institutions, or the current approach. One possibility is the application of the current 
approach with slight modifications, such as a review of the present weights and the incorporation of 
some  innovations  from  the  standardised  approach.  For  these  less  complex  institutions,  the  capital 
requirement for operational risk might not be explicit, but only covered under Pillar II. At best, some 
BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
small  banks  might  be  required  to  allocate  capital  for  operational  risk  through  the  basic  indicator 
approach.  In  the  case  of  larger  institutions,  they  will  be  allowed,  at  first,  to  implement  only  the 
foundation IRB approach. For the advanced IRB approach more time will be necessary for the banks 
to  improve  database  quality  and  for  supervisors  to  improve  their  experience  in  validation.  Also  for 
operational risk, in the first moment, only the alternative standardised approach will be available. The 
advanced measurement approaches will have to wait a while longer. 
No  significant  impact  is  expected  in  terms  of  capitalisation  levels  after  Basle  II.  As  previously 
explained, current capital requirements in Brazil are 11% and this buffer has allowed banks to face 
periods  of  high  volatility  with  no  major  impact.  Two  important  challenges  expected  in  the 
implementation of Pillar I are the construction of adequate databases, either of pooled or individual 
data, and the incipient stage of operational risk management in the industry. 
As for Pillar II, with the New Capital Accord, it will be necessary for institutions to further develop their 
own processes for the internal assessment of capital adequacy and for the supervisory authorities to 
increase their supervisory focus on such processes. Cross-border supervision is another issue where 
occasional  problems  are  expected  to  occur.  Although  we  already  have  a  number  of  supervisory 
agreements  (MOUs)  in  place  with  most  supervisory  authorities  of  home  supervisors  to  banks  of 
importance in Brazil, which will help smoothening such issues, a real sense of the problems and the 
need of effective co-operation will only be truly felt at the moment of validations, that is, after the whole 
process begins.  
The legal and regulatory framework will, of course, have to undergo a number of modifications before 
the implementation of the New Accord. The greatest legal obstacle to the implementation of the New 
Accord  is  that,  currently,  Brazilian  supervisors  are  not  allowed  to  impose  differentiated  capital 
requirements for individual banks (at present, 11% must be applied across the board to all institutions). 
Changes of a smaller scale will also be needed in some regulations in order to allow for more effective 
supervisory discretion. 
No  significant  problems  are  envisaged  with  respect  to  the  implementation  of  Pillar  III  as  far  as 
quantitative  disclosure  is  concerned,  given  that  Brazilian  banks  already  comply  with  a  reasonable 
amount of quantitative disclosure requirements. However, Brazilian banks will have to improve a lot in 
terms of qualitative disclosure, which is something they are not particularly accustomed to do.  
In  terms  of  measuring  economic  capital,  no  doubt  banks  are  usually  more  capable  of  correctly 
determining their own needs than the supervisor via regulatory capital. Nevertheless, for this to work 
properly, banks must develop the culture of using economic capital and employ appropriate internal 
models. In this sense, the use of IRB imposes a dramatic change in the supervisory approach. The 
judgemental capacity of supervisors will play an increasingly important role in examinations, which is 
why adequate training to carry out the validation of models and capital adequacy assessments will be 
of fundamental significance. 
Supervisors still have a lot of work to be done in order to implement Basel II. We understand that it is 
important to disclose, as soon as possible, an overview of our implementation plans to the industry 
while we internally make all the studies necessary to support the numerous decisions to be made. The 
next steps include, for example, the evaluation of simpler alternatives for smaller institutions (non-bank 
and  small  banking  institutions,  the  definition  and  disclosure  of  aspects  of  national  discretion,  the 
definition of eligibility criteria for IRB, and, finally, the release of an “Advanced regulation notice” - open 
to public/industry comments, and a Country Quantitative Impact Study considering revised aspects of 
national discretion. 
