Jaime Caruana: Basel II - a new approach to banking supervision 
Remarks of Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Fourth  Annual  International  Seminar  on  Policy  Challenges  for  the 
Financial  Sector:  “Basel  II  -  the  international  banking  system  at  the  crossroads”,  Washington  DC, 
1 June 2004. 
 It  is  an  honour  to  be  invited  to  join  you,  the  members  of  the  global  supervisory  community,  at  this 
seminar on the future of banking supervision. I would like to thank our host, Chairman Greenspan, for 
his  warm  welcome  into  the  hallowed  halls  of  the  Federal  Reserve.  Likewise,  all  of  us  express  our 
gratitude to the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Federal Reserve for organising 
this  seminar.  To  ensure  rich,  lively,  and  informed  discussions,  our  sponsors  have  assembled  an 
impressive  array  of  speakers  and  participants,  including  senior  supervisors,  central  bankers,  and 
others from over 50 countries, an achievement that demonstrates, for the fourth time, excellence in 
international and inter-organisational cooperation.  
Overview of remarks 
The new capital adequacy framework, or “Basel II,” figures into virtually every discussion today on the 
outlook for international banking tomorrow. This seminar will tackle its policy implications. They include 
the  new  framework’s  potential  effects  on  risk  management  within  an  individual  firm;  on  competition 
between firms; on the stability of the financial sector and the future of supervision; and, most broadly, 
on the long-term growth of the economy.  
What makes this seminar unique is its focus on the perspectives of countries that are not members of 
the Basel Committee and particularly those of emerging market countries. Consequently, I will try to 
focus most of my remarks from this very relevant perspective.  
I would like to discuss three of the most sensitive policy questions that national banking authorities in 
those markets – but also elsewhere – have raised about Basel II. First, will Basel II harm the flow of 
capital  to  emerging  and  developing  markets?  Second,  is  Basel  II  appropriate  for  banks  in  those 
markets? And third, will Basel II lead to a deterioration in the level playing field? 
In  my  answers  to  these  three questions,  I  will  also  highlight  other  related  issues  in  the new  capital 
framework, such as complexity and procyclicality. 
In some of the discussions that I have heard or read about these important issues, I have had the 
impression that perhaps too much attention is placed on the constraints of regulatory capital. While 
regulatory capital forms one of the overall constraints on banks’ activities, it is not usually the most 
binding constraint for the majority of individual banking decisions taken by leading institutions, which 
are  much  more  affected  by  factors  such  as  economic  capital,  the  level  of  competition  and  general 
costs.  At  the  same  time,  too  little  attention  seems  to  be  placed  on  another  channel  of  influence  of 
Basel II: the improvement of risk management practices fostered by the incentives and transparency 
enhancements contained in the new framework. In fact, this is one of the key innovations of Basel II 
compared  to  Basel  I.  Basel  II  is  about  much  more  than  just  setting  quantitative  minimum  capital 
requirements.  It  is  about  establishing  incentive-based  approaches  to  risk  and  capital  adequacy 
management, within a framework of three mutually-supporting pillars: minimum capital requirements, 
supervisory review and transparency. 
I  think  that  Basel  II  represents  an  unparalleled  opportunity  for  banks  to  improve  their  business 
strategies and risk management systems. In my view, the combination of better risk management, a 
stronger  capital  structure  and  improved  transparency  standards  in  the  banking  system  could 
significantly improve the access of emerging economies to financial markets.  
This raises two additional groups of relevant questions that I will also address later in my presentation: 
the first group relates to the transition by different jurisdictions to the new framework, and the second 
to  the  necessary  cooperation  between  home  and  host  countries  to  make  its  implementation  more 
effective and consistent.  
BIS Review 33/2004 
 1
Our  discussions  on  all  of  these  topics  will  bear  on  the  very  well  chosen  title  for  this  event:  “the 
international banking system at the crossroads.” That wonderful image of a “crossroads” suggests two 
metaphors that we should keep in mind.  
The most immediate image that the term “crossroads” calls to mind is, of course, a place where four 
roads meet. It is where a traveller, having followed one road to this point, must reflect to select one of 
the next three roads to continue a journey. That is an appropriate metaphor for us today. We must 
evaluate the environment we and our banks are entering and choose a way forward that enhances 
supervision  and  that  contributes  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  our  banks.  At  the  same  time,  we 
should not invent new roads. There are already ‘roads’ of good practices used by leading banks that 
we can follow and support. 
We might discover a second relevant metaphor if we allow ourselves to be inspired by the beauty of 
the Federal Reserve’s Eccles Building and its architectural references to antiquity. In classical times, 
scholars divided the liberal arts into seven subjects. The first three related to language and formed the 
“Trivium,” which in Latin means “three roads.” In contrast, the “Quadrivium” – which is the Latin term 
for “four roads,” but also for “crossroads” – represented the study of four subjects related to numbers – 
namely, arithmetic and geometry, but also music and astronomy.  
The  classical  metaphor  of  the  Quadrivium,  or  of  the  “crossroads”  of  subjects  related  to  numbers, 
seems equally well suited to a discussion of contemporary banking and supervision. Leading banks in 
recent  years  have  sought  to  augment  subjective  assessments  of  risk  with  more  objective  and 
formalised,  more  rigorous,  and  more  numerically  oriented  analytical  techniques.  After  all,  good 
numbers are the best friend of good judgement. 
Credit scoring, advanced statistical analysis, and financial modelling are among the ever expanding 
range of tools that credit officers and others use to lend more rigorous insight into risks that were once 
thought not readily quantifiable. The businesses of banking and risk management will always be more 
art than science. Still, the metaphor of the crossroads of subjects related to numbers reminds us that, 
for our system of supervision to remain relevant in the twenty-first century, it must reflect the industry’s 
advances in quantifying risk and in developing other tools to measure and manage risk. 
At the conclusion of this seminar, I hope that all of us will return to our home countries with deeper 
insight into Basel II and into our own readiness for a new approach to banking supervision. A Spanish 
proverb reminds us to “drink nothing without seeing it; sign nothing without reading it.” It is in that spirit 
that I would like to begin the substance of my remarks with my thoughts on why we need Basel II. 
Do we need Basel II? 
As  you  know,  Basel  II  has  attracted  much  more  attention,  from  more  segments  of  society,  than 
probably any other reform of bank supervision. Mainstream newspapers have reported extensively on 
it.  Politicians  of  all  views  have  addressed  it.  Even  non-financial  business  owners  have  discussed  it 
extensively. The level of public debate reminds us that banks are charged with a special public trust 
and  that  capital  requirements  are  intended  to  safeguard  their  ability  to  discharge  that  trust.  Banks 
serve  as  custodians  for  the  public’s  wealth  and  as  intermediaries  of  credit  to  consumers  and 
businesses alike. No bank can discharge those duties for long if it lacks sufficient capital. When capital 
is  exhausted,  the  bank  fails,  leaving  public  authorities  –  and  taxpayers  –  responsible  for  making 
depositors whole again. 
The  1988  Basel  Accord  established  the  the  first  internationally  accepted  definition  and  measure  of 
bank  capital.  In  many  ways,  the  1988  Basel  Accord  was  a  tremendous  success  story.  Perhaps 
because it was simple to apply, it was adopted in over 100 countries, including most of the countries 
represented here today. As a result, it became acknowledged as one of the benchmark measures of a 
bank’s financial health. 
While the simplicity of the 1988 Accord was an asset in promoting its acceptance, today its simplicity is 
quickly  becoming  a  liability  for  some  bankers  and  supervisors  alike.  Over  the  past  16  years,  the 
methodologies for measuring and managing risk have evolved in ways that the architects of the 1988 
Accord could not have anticipated.  
For one, advances in technology, telecommunications, and markets have changed the way that banks 
collect,  measure,  and  manage  their  risks.  Having  gained  experience  in  quantifying  exposures  to 
market risk, leading banks today are quantifying and using increasingly reliable estimates of the credit 
risk associated with particular borrowers. Likewise, banks seek to quantify in a more reliable manner 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2004
their exposures to operational risk, or the risk of losses stemming from failures in internal processes or 
systems or from damage caused by an external disruption. Evolution in markets has likewise provided 
banks  with  more  tools  for  managing  and  transferring  credit  risk,  such  as  through  securitisation 
transactions and credit derivatives.  
As risk management becomes more sophisticated, the simple and static rules of the 1988 Accord are 
becoming less relevant. Leading banks increasingly view the old rules as a burden, constraining their 
abilities to administer their businesses relative to the best information and practices available today. 
Supervisors, for our part, have less confidence in the 1988 Accord’s measures of risk for banks that 
engage in the most sophisticated forms of risk taking and risk mitigation.  
By the late 1990s, it became clear to banks and supervisors that we needed a new capital framework. 
But  one  person  in  particular  knew  that  we  should  do  more  than  merely  revise  the  minimum 
requirements. Bill McDonough, the previous chairman of the Committee, and the former president of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, convinced leaders in the industry, in central banks, and in 
supervisory  agencies  that  we  should  provide  incentives  to  advance  the  state  of  the  art  in  risk 
management across the industry. He did not seek to reduce the amount of capital held by the banking 
system but rather sought to increase the stability of the global financial system – a goal that would 
benefit not just banks, but more broadly businesses and consumers. 
To work toward greater financial stability, the Basel Committee is blending several policy approaches 
to  replace  the  existing  capital  framework.  As  I  have  mentioned,  Basel  II  consists  of  three  mutually 
reinforcing  pillars.  The  first  pillar  aligns  the  minimum  capital  requirements  more  closely  to  banks’ 
actual underlying risks. Qualifying banks will rely partly on their own measures of those risks, a rule 
that helps to create economic incentives for banks to improve those measures. The second pillar – 
supervisory review – allows supervisors to evaluate each bank’s assessments of its own risks and to 
determine  whether  those  assessments  seem  reasonable.  The  third  pillar,  market  discipline, 
strengthens  external  incentives  for  prudent  management.  It  strengthens  the  ability  of  marketplace 
participants  to  reward  well  managed  banks  and  to  penalise  poorly  managed  ones  by  enhancing 
transparency in banks’ financial reporting. 
One might say that Basel II seeks an “efficient frontier” of policy objectives through the three pillars. 
Each pillar provides something that the other two cannot. Each is essential to achieving our overall 
objective of financial stability.  
The  three  pillars  represent  a  far  more  sophisticated  view  of  risk  and  a  far  more  comprehensive 
approach  to  supervising  bank  capital  than  the  “one-pillar”  approach  contained  in  the  1988  Basel 
Accord.  As  a  result,  the  Committee  has  engaged  in  an  exhaustive  –  and  sometimes  exhausting  – 
public dialogue with bankers, supervisors, and other observers on Basel II’s structure and merits. That 
dialogue was critical to improving the quality of the new framework, and I would like to express my 
gratitude  to  all  who  took  great  pains  to  share  their  views  and  concerns.  You  provided  us  with  the 
perspective  of  other  markets  and  countries.  You  shared  detailed  comments  on  the  proposals.  You 
encouraged  your  banks  to  participate  in  our  consultations.  The  improvements  that  the  Committee 
made to Basel II would have been impossible without your contributions. 
Indeed, it was during those public discussions that policymakers in emerging market countries raised 
three  sensitive  questions.  I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  address  those  questions  and  help  explain  my 
belief that Basel II represents an opportunity for banks and supervisors in many countries.  
Will Basel II harm the international flow of capital? 
1. 
The first key question in the discussion about the new framework and emerging markets is whether 
Basel  II  will  harm  the  flow  of  capital  across  borders  and  especially  to  emerging  markets.  In  this 
context, some observers suggest that the new capital framework’s heightened sensitivity to risk may 
reduce the flow of foreign investment in developing economies, since exposures to those economies 
might  typically  be  considered  of  higher  risk.  As  I  will  explain,  I  believe  that  Basel  II  will  not  have  a 
material effect on the flow of capital. Basel II seeks to align capital regulations more closely to banks’ 
current practices – it will not change the way that banks actually evaluate risk to decide whether to 
invest in emerging market economies. 
To understand this answer, we must first understand the issue that may have triggered this debate. 
One of the valid criticisms of the 1988 Accord concerns its rather arbitrary treatment of country risk. 
The  1988  Accord  assigns  risk  weights,  and  hence  capital  charges,  to  sovereign  governments  and 
related borrowers, as well as to banking organisations, based on whether the country in question is a 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 3
member of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. The “OECD Club Rule,” as 
it  has  become  known,  assigned  a  zero  percent  risk  weight  to  exposures  to  sovereign  government 
borrowers that were members of the OECD, which means that no capital had to be held against such 
sovereign exposures. In contrast, exposures to all other countries were assigned the standard 100% 
risk weight, which is equivalent to an 8% capital charge.  
The Club Rule was meant to help distinguish between higher and lower risk sovereign borrowers and 
their  banks.  In  retrospect,  it  seems  to  be  an  unfair  way  to  divide  the  world.  Indeed,  some  OECD 
member  governments  have  experienced  serious  economic  shocks  that  threatened  their  repayment 
abilities,  while  several  non-OECD  member  governments  have  performed  extremely  well  in  the 
international debt markets.  
When the Committee set out to revise the 1988 Accord, we wanted to resolve the arbitrary treatment 
of country risk that the Club Rule introduced. Our solution in Basel II was to assign risk weights, and 
hence capital charges, to exposures to sovereign borrowers and to banks that reflected a measure of 
their credit risk. Banks on the standardised approach to credit risk will determine the risk weights on 
their exposures to sovereigns and to banks based on those borrowers’ external credit ratings. Banks 
adopting the internal ratings-based approach to credit risk will rely on their own sense of the credit risk 
involved.  
Basel II eliminates the arbitrary distinctions imposed by the Club Rule and sets capital requirements 
based on external or internal measures of credit risk. Yet some observers have assumed that a more 
risk-sensitive approach might drive up not just capital requirements, but also the pricing of credit for 
loans to emerging market countries and banks.  
This assumption is where the debate breaks down. Indeed, the arguments suggesting that Basel II will 
reduce flows of capital into emerging markets requires us to accept the view that regulatory capital 
drives loan pricing – something that has not been proven in any research.  
In fact, research and the Committee’s own discussions with banks suggest that something else drives 
loan pricing. When determining the price of a loan, banks consider all of the economic risks associated 
with  a  particular  borrower.  It  is  factors  such  as  “economic  capital”  and  the  level  of  competition  that 
drive loan pricing, rather than regulatory capital.  
Research  on  the  pricing  of  international  syndicated  loans  has  confirmed  that  “pricing  clearly  varies 
positively with credit risk.” That finding should be no surprise to any banker or supervisor – banks that 
do not price their loans based on a borrower’s credit risk probably will not be in business very long. 
When  applied  in  the context  of  sovereign  or bank borrowers,  this  finding suggests  that  loan  pricing 
already takes into account the credit quality of the borrowers. 
Studies  such  as  this  one  have  concluded  that,  consequently,  even  those  countries  that  have  the 
lowest credit quality will not likely experience a marked contraction in capital flows. Why would that be 
true? It is because banks that are managing their risks appropriately are already considering all of the 
risks that they face when they lend to higher risk borrowers – and thus a country’s lower credit quality 
is already priced into a loan, even under the existing capital rules today. 
Furthermore, there are additional elements in Basel II that can contribute to alleviate concerns about 
the  impact  on  capital  flows.  Let  me  mention  the  reduction  in  capital  charges  for  retail  lending, 
residential  mortgages,  small  and  medium  enterprises  (exposures  below  €  1  million)  and 
well-provisioned past-due loans.1 Also, the recognition of credit risk mitigants such as collateral and 
guarantees is significantly better in the new framework of Basel II. 
In a similar vein, I would like to address a related comment that I have often heard. Some observers 
argue  that  Basel  II  will  have  a  detrimental  effect  on  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies 
because  the  new  framework  does  not  recognise  the  diversification  benefits  that  characterise 
investments in such markets. 
It  is  true  that  Basel  II  falls  short  of  recognising  the  diversification  benefits  of  full  credit  risk  models, 
although the internal-ratings based approach recognises the benefits of diversification to some degree 
by  assuming  that  a  bank’s  assets  benefit  from  the  same  degree  of  diversification  as  that  of  an 
                                                      
1  
In the standardised approach the risk-weight of residential mortgage is 35% instead of 50% in Basel I. For SME’s and other 
retail the new risk weight is 75% versus 100% in Basel I. Past due loans can have a capital charge of 50% when there are 
enough provisions (loss reserves > 50%).  
4 
 BIS Review 33/2004
average,  internationally  active  bank.  Under  the  evolutionary  approach  of  Basel  II,  the  Committee 
recognises  the  importance  of  continued  active  dialogue  with  the  industry  regarding  both  the 
performance of this models and their comparability across banks, and we have included this issue in 
our agenda for future work. 
Nevertheless, the main reason that we have not fully recognised diversification effects at this stage is 
because first we need to see clear evidence from many banks that they have robust systems in place 
themselves to assess and quantify such effects and that they rely on their measures of diversification 
in their daily risk management. Of course, as systems improve in the future, we would be happy to 
discuss them, and once there is a “best practice” in this field we will be better able to recognise it in the 
capital framework. In the meantime experience with internal credit models will provide us with highly 
valuable information. 
In addition, since loan pricing is not predominantly driven by regulatory requirements, banks are free to 
recognise  diversification  benefits  in  their  own  pricing  calculations.  Consequently,  they  can  indeed 
capture their sense of the benefit of diversification in their credit decisions and loan pricing for every 
borrower, whether in an emerging market country or not.  
From a different perspective, I think that what should be of concern to emerging market is not just the 
level of capital flowing into a country, but also the volatility of the level of capital that is flowing inwards. 
Abrupt changes in capital flows can be just as harmful as contractions in flows. Volatility erodes the 
confidence that businesses and governments have in the future supply of credit, rendering long-term 
planning meaningless.  
I believe that banks adopting especially the advanced approaches to credit risk will increasingly take 
longer-term  views  of  their  international  investments,  as  stress  testing  and  other  requirements  will 
ensure that they consider how their risks would react to certain changes in the market environment. 
When  banking  systems  are  adequately  capitalised,  well-managed  and  risks  are  correctly  assessed 
within the appropriate time horizon, the financial system becomes more stable, less procyclical, better 
able to promote sustainable growth, and more resilient during periods of distress. Risk assessment 
process  that  are  more  formalised  and  disciplined  may  facilitate  early  detections  of  deviations  or 
mistakes,  and  that  may  facilitate  making  smoother  corrections  at  an  early  stage,  reducing  the 
probability of sudden changes in investment decisions. This, in turn, should benefit emerging market 
economies  by  improving  the  degree  of  confidence  that  they  can  have  in  the  future  level  of  capital 
inflows. 
Procyclicality 
This  is  very  much  related  to  the  discussion  about  procyclicality,  an  important  issue  that  we  at  the 
Committee have taken up and addressed seriously. 
In particular, some have suggested that the internal ratings-based approaches will drive up the cost of 
credit  for  borrowers  precisely  at  times  when  its  supply  is  falling,  namely  during  downturns  in  the 
business cycle. This has led to concerns that Basel II may exacerbate fragility in emerging markets. 
There  is  some  degree  of  procyclicality  inherent  in  banking  behaviour.  The  question  that  we  should 
consider is whether Basel II will unduly exacerbate this behaviour. In response, I believe that concerns 
in  this  respect  may  reflect  the  perception  that  I  have  already  challenged  –  that  regulatory  capital 
charges directly drive credit pricing decisions. As I noted, research suggests that it is economic capital 
that  drives  credit  pricing,  not  regulatory  capital.  Consequently,  Basel  II  will  simply  align  regulatory 
capital rules more closely to banks’ actual practices; it will not change how they price credit facilities. 
Nonetheless, the Committee recognises that any risk-sensitive capital framework will cause the capital 
requirement  to  fluctuate  for  the  same  exposure  if  a  borrower’s  creditworthiness  strengthens  or 
weakens. To mitigate excessively wide swings in capital requirements, the Committee has flattened 
the risk weight curves that apply under the “internal ratings-based approach” to credit risk so that a 
small change in credit risk does not lead to a large change in capital requirements. At the same time, 
the  Committee  will  require  banks  adopting  the  more  advanced  approaches  to  credit risk  to  adopt  a 
more  forward-looking  approach  to  credit  risk  management  by  requiring  meaningful  stress  testing  of 
their credit portfolios. Stress testing is intended to help banks understand how their exposures to credit 
risk may change in the future should sudden shocks affect the market in some way. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 5
Is Basel II appropriate for banks in emerging market countries? 
2. 
The first key question addressed Basel II’s potential impact on investment and capital flows between 
countries.  The  second  key  question  is  whether  Basel  II  is  even  appropriate  for  banking  systems  in 
emerging markets, which I would like to address now. 
In my view, the principles and vision of supervision in Basel II are valuable for supervisors and banks 
in  all  markets.  I  must  acknowledge  that  its  advanced  approaches  to  risk  measurement  are  mainly 
intended for those internationally active banks that have the greatest potential to increase systemic 
risk,  and  are  very  demanding  in  terms  of  the  investments  that  they  pre-suppose  in  the  banks’  own 
systems, and the qualitative requirements that they set. The 1988 Accord itself was created initially to 
apply a more consistent set of rules to globally competitive banks, and the shortcomings of the existing 
rules today are especially evident in the context of these highly sophisticated organisations. However, 
many supervisors apply the 1988 Accord to less complex organisations that may be active mainly or 
even only in domestic markets. Is Basel II appropriate for those banks as well? 
I think that the great level of diversity in markets and in financial systems worldwide makes it difficult – 
and perhaps even counterproductive – to try to specify a single rule that could be applied to all banks 
in all countries. Fortunately, Basel II is moving away from a “one-size-fits-all” rule. In fact, Basel II’s 
menu approach provides supervisors and banks with a range of options that make its basic standards 
more  readily  available  to  many  kinds  of  organisations  in  countries  that  face  different  economic 
circumstances. It also makes greater supervisory cooperation essential, in order to ensure consistent 
implementation. 
One concern which has been expressed many times is that excessive reliance is placed on External 
Credit  Agencies  for  those  banks  that  do  not  have  sufficiently  robust  internal  rating  systems.  The 
Committee has been mindful of this concern and if supervisors are uncomfortable with external ratings 
in  their  countries,  there  is  an  option  whereby  all  corporate  claims  are  weighted  at  100%  and 
sovereigns and banks can be risk weighted according to the risk scores of export credit agencies, in 
which case there need not be any reliance on external credit agencies at all. 
Indeed, our discussions with colleagues and counterparts from countries outside the Committee have 
been  instrumental  in  revising  the  capital  framework.  Thanks  to  our  consultations,  we  have 
endeavoured to address several broad issues in the new framework, which I will set out now.  
Complexity 
One inevitable by-product of designing a comprehensive three-pillar framework with built-in options to 
suit different circumstances is increased complexity. The members of the Basel Committee certainly 
recognise that complexity is not a virtue for supervisory guidelines. It is far easier to enforce a simple 
rule than a complicated one. However, achieving a balance between simplicity and comparability, and 
also between simplicity and risk sensitivity is particularly difficult in an industry like banking, where a 
culture  of  constant  innovation  makes  it  a  tall  order  for  regulators  to  develop  simple  rules  that  fit  all 
banking  products  and  services  in  all  their  permutations.  Paraphrasing  Einstein  ‘a  good  framework 
should be as simple as possible, but not simpler’ 
Much of the complexity in Basel II actually stems from the diversity existing in real world and from the 
many options that the rules provide. Many of those options reflect banks’ own requests to address the 
rich  variety  of  risks  and  practices  in  existence  today;  some  banking  organisations  thought  that  a 
“blanket rule” would unfairly burden them. By providing a range of options, we are better able to fit the 
regulatory framework to each bank’s profile, rather than the other way around.  
Similarly, some of the complexity in Basel II stems from the details we provide to clarify expectations 
for banks and supervisors and to promote a more level playing field. Many bankers and supervisors 
asked the Committee to provide greater details where they thought a danger existed for differences in 
interpretation to arise across jurisdictions.  
We have worked hard over the past years to clarify the rules, to simplify those thought to be the most 
complex,  and  to  provide  options  for  those  wishing  to  use  a simpler  approach.  In  fact,  as  the  Basel 
Committee demonstrated in an annex to the third consultative paper, supervisors can select options 
that would result in a very simple set of rules that can be specified in just 12 pages of text. That is 
approximately equal in length to the original 1988 Accord.  
6 
 BIS Review 33/2004
The “simplified standardised approach”, as we call it, is intended to be useful for those countries that 
do  not wish  to  adopt  all  of  the  options available under  the new  framework.  The  trade-off,  however, 
reflects  the  fact  that  the  policy  balance  at  stake  is  between  simplicity  and  risk-sensitivity;  if  one 
chooses  simpler  rules,  the  cost  is  less  sensitivity  to  risk  and  hence  greater  conservatism  in  capital 
requirements.  
Competition and consistency of application. 
3. 
Another  broad  concern  that  the  Committee  has  worked  to  address  is  Basel  II’s  impact  on  global 
competition.  In  particular,  some  have  asked  whether  banks  that  choose  Basel  II’s  advanced 
approaches  will  enjoy  benefits  over  those  that  choose  simpler  approaches.  Others  have  wondered 
whether banks that remain on the 1988 Accord for some time will be disadvantaged.  
To respond to these concerns, we should understand that adopting an advanced approach does not 
automatically reduce a bank’s capital requirements. In fact, a more risk sensitive capital framework is 
intended to align capital requirements more closely to risk. This could mean that capital requirements 
for an advanced bank may actually rise relative to the current rules if the bank’s exposures are actually 
riskier than the measures under the 1988 Accord would have suggested. Furthermore some national 
supervisors may  set  higher capital requirements  than  implied  by  Basel  I,  perhaps even  higher  than 
those implied by Basel II, depending on the risk environment. 
For those banks that do experience reductions in capital as a result of Basel II, some observers have 
questioned whether the lower requirements might provide certain advantages and make it easier for 
those banks to acquire other banks that do not share in the same benefits. History suggests that this 
particular concern may be unfounded. In a paper published this past February by the Federal Reserve, 
researchers  reported  that  they  did  not  find  convincing  evidence  that  past  changes  in  capital 
requirements have had a substantial impact on mergers between banks.  
The  issue  of  competition  between  banks  has  also  come  up  in  the  context  of  competition  between 
countries.  Here,  we  should  remember  that  Basel  II  is  intended  to  help  ensure  that  international 
competition in banking markets is driven by the strengths of each bank, rather than by differences in 
each country’s rules. 
One way that the Committee has sought to promote a consistent application of the new framework is 
by providing banks and supervisors with detailed requirements where necessary. As I have already 
mentioned, these details may add to the appearance of length and complexity in Basel II, but that is a 
small price to pay for greater consistency and a more level playing field. 
However,  given  the  need  to  have  a  framework  which  can  be  adapted  to  a  wide  range  of 
circumstances,  cooperation  among  supervisors  is  clearly  the  most  important  tool  in  achieving  an 
appropriate  level  of  consistency.  The  Committee  has  established  a  working  group  of  supervisors, 
called the Accord Implementation Group, or “AIG,” that shares information on implementation efforts 
among Basel Committee member countries. The AIG works with other supervisors as well, including 
through  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group,  a  group  of  supervisors  from  many  other  countries  that 
shares views and exchanges information. 
By promoting the sharing of information on practical issues, the AIG’s discussions will help to foster 
greater consistency in the implementation and application of the new framework across countries. For 
example, thanks to the work of the AIG, the Committee has been able to publish its thinking on the 
implementation  of  the  supervisory  review  process  –  Pillar  2  –  and  on  home-host  co-operation  in 
implementation of the framework.  
Let me just come back to this latter point. Given the internationalisation of banking groups and their 
increased reliance on group-wide risk management, it is clear that the cross-border implementation of 
the framework is more complex than it was in 1988. The AIG has been actively discussing this issue, 
and  in  August  2003  the  Committee  published  a  set  of  principles  to  promote  closer  practical  co-
operation and information exchange among supervisors. The principles re-emphasise the traditional 
responsibilities of home and host supervisors, but also how those responsibilities will continue under 
the new framework on the basis of enhanced co-operation. More recently, at the beginning of May, the 
Committee published an elaboration of the principles.  
Of  course, we  recognise  that  the  objectives  we are seeking cannot  be  achieved  overnight and  that 
they are dependent on building good relations and trust between supervisors. As part of this effort, the 
AIG  will  be meeting  again  with  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group’s  working  group on capital  in  the 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 7
middle of this month. Among other things, the two groups will discuss cross-border issues and case 
studies and will exchange current thinking on implementation strategies. I believe that each and every 
effort  and  initiative  to  improve  communications  between  supervisors  around  the  world  should  be 
strongly encouraged. 
Moving to the New Framework 
4. 
These are just a few examples of how Basel II has been improved to make it more suitable for national 
circumstances and domestic banking systems in many countries. 
The members of the Committee and I recognise, and we have consistently stressed, that only national 
authorities can decide when to adopt Basel II. Adopting Basel II on the same timetable as the member 
countries  of  the  Basel  Committee  is  not  feasible  for  all  countries.  In  fact,  Basel  II  may  be  a  lesser 
priority  compared  to  other  ongoing efforts  to promote  the  fundamentals of  safety  and soundness  in 
each country’s banking system. 
All  of  us  must  think  long  and  hard  about  the  state  of  our  markets,  our  banking  systems,  and  our 
supervisory  structures  to  determine  when  we  are  ready  to  adopt  the  new  approach  to  banking 
supervision  that  Basel  II  implies.  Of  course,  the  Committee  hopes  that,  over  time,  more  and  more 
countries will adopt the framework. We do not want them to do so before they are ready. And, when 
they are ready, we want them to adopt the options and approaches that are most appropriate for their 
circumstances.  
For a country that wishes to adopt Basel II but may not yet be ready, I would suggest a three-stage 
approach  to  the  transition  to  Basel  II.  These  stages  could  be  categorised  as  (1)  strengthening  the 
supervisory  infrastructure;  (2)  introducing  or  reinforcing  the  three  pillars;  and  then  (3)  making  the 
transition from the 1988 Accord to Basel II. 
This three-stage process recognises that Basel II is not intended simply to ensure compliance with a 
new set of capital rules. Rather, Basel II is intended to enhance the quality of risk management. To 
achieve  this  goal,  Basel  II  must  be  built  on  the  foundation  of  a  sound  supervisory  system.  Such  a 
foundation  includes  having  successfully  implemented  the  Basel  Committee’s  “Core  Principles  for 
Effective Banking Supervision,” including the provisions on operational autonomy of the supervisory 
authority,  adequate  supervisory  resources,  regulatory  and  remedial  powers,  and  a  sufficient  legal 
framework.  Likewise,  sound  accounting  and  provisioning  standards  are  critical  to  ensuring  that  the 
capital  ratios  -  however  calculated  -  reflect  meaningfully  the  bank’s  ability  to  absorb  losses. 
Establishing  a  solid  foundation  of  sound  supervisory,  legal,  and  accounting  systems  constitute  the 
essential first stage of the process of moving to the new supervisory framework. 
Secondly, I would encourage supervisors to consider how the three pillars of Basel II could already be 
enhanced in their jurisdiction. Supervisors do not need to await their formal adoption of Basel II to start 
introducing or using the principles of the three pillars. On the contrary, incorporating those principles is 
excellent  preparation  for  adopting  Basel  II  in  the  future.  For  example,  supervisors  might  be 
encouraged to move towards a system of risk-based supervision, developing skills in assessing the 
quality of a bank’s risk management and its ability to assess risk exposures. At the same time, banks 
could  be  reminded  of  their  responsibility  to  develop  their  own  processes  for  evaluating  their  capital 
needs  and  a  strategy  for  maintaining  their  capital  levels,  in  line  with  the  principles  of  Pillar  2.  With 
regard  to  the  principles  of  market  discipline  in  Pillar  3,  supervisors  in  some  countries  may  wish  to 
focus  initially  on  ensuring  a  baseline  level  of  disclosures  across  all  banks.  This  might  include 
discussing with banks, investors and other users of financial information their information needs and 
the tools available so that supervisors can tailor requirements accordingly.  
In my view, these two preliminary stages will provide an excellent preparation for the “final” stage to 
move to Basel II.  
The  Basel  Committee  welcomes  the  efforts  that  so  many  countries  have  already  undertaken  to 
enhance the quality of bank supervision and to encourage prudent management in the banking sector. 
We support your work and would like to contribute to your efforts. The Basel Committee, its member 
agencies,  and  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  have  long 
participated in regional training initiatives that are intended to help promote supervisors’ understanding 
of  international  banking  standards  such  as  the  new  capital  framework.  The  Committee’s  Accord 
Implementation Group likewise engages in outreach to supervisors in non-member countries, including 
through the Core Principles Liaison Group. I chaired a special session of such a discussion earlier this 
year because I am personally committed to improving that dialogue.  
8 
 BIS Review 33/2004
We  look  forward  to  working  with  other  institutions,  including  the  World  Bank  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund, to assist other supervisors in their journeys as they come to their own crossroads for 
banking supervision. 
Conclusion 
In  my  remarks  this  morning,  my  intention  was  to  offer  more  insight  into  why  the  Basel  Committee 
believes  that  Basel  II  is  such  an  important  step  in  embracing  a  new,  incentives-based  approach  to 
supervision. I also wanted to discuss how it will keep our supervisory framework up-to-date with the 
latest advances in risk measurement techniques and risk management practices.  
In my answers to the sensitive questions that I have heard from bankers and policymakers in other 
countries,  I  have  sought  to  emphasise  that  the  Basel  Committee  seeks  the  appropriate  balance  for 
Basel  II  between  developing  simple  rules  while  maintaining  their  sensitivity  to  a  bank’s  actual 
underlying  risks.  We  intend  to  align  Basel  II’s  capital  requirements  more  closely  to  banks’  actual 
economic  capital  needs.  Consequently,  we  do  not  think  that  aligning  the  regulatory  framework  to 
banks’ contemporary risk measurement techniques will make lending patterns more volatile. Nor do 
we think that it will harm competition or dry up capital flows into emerging market countries.  
The Committee has worked to ensure that the new framework contains sufficient options and simpler 
forms of rules so that its basic principles can be applied to many kinds of banking organisations in 
many countries. Basel II presents an excellent opportunity for emerging and developing markets. By 
stimulating  banks  to  upgrade  and  improve  their  systems,  business  models,  capital  strategies,  risk 
management systems and disclosure standards, Basel II should improve their overall efficiency and 
ability  to  compete  globally.  It  will  help  to  reduce  the  risk  premiums  of  emerging  and  developing 
markets and will help to ensure the stability of the financial system. 
Still,  it  is  clear  that,  to  accomplish  all  of  these  intentions,  the  new  capital  framework  will  be  a  very 
different approach to supervision than what we have known so far. It will require hard work on all of 
our parts. Bankers must work to ensure that their risk management systems meet the standards to 
qualify to use the more sophisticated measures of risk.  
For our part, supervisors must ensure that we are comfortable with banks’ progress. But we must also 
be ready to supervise a more comprehensive capital framework. We will need to share information on 
the issues we encounter in moving from the 1988 Accord to the three pillars of the new framework. We 
will need to compare notes on the advances our banks are achieving in measuring and managing risk 
and on what implications those advances may have, not just for the capital framework, but also for the 
safety and soundness of the banking system, and for the future health of our economies. 
Thanks to the cooperation of the Federal Reserve, the World Bank, and the IMF, we are all privileged 
to enjoy the rare opportunity to engage in a multilateral dialogue with fellow supervisors from 50 or 
more countries in the same room. I encourage you to make the best use of this unusual occasion to 
ask questions, to share views, and to pledge your cooperation – across agencies, across jurisdictions, 
and across markets. Together, we can better encourage our banking organisations to improve their 
risk management. Together, we can better secure the benefits of greater financial stability and more 
sustainable economic growth for all. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 9
