Zhou Xiaochuan: Tenth anniversary of the China Foreign Exchange Trade 
System 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, on the tenth anniversary of 
the  China  Foreign  Exchange  Trade  System  (CFETS)  and  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  Forum  on 
China’s Money Market, Shanghai, 16 April 2004. 
 Distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen: 
Good  evening.  I’m  very  delighted  to  be  with  you  on  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  CFETS  and  the 
opening ceremony of the Forum on China’s Money Market. 
Ten years ago the China Foreign Exchange Trade System (CFETS) was set up in Shanghai as part of 
the efforts to reform the RMB exchange rate system. Starting from this, China began to construct a 
modern platform to offer trading, information and supervision services to the interbank market. Based 
on this platform, a national unified RMB funding market was established in 1996, the interbank RMB 
bond  market  appeared  in  1997,  and  a  national  unified  RMB  commercial  paper  market  debuted  in 
2003. So far, by using electronic telecommunication technology, the CFETS has basically formed a 
national  unified  trading  platform  and  service  system  for  the  interbank  RMB  money  market  and 
FX market, serving all financial institutions in the country. All of these achievements have laid a solid 
foundation  for  safeguarding  China’s  financial  security,  increasing  market  supervision,  improving  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  and  promoting  market-based  interest  rate  and  exchange 
rate reform. The decade of accomplishments in the interbank market evolution is the result of reform 
and opening-up, as well as the devotion and participation of market participants. On this occasion, on 
behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I would like to extend sincere thanks and profound solicitude to 
the staff of the CFETS and all market participants. 
Looking  at  development  trends  in  the  global  FX  market,  we  can  see  that  we  have  enjoyed  the 
latecomer advantage in terms of technology, but there is still a long way to go in market construction 
and development. 
The  continuous  deepening  of  China’s  reform  and  opening-up  requires  further  development  of  the 
financial market, and requires us to update the concept according to specific situations and encourage 
innovation with the future in mind. First, the transitional period for the banking industry after China’s 
entry into the WTO ends in December of 2006. With the realization of national treatment for foreign 
institutions and the gradual deregulation on market accession, China’s financial industry will encounter 
increasing  international  competition.  China’s  commitment  to  the  WTO  and  its  internal  demands  for 
economic  growth  necessitate  accelerated  development  of  its  financial  market.  Second,  the  step-by-
step opening of markets and intensifying economic globalization have brought the country’s economic 
growth  dependence  on  foreign  trade  to  60  percent.  More  and  more  enterprises  are  starting  up 
international  businesses,  calling  on  domestic  financial  institutions  to  provide  enterprises  and 
companies  with  a  series  of  financial  services  including  hedging,  risk  control,  FX  finance,  etc.  The 
concept  of  investment  in  financial  markets  has  also  taken  shape  among  individual  residents.  The 
introduction  of  cross-market  financial  products  is  beginning  to  meet  market  demands.  Expanding 
market demands offered opportunities for the development of both the interbank market and financial 
products.  Third,  learning  lessons  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  people  now  have  a  more  profound 
understanding of the importance of sound development of financial markets. Compared with the global 
financial market, China’s interbank market still has great potential for development. With progress in 
reform of transforming state-owned commercial banks into joint-stock banks, banks will have to offer 
better products in the financial market so as to fulfill the twin goals of minimizing risks and maximizing 
profits.  China’s  interbank  market  has  huge  potential  and  wide  open  space  for  development. 
Furthermore, as opening-up deepens, China, with the objectives set forth in the 3rd Plenary Session of 
the  16th  National  Congress  of  the  CPC,  will  further  perfect  the  exchange  rate  forming  mechanism, 
gradually  lift  improper  FX  restrictions  and  finally  realize  the  convertibility  of  RMB  under  capital 
accounts.  These  objectives  cannot  be  accomplished  without  further  development  of  the  interbank 
market and the innovation and diversification of financial products. In all, it is one of the objectives of 
China’s financial market development to create an all-round and multi-layer financial market system. 
The  realization  of  these  objectives  and  goals  will  rely  on  the  deepening  and  advancement  of  the 
financial market. Some newly emerged products such as ABS, MBS and CDO all reflect new changes 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 1
in market demands. The development of financial engineering is closely related to the infrastructure of 
the financial market and a favorable service system. 
In  the  future  process  of  financial  market  deepening,  the  development  of  financial  products  must  be 
accelerated and innovations must be encouraged so as to further meet market demands. The market 
should give greater play to price discovery, and should strengthen the ability of financial enterprises to 
price  financial  products.  Without  good  products  or  financial  institutions  with  comparatively  strong 
pricing  capabilities,  it  is  difficult  to  reach  the  goals  of  developing  the  financial  market.  Intensive 
research  should  be  made  on  the  relationship  between  the  interbank  market,  FX  market  and  OTC 
market. Secondly, in the aspects of improving the exchange rate forming mechanism and accelerating 
FX market construction, the market should help enterprises cultivate an awareness of risks, and the 
market  in  the  broad  sense  should  be  able  to  provide  enterprises  with  a  complete  set  of  financial 
services including hedging, risk averting, and investment and financing. Technology and supervision 
should also keep up with market development. Supervision should be strengthened with awareness of 
risk supervision built up among participants in the interbank market, though most of them are financial 
institutions  who  have  comparatively  strong  ability  to  take  risks  and  conduct  analysis  and  research. 
Last  but  not  least,  in  terms  of  development  direction,  the  development  of  the  FX  market  should  be 
future-oriented while meeting the current demands of the macro economic system and policies, and 
active studies should be conducted on the trading system. 
The past ten years have been a splendid decade of accomplishments in constructing the interbank 
market.  There  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  toward  market  construction  in  the  future.  Reform  and 
opening-up presents many demands and challenges, but the past decade of development has laid a 
sound  foundation  for  the  future.  I  hope  that  the  CFETS  can  extend  its  efforts  and  innovate  in  a 
pioneering spirit, thus further promoting financial market development and perfecting the functions of 
the interbank market. 
I wish the Forum on China’s Money Market a complete success. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2004
