Zhou Xiaochuan: Explore market position to promote corporate bond 
development 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at The International Seminar 
on Bond Market Development - opportunities and challenges, 12 December 2003. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to join you for a discussion on issues related to bond market development in this 
important and timely international seminar. In my view, development of the corporate bond market is 
critical  to  the  overall  financial  market  development  in  China.  As  you  all  know,  with  the  recent 
conclusion of the 3rd Plenum of the 16th CPC National Congress, certain decisions have been taken by 
the central government on issues concerning further improving the socialist market economic system. 
Many  financial  reform  initiatives  adopted  in  the  Decisions  such  as  “improving  macro  financial 
management  mechanism”,  “steadily  advancing  market-based  interest  rate  reform”,  “improving  RMB 
exchange rate regime” and “maintaining financial stability and preventing systemic financial risks” are 
all  directly  related  to  development  of  financial  market.  Despite  certain  progress  made  in  developing 
China’s financial market, much more remains to be done. In particular, the development of a corporate 
bond market, a salient deficiency for the moment, has yet to be nurtured. It is an important issue on 
the  reform  agenda  which  holds  great  significance  for  financial  development  in  China.  Extensive 
studies have been carried out on the development of corporate bond market. Due to time limit, I would 
like to focus my discussion on the market position of corporate bond. 
International experience 
In  mature  markets,  corporate  bond  issuers  are  usually  confined  to  corporations  of  different  size, 
ranging from large corporations with good credit standing which issue high-grade bonds to the small 
and medium-sized corporations which issue non-investment grade or even junk bonds. The investors 
are  mainly  institutions  such  as  the  insurance  companies,  mutual  fund,  commercial  banks,  pension 
fund,  trust  companies etc,  and  the  individual  or  retail  investors are  rarely  seen  in  the  bond  market. 
According to relevant statistics, individual or retail investors only account for 10-15 percent of the total 
market share of corporate bonds above investment grade in the United States, and the proportion of 
individual or retail investors in non-investment grade corporate bonds is negligible. The reason why 
there are individual or retail investors sticking with the non-investment grade corporate bonds at all is 
mainly because their investment has gone sour and become unsalable after the issuer’s credit rating 
was downgraded due to changes of various factors. Among those 10-15 percent individual or retail 
investors in the corporate bond market, most of them are rich people who either have their own private 
investment advisers or have their financial assets managed by certain institutions. Therefore, they can 
be regarded as institutional investors to some extent. 
This  kind  of  investment  structure  in  the  corporate  bond  market  is  actually  associated  with  market 
requirements  in  financial  strength  and  information  disclosure  of  the  investors.  Based  on  this 
consideration,  corporate  bond  investors  must  have  strong  risk  analysis  capability  so  as  to  make 
sensible investment decision and manage relevant risks properly. In the same vein, corporate bond 
needs to be priced by market forces, for this kind of pricing mechanism could compensate the default 
risks of the bond issuers. 
In  the  transition  and  emerging  market  economies,  underdevelopment  of  institutional  investors  has 
greatly  hampered  the  development  of  corporate  bond  market.  Absence  of  institutional  investors 
implies an excessively high proportion of individual or retail investors in the market. Corporate bond 
was initially called “enterprises bond” in China, and the market infrastructure in respect of intermediary 
services  like  credit  rating,  accounting  and  external  auditing  at  that  time  was  weak,  which  has 
undermined the credibility of information disclosure and credit rating of the bond issuers. Moreover, 
corporate bond issue at that time also involved extensive government intervention, ranging from quota 
allocation  to  implicit  guarantee  by  the  local  governments.  Such  combined  deficiencies  have  made 
China’s corporate bond market fall sharply short of our expectation. 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 1
Preventing distortion 
In the early days of corporate bond issue in China, a relatively high proportion of bond issuers were 
found in default of debt redemption. To prevent substantial losses of the individual investors due to 
lack of risk analysis capabilities and to preserve social stability, the government took the decision to 
either  allow  the  enterprises  to  issue  new  debt  and  use  the  proceeds  to  pay  for  the  old  one,  or 
authorize other enterprises to issue replacement debt, or even allow the underwriters to issue debt to 
fulfill their redemption obligations. Such a practice has caused market distortion, which may lead to 
uncertainties for future corporate bond market development or prolonged sluggishness of the market 
activities.  Recently,  emphasis  on  direct  financing  and  a  desire  to  overhaul  the  structure  of  the 
domestic  financial market has once again  made  the  call  for  development  of  corporate bond  market 
clearly audible. 
Since we have seen turns and twists in the development of corporate bond market, we need to be 
more cautiously mindful of the new development trend in the market. In particular, we have observed a 
general  tendency  demanding  secured  solvency  of  the  bond  issuers.  However,  due  to  various 
uncertainties in market operation, it is not easy to secure solvencies for the issuing enterprises whose 
reform is still underway. In terms of credit rating, the world famous rating agencies are not even willing 
to assign comfortably high ratings for China’s sovereign debt, so it will not be difficult for us to imagine 
the credit ratings they could possibly give to corporate bonds issued by domestic enterprises. In the 
mean time, although our domestic credit rating companies more than frequently give AAA ratings for 
domestic issuers, which to some extent has made us feel insensible to anything like AAA, we do not 
exactly know what the domestic ratings of AAA truly stand for, not to mention some of the domestic 
rating  companies  have  not  even  had  their  reputation  established  in  the  market.  Under  such 
circumstances,  despite  the  fact  that  an  emphasis  on  corporate  solvency  can  help  strengthen 
protection  for  the  investors,  it  will  result  in  concentration  of  issuers  in  large  projects  or  large  state 
enterprises with good credit standing. 
Another tendency in the corporate bond market is observed in the general requirement of guarantee, 
provided  in  practice  by  the  commercial  banks,  for  the  debt  issue.  On  the  one  hand,  this  kind  of 
guarantee  arrangement  can  undoubtedly  improve  the  credit  ratings  of  the  bond  and  hence  the 
confidence of the investors, but on the other hand it implies implicit state guarantee for the commercial 
banks, particularly the large state-owned commercial banks, which could lead to a change in market 
perceptions about the nature of the corporate bond. In such a case, the corporate bond is not issued 
based  on  creditworthiness  of  the  issuing  enterprises,  but  rather  on  the  credit  standing  of  the 
commercial banks which provide guarantee for the debt issue. This arrangement will also have some 
impact on the bond pricing mechanism. Of course, the corporate bond pricing mechanism has its own 
inherent problems. For example, the bond spreads are strictly confined to floating within an extremely 
narrow band compatible with the benchmark lending rates of the same maturities, thus ruling out many 
potential bond issuers, especially the small and medium-sized enterprises, for their issuing price has 
to cover the default risks. 
The above two tendencies are closely related to the market position of the majority investors. If the 
majority of investors are individuals or households, strong protection is reasonably needed and only 
those enterprises with strong repayment capability and sufficient guarantee will be singled out to issue 
corporate  bonds.  In  this  case,  the  development  speed  of  the  corporate  bond  market  might  be 
sacrificed, for it is a bit hard to find debt issuers meeting all these stringent criteria. The problems even 
get  worse  if  the  credit  ratings  are  conducted  in  line  with  international  practice  to  reflect  the  true 
financial  situation  of  the  bond  issuers.  Apart  from  that,  many  of  the  large  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  in  China  are  currently  facing  daunting  challenges  in  the  reform  of  their  corporate 
governance, internal control and accounting practice, and therefore hard to be assigned high credit 
ratings. 
With regard to debt guarantee, we have heard some concerns of the commercial banks. They have 
complained  first  about  the  unreasonable  guarantee  price  and  the  resulted  inadequate  coverage  of 
default risks, and then worried that such an explicit guarantee could become a prominent weakness of 
the  commercial  banks  in  terms  of  risk  control  in  the  future.  Although  partial  guarantee  or  credit 
enhancement  is  sometimes  adopted  in  many  mature  markets  to  promote  corporate  bond  market 
development, targeted guarantee for bond redemption is rarely seen, and this practice is even strictly 
forbidden in certain economies. Some Asian countries have experienced fast economic growth since 
the 1960s and 1970s, and their financial market and corporate bond market have also witnessed rapid 
development, though in different ways. Take Korea as an example. There was a high proportion of 
secured corporate bond in the market before the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis at the end of 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2004
1997.  Such  corporate  bonds  were  issued  in  the  early  days  with  guarantee  provided  mainly  by  the 
commercial banks. Later on, the non-bank financial institutions including the merchant banks and the 
finance  companies  also  started  to  provide  guarantee  for  corporate  bond  issue.  Fueled  by  fierce 
competition and with the benefit of no regulatory requirement in terms of capital adequacy, these non-
bank financial institutions saw rapid development of corporate bond guarantee business. Up to 1997, 
90 percent of the corporate debt issue in Korea was backed by guarantee. However, such secured 
corporate  bonds  revealed  moral  hazards  and  market  risks  during  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  thus 
aggravating the financial turbulence. Recognition of the risks led to abrupt adjustment. By 1998, the 
share  of  guaranteed  corporate  bonds  in  total  corporate  bond  issue  fell  sharply  to  30  percent  and 
subsequently  declined  to  5  percent  and  approached  zero  in  recent  years.  Whether  to  provide 
guarantee  is  a  commercial-based  decision  rather  than  a  government  requirement.  However,  in 
practice, due to factors concerning market rules, target investors and relevant experiences, the growth 
of guaranteed corporate bond has been unduly high, resulting in intensified market distortion. Special 
attention should be paid to Korea’s experience in this regard. Excessive reliance on guarantee does 
not represent the future trend of corporate bond market development. 
Exploring market position 
In China, should the institutional investors be the major player in corporate bond market? If so, their 
development  should  be  actively  promoted.  In  recent  years,  investment  fund  and  specialized  fund 
management  companies  have  developed  in  the  securities  market.  In  particular,  open-end  fund  and 
some specialized fund have grown rapidly. However, they are still in the early stage of development 
and unable to meet market demand. Further efforts need to be made to promote their development. 
Other institutional investors, such as insurance companies and social security fund, also have great 
growth potential.  
In  China,  individual  investors  have  relatively  few  investment  choices.  They  look  forward  to  the 
development of new investment products. Nevertheless, development of corporate bond will not meet 
such demand if most of them are not targeted for individual investors. On the other hand, if the major 
buyer of corporate bond is not institutional investor, then we will have to face the above-mentioned 
question,  that  is,  whether  we  should  further  develop  institutional  investors.  We  may  “stumble  twice 
over the same stone” if we fail to properly identify the major investor in the corporate bond market. My 
opinion is that development of institutional investors will be a priority in China’s corporate bond market 
development. 
Financial  market  consists  of  many  sub-markets.  Most  financial  products  are  traded  in  one  market. 
Some other products, particularly bonds and financial derivatives, are not confined to one market. For 
example,  bonds  are  traded  in  both  securities  market  and  inter-bank  market;  financial  derivatives 
involve not only equity and debt but also loans and foreign exchange, and some financial derivatives 
are  traded  in  more  than  one  market.  The  development  of  institutional  investors  may  rely  on  some 
markets.  How  to  promote  the  development  of  institutional  investors  is  an  important  issue  on  the 
agenda of corporate bond development.  
Institutional investors have accounted for an increasingly larger share in the transactions in the stock 
exchanges. As noted earlier, due to the weak basis, the proportion of institutional investors is still too 
small. Securities can be issued in the primary market in several ways. Their target investors should be 
more  clearly  defined.  Once  we  introduce  a  financial  product  in  the  market,  we  have  to  consider 
whether the investor structure is appropriate. This involves the choice between approval system and 
registration system, information disclosure and accounting standards. Therefore, the first question we 
may have to address is whether a financial product meets the need of major investors.  
Many people have noted that there are active bond transactions in the inter-bank market. In China, 
these  bonds  are  mainly  government  bonds  and  financial  bonds.  Some  of  the  financial  bonds  are 
issued by the policy financial institutions. Such bonds may not exist in other countries. Some financial 
debt  instruments  modified  by  financial  engineering  will  also  be  traded  in  the  inter-bank  market. 
Participants in the inter-bank market include various types of financial institutions – banks, insurance 
companies,  securities  companies,  investment  funds,  trust  companies  and  finance  companies. 
Moreover,  over  1000  large  enterprises  have  been  conducting  transactions  in  the  broadly  defined 
market as institutional investors. 
Given the cross-market nature of corporate bond, we need to clearly identify the major investors in the 
market and seek more opportunities to promote its development.  
BIS Review 4/2004 
 3
While  drawing  on  international  experience,  we  must  also  make  careful  analysis  in  light  of  China’s 
specific conditions. At the same time, we must respect the objective pattern of market development. 
Some people think that we should develop corporate bond market with Chinese characteristics, which, 
unlike in other countries, will mainly serve individual and retail investors. In my view, all opinions and 
studies should be encouraged. We should be active in exploring various possibilities while cautious in 
reaching conclusions. Only after adequate investigation and research can we come to a conclusive 
opinion, or a decision for further study.  
Market infrastructure 
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the development of bond market, particularly corporate bond 
market,  relies  largely  on  the  financial  market  infrastructure.  As  we  all  know,  the  development  of 
infrastructure  cannot  be  done  overnight.  It  requires  careful  planning.  Financial  market  infrastructure 
involves  the  delivery,  settlement,  custody  and  registration  of  all  products.  We  have  made  good 
progress in ensuring the safety and timeliness of transactions through electronic systems. However, 
given  the  relatively  limited  variety  of  products,  simple  transaction  mode  and  the  segregation  of 
domestic market from international market, we need to make further improvement. The other aspect of 
infrastructure  is  market  integrity.  It  involves  the  improvement  of  laws  and  regulations,  including 
accounting  standards,  and  the  development  of  intermediaries,  in  particular  lawyers,  accountants, 
rating agencies and asset evaluation agencies. In recent years, we have made significant progress in 
improving accounting standards. Nevertheless, for transition economies and emerging markets, this is 
an  area  that  needs  further  efforts.  In  the  advanced  economies  and  mature  markets,  new  changes 
have taken place as the companies expand their activities. Accounting standards need to be improved 
to reflect these changes. Accounting standards should be designed to reflect the true financial position 
of the enterprises. This is not an easy task.  
We all hope that law offices, accounting firms and rating agencies can provide high quality services to 
the  corporate  bond  market.  However,  for  the  transition  economies  and  emerging  markets,  such 
services and institutions are in the initial stage of development. Years ago, such institutions did not 
exist  in  China.  In  recent  years,  efforts  have  been  made  to  establish,  develop  and  promote  these 
institutions. In their early stage of development, lack of qualified personnel and other problems and 
weakness may impair public confidence and market integrity. Market requires that these intermediary 
institutions jointly provide true information and data to investors. We should make overall consideration 
in light of both domestic development and global integration. Attention should be paid to promote the 
development  of  domestic  institutions  and  to  avoid  damage  to  market  integrity.  I  believe  that 
infrastructure is very important for corporate bond market.  
Corporate  bonds  and  stocks  have  different  investor  structure,  disclosure  requirement  and  other 
regulatory requirements. Some people think that high disclosure requirement similar to that for stocks 
should also be applied to corporate bonds. Its feasibility and advantages and disadvantages are still 
under  discussion.  Financial  market  consists  of  many  sub-markets  and  products.  All  markets  and 
products will be developed sooner or later. 
There are many issues that need careful study with respect to the development of corporate bond. I 
hope my speech today could serve as a catalyst to invite more valuable discussions and comments. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 4/2004
