Nicholas Le Pan: Implementation of Basel II - the next steps 
Remarks  by  Mr  Nicholas  Le  Pan,  Superintendent,  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial 
Institutions, Canada; Chairman of the Basel Accord Implementation Group; and Vice Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the XIII International Conference of Banking Supervisors, 
Madrid, 20-24 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
Thank you ladies and gentlemen. Basel II implementation is one of the most important challenges over 
the next few years - for banks and for bank supervisors. Adoption of the new framework in countries 
domestic rules is a matter for national processes. But, regardless of the approach countries take for 
adoption, implementing Basel II well has huge benefits, again for banks, for bank supervisors and for 
financial stability. 
A year ago, the questions I was asked the most frequently were, “When will the Accord be finished? 
Will it be finished on time?” Now the questions I get the most are, “How is implementation going? What 
are you going to do with implementation challenges? What are the next steps?” 
In  talking  about  steps  I  am  reminded  of  various  sayings.  “The  longest  journey  begins  with  a  single 
step.” “Don’t be afraid of a big step, you can´t cross a chasm in two steps.” “It is only by taking small 
steps  that  we  can  look  back  after  a  while  and see how  far  we  have  come.”  I  think  all  of  these  are 
relevant to the Basel II journey. 
I believe that Basel II can be implemented well. What I want to talk about this morning is: 
• 
• 
What I believe it takes for high quality implementation to occur. 
Cross border issues. There are understandable worries in both home and host jurisdictions 
about how this will work in practise. There are also understandable worries in the banking 
community about the same thing. And I believe Basel II provides a unique opportunity for us 
to enhance cross border communications and cooperation in a way that will be beneficial to 
us and to financial stability. 
The work of the Accord Implementation Group going forward. 
 Background 
Recently, the Financial Stability Institute (FSI) released a paper that speaks to the preliminary views of 
the  implementation  of  the  new  capital  adequacy  framework  in  non-Basel  Committee  member 
countries. The results of this survey are very interesting. 88 non-BCBS jurisdictions, including Africa, 
Asia, the Caribbean, Latin America, the Middle East and non-BCBS Europe intend to adopt Basel II - 
this represents about 87% of banking assets in those jurisdictions. Furthermore, the paper indicates 
that many of the countries have a preliminary plan to implement the new framework before 2009. 
Including the Basel member countries - that puts the total countries intending to adopt the new Accord 
at  over  100. I  think  it's  safe  to  say  that  implementation  of  the  new  Accord  is  in  the  forefront  of  the 
minds of the majority of supervisors and banks around the world. 
Even countries which have no immediate plans to implement Basel II are often highly interested in the 
current thinking and experience of others. They want to garner useful insights now that will help them 
in the decisions they will want to consider. Experience in implementing Basel II can be very useful for 
countries  who  want  to  make  improvements  in  their  regulation  and  supervision  in  advance  of 
considering how to approach Basel II. 
We also must recognise that one of the strengths of Basel II is its flexibility. As supervisors we must 
ask ourselves what benefits the new framework will bring in the context of our own domestic banking 
system. Each jurisdiction must determine the possible impact of the new framework for their banking 
industry and supervisory resources. Each country must determine the conditions, scope and timing for 
implementation.  Basel  II  contains  a  menu  of  options  that  allows  differences  in  approaches  in 
relationship to the nature of banks and the nature of markets in which they operate. Jaime Caruana 
commented on that in his opening address, but it deserves emphasising. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 1
Shortly we will have four panel sessions. The papers that have been prepared focus on very important 
issues in implementation. For each paper there are questions to kick start discussion. I believe this is a 
unique opportunity to share views and experiences to date. 
There are no jurisdictions nor banks that have all the answers. It is only through discussion, sharing of 
experiences and views that all concerned can proceed. We will have reports back from the leaders of 
each of the sessions. There is ample time for questions. In some cases there will undoubtedly be key 
questions or areas of discussion that will bear repeating and further discussing in the plenary session 
that follows. I encourage you to ask questions, raise concerns and make comments. 
So what does it take for Basel II to be implemented well? 
Within  banks,  it  is  highly  important  that  Basel  II  not  be  treated  as  a  compliance  exercise.  It  has  to 
become part of the management and governance of the bank with a greater focus on risks and how 
those relate to the capital the bank is holding. 
We  also  have  to  remember  that  Basel  II  is  about  judgement.  Judgements  made  by  banks  and 
judgements  made  by  supervisors.  Despite  the  additional  room  for  analytics  inherent  in  the  Basel  II 
framework, we all have to remember that banking is not just arithmetic or higher mathematics. Neither 
is bank supervision. 
It  is  essential  that  banks  adopt  a  disciplined  approach  to  implementation  with  strong  project 
management skills and high quality efforts to identify gaps between where they now are and where 
they would like to be under Basel II, together with a realistic plan for moving to eliminate those gaps. 
Many supervisors using the same approach to assess where they are, relative to where they want to 
be. 
Next,  communication  is  necessary  between  supervisors,  between  supervisors  and  banks,  within 
banks,  and  within  the  supervisory  community.  One  of  the  things  that  is  going  on  with  supervisors 
represented on the BCBS is movement of the Basel II responsibility from policy development types to 
front line supervision staff. More and more supervisors are getting involved. That is occurring in Basel 
countries, with increasingly active involvement of non G-10 countries who are participating in the Core 
Principles Liason group (CPLG) and directly in a number of Basel working groups, through sessions 
run by regional groups, the FSI and so on. Communication is particularly important in the cross border 
challenge - something I will return to in a few minutes. 
A  practical  attitude  is  essential  for  effective  implementation  of  Basel  II,  both  within  banks  and  by 
supervisors. 
I want to emphasize the need for an attitude of ongoing improvement and learning. That’s because 
there  is  not  one  way  to  implement  Basel  II  and  because  Basel  II  calls  for  improvements  in  risk 
management practices and in focus of supervisors. 
Feedback is key from banks to supervisors and supervisors to banks. 
Lastly, so is realism about what can be achieved and the need for trust and respect for the judgements 
of others. I am concerned sometimes about the degree of realism I see within industry about what can 
be achieved. Some talk about close to uniform treatment across jurisdictions. That is not realistic. 
Again,  I  have  seen  circumstances  recently  when  industry  groups  or  certain  individual  banks  have 
called  for  a  resolution  to  the  home/host  issue  by  suggesting  that  banks  ought  to  deal  almost 
exclusively  with  their  home  jurisdiction.  That’s  not  realistic.  At  the  same  time,  within  those 
organizations,  local  management  and  important  local  markets  had  virtually  no  knowledge  of  the 
implementation approach to be adopted by the bank. 
Imagine the situation of a host supervisor who communicates with the bank’s local management and is 
unable  to  get  even  the  most  rudimentary  sense  of  what  the  bank’s  approach  to  Basel  II 
implementation  will  likely  be.  It  would  be  natural  in  human  nature  for  that  supervisor  to  then  start 
approaching the bank’s head office to try to understand what the bank’s plans were. Multiple detailed 
requests  of  that  nature  would  clearly  be  an  implementation  problem  and  would  not  lead  to  cost 
effective implementation. But, banks that neglect to deal with host jurisdictions adequately, are part of 
the problem. 
What I am saying to you today I have also been saying to banking organizations because of their key 
role in effective implementation. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2004
Let me say that I also believe that cost effective implementation is in the interest of not only banks but 
of supervisors. Supervisors don’t have unlimited resources, neither do banks. And so, in many ways 
we all need to try to find ways to economize on the use of resources in order to do an effective job. 
The workshops 
Workshop  A  is  chaired  by  Enrique  Marshal,  Superintendent  of  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  in 
Chile. It covers planning the transition to Basel II. It highlights the essential need for countries to take 
account of their situation in deciding on their approach to Basel II. We have emphasised that each 
country  will  determine  the  conditions,  scope  and  timing  for  implementation.  Assessment  of  national 
priorities  is  essential  in  deciding  the  way  forward.  But  the  material  prepared  for  this  workshop  also 
emphasises  that  Basel  II,  implemented  in  a  way  that  respects  national  conditions  is  an  important 
opportunity  to  enhance  national  practises  in  regulation  and  supervision  and  to  enhance  risk 
management  practises  at  banks.  Some  of  the  questions  for  discussion  touch  on  factors  to  be 
considered  in  developing  an  implementation  plan,  challenges  in  taking  account  of  local  market 
conditions and the impact on supervisory resources. 
Workshop  B,  chaired  by  Jerry  Hawke  Comptroller  of  the  currency  in  the  U.S.  focuses  on 
implementation  of  advanced  approaches.  There  are  unique  challenges  for  banks  and  supervisors 
getting ready for advanced approaches. While standards for advanced approaches for credit risk are 
reasonably  well  developed  there  is  less  of  a  current  industry  standard  in  the  cases  of  the  AMA  for 
operational risk. Areas for discussion include approaches for assessing readiness of banks, validation 
issues and home host issues particularly in the cases of AMA. 
Workshop  C,  with  Daniel  Nouy,  head  of  the  Commission  Bancaire  in  France  chairing,  covers  the 
process  for  implementing  pillar  2.  That  is  a  key  part  of  the  framework  promoting  better  risk 
assessments by banks and more focussed analysis of those risk assessments by supervisors. Pillar 2 
is also key to the expectation that internationally active banks ought to operate at capital levels above 
the pillar 1 minimum (without requiring a series of automatic capital add-ons). Pillar 2 is deliberately 
phrased in a general way as it is recognised that supervisory practises and approaches differ across 
countries. As well, Pillar 2 requirements of the new accord will undoubtedly be met differently by larger 
more sophisticated banks than by smaller less complex entities. Cross border aspects of Pillar 2 are 
important. These topics are the questions for discussion. 
Lastly Workshop D, with Ryozo Himino Secretary general of the BCBS chairing, covers the topic of 
home/host  relationships.  While  home  host  relationships  are  nothing  new,  they  take  on  a  particular 
importance in implementing Basel II. Enhanced communication and cooperation will be required for 
effective implementation particularly in the case of complex major banking groups with material cross 
border  operations.  This  workshop  will  review  the  Committee’s  high  level  principles  for  cross  border 
implementation, and the work in developing real case studies and practical implementation plans. 
Cross border issues 
I want to say a few more words about cross border issues. I know that it is on a lot of minds in this 
room. A paper on the lessons learned to date from the AIG work on cross border case studies has 
been  made  available.  It  is  in  draft  because  it  is  work  in  progress.  These  real  case  studies  are  the 
precursors,  and  can  transition  easily,  into  the  kind  of  practical  enhanced  arrangements  and 
supervisory plans between home and host jurisdictions that are crucial to the effective implementation 
of the Accord. We have some 17 of these started and we are broadening the scope and deepening 
the number. They cover both credit risk and operational risk. Many involve non-G10 countries in Asia, 
Europe and Latin America. Some non G-10 countries are starting these in addition. 
And what drives the need for enhanced cooperation and coordination? We have to realize that it’s not 
just Basel II. It flows from the fact that how banks manage themselves is changing. But it is not only 
the  case  that  banks  risk  management  operations  are  increasingly  being  managed  centrally.  Banks 
operate in a variety of different modes. For some portfolios there is an increasing degree to which the 
analytics  and  judgements  are  made  centrally.  For  other  portfolios  local  information  and  local  inputs 
into modelling and analytics are hugely important. 
And we have to recall that countries don’t fall into neat categories as home’s or hosts. Members of the 
Basel Committee are both home countries and hosts. So are many non G-10 countries. And we have 
explicitly recognised that the significance of a bank to a host country is not just determined by how big 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 3
the host country bank is relative to the total bank. What matters also is how important the bank in the 
host country is as a share of the host country market. 
Implementing Basel II well does not mean home country control and host countries blindly accepting in 
all  cases  capital  calculations  done  elsewhere  (no  matter  how  much  some  banks  would  like  that 
approach). Nor does implementing Basel II well mean a free-for-all with host countries acting totally 
independently in their jurisdiction regardless of how the bank is organised or regardless of what work 
is being done by the home supervisor. Neither of these extremes will work in my view. 
Because of the different ways banks are organised it’s not just the case that host countries need to 
think about how they can better rely on home jurisdictions. In many cases, home countries have the 
need to be able to get more information from host countries about the relevance of the banks’ models 
and analytics associated with that host country’s market. 
The AIG started these case studies because I believe that enhanced trust and communication is not 
built solely by talking about it, but by doing. My job, and the job of the AIG, is to push these kinds of 
efforts  to  happen,  and  to  draw  out  and  share  some  of  the  lessons  learned.  The  AIG  has  recently 
prepared  a  paper  on  a  framework  for  conducting  real  case  studies.  The  paper  I  have  referred  to 
provides  ideas  on  how  to  organise  real  case  studies  and  enhanced  cooperative  arrangements.  It 
emphasises that there is not one way to go about this. And it speaks to the need for communication 
and a practical attitude. 
Let me give you an example of some of the earlier lessons learned. These case studies are built on 
the concept that a relatively small group of supervisors, the home and significant hosts, should first 
start to try to work out and react to a bank’s plans, about how they can better coordinate their efforts. 
Well, the moment the other supervisors involved with the bank heard about this, they wanted to know 
what was going on, when would they be part of this? And in some cases they hadn’t been told - a very 
simple  lesson  in  communication.  Similarly  we  learned  quite  early  on  in  some  of  these  cases  that 
bank’s  plans  were  not  well  developed  enough  for  supervisors  to  determine  how  best  to  coordinate 
their actions. 
My own conclusions of the progress to date draw out two essential points. First, host jurisdictions need 
to think more than they have to date of what information that they would need in order to be able to 
rely more on calculations, analytics and so forth developed outside of their jurisdiction. Second, home 
jurisdictions need to think more about effective ways to communicate the work that they will have done 
and the results of that work in assessing the use of these centrally driven risk management techniques 
so that hosts have a basis on which to rely. 
Let me also emphasise in no case should these enhanced home/host relationships follow a specific 
formula. I am aware of all kinds of forms of cooperation ranging from simple sharing of information to 
joint  participations  in  examinations.  And  in  no  cases  should  these  enhanced  communications  and 
co-operations lead to changes in the jurisdiction or the mandate of home or host supervisors. 
Work of the AIG 
Let me close by talking for a few moments about the work of the AIG. One of our main priorities is 
cross border issues. We have been instrumental in the Committee’s release of high level principles 
related to cross border issues generally and for operational risk. We will want to share experiences 
and course correct as necessary on how these principles are playing out in practise. We will continue 
to share experiences from the real case studies and from development of actual implementation plans. 
The AIG is not a rule setting body - it is not expected to produce rules or extensive guidance. 
We have created a group to go through validation issues for advanced approaches piece by piece, to 
take account of industry views and to produce a kind of cookbook of approaches to validation that can 
be used by supervisors. 
We have also recently created together with the Capital Task Force, which has been the main body 
that  has  produced  the  Accord  itself,  a  joint  group  to  consider  the  issue  of  downturn  LGDs  and  the 
related issues of stress testing under Pillar 2 of the Accord. I anticipate that this group will produce 
some  guidance  on  implementation  of  the  Accord  and  will  also  interact  extensively  with  industry  on 
current practices and how those practices might evolve. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2004
The  AIG  will  be  delving  more  into  the  Op  Risk  area,  focussing  on  the  AMA  approaches  and 
implementation challenges there. We will be involving and have involved non-G10 countries in both 
the validation and the AMA work. 
The AIG already completed earlier this year, a survey of preliminary intentions of national discretion 
items amongst Basel Committee countries. A number of non-G10 countries also chose to indicate their 
intentions and as a result, were provided information on G-10 countries intentions at that stage. The 
Committee has agreed in principle to publish this information and we will be updating it and sharing it 
among supervisors later this year. I think it helps supervisors to know the intentions of others as they 
make their decisions and information on country choices is also helpful in considering cross border 
implementation. 
We spent a fair amount of time on Pillar 2 in the AIG and will likely get back to that both during the 
course of this year and early next year. That resulted in some clarifications issued by the Committee. 
Our focus during the immediate future will be on the more specific elements of Pillar 2, such as how to 
assess concentration risk. 
The AIG is meeting regularly with the CPLG working group on capital. The discussion is productive 
and frank at times. We have cleared up some misunderstandings and we are having real dialogue on 
challenges and approaches to meet those challenges. 
Conclusion 
As we each approach issues of implementing Basel II - when, how and so on - I think it is important to 
keep in mind not only the challenges but also the benefits. Better relating capital to risk, promoting 
enhanced  risk  measurement  and  management  practises  in  internationally  active  banks,  and  further 
enhancing supervisory focus, present huge opportunities. Opportunities for us as supervisors, for the 
constituencies we serve and for our banks, our markets and economies. 
While there are challenges and while implementation won’t be prefect, with goodwill, good feedback 
and ongoing communication, Basel II can be implemented well. 
I look forward to that result. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 5
