Sunil Mendis: Is it time for a common currency in the SAARC region? 
Inauguration speech by Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 15th Forex 
Conference of the Forex Association of India, Colombo, 20 August 2004. 
 It is with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation from the Forex Association of India to inaugurate 
its  15th  Annual  Forex  Conference  here  in  Colombo.  I  would  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  this 
distinguished gathering of forex professionals from Sri Lanka as well as from many of our neighboring 
countries.  I  am  sure  that  this  is  an  excellent  opportunity  for  all  of  us  to  promote  goodwill  among 
ourselves. It also gives us an opportunity for sharing our thoughts on the way forward for South Asia’s 
currency and financial markets, which is the theme of this year’s conference. 
Forex, as you very well know, is the largest financial market in the world. Unlike many other markets, 
the international forex market is open 24 hours a day. Its daily turnover is well over US$ 1.2 trillion. 
This turnover is more than the combined turnover of the world’s major stock markets on any given day. 
Hence, the international forex market is a very liquid, and thus, a desirable market for trading. As with 
any other market, technology has also contributed immensely towards its expansion. Now trades are 
executed  increasingly  through  the  internet.  It  has  allowed  even  smaller  investors  the  access  to  the 
market.  
As conservative central banks, our involvement in the forex markets is limited to strategic investments 
and  stabilising  the  exchange  rate.  Following  this  role,  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  does  not  get 
involved  in  speculative  type  of  trading.  However,  it  plays  a  major  role  in  the  development  of  the 
country’s  forex  as  well  as  other  financial  markets.  We  know  that  in  a  market-oriented  economy,  all 
financial  market  segments,  namely,  the  foreign  exchange  market,  money  market,  government  debt 
securities  market  and  the  stock  market  are  inter-linked.  The  Central  Bank,  while  watching  the 
operations  of  each  market  segment  individually,  needs  to  take  a  macro  view  of  all  the  market 
segments  to  ensure  financial  market  stability.  The  focus  today,  however,  should  be  on  the  foreign 
exchange market.  
In the exchange rate area, it is appropriate to mention at this juncture, Sri Lankan authorities made a 
fundamental change to its policy on 23rd January, 2001 by moving to a freely floating exchange rate 
arrangement. This was necessitated by the inability of the then prevailing exchange rate system and 
the crawling band regime to sustain themselves. Immediately after the float, the market experienced 
some volatility as is usually expected. However, this volatility has been contained overall since then. 
This, not only brought confidence to the market, as evidenced by increased foreign exchange inflows, 
but also allowed greater flexibility and market opportunities to foreign exchange dealers of commercial 
banks. Subsequent to the float, the Central Bank became a net buyer of foreign exchange from the 
market, in sharp contrast to its experience in the period prior to that. 
Our objective with regard to the foreign exchange market is to ensure an orderly adjustment of the 
exchange  rate,  without  excessive  volatility.  Such  adjustment  should  reflect  the  emerging  economic 
fundamentals of the country. We should ensure that demand and supply mismatches are addressed 
on time so that there is no excessive volatility in the exchange rate.  
Turning to the theme of this year’s conference, i.e. “Is it time for a common currency in the SAARC 
region?”,  I  believe  that  it would  give  rise  to  much  interesting  and  thought provoking  discussion  and 
debate. We know that the SAARC was established in 1985, with the objective to provide a platform for 
the peoples of South Asia to work together in a spirit of solidarity, trust and understanding. It aims at 
accelerating  the  process  of  economic  and  social  development  of  member  countries.  I  believe  the 
considerations  of  the  timeliness  to  introduce  a  common  currency  for  the  region  will  be  supportive 
towards the objectives and aims of SAARC as well.  
While  taking  note  that  deliberations  such  as  these  would  definitely  lay  the  foundation  for  future 
developments in the SAARC region, I take great pleasure in inaugurating this conference today and 
wish you all success with the conference. And I would also like to urge you to take a little time off to 
visit some places of interest, while you are in this beautiful country, Sri Lanka. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
