Jürgen Stark: Promoting stability and growth - economic reforms and sound 
institutions 
Speech by Dr Jürgen Stark, Vice President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Central Bank of the 
Argentine Republic, Buenos Aires, 9 March 2004. 
 The last time I visited Argentina was five years ago at the start of the economic recession. Since then, 
Argentina has undergone a painful experience socially, politically, economically and financially. Over 
the past few years, I have followed developments in Argentina with great attentiveness as well as with 
great concern about the destruction of many economic livelihoods and the unused opportunities of this 
country. 
I have come to Buenos Aires today as a friend of Argentina. I would like to form my own impression of 
the current situation and the outlook. I shall be listening as well as giving my own assessment of the 
current problems. And I shall be doing so from the perspective of a major IMF shareholder. 
Key role of policy 
Argentina’  history  over  the  past  150  years  has  been  characterised  by  breaks  in  its  economic  and 
financial development. Periods of economic prosperity and political stability have often been followed 
by a deep crisis, a rapid decline of the currency and great poverty. Economic and monetary policies 
have  invariably  been  of  major  -  if  not  crucial  -  significance  in  this.  More  than  100  years  ago,  the 
Bankers’ Magazine encapsulated the role of politics in Argentina when its stated that “Everything in 
Argentina’s national life, whether industrial, commercial or financial, begins and ends in politics.”1
That  statement  is  confirmed  by  the  economic  developments  of  past  two  decades.  For  one  thing, 
mistaken economic policy decisions - especially government debt getting out of hand - in the mid and 
late 1980s led directly to hyperinflation and to the replacement of the currency. After the “lost decade”, 
the  Convertibility  Law  and  comprehensive  reforms  in  the  early  1990s  succeeded  in  stabilising  the 
economy and the currency. 
In the first half of the 1990s, Argentina managed to match the economic success it had enjoyed at the 
beginning of the twentieth century. The necessary basic conditions for initially successful development 
were 
– 
– 
– 
I  firmly  believe  that  Argentina  can  return  to  stability  and  prosperity  on  a  lasting  and  sound  basis. 
Manipulation and arbitrary intervention in the market bring, at best, short-term and illusory success. I 
think it is important to remember the basic conditions I have just cited. What is required, in particular, 
is the unconditional political will to undertake comprehensive and sensible economic reforms. 
firm political resolve, 
confidence in the country’s own strength and the mobilisation of its inherent potential, 
technical and financial assistance for self-help from international institutions. 
Economic recovery in Argentina 
It is gratifying that, in the past year, the Argentinian economy recovered from four years of recession. 
Real GDP growth has increased by a good 8%. The inflation rate is low and clearly down on the year. 
Unemployment and poverty are slowly being reduced. 
For  the  current  year,  too,  the  outlook  is  promising.  The  IMF  anticipates  growth  of  4%.  Argentina  is 
benefiting  from  the  improved  global  economic  outlook  and  the  sharp  depreciation  of  the  peso.  The 
future pace of growth hinges crucially on the policy measures taken to strengthen investment and to 
boost corporate and consumer confidence. 
                                                      
1  Bankers’ Magazine (1899), quoted after A G Ford, The Gold Standard 1880-1914. Britain and Argentina, Oxford 1962. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
The political agenda is extensive. It calls for highly credible political leadership in order to press ahead 
with all the reforms that are needed and to create confidence on the part of investors, consumers as 
well  as,  in  particular,  the  international  financial  markets.  That  is  because  special  priority  is  to  be 
assigned  to  the  objective  of  regaining  access  to  the  international  financial  markets  as  soon  as 
possible.  Argentina  should  not  rely  on  being  able  to  cover  its  financing  needs  via  the  international 
financial institutions on a long-term basis. In this connection, it should be called to mind yet again that 
Argentina  has  been  in  debt  to  the  IMF,  for  example,  for  an  uninterrupted  period  of  more  than  two 
decades accompanied by sometimes considerable rates of increase. 
Argentina  has  to  compete  for  funding  with  other  emerging  economies  on  the  international  financial 
markets. To utilise its potential, create economic growth and jobs, and, especially, to combat poverty, 
Argentina  needs  the  confidence  of  international  investors.  In  order  to  achieve  that,  better  creditor-
debtor  relations  are  needed.  At  the  end  of  the  1990s,  Argentina  gained  a  lot  of  recognition  for  its 
exemplary relations with its creditors. It is important to re-establish such relations. The treatment of 
investors  over  the  past  two  years  has  destroyed  much  of  that  stock  of  confidence  -  not  just  for 
Argentina. 
At this point, it is worth noting that - in contrast to flows of capital to South East Asia - total inflows of 
private capital to Latin America went down by half last year compared with their level at the end of 
2001 according to the latest estimates of the Washington Institute of International Finance. 
There are reasons for this, which have to be taken very seriously. 
In Argentina, there are two problem areas which need a rapid and constructive solution. 
1. 
the  banking  sector:  recapitalisation  of 
the  banks 
Reform  of 
is  urgently  required; 
compensation  for  the  asymmetrical  indexation  and  pesofication  should  be  brought  to  a 
conclusion  and  the  still  open  question  of  offsetting  the  losses  arising  from  the  ‘amparos’ 
should be brought to a settlement as soon as possible. The tax on financial transactions is 
not conducive to strengthening the banking system either. 
Restructuring Argentina’s debt. International investors naturally also continue to be deterred 
by Argentina’s still unresolved debt problem. Since the Argentinian government unilaterally 
ceased making payments to foreign private creditors more than two years ago, hardly any 
progress  has  been  made  towards  rescheduling  the  debt  apart  from  naming  a  banking 
consortium. The offer presented in September 2003 is evidently unacceptable to the private 
creditors. Without wishing to interfere in this process, I believe it would be in Argentina’s own 
interests  to  enter  quickly  into  meaningful  negotiations  with  the  private  creditors  and  their 
representatives  who  are  willing  to  hold  talks.  This  should  be  done  on  the  basis  of  an 
ambitious time schedule. The aim should be to find a solution that is sustainable over the 
long  term  and  fair  to  both  sides.  This  must  not  place  too  great  a  strain  on  Argentina’s 
economic and financial capacities. Nor must excessive demands be placed on the creditors’ 
willingness to waive claims. 
2. 
Those  are  the  key  preconditions  for  regaining  access  to  the  international  capital  markets.  I  repeat: 
rapid success in rescheduling is in Argentina’s own interests and is not something to be disregarded. 
What has to be considered in this context is that a significantly higher primary surplus is required for 
this. The budget approved by Congress for the current year provides a basis for raising the primary 
surplus. 
International community 
During the past few years, the international community has given extensive assistance to Argentina 
and  not  abandoned  it  to  its  fate.  Argentina  remains  an  important  member  of  the  international 
community of states. Argentina’s membership of the G-20, which was established in 1999, underlines 
that  standing.  Every  country  enjoys  advantages  as  a  member  of  the  international  community. 
Membership also entails obligations, which must not be infringed, let alone destroyed. They have to be 
fulfilled under all circumstances. 
Argentina’s  debt  to  the  international  financial  institutions  at  the  end  of  2003  amounted  to  around 
US$31 billion. In line with their share of capital in the IFIs, the member states of the European Union 
bear US$10 billion of this compared with around US$5 billion for the USA. Even though the IMF and 
multilateral development banks have paid out this financial aid only with the imposition of conditions, 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
Argentina’s sovereignty has been upheld in all cases. However, there arises from that a responsibility 
to use the funds for the intended purposes. 
Conversely, the international financial institutions and their shareholders are responsible for the funds 
being allocated only in accordance with the conditionality of the relevant statutes of the IFIs. The IMF, 
for example, may grant financial aid only to avert a temporary balance of payments crisis and subject 
to conditions. The revolving nature of the IMF’s resources fundamentally prohibits their prolonged use. 
The international financial institutions, the IMF and the World Bank, and their shareholders have had a 
lot  a  patience  with  Argentina  recently.  The  discussions  of  the  IMF  Executive  Board  at  the  end  of 
January and the G-7 statement of Boca Raton show that the shareholders now want to see results. It 
is expected that Argentina will work constructively with the IMF. As is the case for every IMF member 
and program country, binding commitments with verifiable implementation are a precondition for IMF 
loans. 
After all, the high degree of IMF involvement in Argentina has led to the emergence of doubts in some 
quarters about the preferred creditor status of the IMF and World Bank. That status, which has hitherto 
been  observed  without  qualification,  must  not  be  called  into  question  on  account  of  the  possible 
far-reaching implications it might have for the Fund’s role in overcoming disruptions to the balance of 
payments. 
Economic reforms 
The political mood in Latin America has recently turned against a market-economy-oriented policy in 
some  cases.  Many  people  in  Latin  America  associate  reforms  with  weak  growth,  low  incomes  and 
unemployment. The term “reform” does not do justice to what the word implies, however, and is used 
for measures that, looked at objectively, can hardly be described as real reforms. It therefore comes 
as no surprise that positive results fail to materialise and that people talk of “reform fatigue”. 
The current issue of the magazine Latin Finance takes an in-depth look at the subject of reform fatigue 
and the resurgence in populism.2 It describes populism as “Latin America’s chronic political disease” 
and states that “Voters may be attracted to populism, but it cannot deliver long-term growth because it 
repels private capital and investment.” That is certainly not a new insight and it by no means applies 
solely to South America, but rather has general validity. 
Following the debt crisis of the early 1980s, a comprehensive process of reform was begun in Latin 
America. Macroeconomic policy concentrated on the problem of stabilisation, while structural reforms 
promoted growth. In 1995 in Mexico, the floating of the peso and the basis provided by economic and 
financial  reforms  set  in  train  a  process  of  growth  and  slowed  down  the  debt  dynamics.  Something 
similar was repeated in Argentina at the start of the 1990s. Finally, well over a year ago, Brazil was 
able to regain investors’ confidence with a comprehensive reform programme. 
Of course, here - like in the industrial countries - a key debate is taking place on how far, how quickly 
and  at  what  time  structural  reforms  can  or  should  be  implemented.  From  a  European  perspective, 
there are two points to be made here based on general experience. 
1. 
Structural reforms make economies more flexible and therefore less susceptible to shocks. 
This  flexibility  and  the  avoidance  of  excessive  government  intervention  enhances  the 
efficiency of the economy. If reforms are implemented in a credible manner, the confidence 
of  both  investors  and  consumers  is  strengthened.  Such  a  strengthening  of  confidence 
compensates for potential short-term negative effects on the economy. Furthermore, there is 
the question of what the macroeconomic costs of failure to act would be. 
Experience  in  Europe  also  confirms  that  structural  reforms  combined  with  a  properly 
structured fiscal consolidation bring positive economic results even in the short term. 
2. 
                                                      
2  Latin Finance, February 2004. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 3
Washington Consensus 
Examples in Latin America show that a turnaround for the better is possible. What has been the key to 
success? 
In 1989, John Williamson, Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics, drew up a kind of 
basic  canon  of  recommendable  reform  policies  for  Latin  America  and  coined  the  term  “Washington 
Consensus” for this.3 Specifically, this involves the following policies: (1) macroeconomic stability as 
an indispensable prerequisite for economic growth, (2) redistribution of public expenditure in favour of 
healthcare,  education  and  the  infrastructure,  (3)  tax  reform  with  the  goal  of  a  broader  assessment 
base  and  lower  marginal  tax  rates,  (4)  liberalisation  of  the  financial  sector  including  interest  rates, 
(5) creation of a competitive exchange rate, (6) liberalisation of trade, (7) dismantling restrictions on 
foreign  direct  investment,  (8)  privatisation  of  state-owned  enterprises,  (9)  deregulation  to  make  the 
economy more competitive, and (10) safeguarding rights of ownership. 
The  Washington  Consensus  has  been  misinterpreted  -  often  unwittingly  and  sometimes  quite 
intentionally. For many, it is synonymous with “cold Neoliberalism” and “market fundamentalism”. Such 
interpretations are obviously at variance with the reforms I have just listed. Slogans such as “minimal 
state” or “free, unfettered movement of capital” are nowhere to be found among the ten points. After 
all,  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  promoting  a  particular  ideology  but  is  simply  a  matter  of  applying 
economic laws in a market framework. 
A  further  misinterpretation  concerns  the  reform  programme’s  relationship  with  the  international 
institutions  which  have  their  headquarters  in  Washington.  There  are  some  people  who  claim  that  it 
was the power of these institutions that had triggered the reforms in Argentina. Such interpretations 
obviously overestimate the impact of this programme, however. Incidentally, these reforms were no 
more than the lowest common denominator that prevailed in Washington in the early 1990s. 
As I see it, all the reform polices recommended by the Washington Consensus retain their full validity 
even today for Argentina and Latin America in general. That also goes for exchange rate policy. The 
1991 decision to peg the peso to the US dollar through a currency board was right for Argentina at the 
time.  After  years  of  hyperinflation,  the  currency  board  was  an  important  and  successful  element  of 
Argentina’s  stabilisation  strategy.  Over  the  years,  however,  the  strict  pegging  to  the  US dollar 
handicapped 
flexible 
arrangements  at  an  earlier  stage  would  therefore  have  been  better.  Even  those  who  supported  a 
currency board now admit that floating the peso at the end of the 1990s would have been beneficial 
for Argentina. By the way, the Bundesbank has always pointed out as a matter of principle that, when 
a currency board regime is introduced, those charged with responsibility for policy should always have 
an exit strategy as well. 
I wish to stress once again that the elements of the Washington Consensus are still valid today. How 
the elements are implemented - in other words, in what sequence and at what pace - depends on the 
particular circumstances in the country concerned. 
international  competitiveness  - 
introduction  of  more 
the  country’s 
the 
the importance of sound institutions, and 
the social dimension of economic developments. 
Reform Consensus “plus” 
Having  said  that,  it  would  seem  appropriate  to  give  some  thought  to  augmenting  the  consensus,  a 
“Consensus plus”. For me, this concerns two points in particular: 
1. 
2. 
Recently, the debate on economic reforms has undergone a shift of emphasis. Without doubt, stability-
oriented macropolicy is still key. Alongside the continuing unquestioned importance of issues such as 
privatisation combined with market liberalisation, deregulation and a general limitation of government 
activity,  the  public  institutional  conditions  for  the  appropriate  functioning  of  the  markets  have  come 
more sharply into focus of late. Essentially, this concerns the role the institutions play in a country’s 
economic development. Sound institutions play a part in reducing a country’s susceptibility to external 
and internal negative shocks. 
                                                      
3 
John Williamson, “From Reform Agenda to Damaged Brand Name”, Finance & Development, September 2003, p 10. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2004
More than anything else, it is the crises in emerging markets during the past ten years which have 
clearly  revealed  what  grave  implications  non-existent  or  unsound  institutions  can  have.  Institutions 
anchor  sovereign  action  in  a  reliable  framework  and  can  improve  the  consistency  and  continuity  of 
political  measures.  Strong  institutions  are  needed  for  good  policy  to  become  effective.  That  also 
applies to central banks which have to be independent of political influence. 
If, say, the domestic financial markets of emerging economies are only inadequately developed, the 
countries often tend towards an unsound debt structure by borrowing in the excessively short term and 
in foreign currency. Moreover, some emerging markets liberalised the financial sector relatively quickly 
without  a  parallel  adequate  strengthening  of  the  banks’  risk  management  and  of  the  oversight  and 
supervisory institutions. 
Since last year, the most important industrial and emerging countries represented in the G-20 have 
been taking an in-depth look at the importance of sound institutions. There is a general consensus that 
susceptibility to crises can be reduced if a country establishes efficient domestic capital markets and 
creates  independent  supervisory  institutions  to  oversee  the  financial  intermediaries  and  markets. 
Broad, deep and liquid domestic financial markets can alleviate tensions if access to the international 
financial markets should deteriorate at some time. 
What is also crucial is the development of a modern and efficient payment system in which the central 
bank is actively involved. Various studies have shown that the direct involvement of the central bank in 
payment system operations is advantageous, above all, for emerging markets. 
Above and beyond that, the legal system is an integral component of a given country’s institutional 
framework  and  is  of  major  importance  for  the  satisfactory  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  That 
implies a credible statutory framework for monetary and fiscal policies, including the independence of 
the central bank, rules on competition and regulations for corporate governance. A sound legal system 
guarantees the freedom and fulfilment of contracts and the enforcement of private rights of ownership. 
Of importance are appropriate and unambiguous rules and regulations which are rigorously enforced 
by the courts of law. 
The second point concerns the social dimension in the sense of creating social security systems and, 
amongst other things, promoting education and training. This social dimension, however, could also be 
understood  in  the  sense  of  a  social  market  economy  based  on  the  German  model  that  was 
successfully applied by Ludwig Erhard more than half a century ago. 
Social market economy 
The concept of the social market economy is based on economic freedom safeguarded by the rule of 
law.  This  is  supplemented  by  arrangements  pertaining  to  social  security  and  equitable  distribution. 
According to this concept, economic activity is a matter for the private sector, while the government’s 
policy  sets  the  framework  in  which  economic  activity  unfolds  (or  Ordnungspolitik  as  it  is  known  in 
Germany). The social market economy requires and encourages competition and entrepreneurship, a 
sense of personal responsibility and a readiness to take risks. 
The “social” element in the market economy concept means that market freedom is restricted on social 
grounds in those areas where it produces socially undesirable outcomes. Furthermore, the results of 
the economic process should be corrected in those places where they do not appear social enough in 
the light of society’s values. A properly understood social policy envisages a subsidiary role for the 
state. The duties of the state should be confined to providing financial insurance against existential 
risks, such as illness and old age, and to promoting education and training. 
Unfortunately, we in Germany have moved away from these principles of the social market economy 
during the past 30 years. We have overextended the welfare state and, by doing so, overstrained the 
capacity of our economy. For that reason, an in-depth discussion on reverting to the principles of the 
social market economy has got under way. 
Given  the  country’s  generous  social  safety  net,  social  policy  for  Germany  means  that  transfer 
payments should be restricted to those groups of persons who are really in need. For Latin America, 
the weight of basic social problems means that other priorities are likely to apply. For both Europe and 
Latin  America,  however,  it  remains  equally  important  that  the  emphasis  on  social  aspects  of  the 
market economy does not result in the efficiency of the economy being impaired. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 5
The  difficulty  of  pushing  through  reforms  is  something  of  which  we  in  Germany  are  only  too  well 
aware. We  are  emerging from  a  three-year  period  of  stagnation  in  which  potential  growth declined. 
Every effort therefore has to be made to raise potential growth to a sustained higher level again. A 
number of reforms have now been initiated. Nevertheless, the adopted reforms can be no more than a 
first  step.  We  in  Germany  need  an  all-embracing  modernisation  of  society,  government  and  the 
economy. 
Conclusion 
The Governor of the Mexican central bank, Guillermo Ortiz, recently made a call for Latin America’s 
reform fatigue to be overcome.4 I concur in that objective and would like to stress, in particular, that 
greater  efforts  in  terms  of  creating  sound  institutions  could  play  a  major  part  in  achieving  it.  That 
applies not just to emerging markets in Latin America but also to many industrial countries. 
Argentina has a number of difficult years behind it. At the same time, the people of Argentina will have 
a better future to look forward to if it mobilises its own abilities and strengths. Argentina is a country 
with  great  potential.  What  is  now  needed  is  to  strengthen  that  self-belief  and  to  use  the  economic 
potential that is available. 
                                                      
4  Guillermo Ortiz, Overcoming Reform Fatigue, Finance & Development, September 2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2004
