Jean-Claude Trichet: Presentation of the European Central Bank’s Annual 
Report for 2003 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 27 April 2004.  
 In  four  days'  time  the  EU  will  witness  the  most  significant  enlargement  in  its  history  when  some 
75 million  people  from  ten  central  and  eastern  European  and  Mediterranean  countries  join  the 
European  Union.  The  importance  of  this  enlargement  goes  beyond  considerations  of  size.  Its 
significance  lies  in  its  political  message.  By  overcoming  post-war  rifts,  Europe  has  passed  another 
milestone along the way to establishing an “ever closer union” among its peoples.  
I will come back to this issue at the end of my opening remarks. I should like to start by reporting on 
economic  and  monetary  issues.  Since  I  have  the  pleasure  today  of  presenting  to  you  the  ECB’s 
Annual Report 2003, I would first like to briefly review economic and monetary developments over the 
past year, and then turn to developments that have occurred since our last meeting in mid-February. I 
should  then  like  to  address  another  important  issue  raised  in  the  Report,  namely  the  Governing 
Council’s evaluation of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.  
Economic and monetary developments 
In 2003, monetary policy in the euro area operated in a rather uncertain and challenging environment. 
In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  stagnated  in  the  context  of  considerable 
economic  and  geopolitical  uncertainty,  due  to  the  escalation  of  tensions  in  Iraq  and  the  associated 
turbulence  in  oil  prices  and  financial  markets.  It  was  only  from  the  summer  of  2003  that  a  global 
economic recovery began and euro area economic confidence gradually started to improve. After the 
moderate recovery in the second half of the year, real GDP growth in the euro area amounted to 0.4% 
for 2003 as a whole. 
In this context, HICP inflation fell from an annual rate of 2.3% in both 2001 and 2002 to 2.1% in 2003. 
The  persistence  of  inflation  above  2%  in  2003  was  due  mainly  to  unexpected  increases  in  some 
volatile  components  of  the  HICP,  such  as  oil  prices  and,  in  the  second  half  of  2003,  food  prices. 
Increases in indirect taxes and administrative prices also played an important role. At the same time, 
there were good reasons in 2003 to expect that annual HICP inflation would decline to below 2% in 
2004 and remain consistent with price stability over the medium term.  
This picture of a favourable outlook for price stability that resulted from our economic analysis was not 
challenged when cross-checked with the monetary analysis. Much of the strength of monetary growth 
in early 2003 was due to the high level of economic and financial market uncertainty prevailing at that 
time,  which  prompted  portfolio  shifts  into  safer,  short-term  liquid  assets  included  in  M3.  In  the 
Governing Council’s assessment, the accumulation of excess liquidity was less of a concern for price 
stability as long as the economic recovery in the euro area remained gradual. 
In view of the moderation of inflationary pressures in the first half of 2003, the key ECB interest rates 
were reduced by 25 basis points in March 2003 and by 50 basis points in June to reach the historically 
low level of 2.0%. Since then rates have remained unchanged. The low level of interest rates across 
the maturity spectrum provides ongoing support to the economic recovery in the euro area. 
Let me now turn to more recent developments. The evidence available continues to indicate that the 
moderate recovery of euro area real GDP growth that started in the second half of 2003 has continued 
in 2004. Although recently released economic indicators have been mixed, we remain confident in our 
expectation of a gradual recovery, a continued, though modest, real GDP growth in the euro area. 
Conditions remain in place for the recovery to continue in 2004 and to gather strength over time. The 
strength  of global  demand  provides a  positive  external  environment  in  which  euro area  exports are 
expected  to  grow  significantly  both  this  year  and  next.  On  the  domestic  front,  favourable  financing 
conditions  and  an  improvement  in  corporate  earnings  should  continue  to  support  investment  in  the 
euro area. Euro area firms also look set to return to issuing equity, although only in modest quantities, 
favoured by the decline in the cost of equity. Issuance of debt securities by non-financial corporations 
was  robust  throughout  2003,  but  slowed  somewhat  at  the  start  of  2004.  Growth  in  real  disposable 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 1
income  should  sustain  private  consumption  at  a  time  when  there  are  no  financial  constraints  on 
households that could pose an obstacle to higher spending. Over time, private consumption should 
also be fostered by an improvement in the labour market situation. 
Looking at price developments, annual HICP inflation has been below 2% since December last year. 
Over  the  coming  months,  annual  inflation  rates  will  edge  up,  mainly  on  account  of  energy  price 
developments and increases in indirect taxes. However, looking beyond these short-term fluctuations, 
the outlook for price stability continues to be favourable. In a context of gradual economic recovery, 
wage developments should remain moderate. The lagged effects of the past appreciation of the euro 
exchange rate will continue to alleviate import price pressures. They should thereby also dampen the 
inflationary impact of the rise in commodity prices, which is largely related to strong demand at the 
global level.  
Turning  to  monetary  developments,  annual  M3  growth  has  been  moderating  since  the  summer  of 
2003,  albeit  only  slowly,  while  the  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has  been  edging  up.  Both 
monetary and credit growth are supported by the low level of interest rates prevailing in the euro area, 
and  may  also  reflect  the  improvement  in  the  economic  environment  since  last  summer.  Given  the 
strength of M3 growth over the past few years, there is currently more liquidity in the euro area than is 
needed  to  finance  non-inflationary  growth.  The  effects  of  this  high  liquidity  on  inflation  will  greatly 
depend  on  future  developments  in  the  economy  and  the  financial  markets.  Should  excess  liquidity 
persist, it could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
Overall, at this juncture, given the expected gradual nature of the economic recovery, the outlook for 
price  developments  remains  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  expectation  is  in  line  with  available 
forecasts  and  projections.  Obviously,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  all 
developments that could affect the assessment of risks to price stability over the medium term.  
In  terms  of  fiscal  policy,  2003  was  a  disappointing  year.  Public  finances  in  several  Member  States 
were marked by significant deficits, a large part of which were of a structural nature. There is a risk of 
continued  or  renewed  deficits  above  3%  of  GDP  in  several  countries  over  the  coming  years.  As  a 
consequence,  after  several  years  of  uninterrupted,  albeit  moderate  declines,  the  aggregate 
debt-to-GDP ratio in the euro area has started to rise again.  
In the light of these budgetary imbalances, the Stability and Growth Pact must be implemented. As 
you will recall, in November 2003, the ECOFIN Council made a commitment to continuously monitor 
budgetary  developments  and  to  act  accordingly  if  countries  did  not  live  up  to  their  obligations.  The 
European Commission has announced its intention to activate the procedures foreseen by the Pact to 
prevent and deter excessive deficits. We support the Commission’s initiatives. They are necessary to 
maintain the credibility of the fiscal framework, which, in turn, is essential for fostering macroeconomic 
stability and growth in the euro area in the long run. 
On a more positive note, 2003 saw progress in several euro area countries towards structural reforms. 
These  reforms  are  necessary  to  maintain  and  strengthen  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential  over  the 
long  term  and  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  the  euro  area  economy  to  adjust  smoothly  to  external 
shocks.  
While progress has been made, substantial further efforts are needed. I therefore warmly welcome the 
Presidency  conclusions  of  the  Brussels  European Council  held on  26  March 2004,  which underline 
that the pace of reform needs to be stepped up significantly.  
The evaluation of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy  
Turning  to  specific  issues  raised  in  the  ECB’s  Annual  Report  2003,  let  me  briefly  summarise  the 
Governing  Council’s  comprehensive  evaluation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  was 
carried out in the first half of 2003.  
Since  1999,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  with  its  clear  focus  on  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability, has served to anchor long-term inflation expectations in the euro area at low levels. It has 
also  provided  both  a  solid  basis  for  internal  decision-making  and  a  consistent  framework  for  the 
presentation  of  policy  decisions  to  the  public.  The  strategy  has  been  an  indispensable  tool  in 
organising the analysis prepared for the Governing Council and in structuring the discussion within the 
Council. The strategy has also provided a sound framework for the ECB’s overall accountability.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2004
Following the detailed evaluation, the Governing Council confirmed the main elements of the strategy 
originally  announced  in  1998,  namely  its  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  and  the  two-pillar 
structure  underlying  the  overall  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability.  We  continue  to  define  price 
stability as a year-on-year increase of below 2% in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) 
for the euro area. At the same time, we clarified that in the pursuit of price stability the ECB aims to 
keep inflation rates below, but close to 2% over the medium term.  
In addition, the Governing Council also confirmed that its monetary policy decisions would continue to 
be based on a comprehensive analysis of the risks to price stability, comprising an economic analysis 
and a monetary analysis. The economic analysis seeks to identify short to medium-term risks to price 
stability.  The  monetary  analysis  assesses  medium  to  long-term  trends  in  inflation,  given  the  close 
relationship between money and prices over extended horizons. The Governing Council emphasised 
that  the  monetary  analysis  would  serve  mainly  as  a  means  of  cross-checking,  from  a  medium  to 
longer-term  perspective,  the  short  to  medium-term  indications  coming  from  the  economic  analysis. 
Given the medium to long-term nature of the monetary analysis, the Governing Council decided to no 
longer  review  the  reference  value  for  M3  on  an  annual  basis.  We  trust  that  the  monetary  analysis 
serves us well in helping anchoring the long term expectations of inflation, which is very important for 
the  success  of  our  monetary  policy  as  well  as  for  preserving  a  financial  environment  favourable  to 
growth and job creation. 
The  outcome  of  the  evaluation  ensured  continuity  with  the  past  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The 
changes to the presentation of the two-pillar framework were made in order to explain the conduct of 
monetary  policy  more  clearly  to  the  general  public  as  well  as  to  market  participants  and  economic 
agents. We trust that the clarification has helped to improve the overall understanding of our strategy. 
EU enlargement 
To conclude my statement, let me make a few comments on EU enlargement.  
Besides the historic dimension, EU enlargement will also imply substantial benefits in economic terms, 
both  for  the  new  and  the  current  Member  States.  In  the  ten  acceding  countries,  the  prospect  of 
accession has encouraged countries to pursue economic policies that have already led to substantial 
progress in macroeconomic stabilisation and structural reforms. This progress is set to continue, as 
the  new  Member  States  will  be  subject  to  the  EU’s  overall  economic  policy  coordination  and 
surveillance  framework.  Looking  further  ahead,  full  integration  into  the  Single  Market  will  increase 
growth  prospects  and  thus  foster  the  catching-up  process  with  the  current  Member  States,  mainly 
through trade and investment.  
At the same time, the new Member States will be confronted with a number of challenges. One key 
challenge  for  the  acceding  countries  will  be  to  advance  real  convergence  without  putting  current 
achievements in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability at risk. At the moment, the gap in per 
capita income between the current Member States and most of the new ones remains large. Also, in 
most cases, the process of catching-up in real incomes has been slower than initially expected. This 
stresses  the  need  for  prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  such  as  those  that  lock  in  inflation  at  low 
levels,  that  preserve  the  soundness  of  the  financial  sector,  that  renew  efforts  towards  fiscal 
consolidation and, in a few cases, that correct unsustainable external imbalances.  
Another  major  challenge  for  the  new  Member  States  will  be  monetary  integration.  Upon  accession, 
these countries will join the EU as “Member States with a derogation”, and the central banks of the 
new Member States will gain the status of “full member” in the ESCB - just like the central banks from 
the three current EU Member States that are not part of the euro area. The new Member States will be 
required  to  treat  their  exchange  rate  policies  as  a  matter  of  common  interest  and  to  pursue  price 
stability as the primary objective of monetary policy. Under the Treaty, they will be expected to join 
ERM II at some point. To ensure smooth participation in ERM II, major policy adjustments - such as 
price liberalisation and credible fiscal consolidation plans - must be made prior to participation in the 
mechanism.  
Sometime  in  the  future,  monetary  integration  of  the  new  Member  States  will  culminate  in  these 
countries  adopting  the  euro.  This  will  be  an  irrevocable  decision  and,  therefore,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  countries  fulfil  the  convergence  criteria  both  in  a  nominal  and  a  real  -  namely 
sustainable - manner before they join the euro area, in accordance with the Treaty.  
BIS Review 24/2004 
 3
Since the signing of the Treaty of Accession in April 2003, the dialogue among central bankers from 
the current and new Member States has been further strengthened to help the national central banks 
of the new Member States to prepare for accession to the ESCB. Indeed, cooperation among central 
banks has played an important role in this regard.  
Over  the  last  four-and-a-half  years,  staff  members  from  the  ECB  and  the  euro  area  NCBs  have 
devoted  around  22,000  working  days  to  such  cooperation  activities.  Over  the  past  year,  the 
Eurosystem has continued  to  provide assistance  to  central  banks  of  the  acceding countries  in  their 
technical preparations for a smooth integration into the ESCB, in particular, high-level policy seminars, 
training courses at expert level and other activities. And most notably, since June 2003, the governors 
of  the  acceding  country  central  banks  have  attended  meetings  of  the  ECB’s  General  Council  as 
observers.  
So the ECB and the ESCB are well prepared both for EU enlargement itself and for the challenges 
that the future monetary integration of the new Member States will pose. We will continue to steer the 
process of monetary integration in keeping with the principles of the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary 
policy, in line with the Treaty provisions.  
Given that this is my last testimony to your Committee during this parliamentary term, let me take the 
opportunity to thank you all - Madam Chair, honourable Members - for your excellent cooperation. I 
look forward to continuing our regular dialogue with the new Committee in the next parliamentary term.  
4 
 BIS Review 24/2004
