Philipp Hildebrand: The new investment policy of the Swiss National Bank 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 17 June 2004. 
 The evolution of the new investment policy 
1.  
The  new  National  Bank  Act  has  been  in  force  since  1  May  2004.  The  management  of  monetary 
reserves is explicitly mentioned in the NBA as part of the Swiss National Bank’s mandate for the first 
time.  The  management  of  these  reserves  is  subject  to  the  primacy  of  monetary  policy  and 
implemented according to the criteria of liquidity, security and return. In so doing, the National Bank 
must guarantee professional, modern asset management and risk management. 
Until the mid-1990s, the National Bank only had limited possibilities for managing its assets. Monetary 
reserves were mainly held in the form of gold and foreign-currency government bonds with a maturity 
of  less  than  one  year.  Accounting  for  approximately  80%,  the  US  dollar  was  the  main  reserve 
currency.  An  easing  of  investment  regulations  came  about  in  1997  when  the  legally  prescribed 
maximum term for bonds was repealed and repo and gold lending business was introduced. At the 
same time, the National Bank began to diversify currency risks on its investments to a greater degree 
and  gradually  reduced  the  US  dollar  portion.  The  new  Act  takes  this  a  step  further  and  leaves  the 
permissible investment universe completely open. 
Implementation of the investment policy 
2.  
Our  investment  policy  has  not  fundamentally  changed  with  the  new  Act.  The  monetary  reserves 
continue  to  constitute  core  assets  for  monetary  policy.  They  allow  the  National  Bank  to  exert  an 
influence  on  the  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  in  exceptional  situations  and  are  available  as  an 
internationally accepted means of payment in a crisis situation. This presupposes a minimum degree 
of liquidity of these assets. Moreover, monetary reserves enhance the credibility of monetary policy 
and  foster  confidence  in  the  Swiss  franc.  The  security  of  these  investments  and  growth  of  the 
monetary reserves in step with the development of the Swiss economy is an important consideration in 
this  context.  This  is  why  monetary  reserves  ought  to  provide  an  adequate  return,  while  taking  into 
account  the  monetary  policy  restrictions.  It  is  the  aim  of  our  investment  policy  to  strike  an  optimal 
balance between the criteria of liquidity, security, and return. 
We  assess  and  regularly  review  the  National  Bank’s  liquidity  requirements  -  i.e.  its  need  for  easily 
realisable and hence easily accessible assets - on the basis of our experience and taking due account 
of the current situation. Given the Bank’s large portfolio holdings in US dollar and euro government 
bonds, the liquidity requirements are currently more than met. This creates a certain amount of leeway 
for investing in instruments that are less liquid but generate a higher return. 
The investment criterion “security” must be seen in the context of the monetary reserves as a whole. 
The National Bank incurs risks on its investments that cannot be hedged based on monetary policy 
concerns.  Losses  from  gold  and  foreign  currencies  in  particular  can  be  significant.  An  adequate 
volume  of  reserves  allows  the  National  Bank  to  bear  these  risks,  especially  since  such  fluctuating 
values tend to correct themselves over the long term. Greater diversification of both the currencies and 
the investment instruments can bring about the necessary growth of monetary reserves. Diversification 
effects permit investments in higher-yielding and - from an individual perspective - riskier investments 
such as equities and corporate bonds without substantially increasing the overall risk. 
The return potential of monetary reserves depends on the liquidity and security requirements of the 
investments in terms of monetary policy considerations. Pursuing an efficient investment policy for the 
National  Bank  means  achieving  a  return  potential  that  is  as  high  as  possible  within  the  existing 
restrictions.  Under  the  new  Act,  the  National  Bank  will  pursue  a  broader  diversification  of  its 
investments and, in particular, also invest in equities and corporate bonds. 
Because  of  the  National  Bank’s  special  position  as  a  central  bank,  the  exposure  to  equities  and 
corporate  bonds  is  subject  to  some  specific  considerations:  first,  a  conflict  of  interest  may  arise 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 1
between monetary policy and investment policy. For instance, interest rate hikes by the National Bank 
can have a negative impact on a company’s profits. Second, owing to its responsibilities in the area of 
system  stability,  the  National  Bank  has  insider  information  in  the  financial  sector.  And  third,  the 
National  Bank’s  investments  in  equities  and  corporate  bonds  can  have  a  noticeable  impact  on  risk 
premiums on the capital markets, especially in illiquid markets. 
These considerations primarily concern equities and bonds issued by Swiss firms. They are therefore 
excluded  from  the  National  Bank’s  investment  universe.  Holdings  of  foreign  equities  and  corporate 
bonds do not present a problem in this regard. 
A passive management strategy based on indices with liquid, listed securities is followed for equities 
portfolios. Consequently, we do not engage in stock picking or sector picking. As a rule, we do not 
exercise our voting right at annual general meetings. In the case of corporate bonds, attention is given 
to broad diversification from issuer-specific risk. Despite active management, therefore, the corporate 
bond portfolio cannot deviate from the market index to any considerable degree. 
The new investment process: different functions largely separated 
3.  
The market and credit risks of individual transactions increase as the investment spectrum becomes 
broader.  Operational risks,  including conflicts  of  interest  and  the problem  of  insider  know-how,  also 
gain in importance as asset management strategy becomes more active. We have therefore evaluated 
the investment process with a view to the requirements of good governance. Important changes in this 
process include the following: investment and monetary policy decisions have been largely uncoupled, 
the  definition  and  implementation  of  strategy  have  been  segregated,  controlling  has  been  made  an 
autonomous function, and the National Bank’s Bank Council has been tasked with integral monitoring 
of the investment and risk processes. 
The Governing Board of the National Bank decides on the medium-term investment strategy for the 
monetary  reserves.  Taking  into  consideration  the  criteria  of  security  and  liquidity,  an  appropriate 
risk/return  profile  is  targeted.  In  addition  to  the  strategic  allocation  to  the  individual  currencies  and 
investment categories, the Governing Board defines the permissible range for implementation. 
Department  III  implements  the  strategy.  Within  the  defined  bandwidths,  an  internal  investment 
committee decides on positions which deviate from the strategy. 
In the risk controlling process, compliance with the strategy guidelines and the operative limits as well 
as  the  quality  of  the  debtor  categories  are  monitored.  Performance  is  also  measured.  With  the 
expansion of the investment spectrum to include issuers with lower credit ratings, risk monitoring is 
gaining  in  importance.  The  Governing  Board  and  the  Bank  Council’s  Risk  Committee  are  regularly 
informed  about  the  results  of  the  risk  controlling  process.  The  Bank  Council’s  Risk  Committee 
assesses risk control and also oversees adherence to the principles of the investment process. 
Transparency: a further element of good governance 
4.  
The National Bank has an accountability and information obligation not only to the bank authorities but 
also  to  the  public.  Since  the  monetary  reserves  ultimately  constitute  national  assets,  this  obligation 
also applies to the investment policy. The accountability obligation includes regular reporting on our 
investment activities. 
The  National  Bank  already  provides  information  on  the  structure  of  its  assets  in  its  Annual  Report, 
including details on currency allocation, holdings of individual investment categories, and on the major 
risk and return indicators. The Investment Policy Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank, which have 
just been published for the first time, contain additional information on the investment and risk control 
process  and  on  the  investment  universe.  They  define  the  principles  of  investment  policy  and  the 
investment  categories  underlying  the  strategy,  and  describe  the  areas  of  responsibility.  The 
quantitative information already published in the Annual Report will also be published on a quarterly 
basis  in  the  future,  thus  providing  the  public  with  even  more  comprehensive  information  on  our 
investment activities. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2004
Conclusion 
5.  
The management of the monetary reserves has gained in importance. The National Bank Act requires 
the National Bank to manage its monetary reserves professionally, subject to the primacy of monetary 
policy. After the new Act entered into force, we began to further optimise the investment structure. The 
increased  leeway  for  investment  is  used  for  greater  diversification.  The  structure  of  the  National 
Bank’s investments is thus becoming more efficient overall, yet without compromising monetary policy 
requirements in terms of the liquidity and security of these investments. We will also take advantage of 
the  extended  legal  scope  with  regard  to  the  free  assets,  i.e.  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  gold 
reserves no longer required. 
Investment Policy Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank (235 kb) 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 3
