Catherine Kumar: Setting the agenda for hemispheric progress - developments 
in the Caribbean region 
Presentation by Ms Catherine Kumar, Inspector of Financial Institutions, Central Bank of Trinidad and 
Tobago, at the VII Annual Assembly of the Assocation of Supervisors of the Banks of the Americas 
(ASBA), Atlanta, 2-5 June 2004. 
 Introduction 
Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, let me first thank ASBA for their kind invitation to address you 
on  behalf of the  Caribbean  Region  at  this  very  important Conference.  It  is  indeed  a pleasure  to  be 
here at my first meeting with ASBA as a group since I only recently joined this prestigious group of 
Regulators. 
As  I  prepare  to  present  to  you  on  the  issues  and  challenges  that  are  currently  facing  us  in  the 
Caribbean region, I would like to first update you on some important supervisory changes that have 
occurred in Trinidad and Tobago over the last few days. As many of you are aware, our Government 
had been working assiduously to have the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago assume the role of 
the  Supervisor  and  Regulator  of  the  insurance  industry  and  registered  pension  plans.  This  has 
become a reality as an amendment to the current Insurance Act was enacted May 25th, 2004. The 
challenges resulting from this Amendment as you would imagine are many for me and I look forward 
to your support. The Insurance Industry has been expanding borders within the region and doing this 
without proper supervision or regulation. It is the Central Bank’s mandate to correct this and to do it 
with urgency. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the supervisory bodies in our region are facing many challenges as a result of 
globalization.  The  CGBS  therefore  chose  the  theme  “Towards  Effective  Regional  Financial  Sector 
Supervision within a Globalized Context” for this year’s Conference to deal with some of the issues. 
The presentations were very thought provoking and in most cases solutions/recommendations were 
offered, that the CGBS will be seriously considering and implementing as considered necessary. Let 
me thank Jamaica and Deputy Governor Audrey Anderson for their leadership of the Caribbean Group 
of Bank Supervisors. 
It is not possible for me to discuss with you today all the issues raised at the Conference but I would 
like  to  focus  on  two  major  areas  and  the  supervisory  response.  These  are  (1)  the  imminent 
establishment of the Caricom Single Market and Economy (CSME) and, (2) the ongoing challenges of 
consolidated supervision. I will conclude my address with an update on the developments in Trinidad 
and Tobago. 
The CSME 
There is no doubt that this meeting today is taking place at a time when global growth prospects are 
strengthening,  but  unfortunately  this  is  happening  with  significant  downside  risks  such  as  massive 
payments imbalances and an impending transition to a higher interest rate environment. In fact, the 
ramifications  of  globalization  are  clear  when  we  analyze  the  effects  on  many  of  our  smaller  and 
vulnerable economies of a likely hike in interest rates in the United States and generally the shifting 
global  interest  rate  environment.  The  continued  volatility  in  world  petroleum  prices  is  also  another 
factor which impacts most if not all of our economies. 
We therefore have to agree that the global liberalization of trade and finance is now well established 
and  we  have  to  accept  that  there  is  no  turning  back  for  any  of  us  in  the  region.  It  is  against  this 
background  that  the  Caribbean  is  rapidly  forging  ahead  towards  its  goal  of  a  single  market  and 
economy (CSME) by December 2004. Caricom member states have agreed to remove restrictions on 
capital mobility, on the establishment of businesses and on the movement of prescribed skills among 
our countries. As Ambassador Narace who heads the Trinidad and Tobago CSME Unit said recently: 
“If  we  are  to  succeed  from  the  new  hemispheric  arrangement  offered  by  the  Free  Trade  of  the 
Americas it would be important for the Caribbean to develop strong Caribbean brands and the CSME 
does exactly that by providing the environment that would create that”. The Caricom Secretariat has 
already  produced  a  Caribbean  Single  Market  and  Economy  Bill  and  the  CGBS  has  received 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 1
 information of work begun by the Caricom Secretariat on a model Caribbean Banking Statute. In fact, 
members  have  been  asked  to  submit  their  comments  on  the  document  that  has  recently  been 
circulated. 
Some immediate and obvious concerns that the CGBS has with the Bill include:- 
• 
the  reconciliation  of  CSME  provisions  with  international  supervision  standards  and 
requirements,  for  example,  the  need  for  differential  credit  ratings  in  securities  originating 
from other member states based on international capital adequacy standards; 
difficulties  with  the  harmonization  of  the  different  legislative  frameworks  before  the 
dismantling of entry barriers; and 
the role and status of MOUs under the new proposed arrangements. 
• 
Some  of  these  issues  were  discussed  at  length  at  our  recent  CGBS  Conference  in  the  paper 
presented by the representative of Barbados in respect of the Harmonization of Regional Legislative 
and Regulation Framework within the Context of Globalization, a copy of which is available at your 
request. 
I will share a joke with you which I find meaningful. 
“A group of executives got together for a high-powered meeting. At the round table discussions they 
each put their cell phone down; you know we cannot go anywhere without this which has become part 
of us. There was much heated discussion and juggling of papers back and forth. Sometime after, the 
cell phone rang and the executive answered: 
(cid:190) 
(cid:190) 
“Hello”. 
“Hi sweetheart. I am so glad I got you. The real estate agent came around and said they can 
let us have the house for $5 million. I know it is a bit expensive but I really loved that house. 
Can I please commit?” 
“Sure darling, for you nothing is too expensive. You can commit to $5 million. 
“And you know that luxury boat we saw - I think it would be so romantic, we can sail up the 
islands. Oh how I would love to own it. It only costs $2 million.” 
“Alright it is my gift to you. $2 million is fine. You are my greatest love.” 
“And of course I want to sport that 5 carat ring on my finger when we go out and I hold your 
hand. I can see the other ladies admiring us. The jeweler said he can make me a special 
offer of $1 million for it. Can I tell him yes?” 
“My sweetheart sure you can, take the $1 million ring. Bye.” 
(cid:190) 
At the end of the conversation, much to the surprise of the others at the ease with which he made 
such major decisions without proper study and analyses, the executive said: 
“Excuse me gentlemen, but whose cell phone is this?” 
The moral of this joke - while the CGBS is working on its commentary, we have to ensure the Caricom 
Secretariat is not making quick decisions on our behalf which could have a long and consequential 
impact on effective supervision. 
I  wish  to  emphasize  however  that  the  CGBS  supports  any  arrangement  that  results  in  the 
strengthening of the region’s legislation and supervisory framework but we must ensure that proper 
measures  are  in  place  to  manage  transitioning  and  in  respect  of  the  CSME,  address  concerns  of 
jurisdictional independence. 
Colleagues, the effects of globalization are forcing us to come together as a region to try to buffer our 
smaller economies from the downside effects. The CSME is one of the ways but it is not perfect and 
so we need the combined efforts including our Latin American colleagues to make it work. 
At a recent seminar in Barbados, (The Advocate May 22, 2004) the Governor of the Central Bank of 
Barbados  had  indicated  the  need  for  the  formation  of  credit  rating  agencies  in  the  region  to  be  of 
assistance to investors who do not have the time or the training to conduct their own credit analyses. 
She was at the time discussing regional capital market developments and the fact that there must be a 
credit culture in which investors in general should be able to accurately evaluate risks and returns and 
determine  investment  and  financing  trends,  based  on  the  results  derived  from  such  evaluation 
(cid:190) 
(cid:190) 
(cid:190) 
(cid:190) 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2004
exercises. I am pleased to inform you that the Caribbean Community has finally established its own 
rating agency, the Caribbean Information & Credit Rating Agency Limited. The Agency has a capital 
base  of  three  million  dollars  and  is  the  world’s  first  regional  credit  rating  agency  offering  rating 
products in 19 countries. Crisil Limited, India’s leading ratings, financial news, risk and policy advisory 
company,  provided  the  technical  assistance  and  has  acquired  a  9%  stake  in  the  agency  and  its 
Managing Director and CEO is on the Board of the rating agency. Crisil will continue to provide the 
assistance  to  the  Agency  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  operations.  This  establishment  of  a  regional 
credit  rating  agency  is  indeed  a  positive  step  towards  a  regional  approach  to  critical  issues.  The 
agency will commence operations in October 2004. 
As our region continues its move to the CSME we must also be prepared for increased competition 
especially in the area of jobs as the marketplace becomes more unified. It is very important that our 
professional resources must become multi-tasked and multi-disciplined in order to be flexible enough 
to adapt to the new challenges. This is an area that member states must be able to manage efficiently 
through cooperation. 
I now turn to the issue of consolidated supervision 
The  concept  of  consolidated  supervision  has  been  around  for  a  while.  The  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  has  been  promoting  this  concept  by  developing  a  series  of  best  practices  for 
banking supervisors including the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (1997) that has 
become  the  world  standard  for  effective  banking  supervision.  Those  countries  in  our  region  which 
have experienced FSAPs by the multilateral agencies such as the IMF and World Bank, would know 
the importance of adhering to these Core Principles. 
Furthermore, the imminent introduction of the new Capital Accord (Basel II) has renewed focus on this 
area as there is an assumption in the Basel II methodology that consolidated supervision is practised. 
The  implications  of  the  foregoing  in  terms  of  supervisory  oversight  are  serious  as  the  banking 
organizations  in  our  region  continue  to  be  in  an  expansionary  mode  external  to  their  home 
environment. To quote from ASBA’s planning document - “The Banking Industry continues to evolve, 
leading  to  a  greater  concentration,  complexity,  technological  advancements  and  cross-functional 
integration within the industry across banks and non-bank operations.” When this is coupled with the 
development of  new  markets  and new products  through  technological  innovations,  the  possibility  of 
supervisory  arbitrage  and  the  blurring  of  lines  between  financial  products,  we  must  admit  that  as 
Supervisors our plates are full and possibly overflowing. More emphasis must therefore be placed on 
the fundamental elements of risk management practices of both financial and non-financial firms and 
we  have  to  be  up  to  the  challenging  task  of  supervising  financial  conglomerates  with  cross-border 
operations, all of which are critical elements of consolidated supervision. 
The CGBS in recognizing the challenges ahead sought to build on the sturdy foundations already in 
place  by  exploring  fresh  approaches  to  meet  the  needs  of  members,  fostering  and  enhancing 
collaboration within the group and integrating the supervisory practices in response to the emerging 
issues in the regional and international landscape. 
This included the following:- 
• 
The  need  for  accurate  and  timely  data  and  information  to  inform  the  development  and 
enhancement of financial legislation to facilitate the practice of consolidated supervision. 
A refinement of supervisory approaches to address evolution in regional financial markets, 
e.g., growth in cross border establishments, e-banking and other developments. 
Training  of  staff  at  different  skill  levels  and  for  differing  skill  sets  to  better  supervise  the 
rapidly evolving institutions in our regional markets. 
Technical  assistance  in  the  practical  applications  of  new  and/or  emerging  international 
supervisory standards and supervisory frameworks, e.g., anti-money laundering measures, 
Basel II. 
   In addition, the Technical Working Group of the CGBS as part of their mandate and with participation 
from 9 member countries formulated a regional response to the Basel Committee with respect to the 
Third Consultative Paper (CP3) issued by the Basel Committee. A copy was forwarded to ASBA. This 
response together with responses from individual jurisdictions can be found on the BIS website. 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 3
The Working Group has developed a template for the Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) to be used by 
each member state to assess the potential impact of Basel II on supervised institutions. In Trinidad 
and Tobago, we have begun the process with one of our large institutions and we have been receiving 
their full cooperation in acquiring the relevant information. At this time, I would like to acknowledge the 
role  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica  in  providing  the  resources  and  the  infrastructure  without  which  the 
Working  Group  would  not  have  been  able  to  meet  its  mandate.  We  therefore  congratulate  this 
sub-committee on the progress made and we in the region sincerely thank the Bank of Jamaica for 
their efforts. 
There is no doubt that consolidated supervision with the attendant impact on our ability as a region to 
adhere to the New Accord is indeed a challenge. In the meantime our institutions continue to become 
more complex raising the issues of potential contagion and the effective management of systemic and 
liquidity  risks.  The  need  for  specialists  in  our supervision  departments  to  deal  with  these  and  other 
emerging complexities such as financial modeling, is a matter that we must address as a region. 
As  I  conclude  my  address,  I  would  like  to  leave  you  with  an  update  on  the  developments  that  are 
currently taking place in Trinidad and Tobago and which will certainly have an impact on the region as 
a whole. 
The  financial  sector  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  considered  robust  as  it  has  been  experiencing  an 
uninterrupted period of positive economic growth over the last decade due primarily to the increased 
activity  in  the  energy  sector.  However,  there  is an  element  of  caution  being  expressed  by  both  the 
private  and  public  sectors  that  this  is  the  time  to  put  in  place  updated  regulatory  and  preventative 
measures to ensure that potential risk exposures in the financial system are significantly minimized. It 
is clear that the Government is adopting a proactive approach to ensure that we do not have a repeat 
of what took place in the 1980’s when we experienced the collapse of several financial institutions in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago.  As  a  result  of  the  foregoing,  legislative  reform  is  a  critical  aspect  of  a  White 
Paper  being  developed  to  ensure  that  Trinidad  and  Tobago  attains  first  world  status  by  2020.  As  I 
mentioned previously, the Central Bank has assumed the role of Regulator of the Insurance industry. 
The vision is for a single regulator. In the interim a regulatory council is being established which will 
provide for cooperation amongst the various regulators. 
Whilst  legislative  reform  is  critical  to  address  the  complexities  of  the  financial  sector,  other  aspects 
such as the strengthening of corporate governance, promoting market discipline and transparency are 
critical.  It  is  with  this  in  mind  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  developed  several 
Guidelines which include Corporate Governance and Fit and Proper Assessment for both banks and 
insurance companies. 
Finally, I would like to say that globalization is affecting us all and as we live in the same hemispheric 
region I am sure that our Latin American supervisory colleagues present here today are experiencing 
similar  situations  as  I  have  expressed  today.  We  therefore  need  to  work  together  by  sharing  our 
experiences  and  knowledge  at  Conferences  such  as  this  one  to  ensure  that  critical  issues  are 
addressed for the maintenance of the safety and soundness of our financial systems. 
Once again, I thank you for allowing me the opportunity to share with you some of the supervisory 
issues facing our Caribbean Group as we set the agenda for hemispheric progress. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2004
