Jaime Caruana: The New Accord and where we stand today 
Address  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  España  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Annual  Washington  Conference  of  the  Institute  of 
International Bankers, Washington, 1 March 2004. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I would like to thank the Institute of International Bankers for inviting me to join you here in the great 
city  of  Washington,  D.C.  As  the  only  non-US  regulator  participating,  it  is  an  honour,  if  perhaps  a 
daunting one, for me to try to present some reflections from the perspective of the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision  at  your  conference.  Yet  in  this  increasingly  global  world,  banking  supervisors 
need more and more to co-ordinate and work with one another. The benefit of this is that I often find 
myself  meeting  friends  and  colleagues,  both  from  within  and  outside  the  Basel  Committee.  I  am 
pleased to see that several of them are here today. This includes Chairman Powell, plus of course my 
colleagues Bill McDonough, who served as chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
before me, and Mike Zamorski from the FDIC. 
For nearly forty years, the IIB has served as an exchange for views on the issues that affect the U.S. 
activities  of  internationally  active  banking  organisations.  It  has  also  been  a  forum  for  bankers  to 
discuss  these  issues  with  regulators  and  policymakers.  An  active  dialogue  between  banks, 
supervisors, and policymakers is essential for maintaining a regulatory framework that is relevant and 
robust.  
Along  those  lines,  I  would  like  to  thank  those  who  are  participating  in  one  of  the  most  important 
dialogues in bank supervision today, namely the Committee’s consultations on the New Basel Accord 
on bank capital requirements. Many industry participants have written comment letters, participated in 
discussions,  and  provided  us  with  practical  data.  Your  suggestions  have  helped  us  to  clarify  and 
simplify our proposals for the “three pillars” of minimum requirements, supervisory review, and market 
discipline. We have listened carefully and, thanks to the hard work of the industry and to the support 
from other supervisory agencies and central banks, the proposals for the New Accord have improved 
dramatically since the first draft was published in 1999. 
The process to revise the Accord has sparked lively discussion among the industry, policymakers, and 
regulators,  naturally,  but  also  among  the  business  community,  the  popular  press,  and  other 
constituencies. One might ask why so many care so much about something as seemingly esoteric as 
bank capital requirements.  
The  answer,  I  think,  lies  in  the  unique  public  functions  that  banks  provide.  Banks  settle  payments 
among businesses and consumers. They channel savings and provide credit, which is vital to promote 
economic growth. And they safeguard public wealth. Yet banks cannot fulfil any of these tasks for long 
if they fail to remain adequately capitalised and to manage risk properly. Capital is, after all, a bank’s 
last line of defence. Even with appropriate risk management, there will be occasions when reserves 
are exhausted, leaving capital to absorb a bank’s losses. If capital is insufficient, troubled banks may 
disrupt the flow of credit and payments, with this leading to inefficiencies in markets.  
So,  many  parties  take  a  great  interest  in  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system.  In  my 
remarks, I would like to share my thoughts on the New Accord and where we stand today. I’ll cover 
four areas of interest.  
• 
I’ll  begin  with  a  reminder  of  why  a  New  Accord  is  so  important  and  so  different  from  its 
predecessor. 
That leads to our expectations for the New Accord, which is my second set of issues. Our 
overarching public policy objective is to promote a more stable financial system. To achieve 
that goal, the New Accord contains several transmission mechanisms I will elaborate upon, 
namely encouraging improvements in risk management and promoting greater cooperation 
between financial supervisors.  
Finding a way to accomplish such a wide range of objectives has not been an easy task. In 
my third batch of remarks, I’ll address some of the challenging questions we face in drafting 
the New Accord.  
  BIS Review 14/2004 
 1
 Finally, I’ll conclude by offering some thoughts on the work ahead. 
Why is the New Accord so important and so different from its predecessor? 
II. 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  focusing  on  the  first  area  of  interest  and  trying  to  answer  why  so  many 
supervisors, central banks, and banking organisations themselves have invested so much hard work 
in revising the Basel Accord. Perhaps part of the explanation is that we know, as Benjamin Franklin 
did, that diligence is the mother of good luck. But our diligence is hard to explain if you consider that, in 
so many ways, the existing 1988 Accord was already a tremendous success story. The 1988 Accord 
was simple to apply. It represented the first internationally accepted definition and measure of bank 
capital. It has been adopted in over 100 countries and has come to be acknowledged as one of the 
benchmark measures of a bank’s financial health. 
That begs a question. If the 1988 Accord was so successful, why has the Basel Committee published 
a huge number of pages on ways to improve it? Why have several hundred commercial organisations 
participated in hundreds of hours of meetings and written hundreds of comment letters to us?  
The best explanation is that the existing rules have been overtaken by the pace of innovation in the 
banking system. The simplicity of the 1988 Accord was an asset in promoting its acceptance, but its 
simplicity is quickly becoming a liability for some bankers and supervisors alike.  
Over the past 16 years, the methodologies for measuring and managing risk have evolved in ways 
that  the  architects of  the  1988  Accord  could  not  have  anticipated.  Improvements  in  technology  and 
telecommunications  have  changed  the  speed  at  which  banks  collect  and  analyse  data  on  their 
exposures. The explosive growth in the markets for securitised assets and for credit derivatives has 
offered banks new ways to manage and transfer credit risk. And a new discipline in risk management 
is  emerging  -  namely,  operational  risk  management  -  through  which  banks  are  quantifying  in  an 
increasingly reliable manner the risk of losses stemming from failures in internal processes or systems 
or from damage caused by an external disruption. 
As the art of risk management becomes more sophisticated, the static and very simple rules of the 
1988  Accord  are  becoming  less  relevant  to  the  most  advanced  banks.  Leading  banks  increasingly 
view the old rules as a burden, constraining their abilities to administer their businesses relative to the 
best  information  and  practices  available  today.  Supervisors,  for  our  part,  have  less  and  less 
confidence in the measures of risk that the 1988 Accord lays down for banks that engage in the most 
sophisticated forms of risk taking and risk mitigation.  
The goal of the New Accord: financial stability and resilience 
III. 
By the late 1990s, it became clear to leading banks and supervisors that we needed a New Accord. 
But  one  person  in  particular  knew  that  we  should  do  much  more  than  merely  revise  the  minimum 
requirements.  Bill  McDonough,  the  previous  chairman  of  the  Committee,  convinced  leaders  in  the 
industry,  in  central  banks,  and  in  supervisory  agencies  that  we  should  recognise  and  provide 
incentives to advance the state of the art in risk management across the industry. He did not seek to 
reduce the amount of capital held by the banking system but rather sought to increase the stability of 
the global financial system - a goal that would benefit not just banks, but more broadly businesses and 
consumers. 
This leads me to the second part of my remarks, namely what we expect from a New Accord. As a 
result of Bill’s initiative, the Committee has set out as its overarching goal the promotion of greater 
financial  stability.  The  members  of  the  Basel  Committee  believe  that,  when  individual  banks  are 
adequately  capitalised  and  well  managed,  they  become  more  stable  and  better  able  to  withstand 
periods  of  financial  distress.  But  more  importantly,  when  all  banks  have  the  proper  incentives  to 
manage  their  risks  appropriately  and  hold  adequate  levels  of  capital,  we  believe  that  the  entire 
financial sector becomes more resilient, less sensitive to the business cycle, and better able to act as 
a source for the sustainable growth of the broader economy. 
Increasingly, policymakers and central bankers recognise that financial stability is a public good much 
like price stability. All of us have long understood the benefits of price stability and the need for sound 
monetary  policy  in  the  pursuit  of  smooth  economic  growth.  In  recent  years,  we  have  learned  more 
about the concurrent need for a stable financial system as well. That includes the need for businesses 
and  consumers  to  have  access  to  credit  on  fair  and  reasonable  terms  through  all  stages  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2004
business cycle so that they can build and grow. We need an efficient and resilient payments system to 
maintain the flow of funds through the economy at all times. We need financial markets that remain 
active, liquid, and trusted regardless of events in the economy.  
Given  the  unique  positions  of  banks  at  the  crossroads  of  businesses  and  consumers  in  every 
economy  -  and  their  special  role  as  intermediaries  of  credit  to  both  -  nothing  threatens  financial 
stability more than the presence of poorly managed and poorly capitalised banking institutions.  
However, financial stability, like price stability, is not something that can be legislated into existence.  
The New Basel Accord will seek greater financial stability through several mechanisms, all of which 
might be considered objectives in themselves. Some of these mechanisms were already present in the 
1988 Accord, such as setting minimum quantitative capital requirements and a level playing field. But I 
want  to  focus  on  what  I  see  as  two  innovations  of  the  new  Accord.  The  first  is  to  encourage 
improvements in banks’ internal risk management processes, which should, in turn, be anchored on 
good corporate governance. The second is to promote greater cooperation and coordination among 
supervisors across jurisdictions. 
Risk management and corporate governance 
The  first  objective  is  to  encourage  banks  to  improve  their  risk  measurement  and  management 
techniques.  The  existing  rules  set  out  the  quantitative  requirements  for  capital  -  that  is,  how  much 
capital  in  dollar  terms  a  bank  should  hold  relative  to  the  kinds  of  risk  exposures  it  has.  The  New 
Accord  will  improve  those  quantitative  requirements  by  making  them  more  risk  sensitive  and  more 
closely  tailored  to  banks’  practices.  But  we  will  supplement  them  by  setting  incentives  for  banks  to 
strengthen the structures and processes through which they assess and manage their risk exposures. 
To  encourage  enhancements  in  internal  controls and  risk  management processes,  the New  Accord 
will  offer  explicit  economic  incentives  for  banks  to  adopt  more  accurate  measures of  risk  and  more 
sophisticated means for controlling their exposures to such risks.  
Of  course,  risk  management  must  be  based  on  a  strong  foundation  of  corporate  governance. 
Corporate scandals on both sides of the Atlantic - and elsewhere - have highlighted the significance of 
capable, responsible, and proactive management. The Committee has long recognised this, and this is 
why we have explicitly stressed the importance of good corporate governance in the New Accord. We 
have included provisions on the need for boards and senior management to understand the nature 
and level of the risks that their banks are exposed to, to set the bank’s tolerance to these risks, to 
ensure  that  strong  risk  management  and  internal  controls  are  adopted  throughout  the  organisation, 
and to ensure that they themselves continue to be appropriately informed about the risks being taken 
on. The New Accord also stresses the importance of independent assessments and audits. 
Let  me  now  mention  four  different  examples  of  provisions  in  the  New  Accord,  which,  through 
promoting good risk management and governance, should enhance financial resilience. 
The adoption of a comprehensive, enterprise-wide view of risk 
First,  as  you  may  know,  the  New  Basel  Accord  takes  a  big  step  forward  in  developing  a  clear, 
comprehensive, and consolidated view of the risks each bank faces. The 1988 Accord focused initially 
only on a bank’s exposures to credit risk. In the years since 1988, the Basel Committee has sought to 
mirror  the  evolution  of  best  practices  in  the  private  sector  to  identify  other  risks  and  establish 
appropriate controls for them.  
In  1996,  for  example,  the  Committee  adopted  requirements  for  banks  that  are  heavily  exposed  to 
market-related risks. The New Accord continues this trend by segregating and setting explicit capital 
requirements  for  exposures  to  operational  risk.  We  believe  that,  when  managers  and  boards  of 
directors have a better sense of the different extent and kinds of risks they face, they will make more 
informed decisions at the enterprise-wide and business line levels.  
The use of a comparable, quantitative measure for risk 
A  second  step  that  the  New  Accord  will  take  is  to  provide  banks  with  a  means  to  compare  their 
exposures to very different kinds of risks. It will require banks to express their exposures to various 
risks  using  a  common  “language,”  namely  capital.  By  expressing  exposures  to  market,  credit,  and 
operational  risk  in  directly  comparable  terms,  bank  managers  will  be  supplementing  their  more 
subjective expertise in each area with a more objective sense of the relative importance of each. For 
BIS Review 14/2004 
 3
risks not captured in the minimum requirements of the first pillar, the second pillar, supervisory review, 
is  premised  on  the  need  for  banks  to  review  their  exposures  to  all  other  risks  and  on  the  need  for 
supervisors  to  evaluate  those  internal  assessments.  Taken  together,  expressing  risk  exposures  in 
similar  terms  and  considering  exposures  to  risks  not  explicitly  included  in  the  New  Accord  should 
enable bank managers to make decisions more rigorously. 
Demanding operational standards for collecting, analysing, and reporting risk data 
Of course, to quantify and compare the full range of risks, a bank must gather and report information 
on its various kinds of exposures using this common language. This brings me to a third step toward 
strengthened  corporate  governance,  namely  the  New  Accord’s  proposals  to  set  demanding 
operational requirements for the collection, analysis, and reporting of risk data.  
By raising the bar for gathering and interpreting data, we expect to improve the quality, effectiveness, 
and frequency of internal reporting. That should go a long way toward providing senior management 
and even individual members of the board with an accurate and timely understanding of the nature of 
their business. Senior managers and directors must see the right information at the right times. They 
must be positioned to ask tough questions and to make hard decisions confidently - before it’s too late. 
This is something that we always expect of responsible business leaders. For the first time, the New 
Accord allows us to recognise these responsibilities of the board and senior management explicitly in 
the regulatory capital framework. 
The promotion of transparency in financial reporting 
Beyond raising the bar for internal reporting, a fourth step that the New Accord will take to strengthen 
corporate governance is to promote greater transparency in a bank’s external financial reporting under 
the  third  pillar  of  the  New  Accord.  When  marketplace  participants  have  a  better  sense  of  a  bank’s 
financial condition, the risks it faces, and the controls it employs, they will be better able to make their 
own business and investing decisions vis-à-vis the bank. The Committee expects that rating agencies 
and  others  will  be  better  positioned  to  evaluate  a  bank’s  condition  and  future  prospects,  while 
investors and counterparties will be better able to decide whether to invest in or to extend credit to the 
institution.  The  New  Accord’s 
the  power  of 
market-based  incentives  for  bank  management  to  assess  its  risks  carefully  and  to  manage  them 
responsibly. 
Taken  together,  these  four  steps  are  intended  to  renew  the  emphasis  on  excellence  in  corporate 
governance - from the level of the front offices, to the back offices, and up to the board room.  
transparency  requirements 
improved 
leverage 
Promote cooperation, coordination, and consistency between supervisors 
So far, I have focused on improvements within banks that will help to make the financial sector more 
stable. The second objective I will mention today is to promote greater cooperation, coordination, and 
consistency in the ways that bank supervisors evaluate capital adequacy. When supervisors across 
jurisdictions  share  similar  expectations  for  evaluating  a  bank’s  capital  adequacy,  we  can  foster 
competitive equality and lessen the regulatory burden on banks by allowing them to concentrate on 
managing  their  exposures  and  their  businesses  -  rather  than  on  managing  and  trying  to  balance 
differing or even conflicting requirements set by individual supervisors. The IIB, for one, has expressed 
special concern about supervisory coordination and cooperation, which I will address in a moment. 
Responses to Current Concerns 
IV. 
Realising these inter-related objectives to attain greater financial stability will require a comprehensive 
framework for assessing the adequacy of a bank’s capital. This is resulting in what, I must confess, is 
a  more  complicated-looking  Accord  than  the  less  sophisticated,  and  much  less  comprehensive, 
existing Accord. We’ve offered formulas, annexes, and no shortage of footnotes. The astrophysicist 
Stephen Hawkins was once told that every equation he included in his books would cut his sales by 
half: perhaps there is a lesson there. I’d like to turn now to the third area of my presentation and offer 
my  thoughts  on  some  of  the  questions  that  we  have  faced  in  drafting  the  Accord,  starting  with  its 
potential complexity. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2004
Is the New Accord too complex? 
One question I hear frequently is whether the New Basel Accord is too complex. To some degree, one 
might say that complexity lies in the eye of the beholder. Take just a brief glance at the hundreds of 
pages  of  legal  documentation  accompanying  a  simple  debt  security  prospectus.  You  might  quickly 
become convinced that such instruments are highly complex. Yet corporate bonds are sold every day 
to investors, including to individual investors. 
Regardless  of  whether  financial  instruments  are  complex,  one  must  ask  whether  the  regulatory 
framework  needs  to  be  complex  as  well.  The  members  of  the  Basel  Committee  know  that  it  is  far 
easier to enforce a simple rule than a complicated one. Still, banking is no longer a simple business. 
Leading  banks  offer  a  wide  range  of  highly  evolved  products  and  services.  Likewise,  they  employ 
sophisticated  analytical  tools,  advanced  mathematical  models,  and  even  dense  legal  documents  to 
help insulate themselves against losses. What’s more, leading banks seek to differentiate themselves 
and  their  products  continuously  from  those  offered  by  competitors.  A  culture  of  constant  innovation 
makes it a tall order for regulators to develop simple rules that fit all banking products and services in 
all their permutations. 
In fact, some of the complexity of the New Accord stems from banks’ own requests to address the rich 
variety of risks and practices in existence today. The New Accord offers banks and their supervisors 
numerous  options  for  evaluating  capital  adequacy  that  are  intended  to  reflect  differences  in  each 
bank’s level of sophistication. Many of these options were created precisely because some banking 
organisations thought that a “blanket rule” would unfairly burden them. Indeed, banks have asked the 
Committee not to sacrifice the New Accord’s sensitivity to risk, even if this requires some complexity. 
By  providing  a  range  of  options,  we  are  better  able  to  fit  the  regulatory  framework  to  each  bank’s 
profile, rather than the other way around.  
At the same time, the Committee has worked hard over the past five years to simplify the rules where 
possible. Just this past January, for example, the Committee proposed ways to simplify the treatment 
of securitisation exposures, which themselves arise from highly complex transactions. We will continue 
to seek ways to simplify the rules, but we must recognise that ensuring comparability and improving 
the rules’ sensitivity to the actual risks banks face will entail a certain degree of complexity.  
Will differences arise in how countries apply the New Accord? 
Another reason why parts of the New Accord are so detailed stems from our efforts to maintain a level 
playing field. This leads to the second question that I am frequently asked, namely whether the New 
Accord might be applied less stringently in some countries and thereby create unfair advantages to 
banks from more lenient jurisdictions.  
Indeed, the IIB itself, in its comment letters to the Basel Committee on the New Accord and to U.S. 
supervisors  on  the  domestic  rules  being  discussed  here,  has  highlighted  some  concerns  about  the 
cross-border implementation of the New Accord and the need to apply a shared set of expectations 
across jurisdictions to minimise regulatory burden.  
The members of the Committee believe that competition in global banking markets should be driven 
by  each  bank’s  business  strengths,  rather  than  by  differences  in  each  country’s  rules.  One  way  to 
promote  a  more  consistent  application of  the New Accord  is  to provide  banks and supervisors with 
detailed requirements where necessary. These details may add to the length and complexity of the 
New Accord, but that may be a small price to pay to promote consistency and a more level playing 
field. 
The IIB, for its part, has asked the Basel Committee to provide clear standards for the cross-border 
implementation of the New Accord and, especially, on the roles that home and host supervisors will 
play in supervising capital under the new framework. The Committee has been working hard to do just 
that.  Last  August,  for  example,  the  Committee  released  a  paper  outlining  six  principles  that 
re-emphasise the traditional responsibilities of home and host supervisors and that explain how those 
responsibilities  will  continue  under  the  new  framework  on  the  basis  of  enhanced  cooperation. 
Cooperation among supervisors will be critical for effective supervision under the New Accord. 
Just  this  past  January,  the  Committee  published  another  set  of  principles  that  would  apply  more 
specifically to the cross-border supervision of advanced measurement approaches for operational risk. 
The ongoing discussions of the Accord Implementation Group, led by the Canadian Superintendent of 
Financial Institutions, Nick LePan, are likewise intended to help supervisors exchange ideas and reach 
BIS Review 14/2004 
 5
shared  views  on  how  best  to  implement  the  New  Accord  to  domestic  and  international  banking 
operations.  
Where we stand today 
V. 
Let me move now to my fourth point: where we stand today and the work ahead. I have five remarks. 
First, I think the Committee has done tremendous work over the past few years, and in the last few 
months we have continued to make significant progress in a number of important areas: we decided to 
calibrate  regulatory  capital  to  unexpected  losses  only;  we  have  made  significant  headway  in 
securitisation, credit risk mitigation and operational risk; we have clarified Pillar 2, and we continue to 
make progress in the implementation of the Accord. Of course, the work is not yet complete, and we 
continue to evaluate questions and comments. However, we are well on track to resolving outstanding 
issues by the middle of this year, in line with the time schedule and work plan we set ourselves in 
October 2003,  and  to  ensuring  that  the  text  will  provide  a  solid  basis  for  national  implementation 
processes and the industry’s preparations to continue. All this is compatible with the implementation 
date of end-2006 that was previously agreed. 
Second. It is clear that the responsibility for implementing the New Accord is a domestic responsibility. 
As with the 1988 Accord, the members of the Committee know that the process for revising the New 
Accord  will  not  be  complete,  and  our  work  on  the  New  Accord  will  not  be  done,  until  meaningful 
national  processes  are  finalised  and  each  member  country  is  satisfied.  We  have  been  sensitive  to 
national rule-making processes, and we will continue to be sensitive.  
Furthermore, and this is my third remark, the Committee has agreed that, prior to implementation, a 
further  review  of  the  calibration  of  the  New  Accord  will  be  conducted  on  the  basis  of  additional 
information,  which  may  come  from  new  national  impact  studies  or  field  tests  and  the  monitoring  of 
bank’s parallel calculations. The Committee welcomes these efforts and looks forward to considering 
those results. 
Fourth. At the same time, the banking industry needs some certainty about the new rules, so that they 
can  continue  to  improve  their  risk  management  systems  in  time  for  the  implementation  of  the  New 
Accord. Uncertainty about the particulars of the new rules will otherwise become a form of regulatory 
burden,  as  banks  may  become  less  willing  or  less  committed  to  make  investments  in  systems  and 
processes  if  they  lack  confidence  in  whether  certain  rules  will  be  implemented.  Providing  a  greater 
sense of the rules will help to reduce that burden. 
Finally, in this context, I would like to stress that the Basel 2 approach is intended to be evolutionary. 
In  other  words,  it  should  continue  to  evolve  in  order  to  reflect  continuing  developments  in  industry 
practices. We do not intend to wait another ten years before reviewing the New Accord. In fact, we 
already have some items on our agenda which we will begin to consider immediately once we have 
completed the mid-year text, with the intention of finding a prudentially sound solution as promptly as 
possible prior to implementation of the New Accord. So, we might think of the New Accord as “Basel 
2.0”, to be followed by a further release - “Basel 2.1” - and so on.  
This evolutionary approach is not inconsistent with the need for certainty. On the contrary, it requires a 
stable  framework  which  ensures  that  the  accord  is  not  a  moving  target  for  the  industry,  as  well  as 
enough structured flexibility to be able to adapt to relevant changes in best practices. 
Conclusion 
VI. 
In  concluding,  I  would  like  to  note  that  the  Committee  and  its  working  groups  are  addressing  the 
remaining issues with the same level of commitment, energy, and enthusiasm that they brought to the 
table when we began to review the first Accord in the late 1990s. The openness of the process and 
the hard work behind us has strengthened the quality of our proposals. We expect the work ahead to 
be equally fruitful. The industry seems to agree, as you have not hesitated to continue to share your 
views and thoughts with us on the New Accord. 
Adopting an Accord that will serve contemporary banking will require a substantial commitment from 
all of us. What banks and supervisors learn about the factors driving operational, credit, and market 
risk, and how we can better measure and reduce our exposure to losses, means much more to all of 
us than simply a more favourable capital requirement. We are advancing our comprehension of the 
many risks banks face and are sharpening our ability to navigate them successfully. For all of us, that 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2004
offers the reward of a more stable banking system less susceptible to systemic risks and better able to 
circulate credit to businesses and consumers alike through good times and bad.  
BIS Review 14/2004 
 7
