Jean-Claude Trichet: The current state of the European economy and the 
ECB’s monetary policy concept 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  International 
Financial Forum, Paris, 9 July 2004. 
 Mesdames et Messieurs, ladies and gentlemen, 
Présent  aujourd’hui  à  Paris,  je  souhaiterais  remercier  le  Président  Mestrallet  et  les  équipes 
d’Europlace pour la tenue de ce Forum Financier, témoignant une nouvelle fois du dynamisme de la 
place  de  Paris  tant  en  France  qu’à  l’étranger.  J’ai  pu  moi-même  le  constater  à  plusieurs  reprises, 
notamment lors des Journés d’Europlace à New York. 
I am very honoured to have been invited here on the occasion of the International Financial Forum. I 
would like today to talk about two topics of obvious importance for the ECB. First, I will make some 
remarks  on  the  current  state  of  the  euro  area  economy.  Second,  I  will  make  some  more  general 
remarks on the monetary policy concept of the ECB. 
The current state of the euro area economy 
Overall,  the  latest  data  releases confirm  that  the  economic recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  continuing. 
Quarterly real GDP growth in the first quarter of this year was 0.6%, slightly higher than what had been 
expected  earlier  this  year.  For  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  the  latest  indicators  of  output  and 
expenditure, as well  as  the  most recent  survey  data,  remain consistent  with  ongoing  growth  in real 
activity, with the working assumption of a gradual recovery. 
Looking ahead, we remain confident that the recovery of economic activity will continue. Indeed, the 
conditions  for  a  broadening  and  strengthening  of  the  recovery  are  in  place.  Starting  with  external 
developments, economic growth outside the euro area remains strong and this should promote euro 
area exports. As regards domestic developments, investment should benefit from the positive external 
environment and the favourable financing conditions within the euro area. As corporate restructuring 
gathers  pace  and  business  efficiency  advances,  improved  profitability  should  underpin  business 
investment. As regards private consumption, its recovery should proceed in parallel with increases in 
real disposable income and the gradual strengthening of employment growth. 
This picture of the euro area economy is broadly in line with all available forecasts from international 
and private organisations. In addition, it is worth stressing that financing conditions in the euro area 
are very favourable, supporting the ongoing gradual economic recovery in the euro area. 
I should note that this scenario of an ongoing and further progressing economic recovery is subject to 
some risks - in both directions. On the upside, euro area economic growth in the first quarter of this 
year  was  stronger  than  anticipated  and  this  momentum  may  strengthen  shorter-term  dynamics. 
Ongoing robust growth in the global economy could also lead to stronger than expected activity in the 
euro area. On the downside, although oil prices have declined somewhat recently, they remain at high 
levels  and  may  dampen  growth,  mainly  through  their  impact  on  the  euro  area’s  terms  of  trade. 
Considering  longer  horizons,  concerns  also  remain  with  regard  to  the  persistence  of  global 
imbalances. 
Turning  to  price  developments,  when  assessing  risks  to  price  stability  at  the  current  juncture  it  is 
essential to distinguish between short-term developments and the medium-term trend. Over the short 
term, oil prices continue to exert upward pressure on the general price level. According to Eurostat’s 
flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.4%  in  June,  following  2.5%  in  May.  Although  oil  prices 
have fallen over the last few weeks, markets expect them to remain high for some time to come. If this 
were to occur, inflation rates would most likely remain above 2% for longer than was expected this 
year and, possibly, in the first half of next year. 
Looking  beyond  the  short  term,  however,  the  main  scenario  for  medium-term  inflation  remains 
consistent with price stability. This scenario is based on the assumption that wages will continue to 
develop moderately at a time when unemployment is still high. However, there are some upside risks 
to this scenario. The strength of global economic growth may continue to exert upward pressure on 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 1
commodity  prices,  including  oil  prices.  Moreover,  on  the  domestic  side,  indirect  taxes  and 
administered prices have been subject to rather strong increases in the recent past and their future 
evolution is uncertain at this point in time, since such information usually becomes available only later 
in  the  year.  In  addition,  measures  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  derived  from  financial  market 
indicators  remain  relatively  high.  While  such  measures  always  need  to  be  interpreted  with  caution, 
their development calls for particular vigilance. 
Against  this  background,  the  potential  risk  of  second-round  effects  via  wage  and  pricing  behaviour 
needs  to  be monitored  closely.  In  this  respect,  I  should  stress  again  the  important  contribution  that 
social partners can make to facilitating the maintenance of price stability by focusing on the medium-
term outlook for price developments. Certain upside risks to price stability are also indicated by the 
monetary analysis. Although annual M3 growth rates have fallen over recent months, there remains 
substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. While a 
significant part of the excess liquidity has accumulated as a result of past portfolio shifts, low interest 
rates have also fuelled the build-up of liquid assets. The low level of interest rates also supports credit 
growth. The stock of excess liquidity, if it persists, may pose an upside risk to price stability over the 
medium term. The monetary analysis therefore supports the case for continued vigilance with regard 
to the materialisation of upside risks to price stability. 
All in all, we are confident that the outlook remains in line with price stability over the medium term. We 
therefore  left  the  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged  at  our  last  Governing  Council  meeting.  We  remain 
vigilant as regards all developments which could affect risks to price stability. Confidence and vigilance 
is the best summary I can offer of our present attitude. 
Let me also mention that we all have our own, important responsibilities - on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Here  in  the  euro  area  we  of  course  take  our  decisions  on  the  basis  of  our  responsibilities  and 
depending on our own analysis of the situation. Europe is Europe and the United States is the United 
States. They had good reasons to increase rates and we had good reasons to keep rates unchanged. 
Let  me  also  make  a  few  remarks  on  fiscal  policies  in  the  euro  area.  At  present  the  institutional 
framework of public finances in Europe is at a critical juncture. If we are to safeguard the soundness of 
public finances over the long run we cannot afford to weaken the existing institutional framework. In 
this respect, we observe current discussions on reforms of the Stability and Growth Pact very closely. 
In our view, there are no reasons to change the letter of the Pact, although we do not deny that its 
implementation  could  be  improved  further,  in  particular  as  regards  the  analysis  of  structural  fiscal 
balances. 
The  current  economic  recovery  offers  the  opportunity  to  put  public  finances  on  a  sounder  track. 
Credible and resolute fiscal consolidation efforts are essential for strengthening confidence in the short 
term and therefore economic growth prospects in the medium term. I refer here to the neo-Ricardian 
effects of fiscal consolidation, as opposed to the well-known Keynesian effects. 
The ECB’s monetary policy concept 
I would now like to turn to the second part of my remarks, the monetary policy concept of the ECB. 
Devising a monetary policy for the Eurosystem at the outset of Stage Three of EMU was one of the 
challenges we were confronted with in the process of creating a new and common currency for the 
people  of  Europe.  The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  was  announced  in  October  1998.  We 
aimed to build on the wisdom and the wealth of experience with the conduct of monetary policy that 
had  been  accumulated  in  the  preceding  decades  by  central  banks  and  academic  institutions  in 
industrialised countries, in particular those forming the euro area, to devise the best possible monetary 
policy for the new currency. 
Transparency of the ECB’s monetary policy 
One  of  the  principles  that  has  transformed  the  practice  of  central  banking  in  recent  decades  is  its 
pursuit of a high level of transparency in all aspects of monetary policy. This includes the setting of 
clear benchmarks for accountability, the announcement of unambiguous objectives to the public, and 
the timely release of relevant information and the contents of monetary policy deliberations. 
The ECB has played a leading role in this general trend. It has in fact set standards of transparency in 
the practice of monetary policy. We were the first large central bank, and remain the only one, to hold 
press conferences in which we give the public a detailed account of the Governing Council’s monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2004
policy diagnosis immediately after our monthly monetary policy meetings, in real time. The introductory 
statement opening our press conference consists of an extended summary of the deliberations of the 
Governing  Council  in  which  the  situation  is  assessed  and  our  diagnosis  expressed.  Moreover,  the 
press  conference  allows  a  transparent  interaction  with  participants  and,  through  them,  with  the  full 
body of observers, savers and investors. In addition, the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin provides the public 
with the full set of assessments and data underlying policy decisions only a few days after they are 
taken. 
The ECB is one of most transparent central banks in the world and has helped to define “the state of 
the art” of central banking in this domain. The only area in which we prefer to remain cautious is in 
revealing the voting behaviour of individual members of the Governing Council. We have reasons for 
that. 
First, we want to communicate clearly to the public that the entity which decides is not a personality or 
a group of personalities but a college, a united team which benefits fully from the collegial wisdom. 
Second, we do not want in any respect to take the risk of giving credit to the idea that the ECB is a 
place  of  confrontation  between  various  national  interests,  represented  by  various  nationalities  and 
various national central bank governors. The Maastricht Treaty asks all of us to decide in the interest 
of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  to  forget  about  reasoning  on  the  basis  of  a  national  vision.  Our 
present concept is fully in line with this very important Treaty instruction. Let us not forget that, from 
this standpoint, we are in a very different situation to that of the United States or the United Kingdom. 
There  is  no  central  bank  governor  in  the  United  States  or  the  United  Kingdom  equivalent  to  the 
Governing  Council.  The United  States  is  not  made  up of  twelve  sovereign states sharing the  same 
currency. 
Third,  we  publish  our  diagnosis  in  real  time  and  we  provide  a  press  conference  so  that  all  the 
arguments that have led us to our decision are known in full by the public. 
Finally, empirical works - in particular by Artus and Wyplosz - have shown that we have been highly 
predictable  in  our  decisions  -  even  more  than  some  other  very  influential  central  banks.  This 
demonstrates that our present concept does not in any respect undermine predictability, which is one 
of the major ultimate goals of transparency. 
Let  me  now  focus  on  some  elements  of  our  monetary  policy  concept.  To  start  with,  I  would  like  to 
stress something which is essential in order to understand all that we have done over the past five 
years: we were asked to deliver a new single currency that would be at least as good as each and 
every national currency. It was a solemn promise made to 306 million fellow citizens of Europe. It was 
the necessary fundamental feature of a smooth transition to the euro. Had this promise not been met, 
quite a number of people in Europe would have seen their market interest rates rise at the moment of 
transition, and they would have rejected it. So it was undoubtedly necessary. But, at the same time, it 
was also extraordinarily demanding. It was extraordinarily demanding because it called for the euro, 
from  day  one,  to  be  as  credible,  as  confidence-inspiring  and  as  good  a  store  of  value  as  the  best 
national currencies were before the introduction of the euro. And this had to be attained, not only on a 
short-term basis, but also on a five-year, ten-year, thirty-year basis… 
We succeeded in delivering, to the benefit both of the euro and of 306 million fellow citizens, the best 
yield  curve  available  in  the  euro  area  before  the  euro  was  introduced.  This  extraordinary  success, 
which most observers, economists and market participants were not predicting a few months before 
the transition, can be attributed to the credibility of the ECB and the Eurosystem, and their decision-
making processes, as well as to the pertinence of the monetary policy concept devised by the ECB 
before the introduction of the euro. 
When  judging  our  monetary  policy  concept  one  should  never  forget  that  it  has  passed  the  most 
extraordinary test that one could imagine: that of the introduction of a new currency without any past 
record, from day one, at the highest level of medium and long-term credibility and at the lowest level of 
medium and long-term market interest rates. 
It is my belief that each particular feature of our monetary policy concept was a necessary condition for 
the  success  of  the  transition  and  that,  all  together,  they  created  the  necessary  conditions  for  that 
remarkable success. This is true, in particular, of two crucial elements of our monetary policy concept: 
the focus on price stability as the primary objective of monetary policy and the need to provide the 
public with a clear framework for the assessment and communication of the risks to price stability. 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 3
The objective of price stability 
The basis for our strategy is the ECB’s mandate that the primary objective of monetary policy should 
be to maintain price stability. This mandate, which mirrors the mandates of a very large majority of the 
EU national central banks before 1999, is enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, which was signed by all 
governments of the European Union and ratified by all the parliaments. It has been mentioned in the 
appropriate place in the Constitution just approved at the end of the term of the Irish Presidency. 
Price stability enhances the efficiency of the market system in allocating resources. It is associated, in 
particular,  with  lower  uncertainty  and  risk  premia  in  financial  markets.  This  facilitates  financial 
transactions and ultimately implies lower medium and long-term interest rates, fostering investment. 
Maintaining price stability is the contribution of monetary policy to sustainable growth and job creation. 
Price stability also makes an important contribution to attaining social cohesion. 
The ECB’s definition of price stability 
In  order  to  make  the  Treaty  mandate  operational,  and  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  the  policy 
framework and thereby the accountability of its monetary policy, the Governing Council of the ECB has 
provided a quantitative definition of price stability. Price stability has been defined as a year-on-year 
increase  of  below  2%  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole.  By  referring  to  increases  in  the  HICP  it  was  made  clear  that  deflation  is  excluded  from  the 
definition of price stability. 
The May 2003 clarification: “HICP inflation below but close to 2%” 
At  the  same  time,  we  felt  the  need  to  convey  even  more  clearly  to  the  public  that  the  Governing 
Council does not view all positive inflation rates of below 2% as equally desirable. On 8 May 2003 we 
made it clear that, in order to fulfil its price stability objective, the Governing Council aims to maintain 
HICP inflation below but close to 2% over the medium term. This was fully in line with our past practice 
and  with  medium-term  market  expectations.  Thus,  the  announcement  did  not  change  inflation 
expectations. 
The main argument for maintaining a low positive rate of inflation is that it helps to reduce to very low 
levels the probability that nominal interest rates will approach their lower bound of zero. Obviously, the 
likelihood of nominal interest rates hitting the zero lower bound in the euro area is rather remote. This 
notwithstanding,  introducing  a  preventive  margin  for  inflation  rates  is  advisable,  not  least  since 
available evidence indicates that even a relatively small safety margin for inflation rates above zero is 
sufficient to largely eliminate concerns that the zero lower bound for nominal interest rates will become 
binding. 
There  are  other  arguments  for  aiming  at  positive  rates  of  inflation,  such  as  the  possibility  of 
measurement  bias  in  the  price  index  and  the  inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area.  Overall,  our 
assessment is that aiming at inflation below but close to 2% over the medium term strengthens the 
public’s confidence that deflation need not be a concern. 
The anchoring of long-term inflation expectations 
In the light of past experience, it is clear that the announcement of the quantitative definition of price 
stability, in combination with the medium-term orientation of policy, has been an extremely valuable 
element of the ECB’s strategy. With its quantitative definition, the ECB has made a very significant 
contribution to the firm anchoring of inflation expectations. Notably, it has provided a benchmark for 
inflation  expectations,  which  in  turn  has  considerably  facilitated  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy. 
Indeed, as long as longer-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored, chances are high that the 
setting  of  wages  and  prices  will  be  guided  primarily  by  the  ECB’s  objective  rather  than  by  past 
developments.  This  significantly  reduces  the  likelihood  of  temporary  increases  in  inflation  triggering 
harmful second-round increases in wages and prices, events which were fairly frequent in previous 
decades. 
For these reasons, the ECB has from the start carefully monitored and continuously communicated the 
developments in euro area inflation expectations. Experience indicates that the volatility of indicators 
of  long-term  inflation  expectations,  especially  those  based  on  survey  data,  has  always  remained 
relatively limited, at levels comparable to those in the best performing industrialised countries in this 
respect. Notably, survey-based indicators of inflation expectations have always remained fairly close 
to 1.8% and, most of the time, within the range of 1.7 to 1.9%, thus at levels fully in line with the ECB’s 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2004
definition  of  price  stability.  However,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  indicators  of  long-term  inflation 
expectations based on financial market data have edged up slightly in the course of this year. This is a 
source of concern for the ECB. I assure you that the Governing Council is particularly vigilant about 
the development of these indicators. 
The framework for assessing and communicating the risks to price stability 
Another important aspect related to the recent transformation in monetary policy concerns the ability of 
the central bank to present and explain to the public at large the analytical framework used by policy-
makers to continuously assess the flow of data, reach policy decisions and communicate them to the 
public. In this respect, the ECB’s framework emphasises two important principles: the medium-term 
orientation  of  monetary  policy  for  achieving  price  stability  and  the  principle  of  robustness  of  the 
analysis, which underlie its assessment of the risks to price stability. 
The medium-term orientation of monetary policy 
Ever since the announcement of its strategy in 1998 the ECB has made it clear that price stability is to 
be maintained over the medium term. I emphasised before that it is crucial in monetary policy to look 
through”  short-term  volatility  in  prices,  which  is  typically  outside  the  control  of  central  banks.  The 
medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  clarifies  that  the  time  horizon  over 
which price stability has to be re-established needs to be tailored to the prevailing circumstances in the 
economy.  This  horizon  would  depend  on  factors  such  as  whether  the  shocks  are  temporary  or 
permanent, on whether they emerged on the supply or the demand side, on whether the origin of the 
shocks  is  domestic  or  external  or  on whether  they  have a  bearing  on  the  performance or  even  the 
fragility of the financial system. By adapting the appropriate monetary policy horizon to the nature of 
the  shock,  the  ECB  makes  an  important  contribution  to  avoiding  unnecessary  volatility  in  output 
growth. 
The  focus  on  the  medium  term  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  embodies  a  commitment  to 
avoid overly activist and ambitious attempts to fine-tune inflation outcomes. It also helps to reinforce 
the credible anchoring of our definition of price stability in the medium and long-term expectations of 
economic agents and markets. 
Robustness of the framework 
The  appropriateness  of  a  monetary  policy  strategy  cannot  be  evaluated  by  means  of  just  one 
particular model or class of models. Rather, a good candidate strategy needs to perform well across a 
variety of empirically plausible models, and it has to allow for the judgement of policy-making bodies. 
The  ECB’s  analyses  and  economic  perspectives  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  are  founded  on  a 
two-pillar  framework.  The  two-pillar  approach  permits  us  to  convey  to  the  public  the  notion  of  a 
diversified analysis and it ensures robust decision-making based on different analytical perspectives. 
These two perspectives are referred to as “economic analysis” and “monetary analysis”. 
The  economic  analysis  focuses  mainly  on  the  assessment  of  current  economic  and  financial 
developments,  their  likely  future  dynamics,  and  any  implied  short  to  medium-term  risks  to  price 
stability. 
To fully assess the economic situation and the outlook for price stability, the Governing Council must 
be able to call on a variety of tools and models. However, judgement is also needed, particularly in 
assessing  the  likelihood  of  certain  hypothetical  scenarios  eventually  materialising.  The  ECB  cannot 
and does not rely on a single model or a single set of equations. The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections constitute one important input into the monetary policy decision as a way of organising a 
large  amount  of  information  and  helping  to  create  a  consistent  picture  of  possible  future 
developments. However, the numbers which come out of economic forecasts cannot by themselves 
encompass or even reflect all the complexities, conditioning factors, nuances and the multidimensional 
nature  of  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  on  which  monetary  policy 
decisions need to be based. 
In this respect, attempts to base monetary policy decisions solely on inflation forecast numbers would 
involve significant limitations. Notably, they would entail the inefficient use of information, since every 
forecast, or any other index of indicators, is based on one possible scenario and one combination of 
assumptions. In the end, monetary policy requires judgement on the part of the policy-maker to assess 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 5
not only the plausibility of all possible scenarios, but also the nature of the shocks and the best policy 
reaction  in  order  to  deal  with  this  uncertain  environment.  Just  focusing  on  one  or  a  few  forecast 
numbers  would  make  it  difficult  for  policy-makers  to  transmit  the  complexity  of  monetary  policy 
deliberations to the public in a precise and transparent manner. 
To  this  end,  the  ECB  decided  from  the  outset  to  single  out  money  from  the  set  of  selected  key 
indicators that it would monitor and study closely. To mark the fact that, in the medium and long run, 
inflation is indeed a monetary phenomenon, the Governing Council announced a reference value for 
the  growth  of  a  broad  monetary  aggregate  which  is  compatible  with  sustainable,  non-inflationary 
economic growth. 
These decisions were made in recognition of the fact that monetary growth and inflation are closely 
related in the medium to long run. Indeed, assigning money an important role underpins the medium 
and long-term orientation of the strategy. It helps policy-makers to see beyond the transient impact of 
the  various  shocks  affecting  the  economy  and  to  implement  an  adequate  gradual  course  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy. A central bank simply cannot ignore the fact that, ultimately, inflation is 
always a monetary phenomenon. 
To sum up, the ECB’s framework strives to convey to the public the full complexity surrounding the 
monetary policy process. It aims to provide an honest account of all the relevant factors considered in 
monetary policy deliberations, forestalling any mechanistic description of monetary policy. 
Using  a  single  framework  for  both  external  communication  and  internal  analysis  guarantees 
consistency. As already mentioned, empirical studies show that the ECB has been, in the eyes of the 
market,  at  least  as  predictable  in  its  monetary  policy  decisions  as  most  other  central  banks  in  the 
industrialised world, if not even more so. 
The emphasis on the robustness of the framework favours its stability over time. All this facilitates the 
public’s understanding of how monetary policy is conducted, fostering the process of transmission of 
monetary policy decisions to the economy and ultimately facilitating the achievement of price stability. 
Let me conclude. It may be useful to describe EMU as a long-distance race, with several rounds. So 
far, a number of rounds have already been completed, always successfully, leaving us with valuable 
assets,  notably  the  high  level  of  credibility  of  the  ECB  for  attaining  price  stability,  and  highly  and 
increasingly integrated financial markets in which long term rates of bonds have converged not to the 
average  of  the  pre-Stage  Three  figures  but  to  the  best  previous  benchmarks.  Yet  we  are  not 
complacent.  Ahead  lie  further  rounds:  major  challenges  in  restructuring  markets  and  industries, 
enhancing fiscal sustainability, and fostering technological advancement and the enlargement of the 
euro area. Speaking of enlargement, which will be the topic of the following session, I would like to 
stress the great opportunity it offers for the European economy as a whole. Fears and doubts have 
been expressed. I recall that the same fears and doubts were expressed back in 1986, at the time 
when  Spain  and  Portugal  joined  the  European  Union.  Today,  nobody  would  dispute  the  positive 
impact their accession had on the European economy. 
Beyond the enlargement of the European Union will come the enlargement of the euro area. Joining 
the  euro  area  is  a  very  important  step,  as  it  is  an  irreversible  decision.  This  requires  careful 
preparation. Every country will be assessed on its own merits and its own particular situation, on the 
basis of a strict analysis of the convergence criteria. Moreover, economic and monetary convergence 
will need to be sustainable, which means that it can be maintained over the long term. On this basis, 
the new Member States and Europe as a whole will fully reap all the economic benefits we can expect 
from the enlargement. 
I thank you for your attention. Je vous remercie de votre attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2004
