Seong-Tae Lee: Recent development of the Korean bond market 
Dinner speech by Mr Seong-Tae Lee, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Korea University/ 
BIS Conference on Asian Bond Market Research, Seoul, 22 March 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to speak here today at this Asian Bond Market Research Conference, co-hosted by 
Korea University and the BIS.  
As you are well aware, over the past half century the Asian region has achieved unprecedentedly high 
economic growth, and it has now emerged as among the key players in the world economy. With this 
continuing remarkable economic growth, trade within the Asian region is growing rapidly, and there is 
also a greatly increasing demand for financial funds. However, regional financial markets have so far 
not developed sufficiently to meet this demand.  
Asia’s bond markets, in particular, are in far less developed states than those of developed countries. 
According  to  IMF  statistics,  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  primary  bond  markets  of  Asia’s  nine 
emerging market economies combined totaled 1 trillion 473 billion dollars as of the end of 2002. This is 
only 8% the size of the U.S. primary bond market, 12% that of the 15 EU countries combined and 21% 
that of Japan. The ratio of Asia’s outstanding stock of bonds to GDP is a mere 43%, far lower than the 
figures of 182% in the U.S., 146% in the EU and 175% in Japan. In their secondary bond markets as 
well,  almost  all  regional  economies  have  much  smaller  ratios  of  turnover  to  average  outstanding 
stocks compared with advanced nations.  
There is an argument that the 1997 financial crisis was aggravated by these poorly developed regional 
bond  markets.  The  argument  goes  that  because  the  financial  structures  of  Asian  economies  were 
overly reliant on banks and their bond markets were poorly developed, the Asian countries had to rely 
for investment on short-term foreign borrowings, which were inevitably drawn out in a hurry once the 
regional crisis hit.  
Recently, the Asian countries have accumulated significant amounts of foreign assets, thanks to their 
continued current account surpluses. However, due to the underdeveloped bond markets here, some 
say that there have been some inefficiencies in both the raising and the managing of foreign funds in 
the region.  
In the wake of the financial crisis, therefore, countries in the region came to realize the necessity of 
developing  their  bond  markets  and  related  infrastructure.  This  enlightenment  has  become  the 
momentum driving the countries in the region to make the necessary efforts. Let me now share with 
you the efforts Korea has made since the financial crisis in order to develop its bond markets, and tell 
you what we have achieved so far.  
Before the financial crisis, Korea did not have to issue large quantities of government bonds, due to 
observing its balanced budget principle. Once the crisis had broken out, however, the long-cherished 
principle  of  maintaining  balanced  budgets  was  abandoned,  and  the  government  began  to  actively 
issue bonds, as a means of financing the soaring fiscal deficit and supporting economic recovery. With 
technical support from the IMF and the World Bank, Korea also embarked, in a step-by-step manner, 
on a series of institutional improvements. These included the introduction of regular government bond 
auctions,  the  establishment  of  a  primary  dealer  system,  the  integration  of  different  types  of 
government bonds, the opening of the Korea Government Bond futures market and the introduction of 
a fungible issue system.  
For its part, the Bank of Korea has also made considerable efforts to help develop the country’s bond 
markets, including the government bond market.  
Before the crisis, Korean government bond issuance was to some extent not carried out in accordance 
with  the  market  mechanism.  A  portion  of  any  bond  issuance  was  discretionarily  allocated  for 
underwriting to certain financial institutions. The remaining part of the bonds was taken over by the 
Bank of Korea, the nation’s central bank. The government also sometimes financed its fiscal needs by 
relying on borrowings from the BOK rather than by issuing bonds. Since June 1998, however, the BOK 
has  not  accepted  government  requests  to  underwrite  government  bonds  and  has  advised  the 
government to issue all government bonds in the market, based on market interest rates. In addition, 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 1
the BOK has improved the infrastructure related to bond transactions. It has introduced an electronic 
competitive  bidding  process 
for  government  bonds  using  BOK-Wire  and  adopted 
delivery-versus-payment system of government bonds.  
As a result of these efforts, the outstanding volume of Korean government bonds has grown almost 
seven times since 1997, while the turnover ratio for these bonds has skyrocketed 23 times in the same 
period.  In  2003  the  issuance  of  five-year  government  bonds  increased  substantially  thanks  to  the 
government’s  efforts  to  meet  growing  demand  for  longer-term  bonds  on  the  part  of  institutional 
investors  such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies.  The  five-year  Korea  Government  Bond 
Futures  market  was  also  set  up  in  order  to  allow  hedging  against  the  associated  risks.  In  line  with 
these developments, the proportion of five-year government bonds in total bond issuance increased by 
7 percentage points in 2003, to 36%.  
Korea’s  corporate  bond  markets  are  also  in  the  process  of  becoming  more  advanced,  through  the 
introduction of new financial instruments and the establishment of relevant institutions that will support 
bond market development. Since 1999, new products such as ABSs (Asset-Backed Securities), MBSs 
(Mortgage-Backed Securities), ABCP (Asset-Backed CP), CLOs (Collateralized Loan Obligations) and 
CBOs  (Collateralized  Bond  Obligations)  have  been  introduced.  After  the  financial  crisis,  the  market 
structure for corporate bonds shifted to focus on secured bonds rather than unsecured bonds, and this 
change required more scientific analysis of issuers’ credit risk. In response to this need, the setting up 
of new credit rating agencies was allowed, and the fiercer competition among credit rating agencies 
has led to a significant development of credit risk analysis techniques.  
There have also been many improvements in terms of market behavior. With the implementation of 
mark-to-market bond valuation, rates of return on fund management are now evaluated and disclosed 
in accordance with daily bond yields. The introduction of a system for interest rate risk management 
has also made institutional investors respond more sensitively to changes in bond rates. Accordingly, 
it  is  now  becoming  common  practice  for  market  participants  to  closely  watch  the  BOK’s  monetary 
policy, along with economic developments at home and abroad.  
As I have just described it, Korea’s bond markets have gone through remarkable changes, in terms of 
both  quality  and  quantity,  since  the  financial  crisis. The  government  bond  market,  in  particular,  has 
been totally reshaped across the primary and the secondary markets, as well as its infrastructure. We 
believe that Korea’s bond markets will develop further in the future by making continuous efforts to 
heighten bond market efficiency and to push on with corporate restructuring.  
There is considerable discussion going on recently, in various international cooperative forums such 
as ASEAN+3 and the EMEAP (Executives’ Meeting of East Asia and Pacific Central Banks), over the 
development of regional bond markets. In ASEAN+3, in particular, views on securitization and credit 
guarantees  have  been  discussed.  In  relation  to  this  issue,  Korea  has  put  together  a  two-tier 
securitization draft proposal making the most of the securitization and credit guarantee mechanism. 
Other nations have also developed plausible draft proposals in these fields. Meanwhile, the EMEAP, 
comprising 11 central banks and monetary authorities in the East Asia and Pacific region, has raised a 
one-billion dollar fund and invested it in dollar-denominated bonds issued by countries in the region. 
Taking this arrangement one step further, the EMEAP is now actively discussing ways to expand the 
fund and invest it in local currency-denominated bonds in the region.  
Under  these  circumstances,  I  think  that  this  conference  is  very  significant,  in  that  it  brings  together 
distinguished scholars and experts from both at home and abroad, to diagnose the reasons why Asia's 
bond markets are not being developed sufficiently and to propose new visions and ideas on the ways 
to facilitate them.  
I hope there will be as many active discussions tomorrow as there were today, through which a variety 
of epoch-making views will be advanced concerning the development of our regional bond markets.  
Thank you for your attention, and I hope you all enjoy your dinner.  
2 
 BIS Review 18/2004
