T T Mboweni: Challenges of central banking in Africa 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  conference  to 
commemorate the Bank of Zambia’s 40th Anniversary, Lusaka, Zambia, 5 August 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Zambia, Dear Colleague, the Governor of the Bank 
of Zambia, Excellencies, Management and staff of the Bank of Zambia, Retired former Governors of 
the Bank of Zambia, ladies and gentlemen. 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  and  privilege  to  make  this  presentation  on  the  occasion  of  the  celebrations 
marking the 40th anniversary of the Bank of Zambia. Indeed, the Government, the management and 
staff of the Bank of Zambia and the people of Zambia as a whole have every justification to be proud 
on reaching this historic milestone. 
I am truly overwhelmed by your invitation, not only to say a word or two today on the challenges of 
central banking in Africa, but also for providing me the opportunity to return to Lusaka which was my 
home in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Zambia’s contribution to the freedom struggle in Southern 
Africa is firmly embedded in our memories. So I have returned, this time in a central banker’s suit and 
tie,  to  my  home  here  in  Lusaka.  Mr  President,  may  I  express  our  gratitude  on  behalf  of  my 
contemporaries who found a home here. 
As will be evident from my address, the challenges facing central banks are generally the same all 
over the world, but in some instances they are more pronounced in emerging markets than is the case 
in developed countries. 
Price stability  
2. 
In a paper delivered at the Jackson Hole1 conference in 2003, Professor Kenneth Rogoff, who was at 
the  time  the  Economic  Counsellor  and  Director  of  the  Research  Department  of  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), describes how over the last ten years global inflation has dropped from about 
30% per annum to below 4 per cent per annum. This is indeed a remarkable achievement. 
In the economically advanced countries, inflation averaged 9 per cent in the first half of the 1980s and 
2 per cent since the beginning of this decade. Following on this success, the developing world has 
performed even better. While inflation averaged around 30 per cent in the developing countries in the 
first half of the 1980s, it was on average below 6 per cent in the first few years of this decade. 
Recent estimates and forecasts by the IMF indicate that for the year 2003, inflation in Africa averaged 
10,3  per  cent  and  for  2004  it  is  expected  to  decline  to  8,6  per  cent.  Bearing  in  mind  that  average 
inflation  in  Africa  was  around  40%  in  the  early  1990s,  this  is  quite  an  achievement.  The  African 
success in containing inflation is in reality even better. The higher inflation rate is occasioned by the 
impact  of  a  few  countries  that  still  have  very  high  inflation.  Examples  in  this  regard  are  Angola, 
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of Congo.  
Nonetheless, if the average inflation rate of 10,3 per cent for Africa in 2003 is compared to 2,7 per cent 
for developing countries in Asia, it is clear that there is still room for improvement. Consequently, the 
pursuit of price stability is a major challenge for governments and central banks in Africa. 
The  worldwide  success  in  bringing  inflation  down  to  more  acceptable  levels  cannot  be  ascribed  to 
monetary  policy  alone.  It  is  certainly  also  a  consequence  of  other  important  factors  such  as  more 
prudent fiscal policy, the easing of trade barriers, greater competition, productivity improvements and 
changing public expectations of inflation. While the causality regarding inflationary expectations is not 
totally  clear,  it  does  appear  plausible  that  success  in  the  quest  for  price  stability  is  rewarded  with 
                                                      
1 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, is the venue for the Annual Meetings of Central Bank Governors, academics, and financial editors, 
organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
further  success  as  inflationary  expectations  adjust  downwards,  influencing  the  overall  price  setting 
mechanism or chain. 
These expectations also depend on the credibility of the central bank. Whatever other factors influence 
the inflation rate, one can hardly deny that the execution of monetary policy in pursuit of price stability 
is a core function of central banks in all modern economies. The credibility of central banks depends to 
a large extent on whether they are perceived as either consistently applying monetary policy in a fair, 
dynamic, flexible and socially responsible manner or whether they are perceived as institutions staffed 
by arrogant, narrow-minded unelected bureaucrats.  
Almost  in  passing,  one  would  like  to  refer  to  the  phenomenon  of  “dollarisation”.  In  some  countries 
foreign currency, usually the US dollar, is preferred to domestic currency. One is not convinced that 
this would happen if the central bank has earned its stripes as a consistent inflation fighter. 
There  are  of  course  other  reasons  beyond  “dollarisation”  why  central  banks  should  pursue  price 
stability. There has been a growing consensus that high and variable inflation distorts decision making 
in the economy, leading to a misallocation of resources and ultimately to bad economic performance. 
Inflation also tends to lead to an unequal redistribution of wealth to the benefit of the wealthy who can 
hedge themselves against inflation and to the detriment of the poor who have neither the resources 
nor  the  skills  to  protect  themselves.  In  a  real  sense,  central  banks  are  there  to  protect  those  who 
cannot protect themselves against the vagaries of inflation.  
An emphasis on the pursuit of low inflation as an important challenge facing central banks in Africa 
would  be  incomplete  without  at  least  a  reference  to  inflation  targeting.  Following  the  successful 
example set by New Zealand, a growing number of countries have in recent years adopted inflation 
targeting as a framework or anchor for monetary policy. While it should be acknowledged that not all 
countries in Africa might be ready to adopt inflation targeting, it follows quite logically from the pursuit 
of  price  stability.  Many  African  countries  could  probably  benefit  from  working  towards  adopting  an 
inflation targeting monetary policy framework. It is important to emphasise that governments and not 
central  banks  should  ideally  decide  on  the  target  and  the  central  bank  should  implement  such  a 
framework.  
After using different monetary policy frameworks over time, an official inflation target was specified for 
the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  for  the  first  time  in  February  2000  by  the  government. 
Notwithstanding the impact of considerable exchange rate volatility, this monetary policy framework is 
serving  South  Africa  well.  In  deciding  on  monetary  policy,  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  emphasises  the 
inflation rate. Despite acting with due regard to the short-term impact of monetary policy on production 
and employment, the SA Reserve Bank keeps its focus firmly on inflation. This steadfast approach has 
been  rewarded  with  success  and  since  September  2003,  the  twelve-month  percentage  change  in 
CPIX, the official measure for inflation targeting purposes, has been inside the 3 per cent to 6 per cent 
official target range.  
Autonomy 
3. 
While low inflation cannot be the responsibility of the central bank and monetary policy alone, there 
can be no doubt that the central bank has a special role to play in combating inflation. In order to do 
that, the central bank needs to be properly empowered. This implies that the central bank has to be 
autonomous or independent enough to take the monetary policy decisions that are required to pursue 
price stability. The central bank must have total instrument independence which it must pursue without 
fear or favour.  
Pursuing the requisite autonomy is the next challenge facing central banks in Africa. This autonomy 
must  be  explained  as  one  could  ask  why  an  institution  of  unelected  officials  making  such  critically 
important  policy  decisions  in  a  country  that  has  a  democratically  elected  government  should  be 
independent.  In  the  words  of  Mr  B  Gaolathe,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Development  Planning  in 
Botswana:  “However,  there  is  need  to  reflect  deeply  on  the  issue  of  independence  of  the  Central 
Banks.  While  we  all  agree  that  there  should  be  autonomy  of  Central  Banks,  those  institutions  are 
created by the State [or legislators] to serve an important public purpose, and cannot completely be 
de-linked  from  the  policies  and  laws  of  the  nation,  especially  those  pertaining  to  promotion  of 
economic development”. 
It should be borne in mind that being independent does not imply not being accountable. No central 
bank  can  be  totally  independent  in  the  sense  that  it  not  answerable  to  anyone.  Even  the  most 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2004
autonomous central bank has to report in some form or another to the legislature, which in any case 
has the ultimate power to change the laws governing the central bank. Independence also does not 
mean  that  there  is  a  lack  of  dialogue  between  the  government  and  the  legislature  as  the  political 
authorities on the one hand and the central bank on the other.  
It has become customary to distinguish between goal independence and instrument independence for 
central  banks.  Once  again,  I  would  like  to  explain  the  difference  by  referring  to  South  Africa.  Our 
inflation target is set by Government after consultations between the Bank and the National Treasury 
have taken place. Thus the Bank does not have autonomy in choosing the inflation target and as such 
does  not  have  goal  independence.  The  Bank,  however,  has  complete  independence  in  making 
monetary  policy  decisions  aimed  at  achieving  the  target.  This  is  instrument  independence  par 
excellence. 
The autonomy entrusted to the Bank in the use of monetary policy instruments implies that the Bank 
has to be accountable for these decisions, and it should therefore ensure transparency. To this end, 
the Bank publishes Monetary Policy Reviews on a bi-annual basis, while regular regional Monetary 
Policy Forums are arranged to provide a platform for discussions of monetary policy with a broader 
range of stakeholders in the country. More importantly, the Bank’s annual report, which is submitted to 
Parliament  by  the  Minister  of  Finance,  combined  with  the  Governor’s  regular  testimonies  before 
Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Finance, ensure that there is a democratic structure to enforce 
accountability and transparency. 
The explanation above should hopefully clarify the concept of central bank autonomy. It is a difficult 
paradigm shift for the political leadership. One of the major reasons for this autonomy was explained 
as  follows  by  President  Mbeki  in  2001  at  a  meeting  of  the  Association  of  African  Central  Bank 
Governors: “In our case this commitment is borne of the understanding that monetary policy should 
not be subjected to the vicissitudes that necessarily confront ruling political parties.” Monetary policy 
decisions,  which  impact  on  the  economy  with  a  lag  and  over  extended  periods  of  time,  should  be 
insulated from the short-term pressures that accompany party politics and elections. 
There  is  one  other  aspect  of  central  bank  autonomy  which  deserves  mention,  namely  the  potential 
impact  of  fiscal  policy  on  monetary  policy.  Without  fiscal  discipline,  the  ability  of  even  the  most 
independent central bank to combat inflation successfully is severely curtailed. This is particularly true 
when  the  government  has  significant  recourse  to  the  central  bank  to  finance  its  budget  deficit.  A 
central bank can hardly be autonomous if it is obliged to finance unsustainable government deficits. In 
the central banking literature, this is referred to as “fiscal dominance”. 
Uncertainty 
4. 
It  might  sound  strange  to  observers  who  are  not  central  bankers  or  economists,  to  indicate  that 
uncertainty is one of the difficult challenges facing central banks. How, after all, can central banks ask 
for operational autonomy if they are uncertain about major issues such as, for instance, the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism?  One  might  hasten  to  add  that  the  theory  and  practice  of  central 
banking and monetary policy have developed a great deal in recent decades. Nonetheless, monetary 
policy decisions are still taken against a background of considerable uncertainty. As will be indicated, 
this is even more true in the developing world. 
A  few  examples  could  illustrate  the  uncertainties  confronting  central  banks.  The  first  would  be  the 
impact of unexpected exogenous shocks or disturbances on the economy and inflation. In this regard, 
one  can  refer  to  developments  in  the  oil  price.  Earlier  this  year,  the  SA  Reserve  Bank’s  Monetary 
Policy Committee was still convinced that the higher oil prices would be transitory and as such would 
only be a short term risk to inflation. 
Unfortunately,  the  oil  price  has  remained  higher  for  longer,  implying  a  greater  risk  for  inflation.  In 
general,  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  does  not  react  to  exogenous  shocks  like  the  oil  price, 
exchange rate or drought. If, however, these exogenous shocks result in a more generalised impact 
on  inflation,  some  monetary  policy  reaction  might  be  called  for.  Any  response  to  these  exogenous 
factors would depend on how the Monetary Policy Committee viewed their second round effects. This 
often calls for judgement beyond any econometric forecast as the second round effects can be very 
uncertain. It is also virtually impossible to judge with any accuracy whether an exogenous shock like 
the oil price increase is transitory or whether it will continue for a prolonged period of time. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
A  further  example  of  uncertainty  facing  central  banks  would  be  structural  changes  in  the  economy. 
This is a challenge facing not only emerging market economies, but also developed economies. While 
the  emphasis  might  differ  somewhat  among  countries,  the  causes  of  structural  changes  could  be 
productivity  increases,  flexible  labour  markets,  technological  innovation,  the  spread  of  information 
technology,  globalisation  and  increasing  competition.  These  structural  changes  all  affect  micro  and 
macroeconomic relationships, making it very challenging to forecast the future.  
Zambia  is  currently  contemplating  a  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan.  While  this  plan  could 
potentially  deliver  considerable  benefits,  it  will  certainly  alter  the  structure  of  the  Zambian  financial 
system  and  economy.  Beneficial  as  this  will  be,  successful  implementation  of  the  plan  will  change 
established relationships between interest rates, output, employment and inflation, making the task of 
monetary policy even more uncertain than in the past. 
In essence, structural changes impact on the monetary policy transmission mechanism. At the best of 
times, it is difficult to judge whether monetary policy, through interest changes, affects the economy 
mostly  via  domestic  demand,  asset  prices,  the  exchange  rate,  credit  extension  or  inflation 
expectations. When economies change rapidly, as many African countries are trying to do, a further 
layer of uncertainty is added. 
The  additional  uncertainty  facing  African  central  banks  extends  further.  Monetary  policy  decisions 
inevitably  depend  on  a  host  of  economic  developments.  Determining  the  appropriate  stance  of 
monetary  policy  requires  that  the  current  state  of  the  economy  should  be  correctly  reflected  in  the 
available economic statistics. The relevant statistics should also be available timeously and be reliable 
and  credible.  Therefore  adequate  resource  allocation  to  the  statistics  offices  is  of  paramount 
significance for central banks and monetary policy. 
In  the  absence of  correct  and  timeous  economic  statistics,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  current 
state of the economy, let alone forecast future developments. In this regard, it seems appropriate to 
once again refer to South Africa, although this time as an example of how things should preferably not 
be  done.  In  2003,  a  relatively  small  distortion  in  the  compilation  of  the  CPI  caused,  when  it  was 
discovered, a downward revision of some 2 percentage points in the inflation rate. The consumer price 
index in South Africa covers approximately 1500 goods and services. A mistake in one component, 
housing rental, soon compounded to a sizeable deviation. For March 2003, the CPIX inflation measure 
targeted by the South African Reserve Bank was revised to 9,3 per cent, compared to the 11,2 per 
cent published originally. 
This example amply illustrates the potential consequences of incorrect information on monetary policy 
decisions. The appropriate stance of monetary policy is often judged by considering developments in 
indicators such as the real interest rate, the slope of the yield curve, the output gap, the natural rate of 
interest  and  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment.  To  determine  some  of  these  measures  is  difficult 
enough at the best of times. In the absence of correct information it is impossible. 
The development of the financial system 
5. 
As was indicated earlier, there is no denying that price stability has become a core objective of central 
banks  all  over  the  world.  It  is  also  becoming  increasingly  apparent  that  well-functioning  financial 
systems  require  financial  stability  as  well.  This  could  be  described  as  the  presence  of  soundly 
managed financial institutions and robust financial markets.  
Central banks in emerging markets typically face a more fundamental challenge in the sense that their 
financial  systems  are  under-developed.  Today  some  developing  countries  experience  low  rates  of 
economic  growth,  partly  because  of  under-developed  financial  systems  and  a  concomitant  lack  of 
financial intermediation. Financial markets, including the institutions involved such as banks, through 
the  process of  financial  intermediation,  serve as  a conduit  for  the  efficient  and  optimal  allocation  of 
financial  resources  and  can  accelerate  the  rate  of  economic  growth.  In  essence,  financial 
intermediation tends to raise the level of saving and investment as it reduces the costs associated with 
bringing lenders and borrowers together. 
As  in  the  case  with  price  stability,  the  central  bank  cannot  accept  sole  responsibility  for  the 
development  of  banks  and  financial  markets,  but  is  well  placed  to  shoulder  a  major  portion  of  the 
burden. The scope of the central bank’s role in developing the financial system is far too broad for an 
exhaustive discussion in one address and a few related comments will have to suffice. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2004
The first comment is an example of what a central bank can do in practice to help markets develop. 
Some years ago, as part of the development of the market in government bonds in South Africa and 
prior  to  the  appointment  of  primary  dealers,  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  acted  as  a  market  maker  in  the 
market for government bonds. This was an interim phase in the development of the market. The Bank 
contributed to the market’s development by managing liquidity. While the Bank is still involved in the 
primary  market  as  the  issuer  of  government  bonds,  we  have  no  role  left  as  a  market  maker.  The 
government  bond  market  has  matured  with  a  group  of  primary  dealers  having  to  act  as  market 
makers. 
The Bank also played an active role in the early stages of the development of the spot and forward 
foreign exchange market involving the Rand. As we know only too well this participation by a central 
bank  in  the  market  can  be  fraught  with  risk.  As  such,  it  should  be  planned  carefully  and  managed 
diligently. It can, however, expedite the development of a market if the central bank acts as market 
maker while other participants develop the capacity to fully participate. The central bank’s participation 
should be purely to provide and manage liquidity for a defined period and should not degenerate into 
intervention to influence market trends. 
A second comment relates to financial stability. Central banks and Finance Ministers in Africa have an 
important role to play to ensure that a proper regulatory infrastructure for supervising banks and other 
financial institutions and financial markets is established. An effective regulatory infrastructure, efficient 
financial markets and sound financial institutions are essential for financial stability. 
At a micro-prudential level, central banks have a real interest in banking supervision while at a macro-
prudential  level,  central  banks  should  focus  on  promoting  overall  financial  system  soundness.  The 
debate about the most appropriate location of banking supervision is, in the final analysis, dependent 
on country specific factors. There is no ready-made case study or example.  
A third comment relating to the development of the financial system is to point out that central banks 
have  a  pivotal  role  to  play  in  the  development  of  clearing  and  payment  systems.  An  efficient  and 
reliable  clearing  and  payment  system  is  an  important  component  of  overall  financial  stability.  The 
central bank has to be involved in various aspects of the payment system, such as the establishment 
of the appropriate legal framework and the oversight of the payment system. 
6. 
Having reviewed the pursuit of price stability, autonomy, uncertainty and the development of financial 
systems as important challenges facing central banks in Africa, the next challenge, namely the role of 
markets, seems to fit in quite logically. 
In  an  address  in  2001,  reviewing  changes  that  have  transformed  the  economic  and  financial 
landscape as well as the way that monetary policy is conducted over the last two to three decades, 
Mr Jozef Van’t dack, Adviser to the General Manager, Bank for International Settlements, stated that: 
“No doubt the first and most fundamental change has been the almost universal reliance on market 
forces and the competitive price mechanism in organising real and financial activity”. 
A decrease in government’s role in the economy, fiscal discipline, financial liberalisation and reliance 
on market forces have also spread to Africa. In many African countries, however, further progress is 
still  possible.  Concomitant  with  this  process,  central  banks  have  to  develop  market  oriented 
instruments of monetary policy such as repurchase agreements and other open market operations. In 
a financial environment characterised by liberalisation and markets, the so-called direct instruments of 
monetary policy such as credit ceilings and directed lending are less effective. 
The role of markets 
Monetary cooperation 
7. 
In recent years, important initiatives have been taken with a view to the sustainable development of 
Africa. Key amongst these would be the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the New Partnership 
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). Central banks in Africa will have to face the implicit challenges in 
these initiatives. The political will to pursue monetary union, a single currency and an African central 
bank should not be under-estimated.  
Article  44  of  the  Abuja  Treaty  calls  for  the  harmonisation  of  economic  policies  across  the  African 
continent. The Treaty emphasises two important pillars of economic integration: the promotion of intra-
Africa  trade  and  the  enhancement  of  monetary  cooperation.  The  African  Monetary  Co-operation 
Programme (AMCP) seeks to operationalise the monetary cooperation mandate of the Abuja Treaty 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 5
and  the  Constitutive  Act  of  the  African  Union.  In  the  main,  this  involves  a  single  monetary  area, 
encompassing a common currency and a common central bank by the year 2021. 
In terms of the AMCP monetary union in Africa is to be achieved in six stages starting in 2002/2003 
and  culminating  in  stage  VI  in  2021  with  the  introduction  and  circulation  of  the  common  African 
currency. During these six stages, African governments and central banks will have to work towards 
harmonisation  and  coordination  of  macroeconomic  and  monetary  policies,  the  harmonising  of 
interconnected payment and clearing systems, the strengthening and harmonisation of banking and 
financial supervision and the observance of increasingly strict macroeconomic convergence criteria. 
At the continental level, the Association of African Central Bank Governors subscribes to the AMCP. 
At  the  level  of  the  Southern  African  region,  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  in  SADC 
(CCBG) has become more involved in the various initiatives taken at the continental level. The CCBG 
has pledged support for the AMCP and the various projects that fall under NEPAD. 
The  CCBG  was  established  in  1995  with  the  specific  purpose  of  achieving  closer  cooperation  and 
integration  in  the  area  of monetary  policy  among  SADC central banks.  The work of  the CCBG  has 
contributed  to  major  developments  towards  regional  monetary  cooperation  such  as  significant 
progress in the harmonisation of the payment and clearing systems, the approval of Memoranda of 
Understanding on Cooperation, Coordination of Exchange Control Policies in SADC, and Cooperation 
in  the  area  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology.  The  CCBG  has  also  contributed  to  the 
coordination  of  training  for  central  bank  officials  in  SADC  and  the  creation  of  a  Training  and 
Development Forum. 
The  economies  of  our  Southern  African  region  are  closely  intertwined.  Whilst  it  is  evident  that  our 
countries experience differences in levels of GDP, inflation, employment or unemployment, exchange 
rate regimes, etc. we are nonetheless, one of the promising regions in our continent. 
Most SADC countries experienced higher growth rates in real GDP in 2002. Indications are that this 
continued in 2003. Notwithstanding this improvement, the aggregate growth in the SADC region still 
falls below the 7 per cent as recommended by international financial institutions to impact positively on 
poverty. In 2002 Angola, Mozambique and Tanzania reached commendable growth rates in excess of 
6.0 per cent. 
The average rate of inflation for the region slowed down from 2001 to 2002. Figures for 2003 indicate 
that most SADC countries are making progress to achieving single digit inflation rates as proposed in 
the stage of implementation of the African Monetary Co-operation Programme (AMCP) for the period 
2004 - 2008. 
A budget deficit/GDP ratio target of less than 5 per cent for the medium term (2004 - 2008) and a ratio 
of  not  exceeding  3  per  cent  by  2012  is  proposed  in  the  AMCP.  Seven  SADC  countries  recorded 
deficit/GDP ratios of 5 per cent or less in 2002. 
Most  SADC  countries  have  made  progress  in  implementing  economic  reform  policies,  resulting  in 
moderate inflation rates and reduced levels of Government deficit as percentage of GDP. However, 
the  region  still  faces  the  challenge  of  generating  higher  rates  of  sustainable  growth  that  will  satisfy 
regional  and  global  policy  objectives  of  significant  poverty  and  unemployment  reduction  and  other 
aspects of social development. 
According to the IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2004, economic activity in sub-Saharan Africa is 
expected to increase to 4.25 per cent in 2004 and 5.75 per cent in 2005. It is expected that various 
large-scale development projects in manufacturing and infrastructure in the region by South Africa will 
provide  economic  stimulus  to  several  countries.  One  of  the  projects  is  the  expansion  of  the  Mozal 
aluminium  plant  in  Mozambique,  construction  of  a  gas  export  pipeline  from  Mozambique  to  South 
Africa and the Inga Dam project in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
Achieving  macro-economic  stability  and  convergence  in  key  macro-economic  aggregates  are 
important pre-requisites for the eventual achievement of monetary union. This does not all fall in the 
ambit  of  central  bank  responsibility.  Nonetheless,  central  banks  play  a  key  role  in  pursuing 
macroeconomic stability. If central banks successfully pursue price stability, that is low inflation, they 
will  be  making  a  fundamental  contribution  to  macroeconomic  stability,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for 
monetary union.  
6 
 BIS Review 45/2004
Conclusion 
8. 
In reflecting on the challenges facing central banks in Africa, one cannot but notice the overarching 
need for capacity building. To face all these challenges and others that have not been touched upon in 
this address will place significant demands on the staff of central banks. The training and development 
of staff is in reality a further important challenge facing our central banks. 
It is my pleasure to wish the Bank of Zambia well for the future. You have an important role to play in 
Zambia, SADC and Africa. You can count on us as your ally, friend and colleague. 
Happy birthday! 
Thank you very much 
References 
1. Gaolathe, B (2004): “Official Opening Speech for the SADC Committee of Central Bank Governors’ 
Meeting”, Gaborone, 30 April 
2.  Mbeki,  T  (2001):  “Address  at  the  25th  meeting  of  the  Association  of  African  Central  Bank 
Governors”, Johannesburg 
3. Rogoff, K (2003): “Globalisation and Global Disinflation”, Paper prepared for the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  Kansas  City  conference  on  “Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a  Changing 
Economy”, Jackson Hole, WY, 28-30 August 
4. Van’t dack, J (2001): “The Framework of Monetary Policy: An Overview of Issues”, Presentation to 
the Conference on Monetary Policy Frameworks in Africa, Pretoria, 17-18 September. 
5.  Mboweni,  TT(2000):  Address  at  the  Reuters  Forum  Lecture,  11  October,  Johannesburg.  South 
Africa.  
BIS Review 45/2004 
 7
