Klaus Liebscher: The role and functioning of the European System of Central 
Banks (ESCB)  
Speech by Mr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the 5th Legal Alumni Web 
of the Salzburg Seminar (LAWSS) Symposium, Salzburg, 6 July 2004. 
 Introduction 
1.  
I gladly accepted the invitation of the Alumni Web of the Salzburg Seminar to speak to you about the 
architecture and the functioning of the European System of Central Banks, addressing, in particular, 
the role of the OeNB in this framework.  
In early 1999, the adoption of the single monetary policy by the ECB marked the successful transition 
to  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  The  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and 
coins as legal tender concluded the process of establishing a single monetary area, which at that point 
finally became a tangible reality for all European citizens. It is no exaggeration to say that the birth of 
the euro was a truly historic event. For the first time in history, a group of independent countries has 
relinquished its sovereign power to issue money to a newly created supranational institution and given 
up  its  national  currencies  to  adopt  a  common  currency.  Virtually  over  night,  the  euro  became  the 
single currency for 11 - and since 2001, when Greece introduced the euro, for 12 - sovereign Member 
States  of  the  European  Union.  Together,  these  countries  with  a  population  of  some  300  million 
represent an economic area comparable in terms of economic power to the U.S. market.  
Economic and Monetary Union and the euro have been a success story: exchange rate risks between 
the  Member  States  of  EMU  have  been  eliminated  and  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in 
disinflation and economic convergence in the euro area. The euro is well on its way to firmly establish 
itself as an internationally renowned currency, thus becoming a solid cornerstone of the international 
monetary system.  
Looking back, we can say that Austria’s accession to monetary union represented a major step for the 
OeNB, just like for all central banks of the participating countries. The integration into the ESCB with 
the European Central Bank (ECB) at its helm was an entirely smooth process.  
The  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  countries  thus  formally  relinquished  their  monetary 
sovereignty.  Since  January  1,  1999,  the  sole  responsibility  for  the  single  monetary  policy  has  been 
vested in the Governing Council of the ECB, which is independent and not bound by any instructions. 
Let  me  underline  at  this  point  that  the  division  of  responsibilities  as  stipulated  by  the  Treaty 
establishing the European Community clearly removes any doubts that have been raised from time to 
time about the purpose of national central banks in the framework of a common monetary policy.  
The institutional framework of the European System of Central Banks 
2.  
I  would  like  to  start  by  giving  you  an  outline  of  the  institutional  setup  of  the  European  System  of 
Central Banks.  
The  establishment  of  the  European  Central  Bank  in  June  1998  also  marked  the  creation  of  the 
European System of Central Banks. According to the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB, the European 
System of Central Banks consists of the ECB and the national central banks of the 25 EU Member 
States.  
The monetary policy of the euro area is of course only determined by the ECB and the 12 national 
central  banks  of  the  euro  area.  Accordingly,  the  concept  “Eurosystem”  refers  to  the  ECB  and  the 
12 national central banks of the Member States which have adopted the euro presently. The national 
central  banks  of  the  Member  States  which  do  not  participate  in  the  euro  area,  that  is,  the  United 
Kingdom, Denmark,  Sweden  and  the 10  new  Member  States, however, are  members of  the  ESCB 
with a special status. While they are allowed to conduct their respective national monetary policies, 
they do not take part in decision making with regard to the single monetary policy for the euro area 
and the implementation of such decisions.  
Since the beginning of Stage Three of EMU, the Eurosystem has been exclusively responsible for the 
single monetary policy of the euro area. The Eurosystem is independent from taking instructions from 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
any external political body; its primary objective is to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to this 
objective,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  general  economic  policies  in  the  Community  and  acts  in 
accordance with the principles of an open market economy.  
As  to  exchange  rate  policies,  a  rather  complex  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  ECOFIN 
Council (i.e. the Council of economics and finance ministers) and the ECB is set out in the Maastricht 
Treaty. The division of responsibility between these two bodies hinges on the exchange rate regime in 
place. The free-floating regime pursued since the onset of monetary union implies that the exchange 
rate policy is indirectly governed by the relative interest rates set by the central banks of the leading 
world  currencies;  besides,  the  Eurosystem  has  intervened  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  or 
controlled  the  exchange  rate  by  statements  made  by  members  of  the  Governing  Council  whenever 
they felt that the exchange rate of the euro had moved too quickly or too far.  
The key tasks of the Eurosystem 
to define and implement the monetary policy of the euro area;  
to conduct foreign exchange operations consistent with the monetary policy of the euro area;  
to hold and manage the official foreign reserves of the Member States; and  
to promote the smooth operation of payment systems.  
3.  
Let me now turn to the key tasks of the Eurosystem.  
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  (Article  105.2)  clearly  defines  the  Community 
responsibilities in the area of monetary policy. Accordingly, the basic tasks to be carried out by the 
Eurosystem are  
• 
• 
• 
• 
In addition, there is a very strict rule prohibiting the monetary financing of the public sector that makes 
clear that monetary policy and fiscal policy should be two separate areas of policy. Furthermore, the 
Eurosystem  contributes  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the  competent  authorities 
relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. 
Moreover, the national central banks may continue to carry out other tasks and activities, provided that 
they are in line with the single monetary policy.  
The decision-making bodies of the Eurosystem are the Executive Board and the Governing Council of 
the ECB. The General Council is constituted as a third decision-making body of the ECB for as long as 
there are Member States which have not yet adopted the euro.  
The Executive Board of the ECB comprises the President, the Vice-President and four other members, 
all chosen from among persons of recognized standing and professional experience in monetary or 
banking matters. As you know, former OeNB Deputy Governor Tumpel-Gugerell is a member of the 
Executive Board of the ECB. The members of the Executive Board of the ECB are appointed by the 
EU  heads  of  state  or  government  after  a  hearing  before  the  European  Parliament.  The  main 
responsibilities  of  the  Executive  Board  are  to  implement  monetary  policy  in  accordance  with  the 
guidelines and decisions laid down by the Governing Council of the ECB and, in doing so, to give the 
necessary instructions to the national central banks.  
The Governing Council comprises the six members of the Executive Board and the governors of the 
national central  banks  of  the  Member States  which  have  adopted  the  euro. The  Governing  Council 
takes  decisions  with  a  simple  majority  according  to  the  “one  member,  one  vote”  principle.  The 
responsibilities of the Governing Council are:  
• 
to adopt the guidelines and take the decisions necessary to ensure the performance of the 
tasks entrusted to the Eurosystem;  
to  formulate  the  monetary  policy  of  the  euro  area,  including,  as  appropriate,  decisions 
relating to intermediate monetary objectives, key interest rates and the supply of reserves in 
the Eurosystem; and  
to establish the necessary guidelines for the implementation of the single monetary policy.  
• 
The Eurosystem is independent. When performing Eurosystem-related tasks, neither the ECB, nor a 
national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies may seek or take instructions 
 2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
from any external body. The Member States and the Community institutions and bodies, in turn, may 
not seek to influence decision makers in the Eurosystem (Art. 108 EC Treaty).  
In the past five years, European policymakers have repeatedly attempted to put political pressure on 
the Eurosystem. Only a few weeks ago, two high-level politicians from large EU countries called upon 
the ECB to cut interest rates. There were even threats to establish a political committee of government 
representatives  to  exert  influence  on  the  Eurosystem’s  decision  making.  In  the  history  of  central 
banking,  we  have  seen  such  attempts  of  interference  time  and  again.  And  that  is  precisely  why 
governments made their central banks independent - to protect their currencies from their own and 
their successors’ influence.  
It  would  be  wrong  to  simply  dismiss  such  threats.  In  my  opinion,  they  prove  that  first,  central  bank 
independence  is  a  vital  institutional  provision  to  guarantee  continued  price  stability;  and  second, 
support  for  a  stability-oriented  policy  must  be gained,  sustained  and  strengthened  anew  every  day. 
Central  banks  play  a  key  role  in  educating  and  informing  both  the  general  public  and  economic 
policymakers. In other words, central banks are the guardians of the generally agreed importance of a 
permanently stable currency.  
The architecture of the Eurosystem 
4. 
The architecture of the Eurosystem rests on the principle that decisions are made at the central level, 
that is, at the ECB; more precisely, the Governing Council of the ECB decides all key issues. This is 
the  only  way  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  of  the  euro  area  is  uniform.  Monetary  policy 
implementation, which usually absorbs the better part of a central bank’s capacities, takes place at the 
subsidiary level and is coordinated by the Executive Board of the ECB. In other words, the national 
central banks are responsible for the operational aspect of the single monetary policy. This approach - 
central decision making and adoption of guidelines as well as decentral implementation - is a common 
thread that runs through all areas of activity of the Eurosystem.  
At this point, I would like to draw your attention to the following two details: The first concerns the legal 
nature of the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem does not have legal personality, but its components - the 
ECB and the national central banks - do.  
The concept “Eurosystem” solely refers to the fact that the ECB and the national central banks are 
integral parts of an entity that is characterized by common rules, goals and tasks which apply to both 
internal and external relations. The concept highlights the Eurosystem’s federal nature and the equal 
institutional role of the national central banks within this system.  
The  second  concept  I  would  like  to  elucidate  is  the  concept  of  “subsidiarity.”  The  principle  of 
subsidiarity stipulates that all responsibilities in society be distributed in a way that is in the general 
interest  and  that  ensures  maximum  freedom.  Responsibilities  that  can  be  exercised  at  lower  levels 
should not be taken on by higher-level bodies.  
The assignment of monetary policy from the national to the supranational Community level stems from 
the conviction that it is in the Member States’ general economic interest. Monetary policy operations, 
however,  continue  to  -  and  should  -  be  carried  out  at  the,  if  I  may  say  so,  subsidiary  level,  by  the 
national central banks to the extent deemed possible and appropriate.  
Tasks and responsibilities of the national central banks 
5.  
What are the key tasks and responsibilities of the national central banks against this background? The 
structure and idea of the Eurosystem I described before clearly assigns the national central banks the 
task of implementing the monetary policy formulated by the Governing Council of the ECB. In practice, 
the national central banks have substantial room  for maneuver, which is embedded in their various 
tasks.  
Roughly  speaking,  we  can  identify  the  following  five  key  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  the  national 
central banks:  
• 
First, the governors of the national central banks participate in the decision-making process 
in  the  Eurosystem  by  attending  the  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  and 
exercising their voting right in a personal and independent capacity.  
BIS Review 40/2004 
 3
    Second,  the  national  central  banks  act  as  a  communication  hub  between  monetary 
policymakers  at  the  European  level  and  national  economic  policymakers  as  well  as  the 
general public in their respective countries.  
Third,  the  national  central  banks  play  the  operational  role  within  the  Eurosystem  -  they 
implement  monetary,  foreign  exchange  and  payments  policy  and  contribute  to  or  compile 
monetary and balance of payments statistics.  
Fourth, while being part of the Eurosystem, the national central banks remain independent 
institutions that have the right to pursue activities in their own responsibility beyond monetary 
policy, e.g. financial market supervision.  
Fifth, the national central banks are investors in the ECB; together, they own shares of the 
ECB and are thus entitled to equivalent shares of the ECB’s profit.  
Shaping the single monetary policy and the primary objective of price stability 
5.1  
I  would  now  like  to  go  into  more  detail  in  explaining  the  national  central  banks’  five  key  areas  of 
responsibility.  As  I  mentioned  before,  the  national  central  banks  participate  in  shaping  the  single 
monetary policy in the EU.  
To ensure that the ambitious goals of monetary union are accomplished, the Maastricht Treaty sets 
out  a clear  and  transparent  framework  for  the  institutional  implementation of  monetary  policy  in  the 
euro area. As Article 105 of the Treaty establishing the European Community stipulates, “The primary 
objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price 
stability, the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the Community.”  
In  other  words,  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  is  the  most  important  guiding  principle  of  the 
architecture  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  The  clear  hierarchy  of  objectives  that  the 
Treaty establishes for the Eurosystem reflects decades of practical experience and a large number of 
economic  studies  which  suggest  that  monetary  policy  will  contribute  most  to  improving  economic 
prospects and raising the living standards of citizens by maintaining price stability in a lasting way.  
To  communicate  the  objective  of  price  stability  in  a  clear  and  comprehensible  way  to  the  general 
public, the Governing Council of the ECB defined price stability as the year-on-year increase in the 
Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below, but close to 2%. In line with 
this definition, price stability “is to be maintained over the medium term.” The announcement of this 
definition is supposed to provide a firm anchor for expectations of future price developments.  
To achieve its price stability objective, the Eurosystem has devised a monetary policy strategy. The 
approach to organizing, evaluating and cross-checking the information relevant for assessing the risks 
to  price  stability  is  based  on  two  analytical  perspectives,  referred  to  as  the  two  “pillars”.  The  first 
perspective, also called the pillar of “economic analysis”, is aimed at assessing the short to medium-
term determinants of price developments, with a focus on real activity and financial conditions in the 
economy. The second perspective, referred to as the “monetary analysis”, focuses on a longer-term 
horizon,  exploiting  the  long-run  link  between  money  and  prices.  The  two-pillar  strategy  enables  the 
Governing Council to identify potential inflation risks and take appropriate action and at the same time 
provides a framework which permits the general public to understand and assess the monetary policy 
decisions made by the Governing Council.  
As I mentioned earlier on, the Governing Council of the ECB takes monetary policy decisions with a 
simple majority. Members of the Governing Council have one vote each regardless of the size and 
economic importance of the country they represent. The “one member, one vote” principle reflects the 
spirit  of  the  Treaty  according  to  which  Governing  Council  members  are  obligated  to  place  the 
Community interest before the interest of their countries or institutions when taking monetary policy 
decisions. 
They  are  obligated  to  fulfill  the  Eurosystem’s  tasks  and  must  center  their  considerations  on  the 
monetary policy requirements of the euro area as a whole rather than taking into account national or 
regional factors, such as inflation rates.  
Accordingly, central bank independence - as mentioned before - has a particularly high priority in the 
Treaty. There are three levels to which independence applies: the institutional, the personal and the 
financial level.  
4 
 BIS Review 40/2004
Under  the  Treaty  provisions,  neither  the  ESCB  nor  any  member  of  its  decision-making  bodies  may 
seek or take instructions from Community institutions or bodies, from any government of a Member 
State or from any other body ( Article 108 Treaty ). Moreover, the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB 
contains precise stipulations to ensure the personal independence of ECB Executive Board members 
and national central bank governors - such as of a minimum term of office (5 years), the prohibition of 
seeking  or  taking  instructions  and  protection  against  dismissal  prior  to  fulfillment  of  their  terms. 
Additionally, the central banks must have sufficient funds to adequately fulfill their statutory tasks in the 
ESCB.  
ECB  and  Eurosystem  independence  was  sometimes  criticized,  especially  at  the  beginning  of  EMU. 
The  ECB  was  decried  as  too  powerful,  as  undemocratic,  as  devoid  of  adequate  transparency  and 
accountability. I, for one, do not share this opinion. The independence of the ECB, the Eurosystem 
and of its decision makers certainly does not mean that these bodies and people are not answerable 
to society or the general public. In fact, this independence calls on these bodies to explain monetary 
policy  decisions,  strategy  and  motives  to  the  general  public,  that  is,  it  calls  for  transparent 
communications.  
Central  bank  independence  is  one  side  of  the  coin;  accountability  and  transparency  the  other.  In  a 
democracy,  accountability  is  owed  to  those  whose  interests  an  institution  is  obligated  to  represent. 
However, accountability for an independent institution makes sense only if that institution’s mandate is 
clearly defined and delimited. 
For  the  Eurosystem,  this  clear  mandate  is  established  by  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty,  which 
designates the maintenance of price stability as its primary objective. In addition, the Treaty provides 
for a number of concrete accountability duties for the ECB, such as appearances of the President of 
the ECB at hearings of the European Parliament or the obligation to publish a detailed annual report. 
Furthermore, the President of the Council and a member of the Commission may participate in the 
meetings of the ECB-Council. This institutional arrangement shall guarantee for a necessary flow of 
information between the Eurosystem and the political institutions of Europe. It should not, however, 
interfere with the independence of the Eurosystem, thus these two representatives have of course no 
voting right in the decisions of the Governing Council.  
The Eurosystem’s external communications activities up to now - press conferences, the publication of 
e.g. the Monthly Bulletin and the Annual Report, the comprehensive information provided on websites 
and the hearings of the President of the ECB in the European Parliament - have in fact accomplished 
a high degree of transparency. 
Conveying information about the single monetary policy 
5.2. 
Accountability and transparency for European monetary policymaking is the perfect starting point for 
the  discussion  of  the  second  important  role  that  the  national  central  banks  have  to  fulfill:  they 
represent the interface between the single monetary policy and the general public as well as economic 
policymakers  in  the  Member  States.  Like  every  central  bank,  the  Eurosystem  depends  on  effective 
communications  with  the  general  public  and  with  economic  policymakers  for  the  success  of  its 
monetary policy.  
Just  like  any  other  central  bank,  the  Eurosystem  has  assumed  the  task  of  regularly  informing  the 
public  about  its  strategy  and  about  the  motives  for  its  monetary  policy  measures.  These  activities 
ensure  that  policymakers,  business  and  the  general  public  understand  monetary  policymaking  and 
lend their support and cooperation. For a number of reasons, the national central banks play a central 
role in this context: they are aware of the issues to which the citizens of their countries are sensitive or 
which are considered especially touchy; they and the general public speak a common language; they 
have enjoyed the confidence of the general public for many years. Moreover, they have built up a tight 
network of contacts and communication channels. Hence, the national central banks are ideally placed 
to perform the Eurosystem’s communications work at the national level. Of course, in pursuing their 
external communications activities at the decentralized level, the national central banks must observe 
a clearly uniform concept, the so-called “single voice principle”.  
Another  core  aspect  of  the  national  central  banks’  interface  function  is  the  exchange  with  national 
economic  policymakers.  After  all,  one  of  the  typical  features  of  a  monetary  union  is  that  regionally 
different  economic  developments  and  various  structural  problems  cannot  be  offset  any  longer  by 
applying economic policy instruments such as adjusting domestic interest rate levels or the exchange 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 5
rate. Rather, monetary union member countries must employ economic policy instruments which have 
remained in their national competence, such as fiscal, income or structural policies.  
While  these  economic  policy  domains  are  not  within  the  competence  of  central  banks,  the  central 
banks  are  nevertheless  obligated  to  inform  national  policymakers  and  the  general  public  what 
important adjustments a monetary union requires. Only in this fashion can the euro area countries fully 
benefit from monetary union and keep disadvantages to a minimum. Thus at the euro area level, it is 
imperative to resolutely continue work toward consolidating public finances as agreed in the Stability 
and Growth Pact and toward making economic structures more flexible.  
Operating arms of the Eurosystem 
5.3. 
Let me move on to the third important function that national central banks have. The national central 
banks act as the operative arms of the Eurosystem and as such are responsible for monetary policy 
implementation.  
The subdivision of monetary policy into centralized decision making and decentralized implementation 
has obvious advantages. The decentralization of central banking operations enables the Eurosystem 
to use the national central banks’ infrastructure and benefit from their experience in handling monetary 
policy operations. The national central banks have acquired valuable experience and knowledge about 
their national financial markets and are thus best placed to continuously observe changes in market 
participants’ behavior.  
The national central banks are indispensable intermediaries between the policymakers at the ECB and 
the  Eurosystem  counterparties  in  that  they  ensure  that  all  of  the  many  Eurosystem  counterparties 
have  equal  and  equitable  access  to  central  bank  liquidity.  Additionally,  the  national  central  banks’ 
proximity to the home financial and banking sector guarantees that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
instruments retain their effectiveness and efficiency even in a rapidly changing environment. 
Therefore, the tasks the national central banks handle on behalf of the ECB include the execution of 
open market and other monetary policy operations. In addition, the national central banks intervene in 
the  foreign  exchange  market  if  required,  they  are  in  charge  of  manufacturing  and  issuing  euro 
banknotes, they are responsible for payment systems oversight and they assume specific supervision 
responsibilities for large-volume payments (e.g. in the TARGET system, whose Austrian component is 
ARTIS). As part of the operational tasks they fulfill for the Eurosystem, the national central banks also 
hold  the  minimum  reserves  of  the  commercial  banks  in  their  respective  countries,  collect  statistical 
data,  draw  up  economic  analyses  and  take  part  in  international  monetary  policy  cooperation,  e.g. 
within the IMF and the BIS. 
Specific national central bank functions 
5.4.  
This leads me directly to the fourth function of the national central banks. In addition to their role as an 
“integral part of the Eurosystem”, the national central banks have assumed a number of specific tasks 
with which they have been entrusted over time. 
It  is  the  intention  of  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB  and  the  ECB  to  preserve  the  structures  within  which 
national central banks have established themselves in the course of time. What is clear, however, is 
that every national central bank must handle such additional tasks on its own responsibility and at its 
own cost, that these tasks must be consistent with the requirements of the single monetary policy and 
that they must not burden the Eurosystem.  
These  national  responsibilities  include,  above  all,  obligations  of  a  supervisory  nature,  with  most 
national central banks either fully responsible for financial market or banking supervision or in some 
cases providing support.  
The NCBs as ECB shareholders 
5.5. 
What is the national central banks’ role as shareholders of the ECB? How is this fifth key function of 
the national central banks organized? The capital of the ECB comes to roughly EUR 5.5 billion in total, 
with each of the national central banks of the 25 EU Member States holding a share of this capital.  
50% of the national central banks’ capital shares are calculated on the basis of the population share of 
the respective Member State, 50% on the basis of the respective Member State’s share in the gross 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2004
national product of the Community. The OeNB’s share is about 2%, which corresponds to a capital 
volume  of  around  EUR  115  million.  The  difference  between  EU  member  countries  which  have 
introduced  the  euro  and  those  which  have  not  is  that  the  euro  area  national  central  banks  pay  up 
100% of their capital share whereas the non-Eurosystem national central banks transfer only a small 
portion - 7% - of their capital share to the ECB. The interest earned on this contribution is to cover the 
operational cost of these national central banks’ participation in the ESCB.  
Among other things, paying up the capital share of the ECB entitles the national central banks to a 
share of the ECB’s profit. In addition to profit distribution, the capital key also governs the distribution 
of the income from euro banknotes (seigniorage income).  
Experience and outlook after more than five years of success with EMU 
6.  
To conclude, ladies and gentlemen, let me turn to the outlook for European monetary policy.  
Now, having completed this round of EU enlargement, it is time to look ahead. I am convinced that all 
parties involved in the enlargement process are going to benefit from this further integration in Europe. 
The  new  Member  States  will  certainly  gain  most  from  their  new  status,  but  also  the  current  EU 
Member States, especially those with strong trade links towards the enlargement area as for example 
Austria, will experience positive effects. 
Upon entering the European Union, the ten new member states - as I already mentioned - became 
members of the Economic and Monetary Union. While they will not yet take part in EMU to the full 
extent,  as  they  cannot  adopt  the  euro  immediately,  this  certainly  is  the  next  step  the  countries  are 
aiming  for.  From  the  point  of  view  of  a  country  that  already  enjoys  the  benefits  of  the  common 
currency,  it  is  essential  that  the  next  step  of  European  integration,  the  adoption  of  the  euro  in  the 
acceding countries, is as well prepared as all past integration steps.  
The  Treaty  with  its  convergence  criteria  provides  the  right  guidance  in  this  direction  and  the 
appropriate framework to assess whether a country shows a record of stability-oriented monetary and 
fiscal  policy  (low  inflation,  low  deficits)  and  therefore  can  be  regarded  as  ready  for  monetary 
integration. 
One important convergence requirement in this process is the Exchange Rate criteria. The exchange 
rate  criterion  requires  formal  participation  in  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM)  for  at  least  two 
years linking the specific currency to the Euro with no devaluations and without severe tensions. This 
framework is designed to provide for flexibility and adjustability as well as for enough stability to help 
anchor  expectations.  In  this  view,  participation  in  ERM  II  should  contribute  to  real  and  nominal 
convergence. To ensure a smooth participation in ERM II which is envisaged by all acceding countries 
it is essential that major policy adjustments are undertaken prior to participation in the mechanism and 
that a credible fiscal consolidation path is being followed. At the end of June - just two weeks ago - this 
first step in the direction of the adoption of the Euro was successfully completed by Estonia, Lithuania 
and Slovenia. Now these three countries participate together with Denmark in the ERM II framework.  
Let me conclude with expressing my conviction that the enlargement of the European Union and the 
economic and monetary integration of the acceding countries will not only strengthen the role of the 
European  Union  as  a  global  player  in  the  long  term,  but  also  make  a  sustainable  contribution  to 
stability, peace and welfare in Europe. Therefore, I am looking forward to this new era that lies in front 
of us, characterized by a larger number of Member States and, in terms of ideas, by an even larger 
potential of human beings.  
BIS Review 40/2004 
 7
