Marion Williams: The development of the Caribbean capital market 
Speech  by  Dr  Marion  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  the  Capital  Markets 
Seminar, Central Bank of Barbados, Bridgetown, 11 May 2004. 
 First of all, I take this opportunity to express my great appreciation to Geoffrey Bell & Co. in assisting 
the Central Bank, in organising this seminar at relatively short notice. This is the fourth biennial capital 
markets seminar sponsored by the Central Bank. Geoffrey has featured prominently in organizing all 
of them. Thank you Geoffrey. 
I would like to express thanks to Geoffrey also in his role as a presenter as well as to thank the other 
presenters, Dr. Carl Ross, Ms. Marie Cavanaugh, and especially Mr. Wain Iton who kindly stepped in 
as  our  regional  voice  when  Steve  Bideshi  informed  us  that  he  was  no  longer  able  to  attend.  The 
purpose of this seminar is to stimulate discussion and generate ideas with respect to the development 
and direction of local and regional capital markets and to place it in the context of what is happening in 
the international capital markets. 
Our  presenters  will  cover  topics  such  as  the  global  economy,  a  topic  which  is  important  if  regional 
investors  are  to  fully  understand  how  to  position  themselves  in  the  international  markets  and  how 
international  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  are  likely  to  move.  Dr  Ross’s  presentation  on  how 
Caribbean  bonds  stack  up  in  the  international  capital  market  is  also  important  as  it  will  help  us  to 
gauge our performance relative to others. 
The role of rating agencies has become increasingly important and this will become even more so with 
the introduction of the new Basle Accord, which places greater emphasis on credit ratings. We thank 
Mrs. Marie Cavanugh for giving us an inside view of how this is done. Our fourth presenter will give us 
a good perspective on how close we are to realising a Regional Stock exchange and our last item will 
be in the form of a panel discussion. We will have two question and answer sessions, one before the 
coffee break and one before we close. 
I thought I would set the stage by speaking about the importance of capital markets in the Caribbean 
and outlining some of the challenges which we face. 
An efficient market provides competitive financing alternatives, which then generate spin-off benefits to 
the  real  economy.  In  addition,  money  market  ‘price  signals’  gauge  the costs of  government  capital, 
and permit monetary authorities to control liquidity. In addition, market participants enhance the level 
of professionalism, independence and corporate governance. 
Both primary and secondary markets are important to the effective allocation of scarce capital. To the 
extent that capital markets are poorly developed, or lack liquidity and transparency, domestic investors 
will reduce investment in favour of consumption, and thereby lower savings. Furthermore, investors, 
both regional and non-regional will seek to diversify portfolios, and will tend to invest in countries with 
more  developed  liquid  and  transparent  capital  markets  which  offer  a  wider  variety  of  instruments. 
These factors and the ability to enter and exit at will are critical to a well functioning market and are still 
challenges in most Caribbean markets. 
There  is  substantial  room  for  improving  debt  markets  in  the  region  -  where  the  development  of 
secondary debt markets lag equity markets. Possibly only Jamaica and Trinidad can be considered to 
be countries with a genuine secondary market. However, unless we are able to further develop our 
secondary  markets,  the  role  of  capital  markets  in  providing  the  link  between  the  funding  needs  of 
borrowers  and  lenders,  in  realising  efficient  fund  allocation  and  assisting  in  accelerating  economic 
development will not be fully realised. 
The  demands  of  institutional  investors  for  long-term  investment  opportunities  have  risen,  so  that  a 
challenge  for  capital  markets  is  to  provide  a  sufficient  volume  of  long-term  financial  products  in 
response to the heightened need to deploy funds. In Barbados and indeed in many capitals across the 
Caribbean  there  is  a  heavy  build-up  in  liquidity  and  this  is  evidence  that  there  is  a  demand  for 
investment vehicles. 
We  have  now  acquired  the  savings  in  the  banking  system  but  appropriate  investment  vehicles 
continue to be in short supply. It is important that such vehicles be developed soon or there is a risk of 
funds leaving the region. Fortunately, international interest rates are low so this is not an immediate 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 1
risk  but  it  looms  on  the  horizon  as  a  possibility  if  we  are  unable  to  deploy  excess  funds  before 
international interest rates rise. 
Capital  controls,  though  important  for  maintaining  the  adequacy  of  international  reserves,  affect  the 
flow  of  foreign  funds  and the  development  of  domestic  capital  market. Controls  are  therefore  being 
carefully  evaluated  and  scaled  back  in  the  context  of  macroeconomic  objectives,  so  that  their 
downside impact on capital markets development is minimised. The liberalisation which we desire has 
to be achieved without creating other macroeconomic difficulties. 
We have positioned ourselves to be part of an integrated financial system and already our systems 
allow  for  funds  to  flow  across  national  boundaries  in  seamless  bank  transfers.  In  this  context, 
Barbados  is  possibly  ahead  of  many  other  developing  countries  in  the  sophisticated  nature  of  its 
payments and settlement systems. We also continue to integrate ourselves more fully into the regional 
capital  market.  This  has  been  most  evident  by  the  number  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  and 
privatisation involving regional companies within the past two years. Meanwhile our integration into the 
international capital markets system at the level of government issues is progressing steadily, but is 
constrained by the small size of issues. Again, macroeconomic stability must take precedence over 
market impact and our desire for integration into the global market. 
Internationally,  there  has  been  a  wide  level  of  disintermediation  and  an  increase  in  non-bank 
competition in the financial markets worldwide. 
Indeed, in many regional jurisdictions - less so in Barbados and more so in Trinidad and Jamaica - 
firms can satisfy their needs by obtaining funding through the capital markets directly. 
This  should  not  be  seen  as  a  circumvention  of  the  banking  system.  It  is  quite  normal  in  the 
development  of  financial  systems.  Markets  evolve  in  different  ways  as  economic  and  financial 
environments lead participants to seek alternative credit intermediary channels. Capital markets are to 
be seen as complementary to traditional financial intermediaries, and should therefore not be viewed 
as a substitutes for a well-functioning banking system. While there is evidence of disintermediation in 
some  Caribbean  counties,  capital  markets  cannot  substitute  for  banks  as  capital  markets  are 
sometimes better positioned to provide longer term financing and sometimes higher risk financing than 
banks. 
Typically, firms in the region have been generally reluctant to expand their funding sources, seemingly 
for fear of weakening of their relationship with banks. However, it is important for firms to feel free to 
select what they judge as the most advantageous way to obtain funding in order to ensure a smooth 
system of corporate financing. 
As markets become deeper banks themselves will tend to seek to securitise existing loan assets and 
to  provide  advisory  and  underwriting  services  for  the  issue  of  securities.  This  has  been  the  trend 
elsewhere, where bank securitisation has become quite normal. 
Securitisation has its advantages as it allows comparatively riskier firms to access to capital markets, 
and it lowers financing costs by segregating higher quality receivables or assets from the risky firms. 
Properly  used,  in  conjunction  with  derivatives,  it  can  facilitate  the  transfer  of  risks  of  commodities, 
foreign exchange and interest rates, to investors willing to accept these risks for a fee or profit. 
Conditions necessary for the development of capital markets 
Institutional infrastructure 
One  of  the  factors  which  is  most  important  in  the  deepening  of  capital  markets  is  the  institutional 
infrastructure - that is, the legal, taxation, and accounting systems. While, for the most part accounting 
systems are reasonably up-to-date, many Caribbean territories have recognised that their legal and 
tax systems require improvement if they are to be able to facilitate the rapid changes taking place in 
commercial transactions. 
If tax and accounting treatments are not clear, the evaluation of risks of individual products becomes 
difficult and if such treatment is vague, one cannot as effectively and with certainty use technologies to 
meet market demands. Institutional development must therefore be appropriate to objectives of having 
a modern capital market system and must be clear in its framework. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2004
Credit ratings are increasingly important. However, though they have the advantage of protecting the 
investor, it is important that the investor who is willing to accept higher risks for higher returns, not be 
discouraged by the system as this could have the result of suppressing the most important function of 
capital  markets,  which  is  to  attract  investors  with  different  risk  appetites.  Protection  without  over-
protection is what is desirable. 
This  caveat  also  applies  to  Securities  Commissions.  Investors  look  to  Securities  Commissions  to 
safeguard markets through establishing minimum standards of capitalisation, registration of securities 
and  market  participants,  timely  and  material  disclosure,  and  effective  enforcement.  However, 
commissions have to strike the middle ground of being strong managers without being overly intrusive. 
In  many  emerging  markets  also  the  timely  disclosure  of  material  information  is  often  inadequate. 
Adequate  financial  disclosure  is  crucial  for  investors  to  make  informed  investment  decisions  -  and 
though we have had few issues of improprieties as has occurred in other developed country markets, 
the Caribbean still needs to work on this aspect of its information sharing. 
Utilization of evolving innovation in information technology 
Another  necessary  condition  for  capital  market  development  in  the  region  is  the  aggressive 
incorporation of innovative techniques offered by advances in information technology. Perhaps in no 
other activity, with the possible exception of information technology itself, is the pace of innovation as 
great, or the cost of failure to utilize the technology as high as in capital markets. One can miss major 
opportunities if the technology is not able to identify them quickly. 
Access to software to calculate default probabilities and various risks, which are critical when dealing 
with financial products, can now be completed almost instantaneously with the appropriate technology. 
In addition, due to the progress in telecommunications, including the Internet, massive data collection 
has become far easier than in the past, so that investors - say in Hong Kong - can spot opportunities 
as they arise, and can access information on the Barbados market and vice versa. We therefore have 
to cease thinking of our markets as isolated. They are not. Investors are better positioned than ever 
before to spot opportunities, and there are such opportunities in the Caribbean. 
As  regional  exchanges  develop  themselves,  their structure will  be  vastly  different  from  those  of  the 
1980s.  Markets  which  mature  or  develop  at  different  times  do  so  in  different  ways,  since  the 
environment is different. Derivative transactions, which isolate risks intrinsic to underlying assets and 
enable  trading  in  these  risks  separately  are  now  becoming  the  norm  in  other  exchanges  and  will 
become the norm in the region as well. These derivative transactions have enabled and facilitated the 
unbundling and re-bundling of risks to generate combinations of risks and returns different from those 
of underlying assets. This kind of modernisation is important, irrespective of size and scale and though 
it is costly for small-scale operations it is essential in order to be competitive. 
Importance for adequate levels of domestic savings 
Although much attention is focused on international capital flows and foreign savings, which indeed 
are important, domestic savings are a more stable and important source of investment funding for the 
region.  For  capital  market  development,  local  currency  debt  and  equity  markets  are  paramount. 
However,  maturities  need  to  be  lengthened.  The  goal  is  therefore  to  promote  the  issuance  and 
transactions of longer-term securities with an overriding aim of extending the yield curve for public and 
private debt. 
There  has  been  a  challenge  generally  in  the  region  in  extending  the  yield  curve.  Bondholders  are 
exposed  to  inflationary  situations  in  some  economies,  insufficient  information  in  others,  and  legal 
systems which for the most part do not fast track commercial judgments. There is much to be done. 
These goals are best achieved in tandem with enhanced trading systems, clearance and settlement 
mechanisms and efficient depository systems. However, the development of clearance settlement and 
depository systems seem to be moving faster than other market developments. 
As in many emerging markets, these hurdles can be structural barriers to foreign portfolio investment 
in the region by private firms. Without resolute action to address this trend, small markets like those in 
the Caribbean can be kept on the outer fringes of global finance. If we wish to feature prominently on 
the world stage it is important that these niggling hurdles be crossed. It is also important that we face 
the world as a single exchange with a little more depth than is possible with individual exchanges. 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 3
Acceptance of a ‘credit culture’ 
Another  condition  for  capital  market  development  is  the  establishment  of  ‘credit  culture’  in  which 
investors in general accurately evaluate risks and returns and follow investment and financing, based 
on the results derived from such evaluation exercises. 
It can be said that the development of capital markets has been retarded partly because of the lack of 
an  entrenched  credit  culture,  and  conversely,  that  a  credit  culture  has  not  become  entrenched 
because capital markets are not sufficiently developed. However, there is evidence of the formation of 
credit rating agencies in the region. These can be of assistance to investors who do not have the time 
or the training to conduct their own credit analyses. 
Efforts by the Central Bank of Barbados 
Lastly,  let  me  touch  on  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados’  efforts  with  respect  to  capital  market 
development. 
The  Bank  has  a  close  relationship  with  capital  markets  through  its  central  banking  operations. 
Financial  and  capital  markets  serve  as  an  important  vehicle  for  transmitting  monetary  policy  to 
economic agents. If the financial and capital markets do not function sufficiently, policy effects can be 
dampened. Interest rate changes, for example, represent just one example of the importance of an 
efficient market in the effectiveness of policy as this change works itself through to lending costs and 
hence to competitiveness and to profits and to asset prices. In terms of new instruments the Bank is at 
the forefront in developing new secondary mortgage market products to potential investors in the belief 
that capital markets require a wider range of products. It has also started a series of workshops with 
the  objective  of  assisting  in  the  development  of  new  financial  instruments.  Increasingly  also,  Credit 
Unions need to be more integrally involved in the process of financial development. 
At  the  regional  level,  governments  need  to  include  convergence  of  Caribbean  economies  as  an 
important  goal  in  their  national  planning  since  greater  convergence  of  Caribbean  economies  is 
important for the development of a truly regional capital market. While there has been much progress 
on the ground in terms of cross border ownership changes, there is still a wide disparity in interest 
rates and inflation rates across the region. This is not a great deterrent for the growth of a regional 
equities market and for the cross trading of equities but it is not the most propitious environment for 
the  development  of  a  regional  government  securities  market  or  for the  cross-trading  of  government 
securities of a higher interest rate regime in the jurisdiction of a low interest rate regime. 
The opportunities for arbitrage are tremendous so it is desirable that there be greater convergence of 
regional economies as soon as possible. The country most out of line both in terms of exchange rates 
and interest rates is Jamaica, as the interest rate and exchange rate regimes of most other countries 
in the region, perhaps with the additional exception of Guyana, are much closer to convergence. 
Indeed,  in  early  2003  it  looked  as  if  interest  rates  and  inflation  in  Jamaica  were  moving  closer  to 
convergence with that of the rest of the Caribbean as well, but this changed sharply in early 2003 and 
the convergence for which we hoped was abruptly dislodged. 
We need to get back to that situation where economic convergence is a likelihood. Capital markets 
need it. 
Conclusion 
Not  only  do  authorities  need  to  deliberately  target  economic  convergence  we  also  need  to  build 
incentives  into  our  operational  frameworks  and  to  reward  desired  outcomes.  This  calls  for  more 
specific  recommendations  and  for  even  closer  interaction  between  market  participants  and  the 
authorities. It also underscores the need for cooperative mechanisms in building our markets. 
Thank you ladies and gentlemen. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2004
