Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards creating an Islamic Financial System as an integral 
part of the International Financial System - strategies and challenges 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Asian Islamic Banking 
& Finance Summit, Kuala Lumpur, 21 September 2004. 
 “The  integration  of  Islamic  finance  with  international  financial  markets  and  institutions  has 
demonstrated  its  viability,  competitiveness,  resilience  and  sustainability  as  a  form  of  financial 
intermediation. This trend has contributed towards facilitating greater cross border flows in terms of 
increased trade and investment transactions thereby strengthening the global economic and financial 
linkages. As this international integration process intensifies, it not only raises the prospects for more 
balanced  global  growth  but  also  allows  for  greater  diversification  of  risks  thus  contributing  towards 
greater  global  stability.  At  the  core  of  this  financial  globalisation  process  is  the  robustness  and 
resilience of the domestic Islamic financial system. The development of a sustainable Islamic financial 
system  that  is  able  to  withstand  the  challenges  of  the  uncertainties  and  instabilities  inherent  in  the 
global financial system, thus not only requires an effective global financial architecture but a system 
that is also supported by an appropriate, comprehensive and sound domestic financial infrastructure. 
These  mutually  reinforcing  structures  would  not  only  accentuate  wealth  creation  and  foster  greater 
potential for trade but would also promote global financial stability and breakthroughs in new business 
relationships”.  
Distinguished Guests, 
It is my honour to be invited to address this distinguished audience at this ‘Asian Islamic Banking & 
Finance  Summit  -  Developing  a  Comprehensive  Islamic  Financial  System’,  organised  by  the 
Euromoney  Seminars  for  the  Asian  region.  While  the  overall  development  of  Islamic  banking  and 
finance for more than three decades has been evolutionary, the pace has intensified in recent years. 
Islamic financial concepts have been incorporated into many financial products to meet the changing 
needs  of  consumers,  businesses  and  investors.  New  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  being 
established ranging from the traditional banking institutions to more specialised financial institutions. 
This Islamic financial landscape has been supported by a well-developed regulatory, prudential, legal, 
accounting,  framework  and  reinforced  by  the  necessary  research  and  development.  Initiatives  to 
promote  greater  awareness  and  education  amongst  Muslims  and  non-Muslims  have  also  been 
intensified. 
In this recent decade, we have seen the financial globalisation of Islamic finance with the participation 
of both the authorities and the private sector. In the case of the former, attention has been given to 
developing the financial infrastructure, including the financial markets, institutions and agencies as well 
as establishing the necessary prudential and accounting standards. While the latter has included the 
borrowers,  investors  and  institutions  that  participate  in  the  process.  Sovereigns,  corporations  and 
multinational  and  multilateral  entities  have  accessed  the  international  markets  while  the  institutions 
and  investors  have  been  a  source  of  financing.  Indeed,  these  funds  are  either  raised  directly  from 
international banking institutions or through bonds and equity issues in international markets. It has 
not  only  expanded  the  investor base, but  reduced  the  cost of  capital  and enhanced  its  liquidity.  By 
operating beyond their domestic borders, financial institutions also provide their services from different 
geographical  locations.  There  has  also  been  greater  use  of  international  financial  institutions  by 
corporations, households and funds to increase their ability to diversify their risks. Investments in the 
domestic  economies  have  also  been  financed  by  foreign  capital.  International  firms  have  also 
participated in local markets through Islamic based financial structures. With increased liberalization, 
there is also increased foreign presence in terms of foreign entry into the domestic financial system. 
This  is  an  area  where  Malaysia  is  taking  a  step  forward  during  the  course  of  this  year.  The 
globalisation  process  has  also  taken  place  in  terms  of  participation  by  firms  in  international  capital 
markets  through  cross  listings.  My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  strategies  on  the  approach  to 
accelerate the transition of Islamic finance towards being an integral part of the international financial 
system in terms of both the international financial architecture of the Islamic financial system and the 
development of a comprehensive domestic financial infrastructure. 
The establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) has been an important initiative in 
the  development  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  architecture.  It  has  been  established  to 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 1
promulgate  the  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards  for  Islamic  financial  institutions 
aimed at achieving best practices and to secure soundness and financial stability in Islamic finance. In 
this regard, the IFSB has already made progress in developing the prudential standards on the capital 
adequacy and risk management framework, and has commenced work on developing standards on 
corporate governance. 
Appropriate  accounting  standards  have  also  been  put  in  place  to  reflect  the  true  and  fair  value  of 
banking operations that would lead to greater accountability and responsibility on the part of financial 
institutions. While the Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) 
has made a significant contribution in formulating and issuing accounting and auditing standards for 
Islamic  financial  institutions,  efforts  need  to  be  intensified  to  promote  of  the  adoption  of  these 
standards. 
The International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM) further provides the environment that will encourage 
active participation by both Islamic and non-Islamic financial institutions in the secondary market for 
Islamic financial instruments. Several global sovereign sukuks have been issued in the international 
market that has attracted wide interest, both by Muslim and non-Muslim investors. The next phase in 
this development is the raising of funds from this market by multinational corporations and multilateral 
institutions. As the volume increases, it would strengthen the inter-linkages and integration amongst 
the Islamic financial centres. In addition to structuring a variety of attractive off-the-shelf instruments, 
efforts  need  to  be  intensified  to  create  a  benchmark  curve  for  future  issues.  With  a  well-developed 
system, the trading of instruments would encourage the free flow of capital movements and would in 
turn facilitate greater Islamic fund management activities. 
As  a  platform  to  promote  greater  cooperation  among  Muslim countries  and  further  promote  IIFM,  a 
proposal that can be explored is the creation of an Islamic universal bond, structured similar to the 
universally-accepted  asset-backed  Ijarah  sukuk.  Under  this  proposal,  interested  countries  and 
selected organisations could be invited, where each country sells its assets to an SPV, which in turn 
would lease back the assets to the country. Proceeds could then be transferred to the participating 
country  for  the  general  purpose  of  socio-economic  development.  This  could  be  an  avenue  for 
countries that have not secured stronger ratings to get more competitive funding. Indeed regional and 
multilateral entities would be well positioned to explore the viability of this proposal. 
The role of Shariah is one of the key elements that can spur the innovation process and enhance the 
global  integration  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  To  effectively  enhance  Shariah  governance,  the 
understanding  of  the  mechanics  of  finance  by  the  Shariah  experts  is  imperative  to  assist  in  the 
deliberation process in deriving a sound Shariah decision. The Shariah decision should then be made 
transparent. With such disclosure, the ability for others to appreciate the juristic reasoning based on 
contemporary analysis and logical inference of process could lead to wider acceptance of a Shariah 
decision, especially if it has implications on cross-border transactions.  
With better understanding, the likelihood of a Shariah convergence is higher and this will enable the 
creation and trading of Islamic financial instruments at the international arena to be more universally 
accepted,  as  interpretations  will  be  uniform  and  consistent.  Harmonisation  of  the  differing  views 
among the scholars from different schools of thought is necessary to enhance the global development 
of  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  I  believe,  at  this  juncture,  the  right  approach  is  to  advocate  mutual 
respect  in  any  Shariah  discourse  where  there  are  differences  in  opinions,  interpretations  and 
practices.  
To  complement  the  efforts  to  create  a  sustainable  and  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system, 
consumer  education  and  awareness  on  Islamic  banking  and  finance  should  be  extensively 
undertaken. Concerted  efforts  between  the  governments  and  Islamic  financial fraternities should  be 
engaged  to  develop  such  a  consumer  education  programme.  Such  programmes  would  increase 
transparency  on  the  virtues  and  availability  of  Islamic  financial  instruments  offered  by  the  Islamic 
financial institutions. How consumers can expect to benefit will depend on how well informed they are 
about the financial services being provided. Barriers across geographical boundaries can be removed 
by leveraging upon the advances on Information Communication Technology to create an integrated 
internet platform as means for the knowledge sharing on research findings, conference discussions, 
Shariah  rulings  and  other  vital  information  on  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  Improvements  can  be 
made  to  the  existing  internet  portals  to  be  more  comprehensive  with  linkages  to  other  useful 
information providers. 
Equally  important  is  the  consumer  protection  infrastructure.  An  international  financial  information 
dissemination body should be set up to disseminate the development of Islamic banking and finance 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2004
worldwide.  In  addition,  with  greater  disclosure  and  transparency  on  the  manner  in  which  Islamic 
financial transactions are being conducted and the risk and return profiles of the products, the role of 
market discipline in driving Islamic financial institutions towards ensuring Shariah compliance will be 
strengthened. This will ensure operational efficiency, strengthen risk management infrastructures and 
institute sound and dynamic risk management practices. 
As  part  of  the  process  of  enhancing  inter-linkages  with  the  rest  of  the  world  in  the  area  of  Islamic 
finance, Malaysia is also encouraging the domestic Islamic financial institutions to be more global by 
expanding  beyond  the  domestic  shores.  With  the  experience  that  has  been  acquired  in  Islamic 
banking and finance that has been accumulated over more than three decades now, it is timely and 
desirable  to  extend  this  experience  beyond  our  own  borders.  The  domestic  Islamic  financial 
institutions  would  need  to  undertake  feasibility  studies  and  in-depth  groundwork  to  identify  new 
markets to expand their business operations, in particular with economies in which there is potential 
for greater economic linkages and integration.  
As the pace of globalisation and liberalisation accelerates, securing financial stability and confidence 
has  increased  demands  for  more  robust  and  resilient  financial  systems.  While  affected  by  some 
market  instability  and  uncertainties,  it  has  not,  however,  undermined  the  development  of  the  global 
Islamic financial system that has now become an increasingly integral component of the international 
financial system. 
The approach to building a sustainable and progressive domestic Islamic financial system involves the 
creation of the key components comprising the Islamic banking industry, Islamic financial markets, the 
Islamic  insurance  or  takaful  market,  and  fund  management  industry  given  the  strong  linkages, 
inter-dependence and synergies among these components in the system. In addition, to the financial 
intermediaries  and  fund  managers,  other  institutional  players  such  as  brokers,  specialists  and 
corporate treasurers also have important roles to play. 
Another  area  of  focus  is  the  growth  of  non-bank  Islamic  Financial  institutions.  In  Malaysia,  the  first 
included Tabung Haji, the Pilgrim Fund Board. Other components include institutions such as waqaf, 
corporate zakat, investment trusts, mutual funds and inheritance management. This is part of wealth 
management that will become more significant as the domestic economy enters into its next level of 
development  and  as  savings  across  borders  becomes  more  institutionalized.  This  will  become  an 
important source of funding for productive investment, in particular for large-scale investments. New 
forms of financial structures may be developed for this purpose. 
In  promoting  Islamic  finance  in  the  Labuan  offshore  financial  center,  emphasis  is  being  given  to 
several  of  these  areas,  in  particular,  to  promote  the  fund  management  industry  including  via  the 
Labuan International Financial Exchange (LFX). Labuan will also be promoted as a center for waqaf 
administration. It will also promote the development and market acceptance of IIFM. In the LFX, dual 
listing  and  trading  of  capital  market  instruments  are  being  undertaken,  for  both  Islamic  and 
conventional papers. This includes equities, debt instruments, bonds (sukuks), asset back securities 
and mutual funds. In addition, the Islamic capital market will be expanded through IIFM and strategic 
alliances  with  other  stock  exchanges.  These  offshore  activities  will  thus  complement  the  onshore 
activities. 
Not  only  has  attention  to  be  given  to  the  financial  infrastructure,  the  financial  markets  and  to 
institutional development, but also to the regulatory, Shariah and legal dimension. The hallmark of a 
well-developed  financial  infrastructure  is  an  effective  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework 
which underpins the stability of the financial system. For the Islamic financial system, this framework 
also needs to be consistent with the requirements of the Shariah.  
It  is  also  recognised  that  good  corporate  governance  reinforces  sound  regulation  and  supervision. 
This  contributes  towards  maintaining  market  confidence,  and  strengthening  transparency  and 
accountability that is implicit in Islamic finance. Its emphasis is value-oriented and to promote fairness 
and justice with respect to all stakeholders of the financial institution. Transparency and disclosure is 
essential to this process. While the comprehensive and timely availability of financial information will 
increase market discipline, it also needs to be complemented with the ability of the market players to 
analyse,  and  appropriately  interpret  the  information.  Closely  related  to  this  issue  is  the  need  to 
strengthen  the  framework for consumer  protection  to  provide an avenue  for  redress  in  the  event of 
disputes.  
Emphasis on improved corporate governance goes hand in hand with the need for improvements in 
risk management standards. Sound risk management practices will minimise adverse consequences 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 3
faced  by  financial  institutions  during  periods  of  uncertainty.  Robust  internal  controls  to  provide 
qualitative standards are also necessary to complement the quantitative analysis of risk to provide the 
necessary checks and balances. In the area of Islamic banking, the requirement to manage the risks 
becomes more important because of the unique peculiarities in the contracts. Basel II has, to a certain 
extent,  incorporated  some  aspects  in  the  identification  of  risks,  in  particular  the  credit,  market  and 
operational risks that can be assimilated by the Islamic banks in terms of its product offering.  
Another important pre-condition to sustain the continued growth of Islamic banking and finance is a 
comprehensive  legal  infrastructure  for  legal  redress  arising  from  disputes  in  Islamic  financial 
transactions. The legal infrastructure needs to comprise both effective regulatory and substantive laws 
as weIl as appropriate adjudicative fora to resolve disputes relating to Islamic financial transactions. To 
address this, efforts are needed to develop a sufficient number of competent lawyers and judges that 
are  equipped  with  sound  knowledge  and  expertise  in  both  Shariah  and  civil  laws  to  deal  with  such 
matters. This would need to be supported by an efficient court system that can effectively deal with all 
Islamic  banking  and  finance  cases,  whose  decisions  are  enforceable  over  the  range  of  financial 
issues. Above all, these pre-conditions have to be in conformity with the Shariah framework. 
Whilst  it  is  necessary  to  have  in  place  the  market  infrastructure,  institutional  players  and  the 
regulatory,  Shariah  and  legal  framework,  it  is  still  not  sufficient  in  sustaining  the  robustness  and 
dynamism of an Islamic financial system. To achieve this, the strong linkages and synergies especially 
among the components in the financial markets, namely, the money market, foreign exchange market 
and the capital market, have to be extensively capitalised. The Islamic money and foreign exchange 
markets are integral to the functioning of the Islamic banking system, firstly, in providing the Islamic 
financial institutions with the facility for funding and adjusting portfolios over the short-term and thus 
the  necessary  liquidity  mechanism  to  promote  stability,  and  secondly,  serving  as  a  channel  for  the 
transmission of monetary policy.  
The  inter-linkages  in  the  functioning  of  the  Islamic  financial  markets  have  brought  about  a  natural 
environment for innovation of Islamic financial instruments. A broad spectrum of instruments, such as 
Government papers including bonds and treasury bills, Central Bank notes and Islamic accepted bills, 
can  be  structured  on  a  Shariah-compliant  basis  to  meet  the  needs  of  these  markets.  In  addition, 
instruments  for  a  risk  mitigating  mechanism  for  hedging  or  value  protection  need  to  be  developed. 
While risk mitigation is desirable in Islamic finance, innovations need to be made for this purpose. 
To aid the process of developing the financial markets, Bank Negara Malaysia has recently developed 
a  website  on  the  Islamic  money  market  as  a  source  of  information  on  domestic  Islamic  financial 
instruments  and  to  facilitate  investment  decisions  and  secure  public  confidence  in  their  investment. 
The website aims to effectively meet the needs of bankers, financiers, statisticians, economists and 
prospective  investors  as  well  as  increase  awareness  of  the  users  -  domestic  and  foreign.  Moving 
forward, the website will be linked with other markets to serve as a platform for exchanging information 
and knowledge beyond our borders. 
The existence of a well-developed capital market is also important to provide users of capital with an 
alternative and cost efficient source of medium and long-term financing. It would also provide investors 
and savers with a wider range of financial instruments to suit their individual return and risk profiles as 
well as allow for better diversification of risks in the financial system. One of the linkages in this market 
is asset securitisation. Mortgage financing is an example of where the asset liability mismatch can be 
addressed.  This  would  substantially  improve  the  liquidity  and  quality  of  assets  of  the  banking 
institutions, while at the same time contribute towards promoting the development of the capital market 
and secondary trading of instruments through the issuance mortgage-backed private debt securities. 
Over the years, the scope of securitisation activities can evolve and expand with the introduction of 
securitisation of Islamic hire and purchase or leased assets ending with ownership, and other types of 
leased financing. 
At the core of a financial system of any country must lie an efficient and effective payment system as a 
means  for  clearing  and  settling  payments.  In  modern  economies,  this  function  is  already  highly 
mechanised to support a sound and stable financial sector. It is vital that a real time settlement system 
for inter-bank funds transfer be implemented to reduce the credit and settlement risk in the financial 
system.  It  must  be  able  to  handle  scripless debt securities  trading,  processing  and settlement  on  a 
model that reduces counterparty risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2004
Conclusion 
As Islamic finance advances forward to become an important integral component of the international 
financial system, efforts need to continue to strengthen further both the international architecture and 
to  enhance  international  cooperation  and  collaboration  as  well  as  to  develop  the  domestic  financial 
system  to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  a  highly  dynamic  and  rapidly  evolving  environment. 
Malaysia  will  continue  to  play  an  active  role  in  this  process.  In  our  quest  to  build  a  viable  and 
sustainable  Islamic  financial  system,  the  aim  is  to  contribute  to  the  channeling  of  capital  flows  to 
productive investments, create wealth and promote trading activities, with the activities undertaken not 
just among Muslims but with the rest of humanity, Insyaallah.  
On that note, I wish you a successful conference. Thank you. 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 5
