Panayotis Thomopoulos: Anti-inflationary exchange rate policy in Greece in 
the 1990s 
Speech  by  Mr  Panayotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Euro-
Mediterranean Seminar, Eurosystem and Mediterranean country national central banks, organised by 
the Bank of Italy and the European Central Bank, Naples, 14-15 January 2004.  
 I would like to thank the ECB and the Bank of Italy for the successful organization of this meeting. 
Greece has been for more than three thousand years at the cross-roads between North, South and 
Eastern Mediterranean countries and, we Greeks have been able to enrich our culture and ideas from 
our  relationship  with  all  the  nations  around  the  table  and  I  am  sure  that  to-day’s  exchange  of 
experiences will be to the mutual benefit of all present. I look forward to an even closer cooperation in 
the future between the Eurosystem, with the ECB taking the appropriate initiative, and the rest of the 
Central banks from the other regions of the Mediterranean. 
When  the  Maastricht  treaty  was  signed,  Greece  was  meeting  all  the  criteria  of  a  country  in  crisis. 
Stagflation, with mounting macro-economic imbalances, were the main characteristics of the economy. 
In the 15 years up to 1993, average inflation was almost 17%, GDP growth was barely 1% per annum, 
while the fiscal deficit was creeping upwards reaching some 13,5% of GDP by 1993 and pulling up the 
debt - to - GDP ratio to over 110%. It was, therefore, not surprising that the government’s commitment 
to  prepare  Greece  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Maastricht  criteria  in  1999  and  membership  of  the 
Euroarea  by  2001  (2  years  after  its  creation)  was  received  with  disbelief  by  almost  all  foreign  and 
domestic observers. From the beginning of 1994, when the new stability oriented policy was initiated, 
a  managed  exchange  rate  was  a  key  policy  plank  in  the  stabilization  process  and  contributed 
importantly  to  disciplining  economic  agents  and  setting  in  motion  wage  and  price  restraint,  which 
brought the rate of inflation down to some 2% on average in the twelve months to early 2000 thus 
making possible our Euroarea membership. 
Between end 1994 and early 1998, i.e. in the period preceding our ERM I membership, the Bank of 
Greece  and  the  government  had  decided  to  follow  a  policy  of  managing  the  exchange  rate  by  not 
allowing the drachma to depreciate as fast as was needed to compensate for the inflation differential 
vis-a-vis  our  trading  partners.  This  was  done  purposefully  in  order  to  put  a  break  on  inflation  and 
inflationary  expectations,  which  in  the  past  were  strongly  fed  by  the  recurrent  devaluations  of  the 
drachma,  which,  sometimes,  more  than  fully  accommodated  the  excessive  wage  and  price  rises. 
While there was some real appreciation of the drachma, the resulting disequilibrium was not as large 
as some  argued,  especially  participants  in  the  financial  markets.  Studies conducted  by  the  Bank  of 
Greece indicated that the real overvaluation of the currency was of the order of 10 percent after taking 
into  account  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  and  a  number  of  other  factors.  This  anti-inflationary 
exchange  rate  policy  started  having  its  impact  on  inflation  after  less  than  one  year  and  was 
accompanied by other policy measures, with the result that domestic disequilibria were narrowing and 
our policy was gradually gaining credibility. 
This permitted the government to persuade the labor unions to abandon the backward looking wage 
indexation scheme, which by its nature had perpetuated the inflationary spiral for years and instead to 
move to forward looking wage increases, based on the continuously declining annual inflation target 
set by the government. Lower inflation was, in turn, facilitating fiscal consolidation as a result, of (a) 
the progressive narrowing of the very high interest rate risk premia on government debt and, (b) the 
actual  decline  in  interest rates  in  line with  inflation.  As  a  consequence,  government  expenditure  on 
interest  payments  fell  from  13%  of  GDP  in  1993  to  less  than 7%  in  2001, when  Greece  joined  the 
European  Union.  Falling  inflation  was  also  making  our  managed  exchange  rate  easier  to  operate. 
However, we were conscious that an exchange rate adjustment would have to take place at the time 
of joining the ERM I, so as to offset the loss of external competitiveness reflecting the previous few 
years  of  real  appreciation  of  the  drachma.  We  had  fixed  10%  as  an  upper  limit  for  the  real 
appreciation, because, first, a moderate appreciation would not frighten the markets and, second, the 
subsequent necessary correction of the exchange rate would be limited. We were aiming at a limited 
correction that would not impact unfavorably on other macroeconomic variables, in particular inflation 
and would not generate expectations for further depreciations. Indeed, central banks which follow a 
managed  exchange  rate  policy  have  to  be  very  careful  not  to  allow  a  big  appreciation  of  the  real 
exchange rate, that would subsequently open the stage for big speculative attacks, which because of 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
the usual overreaction of markets could trigger capital flight. Indeed, there are numerous examples, 
starting with Argentina and going backwards, that capital flight on the one hand, deprives the domestic 
economy  of  much  needed  investable  funds  and,  on  the  other  hand,  drives  the  exchange  rate  to 
abnormally  low  levels,  which  immediately  set  the  stage  for  a  wave  of  price  rises  and  drive  the 
economy into recession. If this situation is allowed to develop the original anti-inflationary exchange 
rate policy would ultimately cause much more damage than if a pure free floating policy was followed. 
Anti-inflationary exchange rate policies, which aim to eliminate imbalances and disequilibria, so as to 
improve domestic economic performance, inevitably entail a cost. There is no free lunch in a global 
and competitive  world,  especially  when  market  makers  are,  sometimes,  enticed  by speculators  and 
wild  rumors.  Indeed,  for  almost  4  years  the  cost,  borne  by  the  Bank  of  Greece,  of  sterilizing  the 
excessive short-term capital inflows attracted by the high interest rate policy, in combination with the 
exchange  rate  policy  amounted  to  almost  ½%  of  GDP  per  annum.  Furthermore,  the  government 
proceeded  with  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  as  well  as  other  measures  which  were 
introduced  (notably  extensive  privatization)  as  a  necessary  complement  to  the  anti-inflationary 
exchange rate policy. These policies underpinned the improvement in the functioning of the economy 
and gave a significant boost to business confidence. The determination with which the three Cs were 
pursued - consistent policies, continuity in policies and confidence building, after two to three years of 
hesitation,  swayed  the  labor  unions,  businessman  and  the  public  at  large  to  back  the  stabilization 
policies  with  the  aim  of  entering  the  Euroarea  as  soon  as  possible.  In  addition  to  targeting  the 
exchange  rate,  the  Bank  of  Greece  always  kept  a  close  watch  on  the  growth  of  M3  and  domestic 
credit expansion and through open market operations absorbed any excess liquidity, which, if it had 
been  allowed  to  reach  the  real  economy,  could  have  aggravated  inflationary  pressures.  Moreover, 
when necessary, we also imposed stricter terms on banks’ obligatory reserve requirement deposited 
at the bank of Greece, which were already relatively tight (an amount equal to 12% of deposits with 
the banking system and it can be noted that they were remunerated at a negative real interest). 
However, at the Bank of Greece we knew that this was not sufficient to ensure a smooth run up before 
entering  first  the  ERM  I  and  subsequently  the  Euroarea.  Speculators  are  always  waiting  round  the 
corner and, sometimes, markets may wish to test the country’s resolve to maintain its exchange rate 
targets. Therefore, we followed throughout the six years before entering the Euroarea a high interest 
rate policy so as first to keep foreign investors happy and keep their confidence but also in order to 
build a high level of foreign exchange reserves so as to be able to have sufficient reserves to thwart 
speculative attacks. Indeed, when the 1997 south-east Asian crisis spill over effects reached Greece 
in September-October and american hedge funds started speculating heavily (up to $2 billion daily) 
against the drachma and the word was spread that the drachma would devalue by as much as 28% 
we were able to defend our parity by drawing on our foreign exchange reserves and by raising interest 
rates  temporarily,  for  a  couple  of  days  at  a  time.  We  were,  however,  concerned  not  to  scare  the 
markets, which might have perceived our moves as resulting from panic, and, therefore, we were very 
careful about how the policy tightening was presented. Instead of raising our intervention rate (lombard 
rate)  from  19%  to  330%  we  temporarily  put  a  surcharge  of  0,4%  daily  at  the  end  of  October.  This 
move  looked  innocuous  and  passed  smoothly,  while  penalizing  heavily  banks’  cost  of  borrowing. 
Accordingly, we sent the right signal to the market and this permitted us to eliminate the surcharge 
within a few days, so a quasi-normal situation was soon restored. We were also very careful in the 
way  our  foreign  exchange  interventions  were  executed.  In  most  cases,  we  wanted  to  show  our 
determination to defend the parity and, therefore, the Bank of Greece’s foreign exchange department 
intervened  directly  in  the  market  but,  sometimes,  we  judged  that  an  intervention  through  a  friendly 
foreign bank could be more persuasive and influence market sentiment better. 
Both the government and the Bank of Greece knew that our fundamentals were rapidly improving and 
our economy had entered a virtuous cycle of rapid growth, falling inflation and fiscal deficits and with 
relatively small current account deficits by past standards, so we did not hesitate even for a second, 
regarding  our  policies  and  goals.  We  became  even  more  determined  than  before  to  continue  our 
stabilization policies and defend the exchange rate so as not to delay our entry in to the Euroarea. Our 
determination paid off and foreign exchange markets after a few months of turbulence calmed down in 
early  1998.  Conditions  were  then  considered  propitious  to  achieve  our  intermediate  goal,  to  enter 
ERM I in calm waters accompanied by a small devaluation to correct the previous real appreciation. 
We succeeded in catching the markets by surprise and not being forced to make a devaluation under 
duress, with all its destabilizing effects. Moreover, the new ERM parity agreed with our EU partners 
was broadly consistent with Greece’s fundamentals and costs and productivity levels and satisfied the 
markets.  And  judging  from  Greece’s  record  of  the  last  6-7  years:  an  annual  growth  of  GDP  3.9%, 
inflation at the end of 2003 at 3.1% only 1 percentage point above the Euroarea average, and a fiscal 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
deficit at 1.5% of GDP in 2003, the exchange rate with which the drachma entered the ERM in 1998, 
and the subsequent conversion rate into the euro in 2001, were appropriate and reflected Greece’s 
overall competitive conditions. I would like to tell you how markets behave or rather misbehave: in the 
heat of speculation, many investment banks were spreading the word (even via the monthly bulletins 
they circulated and one of them through a teleconference in London) that there would be a devaluation 
of the drachma of up to 28%. We disproved the pessimistic views and the actual devaluation upon 
entering  ERM  I  was  12,3%.  Immediately  afterwards  market  sentiment  changed  and  the  drachma 
traded at well above its central parity. As a result, the central parity was revalued later in January 2000 
and the total devaluation by the time the drachma entered the Euro area was only 7,9%. 
The  lesson  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  greek  experience  is  that  a  managed  exchange  rate  policy 
needs to be consistent with the other policy planks, notably fiscal and structural policies which, in turn 
boost markets’ confidence and, therefore, facilitate the exchange rate policy. Confidence is crucial for 
the  successful  realization  of  the  policy  goals.  As  I  mentioned  above,  the  cost  of  sterilizing  the 
excessive short term capital inflows (almost ½% of GDP) may appear at first sight too high, but the 
benefit  of  stabilization,  notably  the  resulting  sustainable  investment-led  high  rate  of  GDP  growth  of 
almost 4% since 1997, which is expected to continue well into this decade, far outweigh any temporary 
sacrifice the economy incurred in order to fulfill our stabilization goals. 
The road to the Euro was not strewn with roses, it was not smooth and I don’t want to underestimate 
the difficulties. With regard to the sequence of policies and priorities, we took a calculated risk starting 
our stabilization policies by adopting a policy that allowed for a moderately appreciating real exchange 
rate. We walked on a tightrope, sometimes for months in a row, as there were occasional bouts of 
jitters based on  market  expectations, even  until  the last  moment,  that  our  Euroarea entry would  be 
deferred or that we would join at a significantly depreciated rate. Accordingly, whereas our goals were 
ambitious,  our  policies  erred  on  the  side  of  caution.  We  made  gradual  adjustments  and,  as  an 
insurance, always had at hand a sufficient large cushion of foreign exchange reserves and a relatively 
high interest rate differential vis-a-vis Euro rates, even until the last few weeks before entry into the 
Euroarea. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 3
