David Dodge: Monetary policy report update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, Ontario, 22 July 2004. 
 Today, we released our Update to the April Monetary Policy Report. The Update reviews economic 
and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
The Bank's outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada is little changed from the April Report. 
Let me start with our outlook for inflation. Higher-than-expected world oil prices mean that total CPI 
inflation is likely to remain above 2 per cent through the rest of this year, before falling slightly below 
core inflation in the second half of 2005. Core inflation is projected to remain just above 1.5 per cent 
for the rest of 2004, before gradually moving back up to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005. 
Economic growth in Canada should average about 3 ½ per cent through the remainder of 2004 and in 
the first half of 2005, before easing to 3 per cent in the second half. This would imply average annual 
growth of about 2 ¾ per cent in 2004 and 3 ½ per cent in 2005. 
This profile suggests that the Canadian economy will reach its production capacity by mid-2005. 
As  economies  approach  their  production  capacity,  monetary  stimulus  must  be  removed  to  avoid  a 
buildup  of  inflation  pressures.  In  Canada,  the  timing  and  magnitude  of  interest  rate  increases  will 
depend on the evolving prospects for inflation and for pressures on capacity. Three factors will play an 
important role in this respect. The first is the assessment of the size of the output gap. The second is 
the  future  growth  of  Canadian  imports  and  exports,  which  is  particularly  uncertain  because  of  the 
ongoing adjustments to global changes and the recent patterns in trade growth. The third is the overall 
effect on the Canadian economy of movements in the world prices of oil and non-energy commodities. 
In addition, there continue to be heightened geopolitical concerns. 
Paul and I will now be happy to take your questions. 
BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
