John Hurley: The role of the central bank and the current issues being 
considered by the Financial Services Regulator 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, to the Joint Committee on Finance and Public Service, Dublin, 1 June 2004. 
 Introduction 
Thank you Chairman for the opportunity to address the Committee this afternoon. My colleagues and I 
are happy to discuss with the Committee the general issues arising from the overcharging by AIB of 
certain  foreign  exchange  customers.  I  appreciate  that  you  noted,  in  your  invitation  to  us,  that  an 
examination into specific issues relating to AIB Bank is ongoing. Other serious issues have emerged 
since the time of your invitation. As you know, work on all these matters is now the responsibility of the 
Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority rather than the Bank. 
In my opening remarks I would like to deal with the following: 
• 
The role of the Central Bank in financial regulation following the restructuring that took place   
last year;  
The Central Bank’s role in relation to financial stability; 
The profile of the banking system in Ireland;  
The former responsibilities of the Central Bank in relation to foreign exchange charges; 
The current issues being considered by the Financial Services Regulator; and 
The compliance environment. 
 Role of the Central Bank 
I  would  like  to  start  by  briefly  putting  the  role of  the  Central  Bank  in  context  by  describing  the  new 
regulatory structures that are now in place following the establishment of the new Financial Services 
Regulator and our own restructuring last year. 
On the first of May 2003 the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland was established. 
This body carries out all the activities formerly carried out by the Central Bank of Ireland as well as 
several  additional  regulatory  functions,  including  those  previously  discharged  by  other  regulatory 
bodies. The regulatory Departments of the Central Bank, i.e., staff and records, were transferred to the 
Regulatory Authority. Accordingly the CBFSAI has two distinct component entities:  
The Central Bank  
1. 
In addition to being the corporate entity with responsibility for central services, the Central Bank also 
has extensive other functions, including euro-area related functions. Our main functions are: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Monetary policy operations; 
Financial stability; 
Economic analysis; 
Currency and payment systems; 
Investment of foreign and domestic assets. 
The Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority 
2. 
As  you  know,  this body  is  responsible for  the  regulation  of  all authorised  financial  entities including 
banking, securities and insurance and for consumer protection and consumer information matters. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 1
The Financial Services Regulator has clearly defined responsibilities and decision-making powers of 
its  own.  It  is  now  responsible  for  the  regulation  of  all  financial  services  firms  in  Ireland.  It  also  has 
greatly  enhanced  functions  when  it  comes  to  consumer  protection  and  consumer  education.  These 
regulatory powers and functions are exercised independently of the Central Bank.  
There  is  a  wide  range  of  additional  enforcement  powers  being  assigned  to  the  Financial  Services 
Regulator  under  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services  Authority  of  Ireland  Bill,  2003.  These 
additional powers, I know, are very much welcomed by the Financial Services Regulator and I believe 
they are both appropriate and timely.  
There is now a new focus on financial regulation and this includes, in particular, more emphasis on the 
consumer. There is also growing recognition internationally of the desirability of all financial institutions 
being supervised by a single regulator as is now the case in Ireland. The Financial Services Regulator 
has as its focus the protection of consumers by helping them to make more informed decisions in a 
safe and fair market and to foster sound dynamic financial institutions. The Central Bank’s statutory 
responsibility  in  this  regard  relates  to  the  stability  of  the  overall  financial  system  and  not  individual 
institutions. We have a common interest in the stability and solvency of the financial sector and the 
protection of the interests of the consumers. In discharging this function we aim to promote a vibrant 
financial services industry that can continue to prosper in a very competitive international environment. 
Financial stability 
Some concerns were expressed before the current arrangements were put in place that, somehow, 
the Financial Services Regulator might not be fully independent of the Central Bank. I can assure the 
Committee that this is not the case. The Central Bank’s role relates only to the stability of the overall 
financial  system.  This  year,  we  will  publish  a  stand-alone  Financial  Stability  Report  outlining  the 
extensive work being undertaken by the Bank on financial stability. Financial stability work includes the 
development of various early warning indicators of systemic risks. These are events that could spread 
from one institution to another giving rise to serious problems in the financial system and the economy 
more generally. The work also includes the procedures required in the event of a systemic emergency. 
The reason for the strong focus on financial stability is that financial crises are very costly, not alone in 
financial but also in economic terms. Many countries have experienced crises that seriously impacted 
on economic growth - in some cases, 10% or more of GNP. On an international comparison, Ireland’s 
financial stability record has been very good.  
It is worth noting that in discharging its financial stability role in the public interest the Central Bank is 
also protecting the consumers of financial services. 
In concluding my comments on financial stability, I should stress that while the events currently under 
investigation  carry  serious  reputational  risks,  they  have  not  given  rise  to  adverse  implications  for 
financial stability.  
Profile of banking system 
One of the unfortunate fallouts from the problems that have arisen is the tarnishing of the image of the 
Irish banking system, which has an excellent reputation internationally. This is most regrettable, as we 
have a sound and successful banking system that compares very well with international peers. The 
banks are also one of our largest employers with a workforce of nearly 40,000. The banking sector 
accounts  for  4-5%  of  GNP  and  is  a  major  contributor  to  Government  revenue.  Pensions  and  other 
types of savings hold significant shareholdings in banks so that the performance of banks is important 
for them. The banking industry is vital to this country. I should not pass without a brief reference to the 
IFSC. As you know, this has been one of our great success stories. The Centre has a solid record of 
success  even  during  the  global  downturn  of  the  early  90’s.  There  are  now  nearly  12,000  people 
directly employed in the IFSC making a significant contribution to the economy. 
In a large industry like the financial services, problems and improper practices inevitably arise from 
time to time; this is true of all countries. The most important point is that procedures and processes are 
in place to deal with them in a timely and expeditious manner, as the Financial Services Regulator is 
now doing. 
Despite the serious problems that have arisen, I believe that there has been a marked improvement in 
Corporate  Governance  standards  in  the  industry  in  recent  years.  Any  recommendations  emanating 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2004
from  the  current  investigation  that  suggest  further  improvements  are  necessary  should  be 
implemented without any delay. 
I should emphasise that no regulatory system - no matter how extensive or expensive can guarantee 
that  mistakes,  inappropriate  practices  or  behaviour  will  never  happen.  However,  it  is  essential  that 
when such events occur - despite a comprehensive regulatory system being in place - the regulatory 
machinery is capable of dealing with them effectively and speedily. I believe that the measures put in 
place since the mid-nineties together with the forthcoming enactment of the new powers presently at 
Report stage in the Dáil, will provide such a system.  
Foreign exchange charges 
There  was  no  statutory  control  over  bank  charges  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  Central  Bank  Act, 
1989. Section 28 of the 1989 Act placed a statutory requirement on banks to notify the Central Bank of 
every proposal to change any charge or associated term and condition. The Central Bank had power 
to  direct  a  bank  to  refrain  from  changing  the  charge,  term  or  condition.  This  power  was  frequently 
exercised.  In  addition  to  the  legislative  requirements,  the  Central  Bank  also  required  banks  to 
advertise all changes to charges in the national press before they came into effect. I should mention 
that  in  having  a  statutory  underpinning  for  the  control  of  bank  charges,  the  Irish  system  was  much 
more stringent than that of most countries.  
In 1994, the Government formally announced its intention to transfer responsibility for bank charges 
from the Central Bank to the Director of Consumer Affairs. From that time, the Central Bank decided 
that it would not consider any further applications for increases in charges; it did not wish to pre-empt, 
in any way, the future role and decisions of the Director. Some exceptions were made to this, such as 
the introduction of new services such as “laser”, with agreement with the Director of Consumer Affairs. 
When  the  legislation  came  into  effect  the  Director  considered  all  proposals  independently  and  was 
advised, under the legislation, by all the institutions of the charges applied by them. Responsibility for 
approving  bank  charges  is  now  vested  in  the  Financial  Services  Regulator  since  1  May  2003.  As  I 
indicated  already,  the  issue  of  overcharging  by  AIB  is  the  subject  of  an  independent  investigation 
which will report to the Financial Services Regulator and AIB. 
Recent developments 
When Liam O’Reilly and his team were before you in recent days they gave you information on the 
background to their investigation into the foreign exchange charging issues within AIB. 
An independent investigation - which I understand will be funded by AIB - into its foreign exchange 
charges has been established with direct involvement by the Financial Services Regulator. It is being 
carried out by an external firm of forensic accountants and is overseen by an independent assuror, 
Mr Lauri McDonnell. I understand that a full report on the issues will be issued.  
The  Financial  Services  Regulator  is  also  engaged  with  another  investigation,  relating  to  matters 
concerning AIB Investment Managers Ltd (AIBIM) during the period 1989 to 1996. All of the issues 
raised by the investigations will be considered by the Regulator comprehensively and in detail. It will 
then decide what further actions need to be taken in this regard. 
I fully share the concerns already expressed by Liam O’Reilly regarding recent revelations, and that 
any improper practices within the financial services industry in Ireland are totally unacceptable. I fully 
support the approach that is being taken to these issues by the Financial Services Regulator.  
The compliance environment 
I wish to offer a few words on the compliance environment. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  there  has  been  a  fundamental  change  in  the  way  client  funds  are 
handled by investment firms, such as AIBIM, since the passage of the Investment Intermediaries Act 
1995 and Stock Exchange Act, 1995. Since that time Codes of Conduct and Client Money rules have 
been  issued  and  investment  managers  have  been  required  to  invest  substantially  in  compliance 
functions.  The  systems  of  control  are  now  more  transparent  than  they  would  have  been  in  the 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 3
1989-1996 period and I think it is less likely that anything like what happened then could happen now 
and if it did it would be unlikely to go undetected.  
With regard to tax matters generally, we have gone through a similar cultural change. Since the Public 
Accounts  Committee  DIRT  investigations  and  since  the  development,  during  the  late  1990s,  of  the 
money laundering regime - which includes tax evasion - which now applies to banks. Banks are being 
required to heavily invest in compliance. Money laundering is a special focus of the Financial Services 
Regulator’s  inspections  programme  and  there  is  now  detailed  guidance  in  place  for  banks  in  this 
regard. I feel that there is no similarity in the way tax issues are treated now and the way that they 
were  treated  in  the  early  1990s,  either  in  the  banks  or,  I  think,  among  the  public  generally.  The 
approach to all taxation matters is now much more rigorous. 
In  relation  to  the  remaining  issues,  it  is  best  to  wait  to  hear  the  outcome  of  the  Financial  Services 
Regulator’s investigation. Only then will the Regulator be in a position to give a full report on all the 
issues relating to AIB. Many of the matters of concern here have had their roots in an earlier period 
when the compliance environment was much weaker than at present. I think that there is a danger that 
by generalizing on the basis of events, many of which occurred several years ago, we are in danger of 
missing the improvements which have taken place and the significant changes in both the regulatory 
and  compliance  framework  within  which  banks  operate.  Problems  and  improper  behaviour  will 
inevitably occur. But generally speaking, the attitude to compliance among Irish banks has improved in 
recent  years  and,  I  have  no  doubt  that  following  these  events,  the  standards  will  be  further 
strengthened.  
Conclusion 
To summarise my position, Chairman, I regard the events about which we are speaking today to be 
both very serious and deeply disappointing. These matters are being fully investigated by the Financial 
Services  Regulator.  The  Financial  Services  Regulator  has  gone  about  its  task  in  a  comprehensive, 
detailed  and  pro-active  manner.  I  have  full  confidence  that  it  will  reach  the  appropriate  conclusions 
and take any necessary further remedial action. 
Thank you, Chairman, for permitting me to make this opening statement. My colleagues and I will be 
very happy to answer any questions the Committee may wish to put to us. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2004
