Andrew Large: Puzzles in today’s economy - the build up of household debt 
Speech  by  Sir  Andrew  Large,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Association  of 
Corporate Treasurers’ Annual Conference, Newport, 23 March 2004. 
 Leverage & debt: benefit & vulnerability 
A key economic debate of the day is whether we, as a society, should be concerned about the level of 
debt borne by families, businesses and, indeed, governments. We are all aware of the positive role of 
debt in the development of market economies and social well-being. But equally we are aware that 
increasing  leverage  can  give  rise  to  vulnerabilities  -  think  of  LTCM  in  1998  -  and  increase  the 
possibility that external shocks or changes in perceptions will lead to unexpected results that impact 
on the stability of the financial system and the setting of monetary policy.  
On  the  whole  the  increasing  availability  of  debt  is  beneficial.  Debt  helpfully  allows  households, 
companies and even countries to smooth their spending patterns. But as with many things in life, there 
are  potential  downsides.  It  is  often  said  that  central  bankers  and  regulators  tend  to  look  on  the 
pessimistic side and to see “the glass as half empty”. As a former regulator, and now a central banker, 
I am perhaps likely to be doubly cautious and to focus on the potential vulnerabilities! 
Improved  access  to  debt  may  indeed  be  beneficial  overall,  although  high  levels  of  debt  can  cause 
difficulties for companies and for countries. Evidence also suggests that the burden of debt does pose 
a  genuine  problem  for  a  minority  of  households.  And,  as  I  will  discuss  in  more  detail  below,  an 
increase in indebtedness may increase the sensitivity of households - and the economy in general - to 
future shocks, although by how much is very uncertain. 
For public policymakers, the evaluation of these vulnerabilities and the appropriate policy response is 
a matter of continued debate. What levels of debt are sustainable? And what could be the impact of a 
break-down or crisis of one sort or another?  
At  the  Bank of  England we  take  an  interest  in  this subject at  several  levels. We  look  at  it  from  the 
points  of  view  of  governments  or  sovereign  countries;  corporate  entities;  and  individuals  or 
households. 
At  each  level  there  are  two  aspects  that  we  consider.  First,  what  are  the  implications  for  financial 
stability oversight? We look for vulnerabilities that could lead to pressures on counterparties, with the 
possible  failure  of  institutions  and  ultimately  financial  instability.  Such  crises  can  lead  to  immense 
social  and  economic  cost,  as  financial  intermediation  is  disrupted  and  confidence  in  the  monetary 
system is weakened.  
Second, we look at debt from the point of view of monetary policy. In this case we look at the possible 
impact on our ability to meet the inflation target set by the Chancellor via, for example, its effect on 
overall levels of demand and supply. 
At  the  level  of  sovereign  entities  we  have  two  different  types  of  concern  about  the  working  out  of 
sovereign  debt  positions.  First  the  potential  implications  of  sharp  exchange  rate  movements  for 
countries that borrow in their own currencies (for example the USA). Second for countries that borrow 
large  amounts  in  foreign  currency  concerns  about  debt  sustainability  which  lead  to  our  working  on 
crisis prevention and resolution issues in the sovereign area, including the role of the IMF and issues 
raised by the present Argentinean default. 
At the corporate level, the question you all face is what amount of debt is not only sustainable, but will 
lead  to  maximisation  of  shareholder  value  over  time?  Here  our  interest  is  in  trying  to  spot 
vulnerabilities, or debt concentrations across the market place, which could give rise to problems down 
the track. In the face of shocks such factors could have an impact on demand in the economy and on 
the stability of the financial system. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
Household debt: introduction 
It is the third level of our interest - household debt - which I would like to focus on today. It is clearly 
significant for all of us. For you in the corporate world through your customers. And for us in the world 
of public policy.  
I would like to examine, first, why has debt built up in the way it has? Second, what are the facts and 
how  great  are  the  vulnerabilities?  And,  third,  what  are  the  implications  for  those  of  us  involved  in 
financial stability oversight and monetary policy, quite apart from society as a whole?  
The household debt build-up: why has it happened? 
It is worth reflecting on why the build-up in household debt has occurred. On one side there have been 
a  series  of  demand  factors.  Lower  real  and  nominal  interest  rates  have  held  out  the  prospect  that 
interest  costs  and  debt-servicing  burdens  will  remain  within  acceptable  bounds  -  in  terms  of  the 
burdens on both real incomes and households’ cash flows. And lower inflationary expectations have 
held out the prospect that nominal interest rates will remain low. The lower inflation environment has 
also  increased  predictability  and  made  it  easier  for  households  to  plan  ahead.  Risks  seem  more 
acceptable  to  households  because  of  confidence  in  a  stable  economy,  and  secure  job  prospects, 
perhaps in part due to the current accommodatory monetary policy.  
In the meantime, wealth has risen and stocks of financial assets have built up. In the light of this, it is 
not  surprising  that  households,  taken  together,  are  happy  to  have  higher  debts  relative  to  their 
incomes.  And  the  rise  in  house  prices,  combined  with  a  high  level  of  owner  occupation,  has 
encouraged equity-enabled homeowners to borrow accordingly. These factors have given households 
the  confidence  that  present  levels  of  debt  are  quite  rational  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  balance 
sheets. In addition, the rise in house prices has itself necessitated an increase in borrowing as the 
average mortgage size increases.  
There have been supply-side factors too. Competition amongst lenders has been intense. There have 
been  new  entrants  to  the  market.  Not  only  the  traditional  lenders  but  specialist  providers  of  credit 
cards  and  the  like.  Liberalisation  of  markets  has  meant  new  approaches  to  lending  and  new  credit 
instruments,  enabling  credit  to  be  available  to  a  wider  variety  of  participants  and  reducing  credit 
constraints.  
I will come to the vulnerabilities in a moment, but overall this combination of demand- and supply-side 
factors has led debt to rise to today’s historically high levels. 
The debt build-up: what are the facts? How great is the vulnerability? 
It  is  not  just  in  the  UK  that  domestic  indebtedness  has  risen:  its  build-up,  alongside  globally  lower 
levels of inflation, has been a global phenomenon. The ratio of household debt to annual household 
income has increased in most industrial countries - reflecting over the longer term increased financial 
liberalisation, the greater efficiency of financial intermediaries and, in some countries, housing market 
developments. While the ratio in the UK is high, at over 130%, there are other countries where it is 
higher, and where it has grown more quickly.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
Chart 1: 
Household debt-to-income ratios 
Per cent
Netherlands
United States
UK(a)(b)
Japan
Germany
Australia(b)
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
 Sources: Eurostat, national central banks and statistical agencies, and Bank calculations. 
(a) Ratio differs from that in Chart 2 because disposable income used here is not adjusted for changes in net equity in pensions. 
(b) Data for 2003 are as at 2003 Q3. 
In the UK household debt to income amounts to just under 18 months worth of household disposable 
income. Mortgage debt is the biggest component of this, and total secured debt accounts for about 
75% of total debt.  Unsecured debt - personal loans, credit card debt and the like - is still a much lower 
proportion, but has nearly doubled over the past decade.   
Chart 2: 
Consumer secured debt and total household debt 
 as a proportion of post-tax income(a)(b) 
Per cent
Total(c)
Secured
87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
Sources: ONS and Bank Calculations. 
(a) Annualised household post-tax income. 
(b) Debt data are not seasonally adjusted. 
(c) Total household debt. 
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
 The actual statistics of stocks and flows are of course one thing. But the real question is in relation to 
sustainability: sustainability of debt servicing burdens and sustainability of consumption growth.  
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
Household debt in the UK has been increasing more rapidly than post-tax income since the end of 
1997, and the difference in annual growth rates over the past year has been around eight percentage 
points. This has been one of the factors which has permitted consumer spending growth to outstrip 
income  growth  on  average  over  the  past  few  years.  Mortgage  equity  withdrawal,  in  particular,  has 
risen  sharply  relative  to  consumption.  Some  of  this  will  have  helped  to  finance  consumer  spending 
even though much is used to pay off other debts or build up other assets.  
Twelve-month growth rate of total household debt and post-tax income  
Chart 3: 
Annual percentage change 
Total household debt
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
Post-tax income
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. 
25
20
15
10
5
0
 We  also  consider  questions  of  gearing.  First,  capital  gearing  -  the  ratio  of  debt  to  gross  assets  - 
changes  in  which  one  can  regard  as  a  rough  and  ready  indicator  of  pressures  on  solvency  in  the 
household sector. 
It is perhaps noteworthy that despite the large increase in debt, the increase in asset prices, not least 
house prices, has meant that there has been only a slight increase in capital gearing. But the data do 
suggest that household capital gearing could rise to historically high levels if there was, for instance a 
sharp downturn in the housing market or a significant fall in equity markets. I’m not saying that these 
are likely to happen - simply that there is an upside risk to households’ capital gearing.  
Chart 4: 
Household sector capital gearing(a)(b) 
Capital gearing (per cent)
Debt/total assets(c)
Unsecured debt(d)/financial assets
87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
 4 
 BIS Review 17/2004
Sources: ONS and Bank of England. 
(a) Dashed lines indicate averages of series from 1987 Q1 to 2003 Q3. 
(b) Data are not seasonally adjusted. 
(c) Financial wealth plus housing wealth. 
(d) Total debt minus lending secured on dwellings. 
Second, we need to look at income gearing. Changes in aggregate income gearing provide a crude 
proxy for pressures on households’ ability to service their debts, although such measures do not take 
account of who benefits from the interest receipts.  
Having peaked in 1990, aggregate household income gearing fell sharply, mostly reflecting the fall in 
nominal interest rates, and it has been steady since 1993 at a relatively low level. If, as we expect, 
debt  continues  to  grow  faster  than  income,  as  a  result  of  turnover  in  the  housing  market,  income 
gearing in the UK will rise in the future - even on the conditioning assumption of constant interest rates 
which the Monetary Policy Committee makes in its inflation projection. If, for the sake of argument, one 
takes the future path of interest rates implied by market yield curves - the path expected in the markets 
- income gearing is likely to pick up towards the peak last seen in 1990 particularly if, in addition, one 
takes account of regular repayments not only of mortgage principal, but also of unsecured debt. The 
possible build-up in income gearing could under this scenario require vigilance.  
So overall, we may not have an absolute answer about whether today’s levels appear sustainable. I 
feel, however, that since there are at present relatively high levels of debt and these are rising faster 
than income, it is likely that potential vulnerabilities from increased gearing are rising. And we know 
from experience that unexpected shocks from one source or another can upset individuals’ predictions 
and behaviour.  
Does it matter? The general approach. 
The question is does this all matter? Should we really worry about it? Perhaps I can get into this by 
examining the two schools of thought.  
On the optimistic side, as I referred to earlier, you can argue that the rise in debt is a logical response 
to a more stable economic environment and the relaxation of credit constraints. Households consider 
the  wisdom  of  given  levels  of  debt  after  taking  into  account  their  assets  and  prospective  income. 
House  prices  and  the  value  of  financial  assets  have  risen.  Accordingly  some  rise  in  debt  is  quite 
understandable and for many house buyers necessary. 
In  addition,  it  is  a  logical response  to  a  number  of factors.  First, the  lower  initial  cash-flow costs  of 
servicing in the low-nominal-interest-rate environment of the past decade. And second, to the lower 
real  interest  burden  recently  as  monetary  policy  has  reacted  to  weaker  aggregate  demand  growth. 
And  it  is  understandable  for  households  to  wish  to  spread  consumption  over  their  lifetimes. 
Furthermore,  from  an  overall  macro-economic  point  of  view,  the  increase  in  household  spending 
financed  by  borrowing  has  been  consistent  with  overall  monetary  stability  and  our  inflation  target 
because  other  elements  of  demand  have  been  weak.  In  other  words,  it  has  been  a  logical 
accompaniment  to  monetary  stability  at  a  time  of  imbalances  in  the  composition  of  the  growth  of 
demand and has reflected an ‘acceptable’ imbalance needed to keep the economy growing. 
The pessimistic school points first to the fact that leverage adds to vulnerabilities. There will always be 
unexpected shocks, and levels of debt are at historical highs and rising. Second, it warns that reliance 
on wealth to justify levels of debt and provide the collateral can be a circular argument. Demand for 
housing itself has to an extent been increased by the availability, at the time that it is contracted at 
least, of affordable credit. Increases in house prices and secured debt have tended to reinforce each 
other. If either has ‘overshot’ - for instance, because of unrealistic expectations of income growth - the 
other is likely to have overshot too.  
And, third, there is a timing issue. Perhaps the borrowers’ realisation of the implications of higher debt 
take time to sink in. When interest rates are falling- the case in the UK in terms of our repo rate from 
February 2001 to July last year - borrowers may feel better placed to service higher loans and might 
increase borrowing accordingly. However, if rates rise - as they have at the official level - the cost of 
servicing the outstanding debt will tend to rise and can cause repayment difficulties. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 5
While there are elements of truth in both schools of thought, the balance of probability lies with the 
optimists. The optimistic school reflects the central case, whereas the pessimists are more inclined to 
focus on the risks - the tail of the distribution if you like. But even if the probabilities of things going 
wrong in the near future may not be high, there are nonetheless credible threats, and over time the 
risks might mount. 
Remembering our public policy role, I would like  to drill down a bit and ask the question “does this 
matter?” from three aspects: financial stability; monetary policy; and the socio-economy.  
Financial stability issues 
First financial stability, the oversight of which is one of the Bank’s key responsibilities. Here we need to 
focus  on  mitigating  the  potential  impact  on  the  financial system  from  vulnerabilities  that  might  arise 
from high levels of debt. Will they give rise to concerns over repayment strains, to financial failures or 
liquidity withdrawal? Could strains lead to defaults of multiple borrowers, leading in turn to problems 
for the intermediaries and providers?  
From the point of view of lenders I detect that there is on the whole a feeling of confidence, with few 
overall concerns about the asset portfolios of secured and unsecured household debt. There has been 
a  significant  improvement  in  risk  management  systems:  at  the  retail  level,  for  example,  information 
technology  has  enabled  the  development  of  sophisticated  modelling  techniques.  Data  suggest  that: 
UK-owned banks’ capital ratios are strong by international and historical standards; that the proportion 
of new mortgages granted at high loan-to-value ratios has dropped; and that the loan-to-value ratios 
on existing mortgages have fallen. Mortgage arrears are around their all-time low. Such factors help to 
boost the resilience of the United Kingdom’s financial system.  
There are, however, potential hazards - in particular relating to poor lending decisions or to changes in 
the  behaviour  of  borrowers.  There  have  been  examples  in  other  countries,  for  example  the  US,  of 
potential  changing  attitudes  to  personal  bankruptcy  and  defaults.  Under  some  scenarios,  such 
changes  could  put  pressure  on  the  balance  sheets  of  lenders.  Furthermore,  it  is  possible  for  the 
behaviour  of  lenders  to  trigger  a  response  in  borrower  behaviour.  If  lenders  get  nervous  about  the 
credit  status  of  borrowers,  and  turn  off  the  supply  of  credit,  this  could  cause  failure  or  default  of 
borrowers.  The  lenders  seek  to  anticipate  such  issues,  partly  by  pricing  expected  losses  into  the 
lending products they offer and also through the development of risk management tools and stress 
testing.  The  strength  of  the  financial  system  is  increasingly  reliant  on  the  effectiveness  of  risk 
management.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  is  a  potential  concern  that  the  wealth  itself,  on  the  basis  of  which 
increased indebtedness has been made possible, may not be wholly dependable. It could be affected 
greatly  by,  for  example,  a  downturn  in  the  housing  market,  or  by  difficulties  in  the  corporate  sector 
triggering a reduction in people’s wealth via their direct or indirect holdings of shares. Not everyone will 
be affected by the same scenarios, but a reduction in wealth could reduce an ability or willingness to 
repay debts and at the same time reduce lenders’ access to collateral.  
So, with all these caveats, just what are the implications of this for the oversight of financial stability? 
First, of course, we need to be vigilant and watch for emerging signs of weakness. But, second, there 
are  a  number  of  mitigants.  We  can  give  warnings  to  enhance  awareness  of  the  implications  of  the 
indebtedness increasing.  
The  financial  system  itself  can  be  strengthened  through  adherence  to  a  high  quality  prudential 
framework. That is why the current review of the Basel Capital Accord is so important. Remember that 
this is designed to improve risk assessment by lenders, not just at the wholesale level but at the retail 
level as well. And risk management techniques and supervisory processes more generally are in the 
process of significant enhancement. 
In earlier days one might have considered other potential mitigants. These might have included credit 
controls or deliberate prudential measures increasing the cost of lending. The fact, however, is that 
with today’s liberalised capital markets and with the existence of derivatised products these would in 
all likelihood be rendered impractical.  
6 
 BIS Review 17/2004
Monetary policy issues 
Turning to monetary policy, the key focus is the extent to which vulnerabilities from the debt build-up 
could  trigger  changes  to  demand  or  supply  in  the  economy  with  direct  implications  for  monetary 
stability and meeting the inflation target. 
Higher levels of leverage could make demand more susceptible to external shocks which might lead to 
precautionary  saving:  this  in  turn  could  reduce  demand.  Equally,  socio-economic  factors  could  also 
cause changes in behaviour, even though these might be more gradual and are unlikely to affect all 
members of society at once.  
In  assessing  the  potential  impact  of  debt  build-up  on  demand  and  supply,  there  seem  to  me  to  be 
several important factors. First, is the fact that demand in general is boosted by increases in asset 
prices themselves. But what would happen if external events broke the cycle of asset price increases, 
particularly in relation to house prices? A sudden realisation that the wealth cushion supporting levels 
of secured debt was deflating could trigger behaviour that would reduce demand.  
Second, for some people consumption has been growing more rapidly than disposable income, and 
some of the increase is likely to have been financed by increased borrowing. If such people decided to 
readjust their balance sheet this could impact on demand.  
Third,  precautionary  saving  could  increase  -  for  example,  if  households  decide  they  need  to  make 
greater provision for their future retirement income. This could alter the desire to take out or to repay 
debt. Although this would only be likely to affect a particular part of the population, the extent of its 
impact would be hard to assess in advance.  
This, of course, is of direct relevance to monetary policy. Changes in the level of debt can result in 
changes to demand, and also to the level of vulnerabilities. These in turn have an important bearing 
on the state of the economy. And the higher the leverage, the greater the vulnerability to any given 
shock becomes. Furthermore, the price of, and hence demand for, new debt will be affected by the 
policy  decision  itself.  Demand  might  also  be  affected  by  the  impact  of  the  decision  on  people’s 
expectations about future rate movements.  
It may be true that we do not fully understand the transmission mechanism that could lead to changes 
in  demand.  Even  though  the  price  of  debt  is  directly  influenced  by  overall  interest  rate  levels,  we 
cannot evaluate with precision how much effect a given change in interest rates will have on levels of 
debt. But we do watch this from month to month, and are quite well positioned, thanks to the data we 
regularly look at, to judge the emerging impact of policy decisions. 
It is important to remember that we need to consider the fulfilment of our monetary policy remit over 
time. Not just over the next two years for which our forecast is given, but over the longer term as well. 
Sudden unexpected shocks of course could threaten monetary stability and might make keeping to the 
target  trickier.  We  need  to  ensure  that  threats  of  instability  from  such  a  shock  do  not  call  this  into 
question.  
With this in mind, each month when we on the MPC make our policy decision I am conscious of the 
debt situation. In particular the possibility that the potential vulnerabilities stemming from higher debt 
levels do in fact crystallise at some point and trigger a sharp demand slowdown that could have an 
adverse impact on monetary stability and make it more difficult to meet the inflation target over time. 
So  in  considering  the  whole  gamut  of  demand  and  supply  data  that  we  receive  and  evaluate,  I  do 
allow  these  factors  to  weigh  in  the  difficult  balance  all  of  us  face  each  month  in  relation  to  the 
monetary policy decision. I mentioned my tendency to think about the risks, however conscious I am of 
the central case. And this explains why on several occasions over recent months I have found myself 
voting for a rise; with a view to discharging our mandate to stabilise inflation at the target level, with 
stability in the monetary arena.  
Conclusion 
I  have  focused  this  morning  on  the  issues  that  are  of  direct  relevance  to  the  Bank’s  own  remit: 
monetary and financial stability. But a discussion on household indebtedness would not be complete 
without  a  brief  mention  of  the  significant  longer  term  socio-economic  issues,  which  I  certainly  give 
thought to, raised by demographics and a longer living population. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 7
On  the  one  hand  we  can  see,  as  discussed,  many  households  increase  their  borrowing  levels, 
encouraged as this is by willing lenders, low inflation and interest rates, and social acceptability. On 
the  other  hand  people  are  increasingly  going  to  be  confronted,  at  some  stage  in  their  lives,  by  the 
realities  of  the  need  for  extra  saving  to  cater  for  pension  provision,  long  term  care  provision,  and 
increased longevity. 
The  question  is  how  can  these  two  factors  be  reconciled  without  a  significant  impact  on  the  real 
economy?  Or  will  today’s  generation  in  effect  transfer  leverage  to  the  next  generation  -  calling  into 
question the issue of intergenerational fairness? The reconciliation could be exacerbated, given the 
demographic trend of smaller numbers entering the job market. We can certainly hope that the issue 
can  be  resolved  by  gradual  adjustment  over  time  without  a  significant  impact  on  monetary  and 
financial stability.  
But this aspect of the socio economic scene provides a real dilemma. It is not a short term issue, and 
not one that is for MPC. But the issues will surely be addressed and the contribution that we can make 
is to provide a stable and economic and financial backdrop against which this can be done.  
8 
 BIS Review 17/2004
