Jarle Bergo: Flexible inflation targeting 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a seminar 
arranged by the Association of Norwegian Economists, Gausdal, 23 January 2004. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the 
Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  17  December  2003  and  on  previous  speeches  and 
publications. 
The references and the Charts in pdf can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 Price stability, or low and stable inflation, is the primary objective of monetary policy in most countries. 
Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that the absence of price stability 
has resulted in low and unstable output and employment. High inflation or deflation is both a cause 
and a symptom of systematic imbalances in resource allocation.  
In the 1920s, John Maynard Keynes suggested that monetary policy should be aimed at stabilising the 
price level.1,2 This did not become common until the 1990s, however, even though Sweden had an 
explicit target for price stability in the period 1931-1937.  
We have had four periods of high inflation over the past 100 years: during the two World Wars, the 
Korean War and a 15-year period from the first half of the 1970s to the second half of the 1980s. In 
Norway, high inflation is a wartime phenomenon and a 1970s and 1980s phenomenon.  
In  1973,  western  economies  experienced  a  recession  which  would  prove  to  be  the  start  of  a  long 
period of sluggish growth. Annual GDP growth in Western Europe was nearly halved compared with 
the previous ten-year period. This was largely due to a negative shift in productivity growth. In addition, 
we experienced a cost shock as a result of the oil crisis in 1973.  
In  Norway,  the  recession  in  the  1970s  was  dealt  with  by  means of  a  strong counter-cyclical  policy. 
Despite price regulation and rising unemployment, inflation rose sharply. This was an indication that 
structural  shifts  had  taken  place  in  the  economy  in  the  1970s,  shifts  that  were  not  apparent  to 
politicians  and  economists  at  the  time.  The  objective  of  full  employment  was  given  priority  at  the 
expense of price stability.3  
But we did not achieve higher growth in exchange for higher inflation. An economic policy that fuels 
inflation does not generate higher economic growth. On the contrary, it paves the way for subsequent 
recession and unemployment. It would take time, however, before this view took hold in Norway. One 
of  the  first  to  express  this  idea  clearly  during  the  debate  in  Norway  was  Per  Schreiner,  Director 
General in the Ministry of Finance at the time. He wrote the following in 1982:4  
“It has been a common belief in the Nordic countries for a long time that it was possible to make a 
political  choice  between  price  stability  and  full  employment.  There  are  strong  indications  that  this 
option does not exist […] Personally, I am no longer in doubt that controlling inflation is essential to 
achieving other social objectives.”  
Norway adopted a nominal anchor when the devaluation policy was abandoned in 1986. We adopted 
an inflation target in the spring of 2001.  
Section 1, first paragraph, reads: “Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s 
national  and  international  value,  contributing  to  stable  expectations  concerning  exchange  rate 
                                                      
1   Keynes,  J.  M.,  (1923)  “Notes  for  Lecture  to  the  National  Liberal  Club”,  reprinted  in  “Collected  Writings  of  John  Maynard 
Keynes”, Vol. XIX, Macmillian, London, 1981. 
2   A  price  level  target  means  that  inflation  that  is  too  high  for  a  period  must  be  counteracted  by  negative  inflation  in  the 
subseqent period. An inflation target, on the other hand, permits “base drift”, which means that prices do not have to return 
to a specific level. 
3   See discussion in Bjerve, P. J. (1981) “Kva hende I Norge i 1970-åra- konjunkturpolitisk?”, Sosialøkonomen no. 5 1981, pp 
10-21. 
4   Schreiner, P. (1982) “Er Ola Nordmann smart nok? Den fulle sysselsetningen i fare!”, Universitetsforlaget. 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 1
developments. At the same time, monetary policy shall underpin fiscal policy by contributing to stable 
developments in output and employment.  
Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy.  
Norges  Bank’s  implementation  of  monetary  policy  shall,  in  accordance  with  the  first  paragraph,  be 
oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual 
consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. […]”  
Section 1 of the regulation states that in addition to sustaining the rate of inflation at approximately 2½ 
per  cent  over  time,  monetary  policy  shall  also  contribute  to  stable  developments  in  output  and 
employment.  
The  mandate  therefore  establishes  a  flexible  inflation  target  for monetary  policy  where  variations  in 
both  output  and  employment  are  given  emphasis.  Since  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon  over 
time, the level of the inflation target may be chosen by the authorities. A target for output, however, 
cannot be chosen in the same way.  
The economy grows over time. This is a result of positive productivity growth and population growth. 
The level of output that is consistent with stable inflation over time is discussed in economic theory as 
potential  output.  The  level  of  potential  output  cannot  be  influenced  by  monetary  policy.  When  the 
economy grows more rapidly than this level, inflationary pressures will build up in the economy. When 
the  inflation  rate  becomes  high  and  unstable,  self-regulating  mechanisms  will  tend  to  curb  growth. 
Experience shows that periods of high inflation are followed by periods of contraction. Over time, it will 
be impossible to maintain output at a level that is higher than the potential output level.  
Monetary  policy’s  contribution  to  stabilising  output  will  therefore  be  to  curb  fluctuations  around  the 
potential  output  level.  The  potential  output  level  cannot,  however,  be  observed.  It  is  also  difficult  to 
capture changes in productivity and technology.  
One  approach  to  measuring  the  level  of  potential  output  may  be  to  calculate  trend  output,  which 
entails a smoothing of historical GDP figures.  
Norges Bank bases its calculations of trend growth on an HP filter (Hodrick Prescott filter), but also 
takes  into  account  other  factors  such  as  structural  changes  or  changes  in  the  number  of  vacation 
days. Our assessment of the volatility of trend growth is also a matter of discretionary judgement.5  
The output gap measures the deviation in output from the level of potential output. There are various 
methods  for  estimating  the  output  gap.  Statistics  Norway,  like  Norges  Bank,  uses  the  HP  filter,  but 
bases its calculations on quarterly figures for GDP. Statistics Norway’s calculations of the output gap 
are  very  similar  to  the  calculations  made  by  Norges  Bank,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  the  last 
period, where Statistics Norway did not make adjustments for the increase in vacation days in 2001 
and 2002. The OECD calculates the output gap by using the production function method, where trend 
levels  for  labour,  capital  and  available  technology  are  inserted  into  a  specified  production  function. 
Potential  output  is  then  determined  by  trend  growth  in  factor  inputs.  The  IMF  uses  a  number  of 
methods, but has chosen to calculate the output gap for Norway in approximately the same way as 
Norges  Bank.  As  you  can  see  from  the  chart,  the  different  methods  of  calculation  give  roughly  the 
same outcome.  
To cross-check the projections for potential output and thus the output gap, we also look at alternative 
indicators of pressures in the economy.  
The wage gap measures the difference between actual wage growth and the growth that over time is 
consistent with the inflation target, and is an indicator of labour market tightness. With an estimate of 2 
per cent productivity growth, wage growth of 4.5 per cent over time will be consistent with an inflation 
target of 2.5 per cent. In the chart, the wage gap up to 2000, i.e. before the introduction of the inflation 
target, is defined as the difference between wage growth in Norway and in other countries. As we see 
from the chart, there appears to be a close relationship between this wage gap and the output gap as 
it is measured by Norges Bank. If we look at developments in employment in relation to trend growth 
(measured as a percent of the population in employable age groups), we get a similar path.  
                                                      
5   Norges Bank has chosen, in keeping with ordinary practice, to use a smoothing parameter, ? = 100 in the annual data. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2004
We also consider credit growth to be an indicator of public demand. Growth in credit which over time 
deviates from growth in nominal GDP may indicate that the level of activity in the economy is higher or 
lower than normal. In addition, we monitor various cyclical indicators and acquire information from our 
regional network.6  
There is uncertainty associated with the estimation of both trend growth and the output gap, but the 
correspondence  that  seems  to  exist  between  the  different  methods  of  indicating  pressures  in  the 
economy makes us confidant that the output gap, as we calculate it, provides useful information. The 
output gap provides an overview of the overall pressures in the real economy.  
If  there  are  no  substantial  economic  disturbances  -  or  shocks  -  there  will  be  no  conflict  between 
stabilising inflation and stabilising output and employment. A positive output gap will over time result in 
inflation that is above target, while a negative output gap will result in inflation that is too low.  
Nor  will  demand  shocks  in  a  closed  economy  result  in  a  conflict  in  the  short  term  between  price 
stability and stability in the real economy. A positive demand shock will result in higher inflation, and 
an  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  would  be  to  increase  the  interest  rate  as  much  as  is 
necessary for output to return rapidly to its potential level.  
In an open economy, however, a conflict of objectives could arise in the short term following a demand 
shock. Although a higher interest rate would contribute to stabilising both output and inflation, there 
might be a conflict with regard to the “dosage”. If the interest rate is increased to the extent that output 
is reduced to a level that is consistent with stable inflation over time, inflation may be too low as a 
result of an appreciation of the exchange rate in the short term. A trade-off must be made in the short 
term between the inflation target and stability in the real economy.  
A cost shock, which fuels inflation and at the same time reduces output and employment, leads to a 
more marked conflict in the short term between the inflation target and stability in the real economy.  
Different  types  of  disturbances  will  often  occur  at  the  same  time,  and  the  central  bank  must 
continuously  make  trade-offs  between  variations  in  output  and  employment  on  the  one  hand  and 
variations in inflation around the target on the other. Given that inflation over time shall be close to the 
target, these trade-offs are at the core of flexible inflation targeting.  
In the theoretical literature, making trade-offs between price stability and stability in the real economy 
is often described as minimising a loss function, where variations in output and variations in inflation 
are included.7 The central bank shall then choose the path for interest rates ahead that minimises the 
discounted “losses” in all future periods. The loss in one individual period will be:  
  denotes inflation, 
* the inflation target and (y-y*) the output gap. The loss function 
In the equation,
thus  includes  the  deviation  between  output  and  the  output  potential  and  between  inflation  and  the 
inflation target. The deviations enter the loss function quadratically. Large deviations from the targets 
are  thereby  deemed  to  be  a  considerably  more  serious  disadvantage  than  small  deviations.  In  the 
event of large deviations between inflation and the inflation target, or substantial imbalances in the real 
economy, the use of relatively strong measures may be appropriate. The trade-off between inflation 
.  The 
stability  around  the  inflation  target  and  stable  growth  in  output  is  expressed  by  parameter 
is, the greater the emphasis on real economic stability in relation to stability in inflation. With a 
higher 
is the definition 
strict inflation target, i.e. emphasis is only placed on inflation, 
of flexible inflation targeting. Although the loss function has two add factors, both of which are given 
emphasis,  a  fundamental  difference  is  that  the  monetary  policy  authorities  can  choose  the  inflation 
target but not the level of potential output.  
In practice, no central bank uses a loss function of this kind directly. What inflation-targeting central 
banks do in practice does, however, contain elements of the thinking behind this theory.  
is equal to zero. 
                                                      
6   See the box “Flexible inflation targeting and indicators of pressure in the real economy” in Inflation Report 3/03, p. 46, for a 
more detailed description of the different indicators. 
7   See for example Svensson, Lars E. O. (2002): “Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization”, in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, A 
Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29-31, 2002, pages 
261-312. 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 3
The choice of horizon for monetary policy implicitly provides some information about the central bank’s 
loss function.8 A central bank that places considerable emphasis on inflation and little emphasis on the 
real economy will choose a short horizon. A central bank that places considerable emphasis on the 
real economy will choose a long horizon. Behind the choice of a horizon of normally two years lies a 
perception of how the interest rate affects developments in inflation and output, and the central bank’s 
trade-off between variations in these two variables.  
According to theories on optimal monetary policy, the horizon should vary and partly depend on the 
size and duration of disturbances to the economy. For some types of disturbances, such as demand 
shocks, the optimal choice may be to achieve the inflation target relatively rapidly. For other types of 
disturbances,  such  as  cost  shocks,  a  longer  horizon  may  be  optimal,  provided  that  confidence  in 
monetary policy is not in jeopardy.  
Even though, according to the theory, the horizon should be variable, there are some advantages to 
maintaining a fairly firm horizon that have not been as prominent in the literature. It is crucial that the 
public  and  market  participants  understand  how  the  central  bank  sets  the  interest  rate  in  order  to 
contribute to confidence and credibility in monetary policy. According to the principle normally followed 
by Norges Bank, the interest rate is set with a view to achieving inflation of 2½ per cent at the two-year 
horizon. If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2.5 per cent, the interest rate will be increased. If 
it appears that inflation will be lower than 2.5 per cent, the interest rate will be lowered. This is a clear 
and simple interest rate setting principle to which the public and market participants can easily relate. 
This kind of simple principle also contributes to reducing uncertainty about the central bank’s trade-offs 
between price stability and stability in output and employment. We have no reason to believe that a 
variable  horizon  would  generally  result  in  substantially  higher  stability  in  inflation  and  output  than  a 
two-year horizon.  
In some cases, however, it may be appropriate to change the horizon. In situations where the central 
bank’s forecasts indicate that substantial imbalances in the real economy would arise if the interest 
rate was set so that the inflation forecast two years ahead was the same as the target, it might be 
appropriate to apply a somewhat longer time horizon. The same may be the case if financial stability is 
at risk.  
The entire path for inflation and the real economy, both before and after the two years, will be taken 
into account when setting interest rates. There are two reasons for this. First, there may be several 
paths that result in inflation of 2.5 per cent at the two-year horizon, and developments after the two-
year period may be important to the choice of path. Second, the entire path will be considered when 
assessing  whether  there  are  grounds  for  changing  the  horizon.  We  have  also  begun  providing 
projections for a three-year period in the Inflation Report.  
If extraordinary conditions prompt Norges Bank to apply a different time horizon than two years, the 
Bank will provide a clarification of this.  
However,  confidence  and  credibility  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  are  necessary  before  taking 
such  additional  considerations  into  account.  The  greater  the  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  the 
larger the scope for stabilising the real economy. A rapid and pronounced change in the interest rate 
may be appropriate in cases where there is a risk that inflation might deviate considerably from the 
target  over  a  longer  period,  so  that  inflation  expectations  might  be  affected  or  where  heightened 
turbulence in financial markets or a cost-push shock resulting from wage negotiations indicates that 
confidence in monetary policy is in jeopardy.  
In Norges Bank’s Inflation Report, we present our forecasts for both inflation and the output gap in the 
same chart. The reason for this is that we want to be as transparent as possible concerning the trade-
offs  made  in  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Transparency  enhances  confidence  in  and  the 
understanding of monetary policy. This has been well received internationally, cf. the following quote 
                                                      
8   See for example Smets, F. (2000): “What horizon for price stability”, ECB Working Paper nr. 24, July 2000 and Svensson, L. 
(1997), “Inflation forecast targeting: implementing and monitoring inflation targets”, European Economic Review, 41, 6, side 
1111-1146. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2004
from a presentation by Professor Lars Svensson at a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis:9  
“A  recent  innovation  of  the  Bank  of  Norway  […]  is  to  plot  the  inflation  forecast  and  the  output-gap 
forecast  in  the  same  graph.  This  clearly  serves  to  emphasize  that  the  bank  is  concerned  with  the 
stability  of  the  real  economy  as  well  as  with  inflation,  emphasizing  the  flexibility  in  its  inflation 
targeting.”  
Transparency and communication 
Confidence  in  monetary  policy  makes  it  easier  to  achieve  the  inflation  target  and  increases  the 
possibility  of  stabilising  output  and  employment.  Transparency  can  contribute  to  strengthening 
confidence.  
Transparency makes monetary policy more predictable. In an environment where market participants 
understand the central bank’s response pattern, the reaction of market rates to new information about 
economic developments has a stabilising effect.  
Norges Bank wants to be open about its monetary policy work. An account of the methods we use for 
our inflation projections, analyses of the functioning of the economy and our professional judgment is 
provided in our Annual Report, Inflation Report, strategy documents, speeches and other publications.  
We also try to have a systematic procedure for interest rate decisions where we operate with a pre-
announced  calendar  for  the  monetary  policy  meetings.  The  interest  rate  decisions,  together  with  a 
thorough explanation of the background for the decision, are published after each meeting. A press 
conference is held after each monetary policy meeting, whether the interest rate is changed or not, 
where either the central bank governor or deputy governor presents the background for the decision 
and answers questions.  
The strategy documents, which are published at a later time, should serve to further clarify the trade-
offs and the rationale behind the decision.  
The  Inflation  Report  contains  our  analyses  of  the  economic  situation  and  projections  concerning 
developments in inflation and output in the next few years. These reports provide guidance for market 
participants and the general public concerning monetary policy in the period ahead.  
Thus  far,  Norges  Bank  has  generally  used  two  alternative  technical  assumptions  concerning  the 
interest rate in the Inflation Report: that the interest rate follows market expectations, represented by 
implied  forward  rates,  or  that  the  interest  rate  remains  unchanged.  We  have  often  used  both 
assumptions, but in the last Inflation Report, we only used forward rates. Based on the assumption 
that  the  interest  rate  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  move  in  line  with  the  forward  interest  rate  and 
forward exchange rate respectively, our projection implied that inflation would return to target after two 
years. We interpreted this as an indication that the market’s interest rate expectations were consistent 
with achieving the inflation target at the two-year horizon. This type of assumption also provides an 
internal consistency between interest rate and exchange rate assumptions.  
There are also other possible interest rate assumptions, however. We could, for example present an 
“optimal” interest rate scenario, based on model-based calculations and an explicit loss function, or on 
more judgmental assessments. Another alternative is to base future interest rate developments on a 
simple rule, for example, a variation of the Taylor rule. In the inflation reports of The Reserve Bank of 
New  Zealand,  the  interest  rate  varies  over  the  projection  period  based  on  a  simple  forecast-based 
interest rate rule.  
Even  though  these  endogenous  interest  rate  paths  are  a  theoretically  more  satisfactory  way  of 
presenting these forecasts, they are not unproblematical. For example, an “optimal” interest rate path 
could lead to a misconception that the central bank is committed to setting future interest rates in line 
with this path, regardless of the shocks that occur. An interest rate path based on a simple rule may 
give the impression that the interest rate is actually set on the basis of this rule.  
                                                      
9   Svensson, L. E. (2003): “Comments on Laurence H. Meyer, ‘Practical Problems and Obstacles to Inflation Targeting’”, at the 
conference “Inflation Targeting: Prospects and Problems”, the Twenty-Eighth Annual Economic Policy Conference, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October 16-17 2003. 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 5
In  terms  of  communication,  there  is  no  definitive  answer  as  to  what  are  the  best  interest  rate 
assumptions.  Sometimes, projections  based  on specific  interest  rate  assumptions  may  indicate  that 
the monetary policy objective will not be achieved within a reasonable horizon. This will be a signal 
that the interest rate will probably deviate from these assumptions in the period ahead.  
Monetary policy under uncertainty 
There  is  always  uncertainty  associated  with  economic  projections,  but  there  is  also  uncertainty 
concerning the actual state of the economy at the time of the decision. Moreover, the effects of our 
own interest rate setting are uncertain.10  
Because most aspects of the future are uncertain, our projections are seldom 100 per cent correct. 
Viewed  in  retrospect,  it  might  appear  that  monetary  policy  could  have  been  conducted  better. 
However, interest rate decisions have to be assessed ex ante, in the light of the information that was 
available at the time that the decisions were made.  
One of the main problems associated with the conduct of monetary policy under uncertainty is access 
to  real  time  data  that  provide  good  information  about  inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy.  Petter 
Jacob  Bjerve  pointed  this  out  in  an  unusually  perspicacious  article  in  1981  on  cyclical  policies  in 
Norway in the 1970s:  
“It will otherwise always be a problem for economic policy that the statistics are prepared more or less 
after the events, and that it takes time after the statistics are published before we are aware of whether 
new  trends  have  begun  to  emerge.  [...]  Moreover,  the  analyses  were  based  on  projections  of 
productivity growth that proved to be too high.”  
As  I  pointed  out  in  my  introduction,  there  was  strong  growth  until  1973,  and  it  took  time  before  it 
became apparent that there had been a negative shift in potential output. The red dotted line in the 
chart shows what GDP would have been if the growth rate had been the same after 1973 as in the 
previous 10 years. Because the negative shift in the level of potential output was not discovered in 
time, a counter-cyclical policy was employed in an attempt to sustain the output level. Whereas the 
output gap was believed to be negative, it subsequently proved to be positive, as illustrated by the 
chart.  
Similarly,  in  a  study  of  previous  US  monetary  policy,  Ophanides11  finds  that  central  banks 
overestimated the level of output that was consistent with stable inflation in the 1970s because they 
were not aware of falling productivity growth in time. As a result, the output gap was underestimated 
and policy was too expansionary. Also in the 1990s, we saw an increase in productivity growth, and 
even though the mistake from the 1970s was not repeated, there was a vigorous debate concerning 
different targets for trend growth and the output gap.  
In  addition  to  the  difficulty  of  capturing  changes  in  potential  output  fast  enough,  there  is  also 
considerable uncertainty about the level of actual GDP. As an example, Norway’s GDP figures were 
extensively revised in June 2002. Growth in mainland GDP was revised upwards by an average of 1 
percentage point per year for the period 1995-1999. The largest revision was for 1999. As late as in 
May 2002, we believed that growth in 1999 had been 1.1 per cent. The revised figures now show that 
growth was in fact 2.7 per cent. It is obvious that such revisions can have a considerable impact on the 
actual output gap.  
Norges Bank is currently systematising different vintages of national accounts figures. We can then go 
back and evaluate monetary policy in “real time” to learn how we should respond to uncertain data.  
Frank Knight (1921) differentiates between “risk” and “uncertainty”.12 With risk, we know the probability 
distribution for the potential outcomes, but with pure uncertainty we do not. Thus, there is risk, but not 
                                                      
10   In 
the  opening  address  at 
last  year’s  Jackson  Hole  conference,  Alan  Greenspan  expressed 
following: 
“Uncertainty is not just an important feature of monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape. 
As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy in the US at its core involves crucial elements of risk management.” 
11   Orphanides, A. “The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(3), April 2003, 633-663. 
12   Knight, Frank H. (1921) “Risk, Uncertainty and Profit”. 
the 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2004
uncertainty, associated with the fall of a die, according to Knight. Thus, for a decision-maker, risk is far 
more manageable than pure uncertainty.  
In practice, the distinction between risk and uncertainty is not absolute; rather, there is a continuous 
scale. We never have complete knowledge of the probability distribution of the economic variables, 
although historical experience provides some indication. But some variables are characterised more 
by risk, in the sense that the range of outcomes is well specified, than others.  
Let’s look at some concrete examples. Projections for wage growth are important for the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  For  a  given  wage  formation  system,  the  outcome  of  wage  negotiations  is 
characterised more by risk. We do not know with certainty in advance what the outcome will be, but 
historical  experience  provides  us  with  information  about  the  probability  distribution.  However,  the 
probability distribution depends on no change having taken place in the wage formation system. Such 
changes may occur, but we have little basis for judging the probability of this. If a change has actually 
taken place, however, we have little information about the probability distribution for the outcome of 
wage negotiations in the future. Whereas wage growth projections were previously characterised more 
by risk, they are now characterised more by Knight uncertainty.  
Another factor is the rise in prices for imported goods. There have been major structural changes in 
world trade, with intensified competition and China’s WTO membership. It is still too early to establish 
the effects of these factors on inflation abroad or how long the process of change in world trade will 
persist.  Projections  for  imported  price  inflation  may  therefore  be  said  to  be  characterised  more  by 
Knight uncertainty for a period ahead.  
Monetary policy under uncertainty was one of the many topics discussed in the report Norges Bank 
Watch 2003, where our policy response pattern and communication were evaluated in the light of the 
theory of monetary policy under uncertainty. This was useful input and constructive criticism which we 
will keep in mind in our future work.  
Norges Bank Watch 2003 points out, for example, that we should make a clearer distinction between 
additive  uncertainty  and  multiplicative  uncertainty.  This  distinction  is  most  clearly  reflected  in  our 
economic  models.  The  uncertainty  associated  with  the  exogenous  variables  is  called  additive 
uncertainty.  Examples  of  additive  uncertainty  are  add  factors  in  our  economic  models  and  other 
exogenous factors such as fiscal policy and the oil price. Uncertainty about the actual functioning of 
the economy may, however, lead to multiplicative uncertainty. Multiplicative uncertainty often involves 
uncertainty  about  the  structural  parameters  in  the  model,  such  as  the  effect  of  the  interest  rate  on 
demand and the exchange rate and the slope of the short-term Phillips curve.  
How does the central bank relate to the fact that we do not know precisely how the world is or how it 
will be in the future?13  
Alan Blinder, former Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve and currently a 
professor  at  Princeton  University,  touches  on  this  when  he  formulate  the  recipe  for  a  successful 
monetary policy: 14  
• 
Step 1: Estimate how much you need to tighten or loosen monetary policy to “get it right.” 
Then do less.  
Step 2: Watch developments.  
Step 3a: If things work out about as expected, increase your tightening or loosening, toward 
where you thought it should be in the first place.  
Step  3b:  If  the  economy  seems  to  be  evolving  differently  from  what  you  expected,  adjust 
policy accordingly.  
  I have not doubt that a number of central banks will sympathise with this recipe. Norges Bank normally 
takes  a  gradual  approach  to  interest  rate  setting  due  to  uncertainty  concerning  economic 
developments, including the effects of previous changes in the interest rate. 
                                                      
13   See Frøyland, E. and Lønning, I. (2000): “The significance of uncertainty in monetary policy”, Economic Bulletin no. 4/2000 
for a more detailed description of different types of uncertainty. 
14   Blinder, A. (1998) “Central Banking in Theory and Practice”, MIT Press 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 7
This principle is also supported by economic theory. As early as 1967, Brainard showed that central 
banks should respond more cautiously to economic disturbances when there is uncertainty as to how 
strongly the interest rate affects the economy, in other words when there is multiplicative uncertainty.15  
On the other hand, according to theory, additive uncertainty, where uncertainty factors are assumed to 
be  independent  of  the  interest  rate,  shall  not  be  taken  into  account  when  setting  interest  rates. 
Certainty equivalence implies that we make an unbiased projection for the uncertain factor and take 
the projection into account in the same way as if we knew with certainty that it would occur.  
Theory  implies  that  the  central  bank  should  be  more  aggressive  when  setting  interest  rates  when 
faced with certain types of multiplicative uncertainty, for example, uncertainty regarding the extent to 
which  the  deviation  from  the  inflation  target  for  a  period  has  an  effect  on  market  participants’ 
expectations concerning future inflation.16 This is in line with previous statements from Norges Bank 
where we state that:  
The interest rate may be changed rapidly and markedly if there is a risk that inflation might deviate 
considerably  from  the  target  over  an  extended  period  so  that  inflation  expectations  might  be 
influenced,  or  when  heightened  turbulence  in  financial  markets  or  a  rise  in  costs  as  a  result  of 
negotiated wage increases indicate that confidence in monetary policy is in jeopardy.  
The  fact  that  academic  research  is  devoting  more  attention  to  monetary  policy  under  uncertainty  is 
useful for us practitioners. But it is important to be aware that the results in this literature depend, of 
course, on the assumptions, which are often relatively simple and stylised. Therefore, the relevance of 
the theoretical results to the practical conduct of monetary policy is also uncertain! We look at theory 
with considerable interest, albeit with a certain degree of Brainardian caution.  
Summary 
The government has defined a mandate for monetary policy that involves flexible inflation targeting. In 
addition  to  ensuring  that  inflation  is  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time,  monetary  policy  shall  also 
contribute to stabilising developments in output and employment. Monetary policy cannot influence the 
potential output level, but can dampen fluctuations around this level. In this way, monetary policy can 
contribute to stabilising developments in output and employment.  
Inflation cannot be controlled exactly, but it is relatively simple to measure how far it is from the target. 
It is more demanding to measure the gap between actual output and potential output.  
In  our  operational  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  we  normally  set  the  interest  rate  with  a  view  to 
maintaining  inflation  at  2.5  per  cent  two  years  ahead.  Due  to  uncertainty,  we  usually  proceed 
gradually. In our opinion, this response pattern will normally result in a reasonable trade-off between 
stabilising inflation around the target and stabilising output and employment.  
 
                                                     
15   Brainard, W. (1967) “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,” American Economic Review, 57 (2), May 1967, pp 411-
425. 
16   See Söderström, U. (2000): “Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters”, ECB Working Paper No. 13, February 2000. 
8 
 BIS Review 6/2004
