John Hurley: Recent economic and financial developments in Ireland 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of Ireland, at 
the  Russian  Bankers’  Federation  Conference  on  “The  Transition  to  the  Market  Economy:  Actual 
Problems in the Economic and Finanical Sectors”, Dublin, 20 April 2004. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  begin  by  welcoming  you  to  Ireland.  I  hope  that  you  will  find  this 
conference helpful and that you can draw on some of the lessons learned from Ireland’s experience in 
our  transition  to  a  more  market-oriented  economy.  Initially,  I  will  briefly  outline  the  main 
metamorphoses undergone as our economy developed to a stage where standards of living are now 
broadly  comparable  to  those  of  other  advanced  European  economies.  The  process  of  income 
convergence  was  ‘telescoped’  into  a  relatively  short  period  compared  with  many  other  countries. 
However, the fundamental factors underlying the convergence are based on lessons learned over a 
significantly longer period. I will go on to speak about monetary and exchange policy in Ireland prior to 
our entry to the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System, our experience in the 
mechanism itself and our experience in the euro area. I will also give some indication of the current 
economic outlook.  
Economic development and policies in Ireland. 
For  much  of  the  first  half  of  the  last  century,  Ireland  adopted  predominantly  protectionist,  heavily 
regulated  and  inward-looking  policies  with  the  focus  largely  on  promoting  domestic  indigenous 
industries  behind  high  tariff  barriers.  These  policies  ultimately  proved  to  be  unsuccessful,  as 
employment stagnated, emigration became endemic, and living standards, as measured by GDP per 
capita, remained persistently well below European levels. 
Coupled  with  the  protectionist  policies  of  the  time,  the  state  played  a  relatively  major  role  in  the 
commercial life of the economy. With few major industries or wealthy individuals in the country at the 
time of our independence, a strategy of creating State-sponsored bodies to fill the gaps left by the lack 
of  private  enterprise  was  adopted.  State  companies  were  established  in  areas  such  as  banking, 
transport and resource-based utilities. By the 1970s the State still played an extensive role in most 
areas of the economy. However, since then the role of the state has diminished considerably. 
There was a fundamental shift in thinking about a decade and a half or so before Ireland joined the EU 
in  1973,  with  a  move  away  from  protectionist  inward-looking  policies  to  one  of  opening  up  the 
economy  to  trade  and  investment.  This  entailed  a  policy  of  encouraging  foreign-owned  firms  to 
establish manufacturing bases in Ireland and, to this day, industrial policy has been geared towards 
high productivity export oriented foreign and domestic businesses.  
Economic  performance  from  the  early  1960s  until  the  first  oil  shock  in  1973  was  quite  good.  The 
economy  was  reorganised  structurally,  shedding  jobs  in  agriculture  and  low  productivity  indigenous 
industry sectors and opened up to foreign trade and investment. Significant foreign direct investment 
flows were an important factor in this improvement. A second important element was an emphasis on 
improving access to education at both second and tertiary levels. This commitment to developing the 
skills  of  the  population  has  been  maintained  since  then.  However,  the  first  oil  price  shock  and  the 
associated slowdown in world demand resulted, in hindsight, in some inappropriate policy responses; 
this  was  the  case  with  many  other  countries  at  the  time.  The  slowdown  over  the  1970s  and  the 
negative real income effects of the adverse movement in the terms of trade associated with the oil 
price  increase,  resulted  in  increasing  public  deficits  and  a  very  high  national  debt.  By  1985,  these 
reached  over  10  per  cent  and  100  per  cent  of  GDP,  respectively.  In  the  early  part  of  the  1980s 
economic growth was negligible and unemployment and inflation soared.  
The road to convergence  
In the face of these persistent problems, in the mid-1980s a fundamental reorientation of economic 
policies, both macro and micro, was undertaken with the aim of putting the economy on a sustainable 
path  of  economic  growth.  There  were  several  strands  to  the  reorientation  of  economic  policy  that 
contributed to economic success. In the macroeconomic area, fiscal policy was put on a more stable 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 1
footing. This was achieved through effecting sharp cuts in public spending which had grown to 53 per 
cent of GDP by 1985. At that time, interest payments on the public debt were absorbing over one-third 
of  total  tax  revenue.  The  restraints  on  spending  involved  a  curtailment  of  many  public  services,  a 
reduction in the number of public sector employees and a cutback in public investment. There was 
also  an  acceptance  that  tax  rates,  particularly  personal  tax  rates,  had  increased  to  unsustainable 
levels during the early 1980s as taxes were raised in an effort to contain public borrowing. This had led 
to a contraction of the tax base as the economy stagnated and unemployment rose substantially. 
There was an increased commitment to low inflation, having experienced the adverse effects of high 
inflation earlier. There was also an increased emphasis on competitiveness in the economy. 
In  the  micro-economic  sphere,  the  major  changes  occurred  in  the  personal  taxation  area.  The 
disincentive effect of high marginal tax rates was substantially reduced with significant reductions in 
unemployment and poverty traps along with reductions in the replacement ratio. For a number of years 
from  the  mid-1980s,  these  tax  reforms  were  traded  off  against  moderate  increases  in  nominal  pay 
rates. These were negotiated as part of social partnership agreements between Government, labour 
unions  and  employers.  Continued  importance  was  also  attached  to  ensuring  that  non-wage  labour 
costs for employers remained low. In many other countries these are high and are widely recognised 
as inhibiting employment growth. 
More  generally,  there  was  a  concern  to  foster  an  environment  favourable  to  business  development 
and  growth.  Corporate  tax  rates  remained  low,  the  administrative/red-tape  burden  on  business 
continued  to  be  limited  by  comparison  with  international  standards,  and  various  State  agencies 
facilitated business development and adaptation. 
Increased resources devoted to education from the late 1960s began to bear fruit in an increasingly 
well-educated  population  that  was  seen  as  a  major  asset  to  businesses,  particularly  in  the  more 
high-skilled  sectors.  Ireland’s  labour  market,  particularly  in  the  private  sector,  became  increasingly 
flexible and this helped businesses to cope with changing market conditions. 
I  should  also  say  that  Ireland’s  membership  of  the  EU  contributed  to  this  better  economic 
performance.  In  a  direct  sense,  EU  Structural  Funds  contributed  to  the  capability  of  the  productive 
sectors,  to  the  provision  of  public  infrastructure  and  to  education  and  training.  Various  evaluations 
conclude  that  the  Structural  Funds  were  used  effectively  in  improving  economic  performance.  EU 
membership  also,  of  course,  has  continued  to  benefit  the  country  through  increased  trade  and 
financial integration and through the effects of greater competition on economic efficiency. 
Finally, I should say that the road to economic recovery in the latter part of the 1980s was facilitated by 
the  pick-up  in  global  economic activity,  particularly  in  the  UK.  The  reduction in  world  interest  rates, 
which had a direct effect in reducing the country’s large debt-service burden, was also an important 
factor.  
Now  I  would like  to  turn  to  the  changes  in  the country’s  monetary  arrangements  culminating  in  our 
entry to the euro. 
Monetary and exchange rate policy 
In the monetary sphere, since the introduction of the Irish pound in the late 1920s, Ireland maintained 
a one-for-one link with sterling for more than fifty years with no exchange controls between the two 
countries.  This  reflected  the  fact,  inter  alia,  that  Britain  was  (and  still  is)  our  largest  single  trading 
partner. Until well into the 1960s, the London financial markets were used extensively by Irish financial 
institutions. London served as an inter-bank market and large sterling liquid assets were held there by 
Irish  banks.  Measures  were  taken  in  the  1960s,  within  the  constraints  of  the  monetary  union  with 
sterling, to promote a domestic money and foreign exchange market.  
The  link  with  sterling  began  to  be  questioned  in  policy  circles  as  we  imported  a  high  and  volatile 
inflation rate from the UK during the 1970s. This monetary and exchange rate regime continued until 
the opportunity to join the European Monetary System arose in 1978 with the prospect of linking the 
Irish pound to the more stable core EU economies, an important milestone in the movement towards a 
single currency.  
The new exchange rate arrangements provided a major impetus to the domestic money market and 
led  to  the  establishment  of  a  range  of  liquidity  management  instruments  by  the  Central  Bank.  For 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2004
some considerable time the Central Bank continued to be the dominant player in the domestic money 
market until more active market-making by financial institutions began to develop. 
The early years of Ireland’s experience in the European Monetary System were difficult. On the one 
hand, domestic macroeconomic policies were somewhat undisciplined. In particular, problems arose 
from inconsistencies between the exchange rate regime and the monetary financing of public sector 
deficits.  There  emerged  what  amounted  to  a  carousel  effect  whereby  money  market  imbalances 
deriving  mainly  from  the  monetisation  of  the  government  deficit  were  placing  continuing  downward 
pressure on the exchange rate. In turn, the exchange rate was supported by using the proceeds of 
Government  foreign  currency  borrowing.  This  was  an  unstable  situation  that  could  not  continue  for 
very  long.  A  second  issue,  which  arose  somewhat  later,  was  the  volatility  of  sterling  against  EMS 
currencies,  including  the  Irish  pound.  On  two  occasions,  two  sharp  sterling  depreciations  led  to 
downward realignments of the Irish pound within the EMS.  
As I have said, a significant reorientation of economic policies occurred in the mid 1980s. This entailed 
a  devaluation  of  8  per  cent  within  the  EMS,  substantial  cuts  in  nominal  public  spending  and  a 
commitment on the part of the social partners to low nominal wage increases in exchange for cuts in 
income  tax.  These  tax  rates  had  risen  substantially  as  the  country  tried  to  cope  with  the  fiscal 
imbalances in the first half of the 1980s. All of these changes contributed to a turnaround in economic 
performance. Gradually, economic conditions in Ireland began to improve. Foreign direct investment 
inflows, particularly from the US in high technology sectors, began to rise. From the mid-1990s the 
Irish  economy  grew  very  strongly,  with  GDP  growth  averaging  nearly  10  per  cent  a  year  over  the 
second half of the decade. The employment rate for the adult population reached 66 per cent by the 
end  of  the  millennium,  which  was  above  the  EU  average  and  about  a  third  higher  than  a  decade 
earlier. 
Ireland’s decision to join the single currency was a further step towards deeper integration. This was a 
natural progression from our involvement in the Exchange Rate Mechanism and EMS. The increased 
trade  and  investment  opportunities  offered  by  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk,  lower  nominal 
interest rates and the inflation credibility bonus of an independent ECB outweighed the costs of joining 
a single currency without the UK, still our largest trading partner. With the decision to join Economic 
and Monetary Union came the Maastricht nominal convergence criteria, which provided a stable and 
solid  foundation  for economic  growth  in  the second  half  of  the  1990s.  The criteria  provided  a  good 
nominal  anchor  for  both  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  Together  with  a  lower  interest  rate 
environment, these were a significant element in our successful convergence. 
Supervision of the financial sector 
Before  moving  on  from  monetary  issues,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  supervision  of  the 
financial sector. The Central Bank was a relatively early mover in adopting a more formal process of 
supervision of the financial sector - in the early 1970s. Initially, the main concern was with the banking 
sector. In Ireland, at least at the retail and small business level, the two large domestic banking groups 
have been the dominant players. As the economy developed, many foreign banks established here 
and, as part of the single market, EU-based banks can serve the Irish market from their home bases. 
Over the past decade and a half, an International Financial Services Centre, mainly oriented to provide 
financial  services  to  non-residents,  has  been  promoted  by  Government.  As  a  result  of  legislation 
enacted last year, supervision of almost the entire financial sector is the responsibility of a constituent, 
but  autonomous,  element  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services  Authority  of  Ireland.  The 
legislation has placed a significantly increased emphasis on consumer issues. 
In the banking area, a high degree of importance has been attached to the authorisation process - 
prevention is better than a cure. In the early days of formal supervision, prudential standards were set 
down that struck a balance between being over prescriptive and too relaxed. These worked well. More 
recently, with the greater complexity of banking and finance, an increased emphasis has been placed 
on ensuring that banks operate appropriate internal control systems. Since the late 1980s, the Basle 
capital adequacy standards have applied. The Bank is currently a party to the protracted discussions 
to developing these standards to deal with the changing financial environment.  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 3
Our experience in the euro area 
I would like to turn now to our experience with the single currency. In the run up to the euro and in its 
early phase, very buoyant economic conditions in Ireland tested our capacity to cope with the single 
currency.  With  GDP  growth  running  in  excess  of  10  per  cent  and  unemployment  at  historically  low 
levels, capacity constraints inevitably resulted in  increasing inflation, which exceeded 5 per cent for 
much  of  2000  and  2001;  this  was  more  than  twice  the  euro  area  average.  By  contrast,  economic 
growth in the core euro-area economies was sluggish and, with a single monetary policy, monetary 
conditions are set by reference to economic conditions in the euro area as a whole. With relatively low 
nominal  euro-wide  interest  rates,  high  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  in  Ireland  pushed  real 
interest  rates  into  negative  territory.  In  addition,  the  euro  weakened  substantially  after  its  inception, 
further easing monetary conditions in Ireland.  
Until  recently,  these  easy  monetary  conditions  contributed  to  some  widening  of  Ireland’s  inflation 
differential over that of the euro area. However, the strengthening of the euro through 2003 and slower 
economic growth than previously have reduced inflationary pressures. This year, the Bank forecasts 
inflation to be about 2 per cent. 
Although buffeted by the Information and Communications Technology sector shock in 2001 and the 
more uncertain international economic conditions in the recent past, the Irish economy has performed 
well.  Economic  growth  (GNP)  last  year  was  3.3  per  cent,  amongst  the  highest  in  developed 
economies, and employment has continued to perform strongly. Unemployment — currently 4.6 per 
cent — is amongst the lowest of EU countries and is very low by historical standards in Ireland. This 
good performance in a more difficult economic climate reflects, inter alia, the resilience and flexibility of 
the labour market. 
Economic stabilisation in a region of a monetary union is left to other areas such as fiscal policy, and 
structural,  including  incomes,  policy.  Fiscal  policy  has  been  managed  prudently  in  Ireland  for  many 
years.  This  allowed  the  automatic  stabilisers  to  soften  the  impact  of  the  ups  and  downs  of  the 
economic cycle. At the same time, from a position of substantial surplus in 2000, the Government’s 
borrowing requirement has conformed to the requirement of the Stability and Growth Pact to be kept 
close to balance or in surplus. Last year, for example, the Government had a surplus of 0.2 per cent of 
GDP. The stock of debt is one of the lowest in the EU — 33 per cent of GDP —down by two thirds on 
its  level  twenty  years  earlier.  In  the  structural  area,  Ireland  has  made  relatively  good  progress  in 
implementing labour and product market reforms aimed at improving competition and flexibility. This 
has played an important role in mitigating the economic fall-out from asymmetric shocks in a monetary 
union.  Ireland’s  relatively  good  record  in  these  areas  is  borne  out  by  the  EU  Commission’s  recent 
review of countries’ performance in implementing the EU’s Broad Economic Policy Guidelines.  
The current outlook 
As I have indicated, the global slowdown and, more specifically for Ireland, the negative shock to the 
Information and Communications Technology sector in 2001, has resulted in a significant slowdown in 
economic growth from what was clearly an unsustainable pace over the long run. For the current year, 
the Bank expects growth of a little over 3 per cent of GNP, as the pace of the international recovery 
picks  up.  The  recent  sharp  fall  in  inflation  to  about  2  per  cent  is  a  welcome  development  as  price 
levels  in  Ireland  compare  somewhat  unfavourably  with  the  rest  of  Europe,  due  to  several  years  of 
relatively high inflation rates.  
In terms of current challenges and prospects, the rapidity of the real convergence process has placed 
significant  strains  on  domestic  infrastructure,  which  requires  further  sustained  investment.  In  the 
convergence  period  and  the  run  up  to  EMU,  Ireland  benefited  significantly  from  EU  Structural  and 
Cohesion  Funds,  which  provided  a  significant  boost  to  domestic  infrastructure  projects.  As  our 
economy improved these transfers have decreased over time. The National Development Plan 2000 - 
2006  outlined  a  substantial  programme  for  improving  and  expanding  domestic  infrastructure, 
amounting  to  over  €51  billion  over  the  life  cycle  of  the  proposals.  Investment  in  the  capital  stock, 
including infrastructure, in education and training and in research and development must continue if 
future growth potential is to be realised.  
A second area of concern has been the large and persistent increase in the price of housing over the 
last decade. New house prices have increased by 183 per cent between 1995 and 2003, an average 
increase of nearly 14 per cent a year, while existing house prices have increased more rapidly still. 
This has been accompanied by continued strong increases in residential mortgage lending in the 20 to 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2004
25 per cent range for a number of years. Demand for housing has undoubtedly increased significantly 
in recent years due to strong fundamental factors such as income and employment growth, a relatively 
large  young population  in  the  household-formation age-group  and  net  inward migration.  In addition, 
the adoption of the single currency and the credible price stability mandate of the ECB have meant 
that  nominal  interest  rates  have  fallen  and  are  likely  to  remain  low  by  Irish  historical  standards; 
debt-servicing costs for mortgage-borrowers now are roughly half of what they were a decade ago. 
There has, more recently, been a relatively good supply response, with housing output increasing by 
about  69,000  units  in  2003,  suggesting  that  the  market  may  be  approaching  equilibrium  as  this 
demand is at least partially satisfied. Concern still remains, however, that certain sub-sectors of the 
market could be vulnerable if some adverse developments were to occur. 
Some lessons from Ireland’s experience 
As  a  small  open  economy  on  the  edge  of  Europe,  Ireland’s  transition  to  a  more  market-oriented 
economy and attainment of average EU living standards are of significant interest, particularly to the 
accession  countries.  Our  experience  shows  that  good  economic  performance  requires  both  an 
environment of openness to foreign trade and investment and macroeconomic stability together with 
well  functioning  markets.  Flexible,  well-functioning  markets  are  developed  and  sustained  by 
appropriate structural and microeconomic policies. In our progression from a closed, heavily regulated, 
protected economy to a very open, competitive economy, we benefited significantly from policies that 
promoted labour market participation and improved the skills of the work force. A well-educated and 
well-trained  workforce  was  crucial  in  facilitating  the  large-scale  transfer  of  labour  from  an 
agricultural/old  industrial  economy  to  a  more  modern  service-orientated  economy  with  a  modern 
industrial sector. In addition, increased competition and reduced State involvement in many sectors 
has promoted efficiency and reduced the prevalence of uncompetitive practices. International studies 
suggest that Ireland’s product and labour markets are among the most flexible in the OECD. Increased 
flexibility  in  product  and  labour  markets  is  vital  in  supporting  economic  growth  and  in  facilitating 
economic performance generally in the single currency area.  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 5
