Wu Xiaoling: Promoting the extension of micro credit 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China at the Videoconference 
on promoting the extension of micro credit, Beijing, 6 July 2004.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Deputy Secretary-General of the State Council Mr. You Quan has just conveyed the instruction of Vice 
Premier Mr. HUANG Ju to the conference, representatives from 5 different provinces and cities have 
introduced  their  experiences  in  micro  credit  extension,  and  relevant  speakers  from  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  the  Ministry  of  Labor  and  Social  Security  and  the  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission 
have  also  specified  their  plans  for  promoting  the  extension  of  micro  credit.  As  leaders  of  the  State 
Council  are  much  attentive  to  the  making  of  micro  guaranteed  credit  policy  on  unemployed  laid-off 
workers, so banking system should seriously study the spirit of Vice Premier Huang Ju’s instructions 
and learn from the advanced experiences of the 5 provinces and cities to facilitate the work of micro 
guaranteed credit for unemployed laid-off workers to make new breakthroughs continually. I will focus 
my speech on the following issues in terms of banking system’s responsibilities.  
Since the micro guaranteed credit business started in 2002, the People’s Bank of China, the Ministry 
of Finance and the Ministry of Labor and Social Security have consecutively issued a series of policy 
documents, which stipulate the target borrowers, loan size, maturity, guarantee and interest subsidy. 
With  joint  efforts  of  all  relevant  parties,  micro  credit  policy  has  developed  extensively  in  the  whole 
country and become one of the most important reemployment policies to support laid-off workers to 
find jobs and start up business on their own. By end-May of 2004, the outstanding amount of micro 
credit to laid-off workers extended by all financial institutions reached RMB1.22 billion yuan, among 
which, RMB590 million yuan was extended in the period from January to May in 2004. Employees in 
the banking system have made great contribution to the development of micro-credit business. 
We  have  two  pieces  of  precious  experiences  drawn  from  nearly  two-year  implementation  of  micro 
credit policy. First, banking credit support alone cannot satisfy the need of laid-off workers to find jobs 
and start up business on their own, therefore, reemployment policy should be assisted by necessary 
job training and employment services by way of combining job training with micro credits to raise the 
successful reemployment ratio effectively; second, because laid-off workers have limited ability to start 
up their own business and most of them still need to be absorbed by enterprises, in addition to micro 
credit  extension,  we  should  strengthen  credit  support  to  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises,  in 
particular small labor-intensive enterprises which can absorb many laid-off workers. According to our 
investigation and feedbacks from relevant parties, the following problems exist in implementation of 
micro  credit  policy:  first,  lack  of  policy  publicity  and  many  local  governments  did  not  understand  or 
misunderstood the policy; second, in some places complicated credit approval procedures and high 
guarantee requirements hindered borrowing; third, lack of proper projects and high credit management 
cost  discouraged  lending  activity;  and  fourth,  in  some  places,  lack  of  coordination  among  different 
departments resulted in low efficiency. 
On March 18th, given the emerged problems in reemployment efforts and experiences from different 
regions,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Ministry  of  Labor  and  Social 
Security jointly issued the Circular on Promoting Micro Credit to Unemployed Laid-off Workers (Bank 
Document 2004 No.51) to adjust and improve relevant policies. Promoting the implementation of micro 
credit policy relies on the following five aspects: 
1. 
Improve risk-sharing and compensatory mechanism for micro credit; effectively 
streamline loan guarantee and approval procedures. 
The core issue of enlarging micro credit extension is to ensure risk compensation. At the beginning, 
various  guarantee  funds  were  set  up  by  local  fiscal  departments  and  managed  by  guarantee 
institutions  to  share  micro  credit  risks.  But  in  practices,  many  guarantee  institutions  require  laid-off 
workers to provide counter guarantee. The purpose of guarantee fund is to disseminate micro credit 
risks  and  possible  losses  incurred  by  start-up  businesses,  with  proper  counter  guarantee,  a  laid-off 
worker could borrow directly from a bank without resort to the guarantee fund. The reason they go to 
guarantee  fund  is  just  because  of  their  high  risk  profile.  In  some  places,  counter  guarantee 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 1
requirements  restrained  substantially  micro  credit  extension.  No.51  Bank  Document  clarifies 
risk-sharing principles. If some regions have already chosen guarantee institutions, counter guarantee 
cannot  exceed  30  percent  of  the  total  credit  extension;  furthermore,  with  strengthened  credit 
management  system,  each  region  should  abolish  counter  guarantee  requirement  gradually.  For 
regions  that  have  not  chosen  guarantee  institutions,  their  fiscal  departments  can  deposit  guarantee 
funds into banks which can extend micro credits to the laid-off workers independently. In the event the 
extend loans went sour, 20 percent of the resulted losses should be borne by the issuing bank and the 
other  80  percent  be  absorbed  by  the  guarantee  funds,  among  which,  provincial  fiscal  departments 
shall assume 10 percent of the losses while the other 70 percent is to be assumed by low level fiscal 
departments.  By  this  arrangement,  banks,  provincial  and  local  fiscal  authorities  could  share  risks 
effectively.  Besides,  credit  extension  efficiency  is  improved  with  banks  directly  involved  in  credit 
approval. 
2.  
Introduce the experience of combining job training with micro credits, support laid-off 
workers to start-up business of their own. 
To  improve  laid-off  workers’  ability  to  start-up  their  own  businesses,  most  cities  have  launched  job 
training program. Based on such practice, the People’s Bank of China and the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Security jointly promoted the application of “job training plus micro credits” model in 100 cities, 
which  is  to  provide  qualified  trainees  on  a  selective  basis  with  credit  guarantee,  lower  counter 
guarantee  threshold  and  encourage  micro  credit  extensions  by  financial  institutions.  Combing  job 
training with micro credits should become a standard way for commercial banks to extend micro credit 
in the future, including not only fiscal subsidized loans, but also many other commercial micro credits 
to  promote  labor  market  development.  All  branches  (Operations  Offices)  and  sub-branches  of  the 
People’s Bank of China in the capital cities of each province should directly supervise this task in two 
or three cities joining the pilot program and strengthen relevant researches. Commercial banks should 
also explore further in this regard and spread successful experiences nationwide. 
Strengthen credit support for small enterprises to absorb more job-seekers 
3.  
Small enterprises are the main sources for employment. Due to both historical and personal reasons, 
many laid-off workers even subject to job training still cannot start up their own businesses and thus 
seek to be reemployed through job application. Therefore, government has issued various policies to 
support small enterprises to absorb laid-off workers. In accordance with No.51 Bank Document, small 
labor-intensive enterprises, which absorb laid-off workers by over 30 percent of the total number of 
current employees and sign employment contract for above one year, will enjoy three preferences in 
receiving micro-credit: First, 50 percent of the interest rate set by the People’s Bank of China will be 
subsidized by the fiscal authorities with the central and local fiscal departments each contributing half 
of  the  subsidy  fund;  Second,  10  percent  of  bank’s  micro  loan  losses  will  be  covered  evenly  by  the 
central  and  local  fiscal  departments;  Third,  local  fiscal  departments  pay  issuing  commercial  banks 
0.5 percent of commission fees. Total micro credits extended to each small enterprise could reach as 
high as RMB1 million yuan with a maximum of 2-year maturity, based on a credit line of 20,000 yuan 
for  each  laid-off  workers.  Although  it  appears  that  such  preferential  policies  are  not  very  attractive, 
since the interest rate of credit to small enterprises could float 70 percent above the benchmark rate, 
commercial  banks  should  be  able  to  completely  cover  their  risks  by  increasing  the  risk  premium. 
Furthermore,  interest  and  loan  losses  subsidies  should  help  relieve  the  commercial  banks’  political 
worries about credit extension to small enterprises, especially to the private-owned small enterprises. I 
hope  commercial  banks  could  understand  this  policy  and  strengthen  their  credit  support  to  small 
labor-intensive enterprises so that they could absorb many laid-off workers. 
4.  
Effectively use social security platforms at communities to establish credit 
communities.  
Extension  of  micro  credits  involves  large  workloads,  substantial  management  costs  and  high  risks. 
Rural credit cooperatives have solved such problems by establishing credit households, credit villages 
and credit towns. In recent years, established urban communities have become the basis of China’s 
political  hierarchy  and  social  development  in  the  sense  that  reemployment  services  for  laid-off 
workers, social services for retired workers and benefits distribution for low-income households all are 
conducted  on  the  community  platform.  Because  communities  understand  most  deeply  local 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2004
enterprises and households, especially laid-off workers whose livings rely on community services, it is 
useful to establish a good financial environment and reduce micro credits management costs and risks 
by establishing credit communities and publicizing financial knowledge. Credit community will benefit 
not only micro credit extension but also other types of loan extension. I wish every commercial bank 
could participate in the establishment of credit community; in particular, branches of the People’s Bank 
of  China  at  all  levels  should  assist  labor  and  social  security  departments  to  establish  credit 
communities to promote implementation of micro credit extensions to laid-off workers. 
5.  
Help small and medium sized financial institutions to define appropriate market niche 
in order for them to provide communities with quality financial services. 
Although we have many national financial institutions, they are not suitable to extend micro credits due 
to long management chains. Social financial services call for community banking services providers 
that  focus  on  serving  local  households.  Micro  credit  businesses  are  mostly  based  in  cities  and 
conducted by branches and outlets of financial institutions which are located in urban communities. 
Branches  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  at  all  levels  should  work  closely  with  the  China  Banking 
Regulatory  Commission  to  cultivate  development  of  community  banks  and  help  small  and  medium 
sized  financial  institutions  to  define  appropriate  market  niche,  effectively  tap  market  potentials  and 
strengthen support to reemployment efforts. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  policy  implementation  holds  the  key  to  success  of  guaranteed  micro  credit 
business.  Concerning  the  interests  of  laid-off  workers  and  even  social  stability,  extension  of  micro 
credit is indeed a solemn political task which can only be accomplished with hard work and quality 
services.  The  people’s  Bank  of  China  should  coordinate  with  fiscal  departments  at  all  levels  to 
establish guarantee funds and other fiscal subsidies in time and improve the efficiency of guarantee 
institutions. Besides, the People’s Bank of China should work closely with the labor and social security 
departments  to  make  feasible  plans  to  promote  job  training  and  micro  credit  extension  for  laid-off 
workers,  foster  the  establishment  of  credit  community,  and  conduct  periodical  evaluation  of  various 
support schemes. All commercial banks, especially local financial institutions should adjust their own 
credit  management  in  accordance  with  new  regulations  and  support  development  of  the  small  and 
medium sized enterprises to contribute to the coordinated social and economic development. 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 3
