Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the  hearing  before  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  of  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 28 September 2004. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The statement is based, among other things, on the assessments 
in Norges Bank’s Annual Report for 2003 and Inflation Report 2/2004. 
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Storting  for  again  inviting  Norges  Bank  to  appear 
before  this  Committee  to  report  and  answer  questions  on  monetary  policy  in  connection  with  the 
Storting’s deliberations on the Government’s credit report.  
Inflation-targeting countries  
Price stability, in the sense of low and stable inflation, is the objective of monetary policy in a number 
of countries. Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that high inflation has 
resulted in unstable output and employment. In addition, a fall in the price level will often accompany a 
period of decline.  
The first inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the UK in 
1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. In Norway, the government issued a regulation introducing 
an inflation target in 2001. Monetary policy in euro area countries and Switzerland is also aimed at 
price stability, even though this is not referred to as inflation targeting in these countries.  
Inflation  targeting  has  proved  to  be  particularly  appropriate  in  very  open  small  and  medium-sized 
economies. Commodity exports play a particularly important role in several of the countries that were 
the first to introduce inflation targeting.  
Exchange rates fluctuate 
Over  the  past  10-15  years,  many  countries  have  made  the  transition  from  a  fixed  exchange  rate 
regime to inflation targeting. In open economies with free capital movements, the exchange rate will be 
influenced by economic developments.  
The  krone  fluctuates.  This  is  not  surprising  because  other  countries’  currencies  also  fluctuate.  The 
krone  exchange  rate  does  not  stand  out  as  particularly  unstable  compared  with  other  countries’ 
currencies.  
The krone exchange rate is the price of our currency measured in a foreign currency. Developments in 
other  countries  are  just  as  important  for  the  krone  as  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy. 
Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest 
rates as well as output and employment.  
There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is 
stable - but too strong - also entails costs to the economy in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone 
that is stable - but too weak - is a source of high inflation.  
Flexible inflation targeting 
The most important contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the 
long  term  is  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  inflation  target  provides  an  anchor  for  economic  agents’ 
expectations concerning future inflation. We have a very open economy with free capital movements. 
Stable inflation expectations also contribute to more stable exchange rate expectations.  
Inflation  targeting  means  setting  the  interest  rate  so  as  to  achieve  a  numerical  target  for  inflation. 
Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to stabilising inflation at 2.5 per cent within a reasonable 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 1
time horizon, normally 1-3 years. The more precise horizon will depend on the disturbances to which 
the economy is exposed, and how they affect the path for inflation and output.  
The inflation target represents a framework for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to 
stabilising  output  and  employment.  We  have  chosen  flexible  inflation  targeting.  Variability  in  output 
and employment as well as inflation is given weight.  
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  safeguard  the  value  of  money  in  the  long  term,  and  seek  to 
contribute to stabilising economic developments in the short and medium term.  
Like  other  central  banks,  Norges  Bank  publishes  reports  about  the  economic  situation,  the  inflation 
outlook  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  transparency  of  the  basis  for  monetary  policy 
decisions  has  increased.  Norges  Bank  presents  an  account  of  both  the  main  aspects  of  economic 
developments that influence interest rate decisions and of the Executive Board’s assessments. The 
alternatives considered by the Executive Board are made public. Interest rate decisions are taken on 
the basis of an interest-rate setting strategy drawn up by the Executive Board every four months. The 
strategy is now published as soon as it is adopted and prior to the relevant strategy period.  
The interest rate affects the economy with a lag 
The objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation. The instrument is the interest rate. The 
interest rates influences inflation with a lag and with varying intensity.  
As  interest  rates  fall,  household  and  local  government  consumption  and  investment  will  tend  to 
accelerate. Higher demand leads to higher output and employment. Wage growth may pick up. Higher 
wage growth combined with higher profit margins will result in higher inflation.  
Lower interest rates will normally lead to a depreciation of the krone. Imported goods will then become 
more expensive and inflation will accelerate.  
Expectations play a key role in price and wage formation, and they are influenced by the interest rate. 
Expectations concerning future inflation and economic stability have considerable impact, not least in 
the foreign exchange market.  
More stable inflation 
Current inflation is low, but our recent history shows that without a nominal anchor inflation becomes 
high and variable with substantial effects on output and employment. In the 1970s and 1980s, average 
annual  inflation  in  Norway  was  over  eight  per  cent.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  which  was 
introduced in 1986, reinstated monetary policy as an instrument of economic policy in Norway and laid 
the  foundation  for  lower  inflation  and  more  stable  economic  developments.  Like  other  small,  open 
commodity  economies,  Norway  also  experienced  that  it  was  not  possible  to  maintain  a  stable 
exchange rate as a nominal anchor. Inflation targeting was therefore introduced in 2001. 
High  and  variable  inflation  usually  accompanies  instability  in  output  and  employment.  But  inflation 
should not be too low over time either. This is partly because the structure of the economy evolves 
over time. Demand for labour with different qualifications changes. Restructuring requires changes in 
real wages and relative wages. Nominal wages do not readily fall. With some measure of inflation, real 
wages and relative wages can be changed without reducing nominal wages. Some degree of inflation 
will oil the economic machinery. 
In  periods,  it  will  be  appropriate  to  stimulate  the  economy  with  low,  or  even  negative,  real  interest 
rates. If inflation becomes entrenched at a very low level, the interest rate will be less effective as an 
instrument  because  it  cannot  be  set  below  zero.  If  the  economy  is  again  exposed  to  unexpected 
negative disturbances, we will have little scope for manoeuvre. 
Stability in output and employment 
In  the  long  term,  output  and  employment  are  determined  by  the  supply  of  labour,  capital  and 
technology  and  by  the  ability  to  adapt.  Monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  smoothing  fluctuations  in 
output and employment. Norges Bank weighs stable inflation against stable output and employment. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2004
The output gap is a measure of the difference between the actual level of output and potential output. 
Potential output, which is the level of output that is consistent with inflation over time, is not directly 
observable and must be estimated. One simple method is to assume that potential output over time 
grows at trend because the labour force expands and productivity rises. Developments in the output 
gap  provide  a  basis  for  assessing  cyclical  developments  and  can  thus  also  shed  light  on  domestic 
price and cost pressures in the economy. 
It is difficult to know how high capacity utilisation is at any given time. Output and employment figures 
are  often  revised  and  do  not  therefore  always  present  an  accurate  picture  of  the  current  economic 
situation. Norges Bank therefore also uses a number of other indicators to take the temperature of the 
Norwegian economy. 
The period of strong expansion that began in 1997 came to an end in winter 2003. The Norwegian 
economy was hit by a pronounced downturn in the global economy. An economic turnaround has now 
occurred  in  Norway,  with  a  soft  landing  after  the  long  period  of  high  domestic  cost  inflation  and 
sluggish external activity. Output is showing a marked increase, but inflation is low. 
Monetary policy easing 
From spring 1999 to December 2002, the interest rate in Norway was fairly stable at between 5.5 per 
cent and 7 per cent. In other countries, the interest rate fell in 2000 and 2001 when the ICT and equity 
bubbles  burst.  The  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other  countries  widened  due  to 
cyclical divergence. The expansion continued for a longer period in Norway, with strong wage and cost 
inflation. The 2002 wage settlement resulted in very high wage growth for the fifth consecutive year. 
A persistent downturn abroad, the likelihood of lower wage growth in Norway and a strong krone have 
led to reductions in the interest rate of 5 percentage points since December 2002. The sight deposit 
rate has been 1.75 per cent since March this year. Monetary policy easing has aimed to bring inflation 
up towards the target of 2.5 per cent and stabilise developments in output and employment. 
The  decline  in  interest  rates  since  December  2002  have  contributed  to  weakening  the  krone. 
Measured  by  an  index  of  44  trading  partners  (I-44),  the  krone  depreciated  through  2003  by  almost 
11 per cent  from  its strongest  level  in January  of  the  same  year.  In  2004,  the  krone  has  fluctuated 
moderately  around  its  current  level.  High  oil  prices  and  low  interest  rates  abroad  have  curbed  the 
effect on the krone of the fall in Norwegian interest rates. The krone has stabilised - though at a high 
level from the point of view of the inflation outlook. 
Unexpected disturbances 
The  Norwegian  economy  was  exposed  to  substantial,  unexpected  disturbances  from  autumn  2002 
and into 2003. Global economic developments were an important factor behind the appreciation of the 
krone. In 2003, growth in the global economy moved on a different path and was substantially weaker 
than  Norges  Bank  and  other  observers  had  expected.  Weak  developments  in  the  global  economy 
resulted in lower interest rates abroad and a wider interest rate differential between Norway and other 
countries.  Developments  in  international  equity  markets  and  the  risk  of  higher  oil  prices  also 
contributed to strengthening the krone. 
Activity in the world economy picked up in autumn 2003 from a very low level. After expanding sharply 
for  several  quarters,  the  US  economy  showed  slower  growth  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year. 
Economic growth has picked up from a low level in the euro area. Economic growth has also gained 
momentum in Sweden and the UK. Strong growth in the US and China exerted upward pressure on 
commodity prices in 2003 and the beginning of 2004. Oil prices have risen considerably during the 
summer. Several central banks have raised interest rates. Interest rate increases are expected in a 
number of countries. 
Inflation is low 
Consumer  price  inflation  in  Norway  declined  sharply  through  2003.  A  number  of  factors  appear  to 
have contributed to the decline. The appreciation of the krone through 2002 pushed down import price 
inflation. At the same time, a change in trade patterns and external economic conditions have resulted 
in  an  unexpectedly  sharp  fall  in  import  prices,  even  when  measured  in  terms  of  what  Norwegian 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 3
importers pay in foreign currency. The change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution 
to the sharp decline in prices for clothing, footwear and audiovisual equipment. Rapid technological 
advances have also pushed down prices for audiovisual equipment. 
In  Norway,  competition  has  probably  increased  in  retail  trade  and  other  service  sectors  in  recent 
years. In the first round, heightened competition affects companies’ profit margins. But enterprises will 
respond by reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the enterprise itself, but subcontractors will 
also be required to reduce their prices and enhance efficiency. Increased competition therefore usually 
triggers  higher  productivity  growth  in  the  economy.  Low  inflation  may  thus  be  matched  by  higher 
productivity. 
Low inflation in the Nordic countries 
Norway  is  not  the  only  country  where  inflation  has  been  low.  In  Sweden,  underlying  inflation  fell 
sharply. Excluding energy prices, core inflation stands at 0.8 per cent in Sweden. Inflation has also 
slowed in Finland and Denmark. One explanation for this, common to all these countries, appears to 
be intensified competition, which has led to high productivity growth. 
Real exchange rate and competitiveness 
High wage growth over several years as from 1998 has eroded the competitiveness of the Norwegian 
business  sector.  The  nominal  krone  exchange  rate,  as  measured  by  the  trade-weighted  index,  has 
now reverted to around the level prevailing in the mid-1990s, while labour costs in manufacturing have 
risen considerably more than among our trading partners in the same period. 
However, the business sector is still feeling the effects of the loss in competitiveness that resulted from 
high wage increases. The exposed sector has been scaled back. Companies that are still in operation 
may be in a better position to cope with the high wage level. A more effective service sector may also 
have strengthened the export industry. Nevertheless, costs may limit activity and employment. 
The international division of labour is shifting, and when faced with major changes it is a disadvantage 
for Norwegian business and industry that costs are high. 
Credit growth 
Total  credit  is  expanding  broadly  in  line  with  growth  in  nominal  GDP.  However,  the  composition  of 
credit  growth  has  been  giving  mixed  signals  in  terms  of  interest-rate  setting  over  the  past  year. 
Household debt accumulation is high, while it is low in the enterprise sector. 
Household  debt  has  increased  sharply  since  1994.  The  rise  in  the  value  of  dwellings  is  one  of  the 
main factors behind growth in household debt. House prices have risen by an average of around 9 per 
cent over the past 10 years. High and persistent house price inflation may contribute to holding up 
credit growth even after prices have levelled off. Since only a portion of the housing stock is sold each 
year, there will for a long period be some dwellings that are sold at a higher price than when they were 
last sold. This contributes to sustaining credit growth at a high level. This probably reflects a structural 
adjustment to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in the 1980s, after many households 
suffered financial distress in the wake of the relaxation. Homeowners with dwellings that have risen in 
value  now  have  greater  scope  for  taking  up  new  mortgage-secured  loans,  using  mortgage-equity 
withdrawal to finance consumption and other investments. 
A persistently high rate of increase in house prices can in isolation engender expectations of a further 
rise and can thus prove to be self-reinforcing for a period and push up credit demand. 
At the same time, the switch to a flexible inflation targeting regime reduces the possibility of exposing 
households to a double shock in the form of higher unemployment and higher interest rates, as was 
the  case  prior  to  the  banking  crisis  in  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  If  the  economy  is  exposed  to 
disturbances that may lead to higher unemployment, inflation will normally decline and interest rates 
will be lowered. High debt growth increases the vulnerability of households to economic disturbances. 
As a result of low interest rates, the household interest burden will remain fairly low in spite of high 
debt growth. It may prove to be particularly challenging for borrowers to assess their debt-servicing 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2004
capacity over time in a period when the interest rate is abnormally low. Such a low interest rate also 
places particular demands on banks in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers. 
The interest rate can be used to reduce credit demand. At present - with low interest rates abroad and 
a close link between domestic interest rates and the krone - a tighter monetary policy would restrain 
credit demand primarily because job security would be reduced as a result of a stronger krone. 
  Summary of the situation in the Norwegian economy 
A turnaround in the Norwegian economy has occurred. The economy has experienced a soft landing 
after the long period of high cost inflation in Norway and sluggish external activity. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Output has returned to trend and is now showing a marked rise. 
Employment has returned to trend and is rising. 
Unemployment is at the 1996-level, and is at the average for the 1990s. 
Wage growth is broadly in line with a level that is consistent with the inflation target given 
nomal productivity growth.  
Overall  credit  growth  is  balanced.  Credit  is  expanding  broadly  in  line  with  trend  growth  in 
nominal GDP.  
Labour  costs  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading  partners  are  now  broadly  in  line  with  a 
long-term average. 
The nominal krone exchange rate is in line with the average for the 1990s. 
The interest rate level is near the level prevailing among our trading partners. 
Inflation expectations are approximately consistent with the target. 
• 
• 
• 
In that respect, there is equilibrium in the Norwegian economy. 
But the current inflation rate is low, and external and domestic interest rates are low. Lagged effects of 
the strong krone in 2002 are exerting downward pressure on inflation. At the same time, a change in 
trade  patterns  and  external  economic  conditions  are  pushing  down  import  prices,  even  when 
measured  in  terms  of  what  Norwegian  importers  pay  in  foreign  currency.  In  Norway,  intensified 
competition appears to be resulting in high productivity growth, which is probably contributing to low 
inflation. 
The outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Last year, Norges Bank reported that inflation had declined to a low level, but we projected a gradual 
increase. We highlighted the uncertainty surrounding the inflation projection and indicated that inflation 
might remain low. Subsequently, inflation fell to an even lower level. Structural adjustments in goods 
and service markets may imply low inflation also for a period ahead. 
Growth is high in the Norwegian economy. Growth in the mainland economy primarily reflects higher 
activity  in  retail  trade,  the  construction  industry  and  the  service  sector.  Imports  are  expanding  at  a 
brisk  pace.  There  are  prospects  of  continued  strong  growth  in  petroleum  investment  in  2005. 
Employment is rising, albeit still at a moderate pace. 
Monetary  policy  influences  the  economy  with  long  and  variable  lags.  There  is  always  uncertainty 
surrounding  inflation  developments.  A  very  high  oil  price  may  also  have  an  impact  on  the  krone 
exchange  rate.  Historical  deviations  between  projected  and  actual  developments  in  the  CPI-ATE 
provide an illustration of the uncertainty surrounding the inflation projections. 
The fall in the value of the krone through 2003, low interest rates and solid growth in the real economy 
will gradually push up inflation. Price developments in recent months have, nevertheless, increased 
the risk that inflation will remain low for a longer period. 
Thank you for allowing me to make the introductory statement at this hearing. 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 5
