Timothy F Geithner: The Bretton Woods institutions in the 21st century 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, before the Bretton Woods Committee, New York, 10 June 2004. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  join  you  for  this  meeting  of  the  Bretton  Woods  Committee.  This  is  a  great  and 
accomplished  organization.  Although  the  international  financial  institutions  are  one  of  the  most 
important legacies of the great statesmen of the last century, the task of supporting them is not always 
easy.  The  Committee  has  been  effective  in  this  role,  not  just  by  helping  to  explain  the 
accomplishments of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to an occasionally skeptical 
public, but also by helping to shape the debate on how these institutions need to change.  
The Fund, from its inception, was burdened by a mismatch between the aspirations of its architects 
and the authority and instruments they gave the institution to pursue those ambitions. Its authority over 
the  policies  of  its  members  was  limited.  Its  resources  were  small,  and  the  facilities  established  to 
deploy those resources were modest relative to the problems they were designed to address.  
At its creation, the architects of the Fund hoped to build a system that would deliver exchange rate 
stability globally, in a world much less integrated than it is today, without giving the Fund the capacity 
to induce, much less compel, its members to pursue the economic policies that might have made that 
objective more realistic. They gave the IMF a financial mission that had some of the characteristics of 
a  lender  of  last  resort  to  sovereigns,  but  without  mechanisms  to  constrain  risk-taking  behavior.  By 
necessity, they left the Fund in the position where it was ultimately dependent on the strength of the 
governments of its members, and on their willingness to act to address their economic challenges. 
To their credit, the founders gave the institution a basic charter that permitted evolution. And as the 
needs of the world have changed, the institution has been able to change as well. It has been much 
more  responsive  to  change,  and  much  more  agile  in  responding  to  a  rapidly  changing  mix  of 
challenges than other multilateral organizations. But the constraints that were established at the outset 
still exist today. 
I  am  going  to  focus,  in  my  remarks  today,  on  the  Fund’s  role  in  promoting  financial  resilience  and 
mitigating  crises  in  emerging  market  countries.  But  first,  let  me  mention  briefly  several  of  the  other 
areas  where  the  Fund  has  a  very  important  role  to  play  in  the  international  economy  and  financial 
system. The Fund can provide a useful voice and a forum for advising the major economies to pursue 
policies that can contribute better to global economic expansion and financial stability. The Fund can 
play an important role in considering, from a global or systemic perspective, the exchange rate policies 
of its members. And the Fund plays a vital role in providing the macroeconomic policy framework that 
is the critical to sustaining better growth outcomes and the effectiveness of the global development 
assistance effort for the poorest, low-income countries.  
I think the Fund is reasonably close to the frontier, the sensible or achievable frontier, in these areas. 
Some may wish it were more effective in persuading the G-3 to avoid policies that create the risk of 
abrupt changes in financial market conditions or exchange rates, but it will never be decisive in this 
arena. And it might do more to further improve the design of macroeconomic policies and institutions 
in the poorest developing countries. But outside those areas, the challenges to sustained growth in per 
capita income lie largely in areas beyond the core competence of the IMF. 
In the emerging market context, in contrast, there is greater distance between the Fund of today and 
the achievable frontier. This is a timely and critical issue, because of the magnitude of the challenges 
that still confront many emerging market economies.  
Let me start with a broad review of the progress made over the past decade across emerging markets 
in reducing their vulnerability to financial crisis.  
• 
International  reserves  have  increased  substantially,  providing  a  larger  cushion  against 
adversity. Among the largest borrowers, half now hold reserves greater than 150 percent of 
maturing  short-  and  long-term  debt;  less  than  one-sixth  had  such  coverage  heading  into 
1997.  
There  have  been  improvements  in  fiscal  performance,  with  some  notable  cases  of 
governments achieving and sustaining large primary surpluses.  
 BIS Review 37/2004 
 1
       External  balances  have  improved,  with  current  accounts  in  most  of  the  emerging  world  in 
surplus  or  modest  deficit.  Only  2  of  the  20  largest  borrowers  now  are  running  deficits  in 
excess of 3 percent.  
Exchange rate regimes are more resilient and less fragile, as a substantial majority of the 
largest  borrowing  countries  have  moved  to  flexible  regimes,  and  away  from  the  fixed-but-
adjustable pegs that proved so dangerous in the crises of the last decade.  
Important progress has been made in building credibility for new monetary policy regimes, 
and inflation is generally moderate.  
Governments have made major investments in recapitalizing and restructuring their troubled 
financial  systems.  For  example,  in  Asia,  where  some  of  the  most  severe  problems  were 
encountered,  governments  have  spent  over  $500  billion  carving  out  problem  loans  and 
bolstering capital.  
Growth  rates  have  improved  with  the  restoration  of  domestic  stability  and  recovery  in 
external demand. Indeed, aggregate growth currently is running at its highest rate since the 
onset of the crisis in 1997.  
With  these  improvements,  and  generally  accommodative  external  financial  conditions, 
borrowing  costs  have  fallen,  capital  market  access  was  restored  for  many  countries,  and 
credit growth resumed. Net credit growth to sovereigns has remained moderate, however, as 
much of the borrowing has gone to refinancing the existing stock of debt on more favorable 
terms.  
The market for emerging market debt also has matured. There has been more differentiation 
in  the  response  of  spreads,  both  on  the  way  down  as  credit  fundamentals  seemed  to 
improve, and during the recent correction.  
This  progress  is  indicative  of  a  general  increase  in  the  sophistication  and  skill  of  economic  policy 
makers in the emerging world, and in the quality of understanding of the benefits of macroeconomic 
stability and how to achieve it. Many countries benefited from the advice and financial support from the 
IMF and the multilateral development banks. But the most successful were those with policy makers 
who were ahead of the Fund and the Bank in diagnosing and addressing their problems, rather than 
being dragged reluctantly toward a more credible policy stance.  
These improvements have left the emerging markets as a group less vulnerable to financial crisis than 
they were in the mid-1990s. The combination of deeper reserve cushions, stronger external positions, 
improved  balance  sheets,  more  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes,  and  better  inflation  performance 
provide a very different setting from what existed the last time we faced a transition after a sustained 
period of benign financial conditions and low interest rates.  
These aggregate improvements mask substantial differences across countries and a number of areas 
of lingering vulnerability. Let me highlight some, and then suggest some implications for how the Fund 
might better position itself to deal with the challenges they present. 
• 
Some  of  the  most  daunting  challenges  are  in  the  fiscal  and  public  debt  area,  where  a 
number of emerging market economies across different regions face very high, and in some 
cases still growing public sector debt levels. Average public debt burdens in the emerging 
world  have  risen  to  about  70  percent  of  GDP,  and  among  countries  rated  single  B  and 
below, the mean rises above 80 percent.  
The challenge of managing debt burdens of this size is magnified by the fact that the debt 
structures in a number of countries are still quite vulnerable to foreign currency, liquidity, and 
interest rate risk. The substantial share of public debt denominated in foreign currency - 70 
percent on average for the lowest rated group of borrowers - and the relatively short maturity 
of the debt stock mean that a relatively modest shock can produce a substantial increase in 
debt burdens, raising the amount of fiscal effort needed to keep the debt stock on a stable or 
declining path, and increasing the economy’s vulnerability to a crisis.  
In  some  countries,  the  fiscal  trajectory  is  too  weak  to  place  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  on  a 
sustainable  path.  In  others,  the  fiscal  position  is  strong  enough  to  stabilize  the  debt 
dynamics,  but  provides  little  buffer  against  adverse  shocks,  and  very  little  room  for  fiscal 
policy to help cushion the effects of such a shock.  
  2 
 BIS Review 37/2004
   Important  challenges  remain  in  the  financial  area  as  well.  In  many  countries,  large  public 
sector debt burdens have left banking systems highly exposed to the sovereign, constraining 
authorities’ room for maneuver. There are also problems in banks’ corporate and consumer 
loan books, and a number of banking systems also have a large share of foreign currency 
denominated liabilities, in some cases held by non-residents.  
The  durability  of  recent  improvements  in  external  positions,  which  reflect  weak  domestic 
demand  in  many  countries,  is  also  open  to  question.  As  domestic  demand  strengthens, 
external  balances  could  move  into  deficit  again,  which  in  some  cases  will  reintroduce  a 
greater external risk.  
And  in  many  cases,  the  financial  exposure  of  the  IMF  and  the  multilateral  development 
banks is already high.  
These balance sheet challenges took a long time to develop, and they will take a long time to reverse. 
They are the legacy of years of past fiscal decisions, magnified by the impact of crises on growth, the 
exchange rate, and the financial sector. They leave an exacting set of policy challenges. They raise 
the  risk  that  future  shocks  to  domestic  confidence  or  adverse  changes  in  the  external  environment 
could lead to new pressures on exchange rates, on interest rates, and on the capacity of countries to 
fund themselves on sustainable terms. Apart from the risk of crisis, these debt levels are large enough 
to depress domestic investment and long-term growth prospects. 
In part because of these balance sheet and debt burdens, many emerging market economies face a 
protracted  transition  before  they  can  expect  to  be  comfortably  considered  stable  investment  grade 
credits,  with  sufficient  levels  of  self-insurance  against  external  and  domestic  challenges  to  financial 
stability. 
One  of  the  most  pressing  challenges  for  the  Fund  is  to  help  assist  in  this  process  of  reducing 
vulnerability,  by  promoting  an  unwinding  of  these  large  balance  sheet  risks  and,  at  the  same  time, 
providing  a  credible  form  of  contingent  insurance  for  those  hopefully  rare  circumstances  when  its 
members face extraordinary financing needs. 
The Fund would be better able to contribute to this process if it were to strengthen its policies in a 
number  of  specific  areas.  My  suggestions  cover  four  types  of  reforms:  changes  to  the  substantive 
focus of Fund policy advice; to the relationship between the Fund and its members in the surveillance 
framework; to the Fund’s approach to countries undertaking a debt restructuring; and to how the Fund 
uses  its  financial  resources.  They  involve  adopting:  a  risk  based  approach  for  focusing  the  Fund’s 
crisis prevention work; a more intensive framework for the surveillance process to provide a stronger 
anchor for the member’s economic program; a reinforced framework for providing support to countries 
undertaking a debt restructuring; and a more credible form of financial insurance that creates better 
incentives for stronger policies in advance of crisis. 
These proposals do not require amending the Articles of Agreement of the Fund, and can be achieved 
without  major  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  institution.  They  are  evolutionary  rather  than 
revolutionary.  
More policy ambition 
Studies  by  IMF  staff,  the  IMF’s  Independent  Evaluation  Office,  and  others  catalogue  a  number  of 
criticisms of the substantive content of the Fund’s policy advice. Many of these studies conclude that 
the Fund has had insufficient ambition in its prescriptions for reform and in a number of cases was too 
deferential  to  domestic  political  constraints  on  adjustment  and  reform.  Some  conclude  it  was  too 
supportive of choices by its members to run exchange rate regimes that were incompatible with the 
rest  of  the  policy  framework,  that  led to  substantial  appreciation  of  the  real  effective  exchange rate 
over  time,  that  encouraged  borrowing  in  foreign  currency,  and  that  proved  too  brittle  under  stress. 
Some suggest the Fund was in some cases insufficiently attentive to or ineffective in addressing the 
increases in debt, particularly foreign exchange denominated and linked debt, that created the balance 
sheet  problems,  which  made  crises  so  damaging  and  difficult  to  resolve.  It  accommodated,  if  not 
supported,  decisions  by  its  members  to  calibrate  policies  designed  for  a  more  benign  external 
environment than was realistic and therefore encouraged less self-insurance than was necessary to 
manage  safely.  And  it  was  drawn  too  far  into  a  range  of  efficiency-improving  long-term  institutional 
reforms that necessarily diffused attention from critical vulnerabilities. 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 3
To  some  extent,  these  criticisms  suffer  the  classic  failure  of  claiming  that  what  seems  obvious  in 
hindsight was as clear at the time. Many are unfair in the degree of influence they expect the Fund to 
be able to exert over a reluctant member - recall the constraints I described at the beginning on the 
Fund’s powers over its members. And many of the criticisms fail to recognize the difficulty of making 
definitive judgements about the path of policies consistent with sustainability.  
Yet  elements  of  this  general  diagnosis  of  the  Fund’s  policy  advice  to  emerging  market  economies 
have  substantial  merit.  If  the  Fund  is  going  to  contribute  to  a  process  of  well-targeted  reform, 
particularly in the more vulnerable countries, it probably needs to raise the bar, to increase the level of 
ambition of its policy recommendations. Greater policy focus is required on the principal sources of 
near-term  vulnerability,  ideally  without  fully  eclipsing  longer-term  institution  building  and  structural 
reforms important to raising growth potential.  
A  risk-based  framework  for  determining  the  hierarchy  of  policy  priorities  is  important.  Such  a 
framework would almost certainly entail more focus on unwinding large balance sheet problems (both 
with respect to the sovereign and the financial system), reducing sovereign debt to more sustainable 
levels,  making  debt dynamics  less  vulnerable  to  shocks,  increasing  liquidity  buffers,  and preserving 
appropriate exchange rate arrangements. Addressing these issues would help reduce the risk of future 
capital  account  crises.  It  would  create  better  conditions  for  private  sector  growth.  In  virtually  every 
context  where  public  sector  debt  burdens  are  high  and  fiscal  deficits  large,  more  ambition  in  the 
adjustment path should be positive for growth through the effect on confidence, interest rates, and the 
exchange rate.  
Of course the Fund can’t want reform more than its members. The principal burden for running a set of 
policies  more  commensurate  with  the  risks  emerging  markets  face  in  this  world  rests  with  their 
governments. The role of the Fund should be to help guide and encourage them to the point where 
they  build  in  a  more  substantial  degree  of  self-insurance.  The  Fund  should  not  acquiesce  in  and 
validate  policy  frameworks  that  fall  substantially  short  of  the  threshold  necessary  to  safely navigate 
this world of high variability in the external environment and occasional domestic political pressures to 
weaken policies.  
Changing the surveillance framework  
Part  of  the  challenge  entails  reorienting  surveillance,  the  process  through  which  the  Fund’s  policy 
advice is delivered, to make it more effective. The surveillance framework of today has a number of 
features  that  make  it  poorly  suited  to  a  small  open  emerging  market  economy  that  has  fragile 
credibility, a limited buffer against shocks, and considerable exposure to a rapidly changing economic 
and financial environment. The assessments occur quite infrequently, only every 12 to 24 months. The 
assessments can only be published with the approval of the member state, which tends to take the 
edge off the diagnoses and prescriptions. Assessments do not come with a clear evaluation relative to 
thresholds  that  help  define  degrees  of  vulnerability,  or  relative  to  other  countries  in  similar 
circumstances.  The  assessments  are  judgments  of  the  Fund’s  Executive  Board,  not  formally  of  the 
staff, which can also work to take the edge off candid economic and financial judgments. Risks are not 
clearly  and  candidly  identified  and  explored.  And  the  process  does  not  come  with  consequences, 
since critical evaluation can be withheld from the public, and neither favorable nor critical evaluations 
necessarily have consequences for access to financial assistance from the Fund.  
The  model  we  use  for  bank  supervision  in  the  United  States  offers  an  interesting  contrast.  We 
undertake a continuous process of onsite examination. We use a risk-based framework for focussing 
attention  on  critical  factors.  We  produce  a  confidential  rating  of  select  dimensions  of  the  financial 
profile of the institutions and their risk management and control infrastructure. We assess the models 
banks use to measure risk and the scenarios used to stress test exposures, but the banks have the 
responsibility for designing and running the risk management infrastructure. By looking across a broad 
range  of  world  class  financial  institutions,  we  have  a  good  sense  of  the  evolving  frontier  of  best 
practice  in  risk  management  which  we  can  then  use  to  help  benchmark  other  institutions  and  pull 
common  practice  closer  to  that  frontier.  For  a  number  of  reasons,  this  can’t  be  the  model  for  the 
Fund’s  relationships  with  its  members.  But  it  provides  an  interesting  prism  in  thinking  about 
surveillance. 
The Fund has explored a number of ideas to strengthen the surveillance framework. One of the most 
promising is to establish a process with more frequent, published staff assessments of performance 
against a medium-term framework designed by the member country. That assessment could convey a 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2004
clear  judgement  about  the  degree  of  progress  being  made  in  reducing  vulnerabilities,  improving 
resilience, and strengthening the structural underpinnings of growth. Analysis of public and external 
debt  trends,  benchmarked  against  sustainability  and  vulnerability  thresholds,  and  stress  tests  for 
relevant shocks could play a key role in this process.  
There  are  compelling  arguments  for  combining  such  a  framework  with  contingent  access  to  Fund 
resources. Surveillance today does not provide a meaningful check on ex ante policies, and resources 
are only made available when the financial need is acute. Access to supplemental resources from the 
Fund on a precautionary or contingent basis could make a critical difference in preventing short-term 
liquidity  crises  from  becoming  full-scale  solvency  problems  leading  to  default.  Of  course,  access  to 
such  contingent  financing  should  be  limited  to  countries  whose  policies  were  judged  reasonably 
sustainable,  and  consistent  with  a  reduction  in  balance  sheet  risks  over  time.  With  an  enhanced 
surveillance  framework designed  to  help  keep  policy  on  a  stronger  path  that does  reduce risk  over 
time, and with contingent finance that could be mobilized quickly, the Fund would be better positioned 
to  contain  the  risk  of  deeper  financial  crisis.  And  more  of  the  policy  reform  that  is  a  necessary 
accompaniment to Fund finance resources could be supported ex ante, rather than ex post. Catalyzing 
better policies sooner is the best defense, though it will never be a perfect defense, against crises. 
Facilitating restructurings 
We have seen some progress in the last few years in efforts to improve the framework for sovereign 
restructurings.  In  particular,  collective  action  clauses  have  now  become  the  market  standard  where 
emerging market governments issue debt under foreign law. It will take some time for the full stock of 
sovereign emerging market debt to include these provisions for restructuring by majority action, but 
this progress is nonetheless important.  
But  there  are  also  some  experiences  that  overshadow  these  more  encouraging  developments,  and 
expose  a  breakdown  in  the  broad  consensus  that  had  formed  the  basis  for  the  successful  past 
strategies of collaboration among the official sector, borrowers, and private creditors.  
Without  commenting  on  the  specifics  of  any  particular  case,  let  me  offer  a  view  of  what  I  see  as 
fundamental  tenets  of  a  credible  approach  by  the  international  community  to  situations  where  a 
sovereign finds it necessary to restructure its obligations to private creditors: 
The IMF should be willing to lend to a sovereign that is in default to its private creditors only when two 
conditions have been established:  
First,  the  country  must  commit  to  a  credible  medium-term  adjustment  program,  one  that  offers  the 
prospect of a successful restructuring and a reasonably early return to the capital markets. This has to 
be established up front for any restructuring effort to work. Commitment to a credible adjustment path 
that  offers  the  reasonable  prospect  of  a  return  to  financial  viability  and  growth  is  the  necessary 
foundation for engagement by the creditors in a restructuring process. Without that, there is little basis 
for meaningful engagement. The science of economics does not provide a definitive answer to what 
that  adjustment  path  must  be,  but  it  does  offer  the  means  to  determine  a  reasonable  band  of 
outcomes  between  the  inadequate  and  the  excessive.  This  judgment  must  be  made  by  the 
government.  It  can  be  informed  by  consultations  with  the  creditors.  Ultimately,  though,  it  has  to  be 
endorsed by the Fund, if the Fund is to lend. 
Second,  before  the  Fund can commit  its  support,  the  country  must  develop,  in  consultation  with  its 
advisors,  and  outline  to  the  Fund  and  its  creditors,  a  credible  and  monitorable  framework  for 
cooperatively achieving a viable debt restructuring, one that leaves the country with a sustainable debt 
burden. The issues of appropriate adjustment and appropriate broad terms of proposed restructuring 
are closely intertwined and need to be assessed in tandem. For the Fund, it should be an essential 
prerequisite  that  the  country  demonstrate  at  the  outset  that  its  approach  has  credible  prospects  for 
enlisting  broad  creditor  concurrence,  and  for  being  consistent  with  the  country’s  macroeconomic 
framework and payment prospects. 
Reaffirming  these  conditions  as  the  foundation  for  Fund  support  in  restructuring  or  arrears  cases 
would be a useful contribution to the system, and would leave the Fund better positioned to contribute 
to the favorable resolution of future crises that involve restructurings. 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 5
Strengthening the Fund’s financial instruments 
The Fund has taken a number of important steps to make its financial instruments more effective for 
dealing with the challenges inherent in a world with ever more integrated national financial systems. 
The  reforms  of  late  90’s  -  the  increase  in  the  size  of  the  Fund  and  its  supplemental  borrowing 
arrangements,  the  launch  of  new  facilities  that  offered  the  means  for  large-scale  lending  at  penalty 
rates in carefully circumscribed cases, the introduction of greater flexibility in the phasing of resources, 
and in how those resources could be used to reestablish confidence - were extremely important. More 
recently the Fund adopted a set of criteria designed to limit the risk that the Fund would make large-
scale resources available too frequently and in conditions where they would be unlikely to contribute to 
a  resolution  of  the  crisis.  These  various  reforms  gave  the  Fund  a  substantially  more  effective 
insurance mechanism for emerging market economies than it had before. 
Building on this progress, I see the key elements of a credible insurance mechanism as including the 
following: 
• 
Finance  must  be  conditioned  on  a  policy  framework  strong  enough  and  timely  enough  to 
restore  confidence.  Fund  resources  can’t  compensate  for  a  lack  of  policy  credibility,  and 
lending official resources to fund an inadequate policy effort may make the situation worse.  
The  scale  of  finance  provided  has  to  be  calibrated  to  the  need,  and  the  needs  can  be 
substantial in today’s world. The Fund can only fill part of the gap, but it has to be able to fill 
a credible share of the gap if it is to play a successful part in catalyzing other resources to 
flow.  
Flexibility to structure programs appropriate to the circumstances and the borrower’s policy 
efforts is essential. The Fund needs to be able to substantially front-load financial packages, 
when  this  is  warranted.  Making  available  small  tranches  of  resources  over  the  life  of  a 
program  does  little  to  address  the  realities  of  open  emerging  market  economies  facing 
liquidity  problems.  Rather  than  the  classic  staircase  pattern  of  disbursements,  the  Fund 
should  consider,  in  some  cases,  providing  a  larger  up  front  tranche  that  floats  and  is 
available if stress materializes and policy is responding appropriately.  
The  Fund  should  stand  ready  to  support  countries  in  pursuing  reasonable  restructuring 
proposals when warranted by the circumstances. Official financial resources in that context 
can be helpful in meeting some targeted needs.  
And finally, the Fund needs a more credible capacity to withstand arrears, so that it does not 
face  the reality  or  the  perception  that  is can  be  induced  to accept  weak  programs  only  to 
allow it to refinance its exposure.  
    Conclusion 
These are modest proposals. They only cover a small piece of the world of the Fund, much less the 
broader Bretton Woods institutions. They would not fundamentally change the balance established by 
the Fund’s articles between the rights and obligations of its members. But they would help position the 
Fund to deal with future financial pressure in emerging markets. And given the scale of the economic 
costs imposed by recent crises, that is an important goal. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2004
