Seung Park: Korea’s experience in the choice of bank supervisory 
arrangements 
Speech  by  Dr  Seung  Park,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  39th  SEACEN  Governors’ 
Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 12 February 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
This afternoon, I would like to talk about Korea’s experience in the reform of the financial supervisory 
system. 
In  April  1998,  Korea  established  an  integrated  financial  supervisory  body  responsible  for  banking, 
securities,  and  insurance.  As  you  may  be  well  aware,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Japan  launched 
integrated financial supervisory systems : the U.K. in October 1997 and Japan in June 1998. In some 
ways,  therefore,  Korea  was  going  along  with  a  new  international  trend  toward  bringing  together 
financial supervision within a single agency. 
The Republic of China, and Governor Fai-nan Perng will correct me if I am wrong, intends to set up an 
integrated financial supervisory body this July. And the People’s Republic of China has, meanwhile, 
stripped the central bank of its bank supervisory function and established a separate bank supervisory 
agency. 
In most other SEACEN member countries, I understand that the central bank exercises the function of 
bank  supervision.  So  I  think  that  my  fellow  governors  may  have  a  deep  interest  in  proposals  to 
establish a separate financial supervisory body. 
I believe that Korea’s experience, in this regard, may be of some help to you in this area. Let me now 
express  my  deep  thanks  to  our  gracious  host,  Governor  Jayawardena,  for  providing  me  with  this 
opportunity. 
2. 
Establishment of integrated financial supervisory agency 
The financial supervisory system prior to integration 
Until the 1998 reorganization, Korea had several supervisory bodies responsible for different types of 
financial  institutions.  The  Office  of  Bank  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of  Korea(BOK)  supervised 
commercial banks. It authorized the market entry of new banks, laid down prudential regulations, held 
on-site examinations, and exercised discipline over them. Two other major supervisory bodies were 
the Securities Supervisory Board responsible for securities companies and the Insurance Supervisory 
Board, the insurance company watchdog. Both these supervisory bodies came under the direction of 
the Ministry of Finance and Economy(MOFE). 
Debate over the integration of financial supervisory bodies 
Great  changes  had,  however,  been  taking  place  in  the  financial  institutions’  operating  environment 
particularly since the mid 1990s. 
Following  Korea’s  admission  to  the  OECD  in  late  1996,  competition  in  the  Korean  financial  market 
became fiercer and fiercer as the financial and capital markets were thrown open in line with OECD 
criteria. Banks, securities companies and insurance companies all sought to expand their turf and the 
linkages between them grew much closer. As enterprises had more transactions with various types of 
financial institutions, money flows grew increasingly complex. 
Meanwhile,  the  scale  of  the  Korean  economy  was  expanding  and  its  structure  becoming  more 
complicated.  An  important  new  task  emerged  :  that  of  rolling  back  government  intervention  in  the 
economy in the name of improved efficiency. 
From  early  1997,  the  Korean  government  began  to  press  ahead  with  financial  reforms  to  bring 
together the various independent supervisory bodies under a single roof. It also sought to strengthen 
the BOK’s independence in monetary policy. The government’s steps toward the establishment of an 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 1
integrated financial supervisory body naturally ignited a debate on the idea of taking away the central 
bank’s bank supervisory function. The BOK at that time strongly opposed such government’s plans. 
Firstly, as lender of last resort, the central bank had to be in a position to monitor the insolvency and 
liquidity  status  of  banks.  This  was  also  necessary  for  it  to  secure  the  stability  of  the  payment  and 
settlement system. Therefore it was essential for the BOK to keep bank supervisory function. 
Secondly,  it  stressed  that  the  politically  neutral  central  bank  should  carry  out  bank  supervision,  a 
process that needs to be shielded from political pressure. It was also more efficient if bank supervision 
remained  entrusted  to  the  BOK,  which  already  possessed  the  adequate  human  and  physical 
resources. 
The  government,  for  its  part,  advocated  that  bank  supervision  had  to  be  separated  from  the  BOK 
because of conflicts of interest that might arise between monetary policy and supervisory policy. For 
example, if the central bank eased monetary policy to maintain financial stability, this could damage 
price stability which was the core goal of the central bank. Furthermore, the government pointed to 
worries that the central bank might become overly powerful, if it were to retain the right to supervise 
banks while being granted independence in monetary policy. 
The plan to establish an integrated supervisory body became bogged down because of the clash of 
opinions  between  the  BOK  and  the  government.  It  gained  a  new  lease  of  life,  though,  once  the 
situation took a new turn in the aftermath of the outbreak of the currency crisis in late 1997. 
In  view  of  the  urgent  need  for  prompt  financial  sector  restructuring,  the  IMF  recommended  the 
setting-up  of  an  integrated  financial  supervisory  agency  to  the  Korean  government.  An  MOU  was 
consequently drawn up between them concerning its establishment in December 1997. 
The National Assembly late that month passed the necessary legislation to remove bank supervision 
function from the BOK and establish an integrated financial supervisory body. This was duly set up in 
April 1998. The BOK consequently lost its bank supervisory function. Some 650 members who had 
been working in its bank supervisory field moved over to the new integrated agency. 
In tandem with the passage of the new legislation for the financial supervisory system, the Bank of 
Korea Act was revised so as to give the central bank a greater degree of independence in monetary 
policy. 
Previously the finance minister had been the chairman of the central bank’s policy-setting body. Under 
the  revised  Act,  the  central  bank  governor  became  its  chairman.  Consequently,  the  policy  setting 
body, the Monetary Policy Committee, was able to make decisions on monetary policy without prior 
consultation with the government. 
Overview of the integrated financial supervisory system 
Now, I would like to move on to explain the workings of the integrated financial supervisory system in 
its present form. 
The Korean financial supervisory agency is made up of the Financial Supervisory Commission(FSC) 
and the Financial Supervisory Service(FSS). 
The FSC is a collegiate administrative body under the control of the Prime Minister. It is the supreme 
decision-making  organ  in  relation  to  financial  supervision  and  examination.  As  such,  it  has  the 
authority  to  direct  the  operations  of  the  FSS  and  exercise  surveillance  over  it.  The  Commission 
consists of nine members, and its chairman is appointed by the President for a three-year term. It is 
served  by  a  secretariat  made  up  of  public  officials.  Under  the  FSC’s  direction,  the  FSS,  a 
non-governmental  organization  and  special  juridical  person  having  no  capital,  supervises  and 
examines financial institutions. The Chairman of the FSC serves concurrently as the Governor of the 
FSS. 
In the meantime, the BOK, the MOFE and the Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation(KDIC) exercise 
some limited supervisory functions in relation to those businesses falling within their particular areas of 
competence. 
For its part, the BOK has the right to request individual banking institutions to submit materials about 
their  business  to  check  their  actual  management  status.  It  may  also  require  the  FSS  to  examine 
banking institutions or to have its own staff participate on a joint basis in such examinations. Another 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2004
connection  is  that  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  BOK  serves  as  an  ex-officio  member  of  the  FSC. 
Consequently, he takes part in the decision-making process concerning financial supervisory policy. 
To  perform  these  tasks  efficiently,  the  BOK  established  a  Banking  Institutions  Department,  which 
currently comprises a staff of 57. 
The  MOFE  has  the  right  to  present  draft  bills  relating  to  finance  and  supervision  to  the  National 
Assembly.  It  is,  however,  required  to  consult  with  the  FSC  before  proposing  or  revising  such 
legislation.  The  KDIC,  meanwhile,  has  the  right  to  investigate  the  business  status  and  assets  of 
financial institutions thought to be in danger of failure. Like the BOK, it has the right to request that the 
FSS  undertake  the  examination  of  financial  institutions  or  allow  its  own  staff  to  take  part  in  joint 
examinations with that body. 
Evaluation of the current financial supervisory system 
3. 
Six years have passed since the integrated financial supervisory body was established in Korea. 
During  this  period,  the  Korean  financial  industry  has  undergone  intensive  and  far-reaching 
restructuring. The number of banks fell to 19 as of today from 33 in December 1997. The number of 
bank  employees  meanwhile  declined  by  about  30  percent.  Non-banking  financial  institutions  have 
experienced an equally dramatic process of restructuring. 
The  integrated  supervisory  agency  has  been  highly  rated  for  its  role  in  helping  to  overcome  the 
currency crisis and improving the soundness of financial institutions through the swift and consistent 
restructuring  of  the  financial  industry.  It  has  been  able  to  do  so  through  the  concentration  of 
supervisory authority and information. Also, with the gathering of comprehensive information about all 
kinds of financial activities, the inter-linkage and consistency of supervisory activities have increased. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  grey  areas  in  supervision,  which  existed  under  the  multiple-regulatory 
structure, have been largely eliminated. 
However, there is increasing concern that conflicts of interest between the prudential regulations of the 
supervisory  agency  and  the  macro-economic  policies  of  the  MOFE  might  limit  the  efficient 
implementation of supervision policies. 
The threat of the insolvency of a number of credit card companies has recently become a potential 
source  of  risk  to  the  financial  market  stability.  There  has  been  suspicion  in  some  quarters  that  the 
reason the FSC was unable to nip the looming insolvency problem in the bud was because of its lax 
supervision of credit card companies under the influence of the MOFE that wanted to boost domestic 
demand. 
With regard to this problem, the question of an adjustment of the functions of the MOFE, the FSC and 
the FSS has recently come under discussion. 
Response of the Bank of Korea to the new financial supervisory system 
4. 
Now I would like to tell you how the Bank of Korea has come to live with the new financial supervisory 
system. 
As  you  know,  a  central  bank  needs  a  wide  range  of  up-to-the-minute  information  on  the  financial 
markets  not  only  to  carry  out  monetary  policy  but  also  to  perform  its  function  as  the  lender  of  last 
resort. 
Though stripped of the banking supervisory function, the BOK has been given the statutory right to 
request  managerial  information  from banks  and  to  ask  the  FSS  to  examine banks  with  it  on a  joint 
basis. It can also ask the FSS to examine banks on specific areas of concern to the central bank. 
In  actual  practice,  though,  the  BOK  has  had  considerable  difficulty  in  gathering  information.  Banks 
often  took  a  negative  attitude  toward  the  BOK’s  demand  for  managerial  information.  Moreover,  the 
BOK has no right to demand information from non-bank financial institutions. 
Under these circumstances, the BOK has prevailed upon the FSS to provide it with materials such as 
the  reports  filed  by  financial  institutions.  This  January,  the  BOK,  the  FSS,  and  the  KDIC  agreed  a 
memorandum of understanding providing for a dramatic increase in information sharing among them. 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 3
This means that the central bank is now able to collect managerial information both from banks and 
non-bank financial institutions. 
Another area of concern was the on-site examinations to check banks’ managerial status. In its early 
days, the FSS was reluctant to accept the BOK’s requests for bank examination, even though it was 
legally stipulated that the FSS should accept the BOK’s demands for bank examination. In 2002, the 
FSS went so far as to turn down the BOK’s demand for a joint examination. This clash spurred the two 
organizations to draw up a memorandum of understanding in October 2002 after a hard negotiation. 
Under it, the FSS must accept the BOK’s demand for joint examination provided the MPC decides this 
necessary. 
The arrangements, nonetheless, suffer from the limitation that the Bank has no option but to stick to 
the FSS’s examination schedule. It is still impossible for the BOK to hold an on-site examination when 
it judges this warranted. 
It was a big issue whether to give the BOK the power of independent examination, even at the time of 
reforming the financial supervisory system in 1997. On that occasion, the BOK took the position that it 
should be free to examine banks at its own discretion. The National Assembly, however, accepted the 
government’s argument that if the BOK examined banks independently of the FSS, the burden on the 
financial  institutions  might  be  too  heavy  and  that  joint  examinations  should  be  held  with  the  BOK 
joining in the FSS’s on-site examination. 
Under  the  present  joint  examination  system,  the  FSS  examines  general  matters  regarding  financial 
institutions’  managerial  soundness.  For  its  part,  the  BOK  examines  only  limited  areas  related  to 
monetary  policy  and  the  payment  and settlement  system.  The  two  institutions,  meanwhile, pool  the 
information that they gather in the course of on-site examination, and draw on it for their respective 
operations. 
There is one more issue concerning financial stability and efficiency, although it is not directly related 
to banking supervision. That is the need for strengthening the central bank’s oversight of the national 
payment  and  settlement  system.  The  case  for  this  is  constantly  advocated  by  multilateral  financial 
institutions  such  as  BIS  and  IMF.  In  this  regard,  the  BOK  was  given  the  authority  to  oversee  the 
various payment and settlement systems in Korea under the most recent revision of the Bank of Korea 
Act in September 2003. Under the revised legislation, the BOK may demand relevant materials from 
both  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  that  take  part  in  BOK-Wire,  the  real  time  gross 
settlement  system  operated  by  the  BOK.  It  may  also  request  the  improvement  of  payment  and 
settlement systems operated by other entities. 
All this means that the BOK has come to play many roles in order to secure financial market stability in 
spite of its limited official powers of financial supervision. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Let me now indicate a few points that central bankers may wish to bear in mind from our experience 
following the integration of financial supervisory agencies in contemplating the reorganization of their 
own national financial supervisory framework. 
Firstly,  in  the  light  of  other  countries’  example  and  Korea’s  experience,  I  do  not  think  there  is  any 
one-size-fits-all supervisory system that is the optimal for every country. In particular, I think there are 
various alternative options regarding the issue of the central bank’s supervisory function. These will 
depend on the degree of financial market development and a nation’s traditions related to the division 
of  roles  between  government  and  central  bank.  And  I  think  that  it  rests  with  the  financial  system 
characteristics of a particular country whether it should go for an integrated financial supervisory body 
or multiple supervisory agencies for the various types of financial institution. 
Secondly, it is absolutely essential for central banks to obtain a wide range of information on financial 
markets and the management status of financial institutions whether or not they are responsible for 
bank supervision. Where a separate bank supervisory agency exists, a system of co-operation with it 
must be built up so that necessary information can be collected promptly. It is also desirable for the 
central  bank  to  have  the  authority  to  conduct  the  on-site  examination  of  financial  institutions 
independently so that it may obtain the necessary information when there is a high degree of market 
instability. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2004
Thirdly, it is vital to set up a system for policy coordination so that the opinions of the central bank are 
reflected  in  the  supervisory  policies  of  the  financial  supervisory  agency.  Prudential  supervision  is 
closely  related  to  monetary  policy.  If  the  financial  supervisory  agency  strengthens  prudential 
supervision, this may bring about similar effects to the tightening of monetary policy. Therefore I think 
it is crucial that the supervisory agency be required to consult with the central bank before the revision 
of prudential regulations. What is more, the central bank should, where necessary, have the right to 
ask the supervisory agency to adjust its prudential regulations. 
Korea’s current  supervisory  system was  introduced in  some  haste  under  the extraordinary  situation 
prevailing  in  the  aftermath  of  the  currency  crisis  six  years  ago.  Therefore,  there  have  been  some 
frictions between the institutions concerned with financial supervision. 
In the course of time, its shortcomings have been made good to a considerable extent, but to my mind 
a number of areas still call for improvement. 
Drawing my remarks to a close, I venture the hope that Korea’s experience may serve as a useful 
reference for member countries in discussing the reorganization of financial supervisory systems. 
Thank you very much for listening so attentively. 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 5
