Philipp Hildebrand: Developments in the international financial markets and 
managing the Swiss National Bank’s assets 
Introductory remarks by Dr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2004. 
 Developments in the international financial markets 
1. 
Looking  back  at  the  year  gone  by,  it  becomes  evident  that  two  opposing  price  movements  have 
dominated the markets: the strong depreciation of the US dollar on the one hand and the sharp rise in 
oil  prices  on  the  other  hand.  Developments  in  the  bond  and  equity  markets  were,  by  comparison, 
rather restrained. 
In the past few weeks, the dollar has continued its downtrend that commenced three years ago, at 
which  time  the  greenback  was  still  worth  over  CHF  1.70.  Given  the  structurally  inflated  US  current 
account  deficit,  the  sustained  downward  revision  comes  as  no  surprise.  However,  the  fact  that  the 
revision  to  date  has  been  relatively  one-sided  vis-à-vis  the  European  currencies  and  the  Canadian 
dollar is problematic. Major Asian currencies have either remained completely pegged to the dollar, 
such  as  the  Chinese  renminbi,  or  joined  the  dollar  in  its  slide  -  at  least  to  some  extent  -  like  the 
Japanese yen. This was only possible, however, at a price, namely huge dollar-buying efforts on the 
part of the central banks and governments in question. As a result of this asymmetric trend, European 
exporters are currently bearing the brunt of the additional competitive pressures stemming from the 
weaker dollar. The Swiss export industry is understandably especially keen to see that the franc is not 
exposed  to  any  further  revaluations  against  the  euro.  Sudden  and  precipitous  adjustments  to  the 
exchange rates are also undesirable from a monetary policy perspective. 
The unrelenting rise in oil prices surprised many market analysts. Since the beginning of 2004, the 
dollar  price  of  West  Texas  Intermediate  crude  oil  has  climbed  by  more  than  50%.  In  real  terms, 
however, the ascent was not nearly as sharp as in earlier oil price shocks. In Europe, the hike was 
further cushioned by the erosion of the dollar. The reasons behind the bullish oil prices are manifold. 
The main trigger, however, is likely to have been the structural increase in demand coming from the 
emerging economies, particularly from China and India. In addition, supply flexibility is currently quite 
weak,  as  investment  spending  in  the  drilling,  transportation  and  storage  of  oil  was  somewhat 
neglected in the years when oil prices were low. Potential geopolitical risks also push up the prices. 
Last  but  not  least,  raw  materials  -  such  as  gold  traditionally  -  are  playing  an  ever  greater  role  in 
international  investors’  asset  allocation,  which  also  tends  to  generate  an  increase  in  demand.  That 
notwithstanding, the influence of financial players on the price of oil should not be overestimated. The 
development of the long-term futures prices of crude oil indicates that the price spike was primarily 
triggered  by  a  sustained  increase  in  consumer  demand.  The  price  of  five-year  futures  contracts  for 
West Texas Intermediate crude has almost doubled in the last three years. 
Following  the  sudden  rise  last  spring,  US  capital  market  rates  have  since  dropped  back  to  the 
year-earlier  level.  The  temporary  increase  in  capital  market  rates  in  Europe  was  slightly  less 
pronounced. As a result of the opposing movements of the US and European interest rates of the past 
few weeks, the long-term dollar interest rates now exceed the corresponding interest rates in the euro 
area by approximately 50 basis points. On the one hand, the general interest rate development in the 
capital  markets  reflects  market  participants’  misgivings  concerning  the  strength  of  the  economic 
upswing. On the other hand, the historically low nominal interest rates are testimony to the markets’ 
confidence in the ability and determination of central banks to further ensure price stability. Moreover, 
the interest rate structure in the US is characterised by the sizeable dollar investments from Asia. 
International equity markets trended sideways for much of the year, although some emerging market 
indices in particular were able to generate significant profits. 
Managing the National Bank’s assets 
2.  
The  National  Bank  manages  monetary  reserves  slightly  in  excess  of  CHF  60  billion,  two-thirds  of 
which  are  held  in  foreign  currency  investments  and  one-third  in  gold.  In  addition  to  this  are 
approximately 25-30 billion Swiss franc assets in the form of balances from repo transactions in the 
   1/2 
money  market  and  bond  investments  in  the  domestic  capital  market.  The  monetary  reserves  and 
Swiss franc assets combine to make up the monetary assets, which are required for monetary policy. 
In addition to these assets, the National Bank also manages the proceeds from the sale of the surplus 
gold  reserves.  The  portfolio  of  these  so-called  free  assets  amounts  to  slightly  more  than 
CHF 20 billion. 
In the management of the monetary assets, monetary policy objectives and restrictions have priority. 
In  compliance  with  the  primacy  of  monetary  policy,  the  investments  are  optimised  according  to 
security, liquidity and return. Important in this regard are the concentration on liquid investments, in 
other  words  readily  marketable  investments,  and  on  the  greatest  possible  risk  diversification  by 
holding different currencies and investment categories. 
The National Bank’s leeway for investment has extended considerably since the entry into force of the 
new National Bank Act in May 2004. Risk diversification options in particular were also increased as a 
result.  The  concrete  investment  structure  of  the  different  portfolios  and  their  yields  are  published 
quarterly in an updated appendix to the Investment Policy Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank. The 
current investment structure and the risk/earnings profile of the National Bank’s assets, in particular 
the foreign currency reserves and free assets, can be summarised as follows: 
The portfolio adjustments made under the new Act aim to increase diversification in terms of currency 
and  investment  category.  Within  the  context  of  the  2004  strategy,  the  dollar  share  was  reduced  in 
favour  of  the  pound  sterling  and  the  yen.  The  weakening  of  the  US  currency  resulted  in  a  further 
decrease in the dollar’s share of foreign currency reserves. Recently, in an effort to prevent the dollar’s 
share from dropping too low and with a view to rebalancing, we bought dollars again on a number of 
occasions. Furthermore, as part of the 2004 strategy, the proportion of government bonds was also 
reduced in favour of other borrowers’ bonds. The required minimum rating for bond investments was 
lowered from A2 to BBB,  thus covering the entire “investment grade” range. Corporate bonds have 
now  also  been  added  to  the  National  Bank’s  investment  universe,  albeit  only  those  of  foreign 
companies. Currently, roughly 4% of both foreign currency reserves and free assets are invested in 
corporate  bonds.  The  credit  quality  of  all  our  investments  is  still  very  high.  Borrowers  with  the  top 
rating AAA account for over 70% of the investments. Close to 20% bear the AA rating. The remaining 
investments have an A or a BBB. The average residual maturity (duration) of all bonds held by the 
National Bank was kept at 4-5 years. The first investments in equities issued exclusively by foreign 
companies  will  be  made  at  the  beginning  of  2005.  The  addition  of  equities  and  corporate  bonds  is 
likely to improve the degree of diversification of the investments and will contribute to the achievement 
of slightly higher returns in the medium term. 
The main difference between the investment structures of foreign currency reserves and free assets is 
their currency profile. In the case of free assets, foreign currency investments are more diversified and 
are  also  partially  hedged  against  exchange  rate  risks.  Around  half  of  the  free  assets  are  currently 
exposed to currency risks. 
The  risks  relating  to  the  National  Bank’s  assets  are  primarily  assessed  and  monitored  using  the 
value-at-risk method. Moreover, a number of different stress analyses are increasingly being carried 
out.  In  risk  measurement,  it  is  taken  into  account  that  the  investment  horizon,  in  particular  for  the 
monetary  reserves,  is  a  long-term  one.  Where  monetary  assets  are  concerned,  gold  price  and 
exchange  rate  risks  -  notably  those  on  the  dollar  -  play  a  decisive  role.  Interest  rate  risks,  while 
significant  in  their  own  right,  are  quite  small  by  comparison.  The  overall  risk  with  free  assets  is 
considerably lower. On the whole, the credit risks are relatively small. 
The National Bank’s investments are valued daily at market prices, thus making it possible to form an 
up-to-date impression of the earnings situation. Owing to the high degree of risk exposure to the gold 
price,  the  exchange  rate  and  the  interest  rate  level,  the  earnings  situation  can  change  dramatically 
from  quarter  to  quarter  and  year  to  year.  In  this  year  alone,  the  quarterly  returns  on  total  assets 
fluctuated between +2.7% and -3.2%. So far this year, the National Bank’s assets have yielded 1.3% 
overall.  Given  its  long-term  investment  horizon,  short-term  fluctuations  generally  do  not  present  a 
problem to the National Bank. The long-run yield is of greater importance. In the past five years, the 
National Bank has achieved an average yield of 2.9%. This more or less corresponds to the earnings 
forecasts  underlying  the  agreement  between  the  Swiss  Confederation  and  the  National  Bank 
regarding the distribution of profits. 
   2/2 
