Ishrat Husain: Effectiveness of policies and reforms - a country perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  World  Bank  OED 
Conference on Effectiveness of Policies and Reforms, Washington DC, 4 October 2004. 
 The OED has done all of us a great service by carrying out evaluations of Bank Country Programmes 
in a systematic manner using a common framework. The findings of these studies should be of value 
not only to the Bank’s own operational staff but also to the economic managers of the client countries. 
As someone who has had the good fortune of working on both sides of the table, I would like to share 
some of my thoughts with you on the findings of these studies.  
First, let me begin by saying that I find myself in agreement with some of the conclusions of this report 
and there are at least three such broad areas: 
(a) 
I  believe,  just  like  the  OED  Report,  that  Aid  is  neither  necessary  nor  sufficient  for  good 
policy.  Aid  can  complement  and  catalyze  the  political  and  administrative  processes  by 
fostering  and  reinforcing  the  development  of  ownership  but  aid  per  se  is  no  substitute  for 
ownership. 
I  also  think  that  conditionality  per  se  is  ineffective  in  linking  aid  with  reform  because  the 
incentive  structure  makes it  difficult  for donors  to  disengage when  conditions  are  not  met. 
The donors should avoid micromanagement and focus on results. 
I am more emphatic, than the OED is, on the relationship between policy reform and growth. 
There is strong empirical evidence at country level (not clearly sorted out in cross-country 
regressions) that this relationship is indeed robust. The experience of Pakistan since 2000 
exemplifies that prudent fiscal balances, appropriate exchange rate, open trade regime, etc. 
do  lead  towards  good  growth  outcomes  and  absence  of  these  policies  in  the  1990s  had 
decelerated growth and raised poverty level. 
(b) 
(c) 
Having agreed with these broad findings let me elaborate on some other nuances and lessons which 
should be taken seriously at the time of formulation of policy reforms. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Policy reform process is not always linear and we should expect slippages, setbacks 
and reversals during implementation. This should not throw donors off and they decide 
to disengage, withdraw or reduce planned assistance. The donors should stay on the 
course if the long-term direction, framework for action and overall strategy pursued by 
the country is clearly defined, followed and shared by them. 
Donors, including the World Bank have a vast array of instruments at their disposal 
and  they  should  use  the  appropriate  instruments  judiciously  and  imaginatively  at 
different stages to support the strategy. For example, if it is determined by the World 
Bank AAA work that a particular institution is not ready for lending because it is in bad 
shape,  the  appropriate  response  is  not  to  wait  until  there  is  a  turnaround  in  the 
institution but to deploy technical assistance, capacity building, advice, best practice 
dissemination  and  dialogue  to  prepare  the  institution  so  that  it  is  ready  to  become 
eligible for lending. 
There is a convergence of interest between the sectoral ministries in the country and 
their counterpart sectoral departments of the Bank. So they form a lobby group and 
agitate for higher allocation of resources for their respective sectors and projects in an 
additive  mode.  There  is  little  effort  to  explore  trade-offs  in  a  constrained  resource 
situation  and  assign  weights  to  the  outcomes  which  can  contribute  towards  the 
achievement  of 
the  other  hand, 
complementarities  and 
linkages  between  different  sectoral  programmes  and 
interventions are not fully exploited and the planning and sequencing of different forms 
of  reforms  do  not  always  reflect  the  synergies  arising  from  such  complementarities. 
For example, those who design the education policy interact with those responsible for 
labour policy only at a superficial level but not in an integrative manner. 
the  strategy  and  desired 
results.  On 
BIS Review 65/2004 
 1
(iv)  The behaviour, response and advice extended by the donors to the countries should 
be counter-cyclical in nature. When there are good days and booms, they should not 
be  carried  away  by  excessive  affection  for  the  country  manifest  in  form  of  higher 
lending, AAA work and all kinds of assistance. The donor staff should desist from the 
temptation  to  shine  in  the  glory  of  their  countries.  I  would  suggest  that  it  is  during 
these  times  that  the  donors  should  render  advice  of  caution  to  the  country  and 
exercise  prudence  in  their  assistance.  But  when  the  country  faces  bad  days  or 
difficulties it is incumbent upon donors to continue engagement and not pull the plug. 
They should not sound tough at those moments but work with the country’s reformers 
to get the country out of the difficult patch. The trust and goodwill generated during 
these  times will  foster closer  relationship  between  the  Bank,  or  the  donors, and  the 
authorities of the country on a long-term sustained basis. 
Let me conclude by thanking the organizers of this Conference who have provided this opportunity to 
share my views with such an august gathering of practitioners, policy makers and donors. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2004
