Jean-Pierre Roth: Monetary independence and monetary stability - 
two sides of the same coin 
Luncheon address by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, to the FEBRABAN Brazilian Federation of Banks, Sao Paulo, 18 November 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
It’s a real pleasure to be with you today. As you may know, our two countries have a long history of 
mutually beneficial relationships, going back as far as the 16th century. As very often in long-standing 
relationships, the first steps were quite difficult. In 1557, Protestant emigrants from Calvinist Geneva 
tried to found a “New Geneva” close to today’s Rio de Janeiro. Unfortunately, their obedience to the 
Protestant church was not considered as an asset at the time, and they had to leave the country rather 
precipitately.  But  hard  work  is  a  Swiss  characteristic,  and  business  relations  between  Brazil  and 
Switzerland developed intensively in the 19th and 20th centuries. In 1907, diplomatic representatives 
were sent to Berne and Rio. 
As a matter of fact, the enormous potential of Brazil has been attracting Swiss firms from every sector 
of our economy. Nestlé and Jacobs-Suchard were among the first to cross the Atlantic in the 20s of 
the last century, but the chemical industry with Ciba, Geigy, Sandoz and Hoffmann La Roche rapidly 
followed  in  the  30s.  After  the  Second  World  War,  the  machine-tool  industry  with  Brown-Bovery, 
Schindler and Sulzer, to name only the most famous, joined the Swiss club, followed later on by Swiss 
banks.  Today,  more  than  250  Swiss  corporations  are  active  in  Brazil,  which  has  become  the  top 
recipient of Swiss direct investment in Latin America and the fifth-largest worldwide. 
Despite  differences  in  the  structure  of  our  economies  -  or  maybe  precisely  because  of  them  - 
corporate Switzerland is very engaged in Brazil and has shared, for almost a century now, some of the 
fortunes and misfortunes affecting the Brazilian economy. 
After a long period of pegged exchange rates, Brazil recently decided to float its currency, to follow a 
monetary  policy  primarily  focused  on  price  stability  and  to  reform  its  public  finances.  This  new 
economic  program  seems  to  bear  fruit,  as  growth  has  clearly  resumed.  However,  the  road  to  price 
stability is not an easy one. Inflation, although extremely low in comparison to the four-digit period of 
the  late  80s,  is  not  yet  subdued,  and  the  state  of  government  finances  is  still  subject  to  legitimate 
worries. 
The title of my speech is “Monetary independence and monetary stability: two sides of the same coin”. 
I  will  start  by  looking  at  some  of  the  features  which  have  given  Switzerland  the  reputation  of  a 
financially strong country. Among other elements, I will show that price stability has played a central 
role in this respect. But there can be no monetary stability without an independent central bank and an 
independent  monetary  policy  course.  Drawing  on  my  experience  at  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  I  will 
spend  some  time  discussing  what,  in  my  view,  are  the  most  crucial  characteristics  of  a  successful 
monetary  policy.  I  will  conclude  my  speech  by  addressing  the  thorny  question  of  the  choice  of  a 
monetary policy regime. After all, is it worthwhile for a country in the vicinity of a large monetary zone - 
the euro zone or the dollar zone - to try to conduct an autonomous monetary policy? 
Switzerland’s tradition of financial stability 
Many  people  outside  Switzerland  think  that  financial  stability  should  be  added  to  the  list  of  Swiss 
specialties like chocolate, watches and banks. Indeed, the fact that Switzerland is the only country that 
has been able to keep unchanged its set of coins in circulation since the franc was created in 1850 
speaks  for  itself.  Even  more  spectacular  is  the  position  of  the  Swiss  franc,  which  has  retained  its 
international  purchasing  power  over  time.  The  Swiss  franc  has  been  devalued  only  once,  in  1936, 
during the Great Depression, following the devaluation of all major currencies. 
Financial  stability  has  contributed  to  shape  Switzerland’s  business  environment  and,  to  a  certain 
extent, explains some of the typical features of the Swiss economy. For example, with about 32% of 
GDP, the Swiss saving rate is among the highest in the world. Some of these savings are channelled 
abroad via our banking system, and their proceeds guarantee us a very strong balance of payments 
position. As a matter of fact, Switzerland’s current account is almost endemically positive. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
As the counterparties to large positive current accounts are, by definition, large negative positions in 
the capital account, Switzerland has become a net creditor to the rest of the world. Contrary to the 
popular belief that my country is the ultimate recipient of other countries’ savings, Switzerland is in fact 
a traditional net exporter of capital. By and large, our current account surplus amounts to 13% of GDP. 
Although  portfolio  investments  remain  the  preferred  channel  for  investing  abroad,  foreign  direct 
investments have, in line with the process of globalization, increased steeply in the last ten to fifteen 
years. Today, thanks to its presence abroad, Switzerland employs almost 1.7 million people outside its 
borders.  This  amounts  to  40%  of  its  domestic  labour  force.  National  boundaries  cannot  delimit  the 
Swiss economy anymore; it is better described as a kind of global network to which Brazil also belongs 
via the regional branches of ABB, Credit Suisse, Nestlé, Novartis, Roche, Schindler and UBS, to name 
only the most well-known firms. 
The  fact  that  financial  stability  is  a  traditional  facet  of  the  Swiss  economy  is  largely  due  to  the 
socio-political characteristics of my country. Switzerland benefits from a stable political environment, 
an efficient legal system and a rather reasonable fiscal policy. Social security is well developed without 
being oversized, and relationships between labour unions and the employers’ associations are rather 
smooth by international standards. Moreover, property rights are guaranteed. 
As  a  result,  one  of  the  most  salient  features  of  the  Swiss  economy  is  the  strength  of  its  finance 
industry. Despite its very small size, Switzerland stands as the eighth largest securities market in the 
world. The total value of its quoted stocks and bonds amounts to four times its annual GDP, a world 
record. Swiss banks manage about one third of total offshore assets worldwide, and our insurance and 
re-insurance companies have reached global dimensions. 
What are the keys to financial stability? For sure, financial stability is the result of many elements: the 
importance of domestic savings, the stability of the institutional framework, the strength of our banking 
system  and  -  last  but  not  least  -  the  deeply  rooted  conviction  of  the  general  public  that  monetary 
stability is important and should be preserved. 
Monetary stability: a well-accepted objective 
Indeed, there can be no financial stability without monetary stability. History has taught us many times 
that policy instability almost invariably leads to financial chaos and, very often, to political unrest. 
But the issue is not avoiding hyperinflation only. I suppose that everybody in this room would agree 
that hyperinflation must be eliminated by all means. Sooner or later, it leads to the total disorganization 
of a market economy. But even on a lower level, inflation interferes with growth and reduces welfare. 
In Switzerland, too, some are of the opinion that “a little dose of inflation” is beneficial to growth and 
employment. I entirely disagree with this view. On the contrary, most empirical studies, as you know, 
show that there is a negative relationship between inflation and output in the long run. Inflation is a tax 
on financial assets; it distorts investment decisions and increases overall uncertainty. 
In Switzerland, monetary stability has become part of the country’s culture and has been the guideline 
of  monetary policy  for  more  than  30  years  now.  After  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods system  in 
1973, the Swiss National Bank made it clear that the overriding objective of its policy was to preserve 
long-term price stability. Convinced that inflation was a monetary phenomenon, it opted for a strategy 
aiming at a steady growth of the money stock in line with the potential growth rate of the economy. 
At the time, the Swiss National bank was actually one of the first central banks to adopt a rule-based 
strategy.  Between  1975  and  1999,  we  implemented  a  “pragmatic”  policy,  with  monetary  targets 
serving  as  benchmark  and  communication  devices.  Here  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  term 
“pragmatic”, because it was never the goal of our policy to fulfil monetary targets mechanically. As a 
small economy with an international currency, we had to face severe exchange rate shocks or money 
demand instability. In such circumstances, pre-announced monetary targets could not be met. In these 
particular and difficult periods, however, we never gave up our objective of preserving price stability in 
the long term. 
In  the  late  1990s,  day-to-day  implementation  of  monetary  targeting  turned  increasingly  difficult 
because of financial innovations. An update of our monetary strategy became necessary. In 2000, we 
decided  to  abandon  our  traditional  monetary  targeting  in  favour  of  a  new  monetary  policy  concept 
based on an inflation forecast. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
Overall, despite difficult times, our policy has been a success. The annual average rate of inflation in 
Switzerland over the last 25 years amounts to 2.8%, one of the lowest in the world, and price stability 
has provided Switzerland with an important comparative advantage: the so-called Swiss interest rate 
bonus, which means that nominal and real interest rates are lower in Switzerland than in the rest of 
Europe. 
Strategy towards monetary stability 
Is there any secret about Switzerland’s success in preserving price stability? 
I do not think so. Switzerland, as a small and open economy that is deeply integrated in trade flows, 
has  always  felt  that  price  stability  was  a  necessary  ingredient  of  competitiveness.  In  the  almost 
100-year history of the Swiss National Bank, fighting inflation has been a permanent objective, and 
there were only rare occasions of disagreement between the government and the Bank on monetary 
issues. Actually, central bank independence had been a tradition in Switzerland even before it became 
fashionable  elsewhere.  In  my  country,  most  politicians  consider  monetary  stability  as  a  kind  of 
common good which should escape partisan disputes. The fact that our federal government plays only 
a  limited  role  in  economic  policy  also  supports  the  view  that  monetary  decisions  should  be  left  to 
technicians.  It  is  only  very  recently  that  the  explicit  mandate  of  promoting  price  stability  has  been 
introduced in the Swiss National Bank Act. 
But central bank independence requires more than just an appropriate legal framework. What are the 
necessary elements? I see three of them. 
First of all, to avoid any ambiguity as to what the ultimate goal of policy really is, price stability must be 
clearly defined. In other words, at some point, a nominal anchor has to be set. This can be an inflation 
target  approved  by  the  government,  or  a  definition  of  price stability  adopted  by  the  central  bank.  A 
clear definition of the central bank’s goal underpins expectations and allows an objective assessment 
of  the  implemented  policy.  It  also  protects  the  central  bank  from  counterproductive  bargaining 
concerning the appropriate direction of its policy. 
Secondly, monetary policy must be forward-looking. Because monetary actions affect prices only after 
long lags, the central bank’s policy must be pre-emptive. This implies that in certain circumstances, 
policy  decisions  taken  in  order  to  guarantee  price  stability  in  the  long  run  may  be  difficult  to 
communicate,  or  even  unpopular.  It  is  thus  of  key  importance  that  the  goal  and  the  strategy  of  the 
monetary authorities are well understood by the market and the public. 
This  leads  me  to  two  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  modern  central  banking:  accountability  and 
transparency. For sure, central banks have to be independent in order to fulfil their job of maintaining 
price stability in the long run. But in a democratic society, each institution must be held accountable for 
the consequences of its policy decisions. The central bank is no exception. I am deeply convinced that 
its independence might be in danger if the general public perceived monetary policy as not in line with 
the  central  bank’s  mandate.  To  guarantee  their  independence  in  the  long  run,  central  banks  must 
therefore invest a lot of energy in communicating and explaining their decisions. Although this might 
appear constraining, it is in their own interest if the general public has a proper understanding of the 
monetary action. 
I also believe that transparency is not only necessary for the accountability of a central bank’s action, 
but that it also has its own merits: transparency reduces any uncertainty surrounding monetary policy 
and  the  future  course  of  interest  rates;  it  makes  private  planning  easier  and  enhances  overall 
efficiency. Transparency reinforces both the central bank’s independence and the market’s support for 
monetary policy. 
Is there any chance to survive outside monetary policy blocks? 
I would like to conclude these remarks by addressing the more fundamental question of the feasibility, 
or  even  desirability,  of  pursuing  an  independent  monetary  policy  in  the  vicinity  of  a  large  monetary 
zone. Is it realistic to assume that the SNB, for example, can follow a monetary policy that differs from 
the one set by the ECB? 
Wouldn’t it be preferable to have a fixed exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the euro? And 
with Switzerland now being fully surrounded by euroland, is there any danger the euro replacing the 
Swiss franc? 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 3
Those are, of course, the questions we had to answer when the euro was launched in 1999. 
Our experience so far has shown that the much feared euroization of Switzerland has not taken place. 
To date, the Swiss franc has kept its attractiveness. It has been stable enough to be relied on as a 
valuable medium of exchange and store of value. Euros are accepted in Switzerland as a means of 
payment, like dollars or pounds sterling, but there is no sign of the franc being crowded out. 
A more important question, however, is the desirability of an independent monetary course for a small 
country  located  in  the  midst  of  the  euro  zone.  Isn’t an  autonomous  policy  a myth  in  a  world  where 
capital  markets  are  so  well  integrated?  Wouldn’t  a  country  be  better  off  by  importing  the  monetary 
stability of its large neighbour? 
Unfortunately, the painful case of Argentina shows that fixing the exchange rate does not solve all the 
problems. When country-specific shocks are large and persistent, the absence of a national policy can 
be extremely costly. 
But  let  me  again  take  the  example  of  Switzerland.  Shocks  to  the  Swiss  economy  are  not  perfectly 
correlated with shocks to the euro area, and our business cycle is more influenced by developments in 
the investment goods market and in the financial market than the rest of Europe. Therefore, it seems 
rather  intuitive  that  a  “Swiss-made”  monetary  policy  would  potentially  fit  Switzerland’s  needs  better 
than a “one-size-fits-all” European policy. 
The latest recession is a case in point. The investment spree of the late nineties created a massive 
worldwide  capital  overhang.  The  collapse  in  asset  prices,  in  2001,  and  the  ensuing  worldwide 
recession  had  a  particularly  strong  impact  on  Switzerland,  whose  exporters  are  specialized  in  the 
production of capital goods and where the production of financial services represents about 13% of 
GDP. Because ensuring price stability means avoiding deflation as well as inflation, the SNB had to 
cut interest rates much more aggressively than the ECB from March 2001 to April 2003. 
The  case  of  Switzerland  is  not  unique  in  this  respect.  Canada,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Norway, 
Sweden  and  the  UK,  for  instance,  also  let  their  currencies  float  and  pursue  successful  national 
monetary policies. They all follow a clear strategy of preserving long-term price stability, and they all 
have an independent central bank pursuing an independent policy. 
So we can definitely say that monetary independence and monetary stability are two sides of the same 
coin. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2004
