T T Mboweni: The global economy and central banking in Africa 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the National Bank of 
Belgium, Brussels, 9 November 2004.  
 Introduction 
1.  
The global economy changed considerably in recent years with important consequences for central 
banking.  During  the  last  half  of  the  previous  century  the  world  economy  was  characterised  by  a 
process  of  liberalisation,  deregulation  and  eventually  globalisation,  i.e.  a  process  through  which  an 
increasingly  free  flow  of  ideas,  people,  goods,  services  and  capital  leads  to  the  integration  of 
economies  and  societies.  Globalisation  brought  increasing  prosperity  to  the  countries  that  became 
involved in it. The free flow of goods, capital and people boosted incomes and raised living standards 
in  many  parts  of  the  world.  In  addition,  new  technological  advances  reduced  transportation, 
telecommunication  and  computation  costs.  These  developments  did  not  only  lead  to  greater 
operational effectiveness, but also increased the ease with which national markets could be integrated 
globally. 
The more integrated world economy did not benefit all economies and all the inhabitants of the globe. 
Mr Horst Köhler, the past Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund recently stated that: 
“nearly 1,2 billion people - one fifth of humankind - continue to live in absolute poverty, with incomes 
less than $1 a day. In many countries, durable economic and social progress remains elusive. In most 
of these countries, trade has decreased in the last 20 years and on average, economic growth has not 
kept  pace  with  population  growth.  The  situation  in  Africa  is  particularly  dramatic  because  it  is 
aggravated  by  the  AIDS  pandemic.  I  believe  that  the  fight  against  global  poverty  is  the  greatest 
challenge for stability and peace in the 21st century.” 
It is true that disease, unemployment and poverty reduction remain the major challenges confronting 
policymakers in Africa. For this reason it is encouraging that African leaders have embraced the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) to confront the challenges facing the continent. NEPAD 
is  a  strategic  development  plan  that  addresses  the  economic,  social  and  political  dimensions  of 
Africa’s future development. It is a clear demonstration of the willingness of the leaders in Africa to 
take responsibility for actions needed to advance development. The vision and way forward basically 
consist of creating the policy environment and institutions that are necessary to translate the political 
commitment into economic benefits. 
It is further encouraging that there has been some improvement in Africa’s growth performance since 
the mid-1990s, albeit from a low level. The average growth rate in Africa amounted to 3,7 per cent in 
the  period  from  1995  to  2004,  compared  with  1,9  per  cent  in  the  preceding  10  years.  This 
improvement was underpinned by some reduction in conflict on the continent and the achievement of 
greater  macroeconomic  stability.  According  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  African  economic 
growth is expected to rise even further to 4,5 per cent this year and to 5,4 per cent next year. While 
this  improvement  can  be  acclaimed,  the  progress  needs  to  be  accelerated.  Only  seven  African 
countries achieved economic growth rates above 7 per cent during 2003 - the level required to attain 
the  United  Nations  Millennium  Development  Goals.  A  continued  concerted  effort  is  therefore  still 
required to raise living standards in Africa. 
Price stability 
2.  
An  important  spin-off  of  globalisation  to  the  world  and  to  some  extent  also  to  Africa  has  been  the 
contribution that this process has made to the attainment of price stability. In a paper delivered at the 
Jackson  Hole  Conference  of  2003,  Professor  Kenneth  Rogoff,  who  was  at  the  time  the  Economic 
Councillor and Director of Research of the International Monetary Fund, describes how globalisation 
has contributed to the drop of global inflation from about 30 per cent to below 4 per cent per year over 
the  past  decade.  In  this  paper  Rogoff  states  that  although  central  banks  deserve  a  lot  of  credit  for 
today’s  low  inflation  rates,  they  cannot  claim  all  the  credit.  The  increased  level  of  competition  in 
product and labour markets, arising from the interplay of globalisation, deregulation and a decreased 
role for governments in many economies, was also an important factor. 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
These developments in the rest of the world probably contributed to the increasing emphasis placed in 
most  African  countries  on  the  achievement  and  maintenance  of  price  stability.  At  a  conference  on 
Monetary  Policy  Frameworks  in  Africa  held  at  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in  Pretoria  in 
September 2001, most of the central banks that attended the conference stated that price stability was 
the ultimate objective of monetary policy in their countries. Price stability was generally defined as low 
inflation  or  single  digit  inflation.  Most  of  the  countries  indicated  that  they  had  adopted  a  pragmatic 
approach in attaining this objective, i.e. to achieve price stability as soon as possible without making 
policy measures too stringent. 
Considerable progress has been made with this approach in bringing inflation down to lower levels. 
According to estimates made by the International Monetary Fund in the World Economic Outlook in 
September 2004, consumer price inflation in Africa will average 8,4 per cent this year and 8,1 per cent 
in 2005. This is a far cry from the upper 40 per cent that was recorded at the beginning of the 1990s. 
Moreover, the number of countries registering double-digit inflation came down from 32 in 1995 to only 
12 in 2003, and 21 countries had inflation rates of less than 5 per cent last year. Monetary policy was 
assisted  considerably  by  prudent  fiscal  policy  in  achieving  these  more  favourable  results.  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  calculates  that  the  average  budget  deficit  as  a  percentage  of  gross 
domestic product in Africa has declined from 3,9 per cent in 1995 to 1,5 per cent in 2003. 
Monetary policy strategy 
3. 
Although  price  stability  is  the  overarching  objective  governing  monetary  policy  decisions  in  almost 
every African country, different monetary policy strategies are followed depending on circumstances 
existing  in  the  various  countries.  Before  the  1980s direct  monetary  policy  measures were  generally 
applied in African countries. These measures consisted of interest rate controls, credit ceilings, foreign 
exchange restrictions and fixed exchange rates. This changed in the last 20 years with deregulation 
and financial liberalisation in the rest of the world. Since the beginning of the 1980s, African countries 
have  generally  moved  to  more  market-based  financial  systems  with  greater  autonomy  and 
accountability applying to central banks. 
Broadly there are three monetary policy strategies applied by African countries, namely exchange rate 
targeting, inflation targeting and monetary targeting. Countries forming part of monetary unions have 
fixed exchange rate regimes with each other. For example, the currencies of Namibia, Lesotho and 
Swaziland, as members of the Common Monetary Area, are pegged to the South African rand. Some 
countries that do not form part of monetary unions also prefer to link their currencies to those of other 
countries or to a basket of currencies. Botswana has been doing this since 1976. 
Most  African  countries  still  apply  monetary  targeting.  Of  the  18  countries  represented  at  the 
Conference on Monetary Policy Frameworks in Africa that was held in Pretoria, 14 targeted monetary 
aggregates.  The  operational  variable  used  by  these  countries  are  the  management  of  reserve 
balances  or  controlling  the  balance  sheet  of  the  central  bank.  By  managing  both  the  domestic  and 
foreign  sources  of  money,  the  growth  in  money  supply  is  controlled.  Taking  the  current  financial 
infrastructure of these countries into consideration, the management of reserve balances to influence 
monetary  aggregates  as  intermediate  targets  is  probably  the  most  efficient  way  of  conducting 
monetary policy. 
Recently, inflation targeting is becoming more popular in Africa. However, in a Working Paper of the 
International Monetary Fund that was prepared by Mark R. Stone, South Africa was the only African 
country that was regarded to have a clear commitment to inflation targeting. South Africa shifted away 
from monetary targeting to informal inflation targeting in the 1990s, and started to apply formal inflation 
targeting  from  February  2000.  The  inflation  target  is  determined  by  government  and  at  present  is 
specified  as  an  increase  measured  over  twelve  months  of  between  3  and  6  per  cent  in  the  overall 
consumer price index excluding the interest cost on mortgages. The South African Reserve Bank has 
complete  instrumental  independence,  but  is  of  course  accountable  to  the  citizens  of  South  Africa. 
Considerable  success  has  been  achieved  in  bringing  the  inflation  rate  down  to  its  present  level  of 
3.7 per cent as of September 2004. In fact CPIX has been inside the target now for more than a year. 
The  instruments  of  monetary  policy  in  African  countries  generally  agree  with  those  of  other 
emerging-market  economies  and  industrialised  countries.  In  the  main  they  consist  of  open  market 
operations, treasury bill auctions, transactions in central banks’ bills, repurchase agreements, foreign 
exchange market operations and accommodation facilities. Most of the African countries continue to 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
make use of statutory reserve requirements. Moreover, these reserve requirements are quite high in 
many of the countries. 
Banking supervision and regulation 
4.  
Another important consequence of the globalisation process for central banking has been the rapid 
pace of consolidation of financial markets and institutions in the world over the past decade. Banks 
have been merged to become bigger players in the market. This consolidation was also extended to 
include  other  financial  institutions.  The  consolidation  process  was  not  confined  to  domestic 
enterprises. Many  mergers  and  acquisitions  transcended  national  boundaries  to  create  international 
players in an endeavour to improve profitability. Large international financial conglomerates are now a 
common feature of the world economy. 
Developments  in  technology,  especially  the  impressive  growth  of  internet  banking,  have  made  it 
possible for banks to use their online operations to expand into international markets, thereby avoiding 
the costly process of establishing subsidiaries or branches. In this way they have become players in 
the  retail  markets  of  many  countries,  without  having  any  physical  presence.  The  development  of 
information  and  communication  technology  has  made  it  possible  for  non-bank  institutions  to  obtain 
funds from and provide credit to the public. Large retailers have become involved in activities closely 
akin to banking practices. This has blurred the boundaries between a bank and other activities. 
Like  most  other  things  on  earth,  the  globalisation  and  consolidation  of  banking  activities  has 
advantages and disadvantages. On the positive side, these developments could lead to cost saving, 
improved  profitability  to  the  benefit  of  clients  and  shareholders,  facilitating  risk  diversification  and 
contributing to economic development. On the negative side, consolidation, if taken too far, could lead 
to  abuse  of  dominant  market  positions  and  moral  hazard  issues.  Excessive  involvement  in 
international markets without sufficient knowledge of local conditions could increase the vulnerability of 
individual banks. 
One of the most serious negative consequence of financial liberalisation and globalisation is that it has 
made  emerging  market  economies  more  prone  to  sudden  withdrawals  or  inward  movements  of 
financial  flows.  As  a  result,  a  number  of  financial  crises  have  affected  the  world  severely  since  the 
beginning of the 1990s. I think here of the crisis in Mexico in 1994/95, East Asia in 1997/98, Russia in 
1998, Brazil in 1998/99 and Turkey and Argentina in 2001. Although countries like Chile and South 
Africa  did  not  experience  a  financial  crisis,  substantial  reversals  in  international  financial  flows 
complicated  the  task  of  central  bankers  and  had  a  negative  impact  on  economic  activities.  For 
example,  the  substantial  financial  outflows  in  2000  and  2001  from  South  Africa  caused  a  large 
depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand and an increase in the rate of inflation. The subsequent 
reversal  in  these  flows  was  accompanied  by  a  recovery  in  the  level  of  the  rand  above  its  previous 
spike  in  2000.  This  forced  domestic  manufactures  and  mining  companies  to  make  significant 
adjustments to their development plans in order to protect profitability. 
From this brief description of the pros and cons of financial liberalisation and globalisation it should be 
apparent that these developments have significant implications for prudential and supervisory policy, 
i.e.  for  systemic  risk  and  the  ability  of  the  appropriate  authorities  to  manage  them.  Derivatives, 
off-balance-sheet  operations  and  diversification  across  countries  and  sectors  have  made  traditional 
risk-management techniques obsolete and have increased the scope for and the speed of contagion. 
A liquidity shortage in a particular market can rapidly spread throughout the global market. 
Financial  regulators  responded  by  focusing  on  increased  transparency  and  by  strengthening 
prudential regulation and supervision in a way that takes account of the increased risks. The initiatives 
that  have  been  taken  include  addressing  the  deficiencies  of  the  1998  Basel  accord;  developing 
guidelines  to  consolidate  financial  statements;  achieving  better  cross-country  harmonisation  in 
disclosing information; developing standards for the compilation of statistical data; and closing gaps in 
regulations in order to avoid regulatory arbitrage. 
At first glance it seems as if the changed international environment had little impact on Africa, with the 
notable  exception  of  South  Africa.  A  number  of  African  countries  attempted  to  adjust  their  financial 
sectors  to  the  changed  circumstances,  but  achieved  only  limited  success.  These  attempts  were 
hampered  by  the  then  high  inflation rates  that  these  countries registered.  In addition several  banks 
were  still  publicly  owned  and  the  non-performing  loans  inherited  from  direct  lending  programmes 
before the reforms became were adopted were still very high. 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
The  relevance  of  globalisation,  deregulation  and  financial  liberalisation  for  central  banking  in  Africa 
becomes more apparent when three important elements of Africa’s policy agenda are considered. As 
already  indicated,  Africa  has  achieved  greater  macroeconomic  stability,  and  growth  has  increased 
significantly in the past ten years. However, for poverty relief, it is firstly of the utmost importance that 
economic growth should accelerate considerably. Secondly, gross domestic fixed investment must be 
increased.  At  a  level  of  about  17  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product,  domestic  investment  falls  far 
short of levels needed for higher economic growth. African countries need to establish the economic 
environment  to  create  investment  opportunities  for  domestic  and  international  investors.  Thirdly, 
African countries need to strengthen their financial sectors by mobilising savings and allocating credit 
effectively and efficiently so that financial services are available to more people than in the past. The 
central  banks  in  Africa  must  play  a  major  part  in  this  third  prerequisite  for  the  attainment  of  higher 
sustainable economic growth and poverty alleviation. 
This task of central banks in Africa is more difficult than in other parts of the world. The number of 
standards and codes can be overwhelming and highly demanding of human and financial resources, 
and  meeting  them  may  overstretch  the  capacities  of  some  African  countries.  Moreover,  these 
standards and codes are formulated mainly for industrialised countries and may not always fully take 
cognisance  of  conditions  in  Africa.  It  will,  for  instance,  be  difficult  for  banks  in  Africa  to  meet 
international standards for limiting portfolio concentration and exposure to a single client, because in 
many African countries there is little economic diversification and economies are dominated by a few 
large  enterprises.  Constraints  on  the  functioning  of  markets  can  also  reduce  the  effectiveness  of 
market discipline and, hence, of transparency. 
Despite these kinds of problems, there is a need for fundamental reforms to strengthen institutional 
capacity,  reduce  government  interference  and  allow  markets  to  operate  efficiently.  Further  financial 
liberalisation should lead to an increase in the quality of financial intermediation. Reforms should be 
undertaken  to,  among  other  things,  restructure  bank  balance  sheets  by  removing  bad  debts, 
privatising  publicly  owned  banks,  and  introducing  measures  to  promote  competition  in  the  banking 
sector.  Strengthening  the  management  and  risk  evaluation  capabilities  of  bank  managers  and  staff 
should also form an integral part of the restructuring process. 
In  South  Africa  we  are  in  the  fortunate  position  that  our  financial  system  is  highly  developed  and 
diversified. We have a large number of financial institutions and sophisticated financial markets which 
perform the function of financial intermediation in an efficient manner. According to assessments made 
by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  other  international  organisations  the  banking  regulations  of 
the  country  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  conform  to  high  international  best  practice.  Our 
financial institutions are well managed and non-performing loans are well within the bounds of sound 
management. Moreover, South Africa subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard of the 
International Monetary Fund and meets the specifications for the coverage, periodicity and timeliness 
of all data categories and for the dissemination of advance release calendars. The timeliness of the 
accounts of the South African Reserve Bank and the banking sector is even better than the due dates 
prescribed by the Fund. 
Other  African  countries  have  launched  a  number  of  initiatives  to  implement  the  new  international 
financial  architecture.  These  initiatives  are  mainly  focused  on  enhancing  transparency  and 
accountability,  adhering  to  international  standards  and  codes  and  maintaining  financial  stability.  A 
number of African countries have launched medium-term programmes to restructure weak banks. This 
included measures to address non-performing loans and accumulated losses of banks. In addition, the 
authorities  have  increasingly  focused  on  improving  banking  regulation  and  supervision,  essentially 
through  greater  compliance  with  the  Basel  Committee’s  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision. 
National payment, clearing and settlement systems 
5. 
The  national  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  of  central  banks  in  Africa  have  also  been 
influenced to a considerable extent by the changed global economic environment. Global trade and 
financial  integration  have  led  to  substantial  increases  in  cross-border  flows,  while  financial 
liberalisation,  the  creation  of  new  financial  instruments  and  the  development  of  financial  markets 
increased the domestic payments which have to be cleared and settled. The resulting increase in the 
values and volumes that have to be handled by the payment systems increased non-settlement risk 
exponentially. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2004
Developments  in  information  and  communication  technology  have  changed  the  payments  structure 
considerably.  Although  it  is  still  in  its  infancy  on  the  African  continent,  the  volume  of  transactions 
undertaken  by  means  of  debit  and  credit  cards  have  increased  significantly  and  there  are  signs 
appearing in South Africa that this means of payment may overtake cash payments in the near future. 
In  some  African  countries  mobile  banking  facilities  have  come  into  use.  This  demands  increased 
security measures and higher standards. 
South Africa has put considerable effort into the revision of national payment, clearing and settlement 
systems. Reforming the national payment system started to receive attention in 1993. By 1995 a plan 
had been finalised containing the objectives, strategies, fundamental principles and critical issues for 
payment  system  reform.  The  implementation  of  this  plan  started  off  with  the  introduction  of  a  large 
value  inter-bank  real-time  gross  settlement  system  in  March  1998.  The  South  African  National 
Payment System Act was then promulgated in October 1998, which provided the central bank with the 
regulatory powers  to  oversee  the safety  and  integrity  of  the national  payment system.  A  number  of 
refinements  have  since  been  made  to  the  system.  Recently  arrangements  have  been  finalised  to 
include  the  South  African  rand  in  the  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  process  before  the  end  of  the 
year, which will link it to the major currencies of the world and eliminate foreign exchange settlement 
risk through the simultaneous settlement of both legs of foreign exchange transactions. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  not  only  concentrated  on  the  development  of  our  own  domestic 
payment system, but also encouraged the development of payment and settlement systems in other 
African countries, particularly countries forming part of the Southern African Development Community. 
A number of these countries have accordingly modernised their payment systems considerably and 
many have also reviewed domestic legal frameworks to accommodate these changes. 
Conclusion 
6.  
In conclusion, it can be stated that the changes in the world economy in recent years have led to large 
improvements in central banking in Africa. At the same time, globalisation and financial liberalisation 
have complicated the task of African central bankers and the general management of the economies 
on the continent. Our economies are generally small open economies dependent on one or only a few 
export commodities. This makes them particularly vulnerable to developments in international markets 
affecting the demand for and the prices of their main exports. With the exception of South Africa, most 
of the financial markets in Africa are still thin and under-developed. They therefore depend to a large 
extent  on  foreign  financing  for  their  development  needs.  This,  in  turn,  makes  them  vulnerable  to 
fluctuations in international financial flows and complicates monetary policy. 
Even in a country with a relatively advanced financial infrastructure, such as South Africa, international 
financial outflows have seriously disrupted economic developments. Swings in portfolio capital flows 
and leads and lags in foreign payments and receipts have at times played havoc with the exchange 
rate of the rand. Turnarounds in international financial flows have also harmed the efficient functioning 
of domestic money and capital markets and disrupted the implementation of monetary policy. 
References 
1.  Greenspan,  Allan:  “Remarks  on  Globalisation”,  Bundesbank  Lecture  2004,  Berlin,  13  January 
2004. 
2.  Köhler, Horst: “Towards a Better Globalisation”, Inaugural Lecture on the Occasion of the Honorary 
Professorship Award at the Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen, 16 October 2003. 
3.  Maxwell, J and others: “Central Banking in Developing Countries”, Routledge, London, 1996. 
4.  Rogoff,K.: “Globalisation and Global Disinflation”, Paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City conference on “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: adapting to a Changing Economy”, 
Jackson Hole WY, 28-30 August 2003. 
5.  Stone Mark R.: “Inflation Targeting Lite”, Working Paper WP/03/12, International Monetary Fund, 
January 2003. 
6.  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  “Conference  Proceedings  on  Monetary  Policy  in  Africa”,  Pretoria, 
17-19 September 2001. 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 5
7.  South African Reserve Bank, “Challenges of Central Banking in Africa”, Zambia, 5 August 2004. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2004
