Jean-Claude Trichet: Euro in wider circles 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Conference 
“Goodbye Lisbon” organised by the European Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 19 November 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to share with you some thoughts on the euro in wider circles. Reflecting on what 
the term “wider circles” means for the euro, I think of the EU Member States that still use their national 
currencies  and  that  aim  to  adopt  the  single  currency  in  the  future,  and  in  particular  the  ten  new 
Member States that joined the EU earlier this year and their path towards the euro. Let me briefly say 
a few words on this aspect.  
The euro goes east 
It is now 15 years ago that the Berlin Wall fell, giving rise to one of the most astonishing political and 
economic transformations in European history. Who could have imagined 15 years ago that in May 
2004, eight countries in central and eastern Europe, together with two countries in the Mediterranean, 
would  be  members  of  the  European  Union?  The  perspective  of  joining  the  European  Union  and 
eventually adopting a European single currency was out of sight for even the most imaginative minds. 
In only 15 years, these countries managed to restore and entrench democratic institutions and market 
economies, replacing the communist ones that were imposed there before.  
The accession of ten new countries to the EU was an important milestone in a process that will lead to 
the eventual adoption of the euro by these new Member States. The euro will go east and south and 
the road to the adoption of the euro is embedded in a well-defined institutional framework. A crucial 
phase before euro adoption is ERM II membership for at least two years. Although there are no formal 
criteria to be met for entry into ERM II, successful participation in the mechanism requires that major 
policy adjustments - for example relating to fiscal policy and price liberalisation - are undertaken before 
joining the mechanism. Participation in ERM II is an important means to anchor exchange rate and 
inflation  expectations  and  to  promote  consistently  sound  policies.  It  helps  to  orient  macroeconomic 
policies to stability, while at the same time allowing for a degree of flexibility, if needed, through the 
wide standard fluctuation band and the possibility of adjusting the central parity. 
As  you  know,  three  new  EU  countries  have  in  the  meantime  entered  the  ERM  II:  with  effect  from 
28 June 2004, Estonia, Lithuania and Slovenia joined Denmark as participants in the mechanism. The 
three new entrants joined with a standard fluctuation band of ±15% around their central rates against 
the euro, while Estonia and Lithuania kept their currency boards as a unilateral commitment. In order 
to  ensure  a  smooth  participation  in  ERM  II,  countries  have  firmly  committed  to  take  the  necessary 
measures to preserve macroeconomic and exchange rate stability. Participation in ERM II has been 
smooth. The four currencies in the ERM II have traded continuously at or close to their central rates, 
while short-term interest rate differentials vis-à-vis the euro area have been small.  
Beyond ERM II membership lies the adoption of the euro, the crowning achievement of the monetary 
integration process. In order to adopt the euro, non-participating EU Member States have to achieve a 
high degree of sustainable economic and legal convergence. Every country will be assessed on its 
own merits and its own particular situation, on the basis of a strict analysis of the performance relating 
to  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria.  Let  me  stress  that  there  is  no  pre-set  timetable  for  the 
enlargement of the euro area.  
Economic challenges for the new Member States 
How far are the new Member States on this road towards the euro? The countries that joined the EU 
this  year  have  shown  impressive  economic  growth  rates  and  have  made  great  strides  in  reducing 
inflation.  They  belong  to  the  most  dynamic  economies  in  the  EU,  having  gone  through  profound 
structural  changes.  For  example,  they  have  taken  thorough  measures  to  reform  their  product  and 
labour markets, and some new Member States, in some respects, may be even more advanced than 
other, existing EU countries. They have become more integrated with the euro area, with the major 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
part of their trade now occurring with the euro area and tight financial links: as a matter of fact, the 
share of the new 10 Member States in the total external trade of the euro area stands around 11%, 
compared  with  around  14%  for  the  US  and  3%  for  Japan.  In  addition,  the  transition  process  has 
brought their economic structures closer to those of the euro area. At the same time, while remaining a 
diverse group in many respects, the new Member States still display distinct economic characteristics 
that differ from the euro area. Their income-per-capita and productivity levels are still low relative to 
the euro area, which may have an impact on their inflation rates. 
Let  me  mention  two  particularly  important  economic  challenges  that  the  new  Member  States  are 
confronted with on the road to the euro: price stability and fiscal policy. Price stability is an essential 
requirement for a successful monetary integration process. Inflation rates in many new Member States 
have picked up recently to an average of almost 5%, following increases in food and energy prices 
and indirect tax changes. The challenge for the new Member States is to contain inflation and inflation 
expectations in an environment of rapid catching-up. Besides solid macroeconomic policy frameworks 
and prudent wage policies, progress in structural reforms is conducive to price stability by improving 
the supply side of the economy and enhancing the growth potential.  
This  brings  me  to  the  second  challenge  that  I  want  to  mention:  the  need  to  achieve  sound  fiscal 
positions. Fiscal deficits are on average high or even very high in a number of new Member States 
and  mostly  despite  very  high  economic  growth.  Their  governments  are  confronted  with  competing 
expenditure  demands,  including  public  investment  in  infrastructure  and  the  need  to  strengthen  the 
effectiveness of public administration and the judicial systems. This, however, should not be seen as 
an  excuse  to  delay  fiscal  consolidation,  but  as  an  additional  reason  to  design  and  implement  a 
credible consolidation path based on durable and growth-enhancing structural reforms. It is important 
to bear in mind that fiscal consolidation in the new Member States becomes increasingly important in 
the course of the monetary integration process and it is essential for a smooth participation in ERM II 
and the eventual adoption of the euro. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The historic enlargement of the EU is now six months ago and I think we can say 
that is has been a genuine success. Following a remarkable transformation in the past 15 years, the 
further integration of the new Member States into the European family has progressed smoothly and 
without any disruptions. The new Member States have shown an impressive economic performance, 
though  various  important  challenges  still  remain  to  be  fully  tackled,  including  those  relating  to  the 
recent pick-up in inflation and to fiscal imbalances. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
