Tom Alweendo: The use of small and medium size enterprises (SMMEs) to 
reduce poverty 
Keynote address by Mr Tom Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the opening ceremony of 
the  6th  African  Development  Finance  Conference  and  SMME  Awards,  Cape  Town,  20-21  October 
2004. 
 Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be with you this morning. I consider this an honour and a privilege to be invited to 
give the keynote address to this distinguished gathering of academics and policymakers. I would like 
to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak at this important conference. 
At the beginning of the new century, the global economy woke up to the reality of the need to rid the 
world  of  poverty,  promote  human  dignity  and  equality  and  achieve  peace,  democracy  and 
environmental  sustainability.  That  realization  found  expression  in  the  Millennium  Declaration  which 
gave birth to the Millennium Development Goals (MDG). The MDGs focus on a core set of values that 
developing countries must achieve by the year 2015 in order to better their present living conditions 
and launch themselves on a path of sustainable growth. Among others, the MDGs aim at eradicating 
extreme poverty and hunger, promoting gender equality and empower women, combating HIV/AIDS, 
malaria and other diseases, and ensuring environmental sustainability. 
The reduction of poverty is regarded as central to the achievement of the MDGs and has been given a 
lot of attention by policymakers in both developed and developing countries. Poverty is observed to be 
closely  related  to  malnutrition,  lack  of  education,  low  life  expectancy,  high  mortality  rate  and 
substandard housing. Both the urban and rural poor lack access to basic services such as water and 
sanitation, electricity and telecommunications. 
Accordingly, governments have devised two broad policy interventions to ameliorate the conditions of 
the poor. The first such strategy is indirect. It is designed to accelerate growth and to direct the flow of 
growth  benefits  to  the  poor.  It  involves  encouraging  countries  to  adopt  market  based  resource 
allocation  techniques  which  emphasizes  competition  as  a  basis  for  sustained  economic  growth, 
ensuring greater availability of land to the poor through land reforms, creating productive employment 
opportunities  through  better  land  utilization  and  ensuring  greater  accessibility  of  the  poor  to  social 
services.  The  second  set  of  policies  is  intended  to  reduce  poverty  by  providing  consumption 
entitlements  to  the  poor  in  the  short  term  and  redistributing  incomes  in  favour  of  the  poor.  Public 
provision of education, health, nutrition and housing form the core of this strategy. 
A prominent component of this second approach is the design and implementation of self-employment 
and  wage  employment  programmes  targeted  at  the  poor  to  improve  their  conditions  of  living  to 
explicitly defined levels. This strategy recognizes the fact that wage employment policies are the most 
desired instrument to provide basic consumption needs of the poor mainly because of its self-targeting 
nature.  A  very  prominent  example  of  such  interventions  is  the  use  of  Small  and  Medium  size 
Enterprises (SMMEs) to reduce poverty. The World Bank and other multilateral development agencies 
have  long  recognized  the  importance  of  targeted  assistance  to  SMMEs  in  accelerating  growth, 
promoting economic development and reducing poverty in their interventions in developing countries. 
The  mainstay  of  this  pro-SMME  policy  is  threefold.  First,  SMMEs  enhance  competition  and 
entrepreneurship and hence have spillover effects on innovation, efficiency and productivity growth. 
Second, SMMEs are generally held to be more productive than large firms although financial markets 
and  other  institutional  failures  could  impede  their  development.  Thirdly,  expansion  of  SMMEs  could 
boost employment more effectively than large firms because they tend to be more labour intensive. 
From this perspective government intervention to subsidize SMMEs could help to alleviate poverty. 
Although some of these arguments in support of SMMEs have not been substantially proven, available 
empirical evidence especially from developed countries tends to support these basic tenets. A recent 
survey  of  OECD  countries1  showed  that  SMMEs  account  for  a  large  share  of  the  private  sector 
                                                      
1  See OECD Small and Medium Enterprise Outlook (2002). 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
economy  representing  between  96  and  99  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  enterprises  in  these 
economies. Microenterprises (0-9 employees) account for between 70 per cent and 90 per cent while 
small  firms  (0  to  49  employees)  constitute  at  least  95  per  cent  of  the  total.  Only  0.5  per  cent  of 
enterprises in the manufacturing sector employ more than 500 in OECD countries. It should not be a 
surprise therefore that SMMEs are responsible for the vast majority of new businesses. 
The report further revealed that SMMEs account for a significant share of output in OECD countries. In 
the  United  States  for  instance,  they account  for  about  40  per cent  of  total  economic  activity.  About 
17 per  cent  of  manufacturing  output  comes  from  SMMEs  in  OECD  countries.  In  Korea  and  Japan, 
policy makers look up to the SMME sector to reinvigorate the national economy. SMMEs also make an 
important contribution to overall employment, accounting for 60-70 per cent of the manufacturing total 
in most OECD economies. In the services sector, small firms provide the vast majority of jobs. During 
the 1990s, small firms were responsible for up to three quarters of employment growth in the United 
States, and businesses with fewer than 20 employees are now generating up to one-half of the jobs in 
the country. In Korea, national statistics indicate that SMMEs increased their share of manufacturing 
employment from 63.5 per cent in 1991 to 74 per cent in 2000. In Australia, statistics show that the 
share of small business in total employment has been growing at about 3.1 per cent since the early 
1980s. SMMEs have tagged on to the globalization trail. Although initially most SMMEs focused on 
local markets, the trend has changed in the past couple of years. SMMEs now account for between a 
quarter and two-fifths of the worldwide manufactured exports. In Korea, SMMEs account for roughly 
40 per cent of manufacturing exports. In Europe, 20 per cent of SMMEs are engaged in exports. 
It  is  generally  accepted  that  SMMEs  even  have  a  greater  role  to  play  in  developing  economies 
especially  when  it  comes  to  employment  generation  and  output  growth.  Preliminary  estimates  for 
developing economies in South-East Asia show that SMMEs provide employment to over 80 per cent 
of the labour force. They also contribute more than 50 per cent to GDP, meeting the demands of local 
and regional markets. SMMEs also make a substantial contribution towards export earnings through 
direct and indirect exports. 
Also significant is the fact that the SMME sector provides both rural and urban women an opportunity 
to  utilize  their  vocational  skills  while  staying  within  their  residential  premises.  In  urban  areas,  most 
female entrepreneurs have introduced product lines whose uniqueness has created a strong demand 
in  the  market  place.  Today,  most  big  industrial  establishments  depend  on  SMMEs  for  their  value 
addition. It is on record in most emerging markets that the fastest growing export industries (cotton 
weaving, textiles, surgical instruments, carpets and footwear etc) have been dominated by SMMEs. 
Thus,  SMMEs  have  played  very  significant  roles  in  reducing  the  poverty  levels  in  many  developing 
countries. It is no surprise therefore that as countries prepare their Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers 
(PRSP), emphasis has been placed on pro-poor growth led by the private sector especially through 
SMMEs. Sectors such as agriculture, services, manufacturing with heavy content of labour-intensive 
activities  have  received  much  support  by  programme  implementers  because  of  their  potential  for 
reducing poverty. 
Given  this  increasingly  important role of  SMMEs  in  both  developing  and  developed  economies,  the 
need  for  policy  intervention  to  stimulate  the  growth  of  this  sector  remains  an  active  debate  in  the 
literature.  This  is  particularly  so  given  the  failure  of  most  intervention  policies  in  the  past. 
Governments, cognizant of the need to provide a favourable business environment for their business 
communities  and  becoming  increasingly  aware  of  the  role  SMMEs  play  in  achieving  economic  and 
social goals, have stepped up efforts in this regard over the years. Such efforts have focused mostly 
on the need to provide appropriate competition policies, appropriate taxation regimes, flexible labour 
markets,  an  educational  system  which  promotes  entrepreneurship,  open  capital  markets  and  more 
liberal access to financing. 
In deference to the organizers of this conference, allow me to make a few remarks on the last two 
issues.  Globalization  and  liberalization  of  financial  markets  have  had  some  far-reaching  effects  on 
SMMEs.  On  the  positive  side,  industrial  restructuring  through  various  types  of  business  linkages, 
especially cross-border alliances and mergers and acquisitions have opened up international business 
opportunities for SMMEs. Globalization may also have opened up access to international sources of 
financing  thus  removing  a  major  constraint  to  SME  development.  However,  SMMEs  especially  in 
developing  countries  may  have  to  contend  with  more  competitive  products  from  the  developed 
countries  where  the  availability  of  adequate  technology  and  well-funded  research  and  development 
strategies may have resulted in lower costs of production. Moreover, in many developing countries, 
financial  liberalization  may  have  resulted  in  higher  real  rates  of  interest  and  the  suspension  of 
subsidized  lending  to  SMMEs  thus  further  reducing  SMME  access  to  finance.  Restrictive  monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
policies  which  often  accompany  structural  adjustment  programmes  may  heighten  interest  rates  and 
thus discriminate strongly against SMMEs. Moreover, the strict requirement for collateral lending which 
is more predominant with financial liberalization policies could bring about a conflict between banking 
prudence and the policy of government to target borrowers who in the first instance cannot afford such 
securities.  The  overall  impact  of  globalisation  and  liberalisation  on  SMMEs  needs  to  be  properly 
researched and appropriate policies designed to ameliorate any adverse consequences. 
By far the most publicized of all the barriers to SMME development is the issue of access to finance. 
This  is  not  to  denigrate  other  SMME  problems  such  as  skills  shortages,  sometimes  unfriendly 
regulatory and supervisory environment, scarcity of capital goods, poor management, lack of data on 
the  sector,  resistance  to  change  and  marketing  difficulties  especially  for  export-oriented  SMMEs. 
Despite all efforts by financial institutions and governments to close the financing gaps in the market, 
SMMEs  continue  to  experience  considerable  difficulty  in  obtaining  risk  capital.  Access  to  finance 
therefore remains a policy priority by most governments. 
Finance for SMMEs remains problematic because their borrowing requirements are usually small and 
frequently does not appeal to financial institutions. Where they are available, more collateral may be 
required  than  SMMEs  can  pledge.  Moreover,  flexibility  on  terms  and  conditions  that  many  SMMEs 
require  may  not  be  available.  Governments  must  therefore  come  in  to  complement  the  efforts  of 
private financial institutions with such policies that are aimed at easing access to existing and newer 
sources of financing. 
In particular, SMMEs face considerable difficulty with sourcing start-up finance. Given the risk involved 
at  this  stage,  most  commercial  banks  are  very  reluctant  to  go  into  such  ventures.  This  has  led  in 
recent  times  to  an  increasing  role  for,  credit  guarantee  schemes  and  venture  capital  in  the  SMME 
sector. 
Many countries have also developed seed capital funds to provide capital and competence for projects 
involving high risk at an early stage. Furthermore, many governments have now embarked deliberately 
on  enterprise  promotion  schemes  to  build  an  entrepreneurial  culture  through  the  inculcation  of 
entrepreneurial behaviour so as to foster competition and innovation in the SMME sector. In spite of 
recent  attempts  to  bridge  the  gap  in  SMME  finance,  much  still  needs  to  be  done  and  a  lot  of 
understanding needs to be created. This is why a forum such as this could go a long way in improving 
our understanding of this very important sector of our economies. 
Let me at this juncture briefly highlight developments in the SMME sector in my country, Namibia. The 
government  of  Namibia  recognises  the  vital  role  which  SMMEs  can  play  in  the  country’s  socio-
economic development. Both the First and Second National Development Plans (NDP) have as their 
main focus the eradication of poverty and inequality, two main problems that the country inherited at 
independence. This problem was exacerbated by the fact that a large proportion of the population did 
not have direct access to the means of production especially land and capital before independence. 
This previously disadvantaged people therefore constitute the bulk of the unemployed. 
Realising the role that SMMEs could play in bridging this gap, government produced a policy paper on 
SMME in 1997 entitled “Namibia: Policy and Programme on Small Business Development”. This policy 
document, amongst others stipulates government programmes in place to ensure that conditions are 
favourable for SMMEs in Namibia to flourish. The government initiatives mainly concentrated on the 
following  three  areas:  De-regulation  in  terms  of  policy  and  legislative  measures  so  as  to  create 
favourable  regulatory  environment  to  serve  as  an  incentive  to  SMME,  programmes  designed  to 
overcome  constraints  towards  the  development  of  the  sector  in  the  areas  of  finance,  marketing, 
technology transfer, purchasing of inputs by SMME and sites and premises for SMME to operate from, 
and institutional support, whereby the Ministry of Trade and Industry serves as the lead ministry for the 
small  business  sector.  The  government  has  successfully  launched  and  implemented  the  above 
mentioned  programmes.  This  is  clearly  manifested  in  the  increase  in  SMME  contribution  to  the 
economy in terms of growth promotion and jobs creation. 
According to a recent survey conducted by the Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit (NEPRU, 
2003)  on  SMMEs,  it  is  evident  that  this  sector  is  a  key  sector  in  poverty  alleviation  and  economic 
growth  generation  in  Namibia.  The  study  showed  that  the  sector  has  exceeded  the  targets  set  in 
NDP2. In terms of the sector’s contribution to GDP, it increased from 8.0 per cent as recorded in 2002 
to 11.0 per cent in 2003, exceeding the target of 5 to 10 per cent by 2006. In terms of the sector’s 
share in the labour force working full-time, its contribution increased by 4.8 per cent to 19.8 per cent in 
2003.  As  it  is  in  the  case  of  the  sector’s  contribution  to  GDP,  SMMEs  share  in  total  labour  force 
exceeded the set target of 2.8 per cent annual growth rate in NDP2. The sector’s contribution in terms 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
of  employment  and  economic  growth  is  expected  to  grow  further  as  its  contribution  to  investment 
increased from 5.1 per cent in 2002 to 8.5 per cent in 2003. Generally, an increase in investment is 
followed by more employment creation and growth. 
One  of  the  challenges  that  Namibia  is  facing,  is  the  challenge  of  lessening  gender  inequality  and 
ensuring that the previously disadvantaged gets into the mainstream of the economy. It is therefore 
encouraging to note in this regard that about 37 per cent of the businesses surveyed in Namibia are 
owned  by  women  and  93.4  per  cent  of  the  business  owners  can  be  classified  as  previously 
disadvantaged Namibians. SMME in Namibia are therefore not only playing a significant role in terms 
of  their  contribution  to  GDP  but  equally  in  terms  of  addressing  social  evils  such  as  poverty  and 
inequality. 
From the foregoing, one can conclude that the SMME sector in Namibia has flourished and met most 
expectations.  However,  the  issue  of  access  to  capital,  entrepreneurial  development,  and  enabling 
regulatory environment still pose serious challenges that require active government and private sector 
involvement if the huge potential in this sector is to be harnessed. 
For  us  at  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  our  efforts  have  been  geared  towards  providing  policy  advice  to 
relevant stakeholders in this regard. In a recent research paper by the Bank, the issue of private equity 
and the contributions they could make to the growth of SMMEs received our attention. Among others 
the paper concluded that private equity as a source of alternative finance for SMMEs in Namibia could 
go a long way in removing the constraints posed especially by start up capital for SMMEs. The paper 
accordingly recommended, among others, that Venture capital should be encouraged as one of the 
sources to finance SMMEs in Namibia. In addition to providing finance, Venture capital also assists 
with  the  provision  of  expertise  necessary  for  the  success  of  these  businesses  at  the  initial  stages. 
Specifically,  the  paper  recommended  that  private-public  partnership  be  encouraged  particularly  for 
investments in start-up businesses. This initiative will stimulate the growth of the SMME sector, reduce 
the  backlog of  unemployment  and  thus  promote  the  attainment of  the  goals  of  poverty  and  income 
inequality reduction in the economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me conclude by restating the fact that SMMEs will continue to play a very 
important  role  in  the  economy  especially  in  developing  countries  where  the  twin  problems  of 
unemployment  and  poverty  constitute  major  development  challenges.  Well  targeted  government 
intervention  in  this  sector  remains  indispensable  provided  such  interventions  do  not  displace  the 
private  sector.  These  are  serious  challenges.  However,  given  the  quality  of  papers  that  will  be 
discussed in the course of this conference, I am convinced that useful policy recommendations will 
emerge at the end of the different sessions. 
I thank your for listening. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2004
