Y V Reddy: Rural credit - status and agenda 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Administrative Staff College 
of India, Hyderabad, 16 November 2004.  
 Distinguished participants and guests,  
It is privilege to be associated with the International Seminar in Honour of Professor CH. Hanumantha 
Rao.  His  valuable  contributions  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  RBI,  my  professional 
association with him for about three decades being a fellow Osmanian, and above all, my personal 
regard for him, make the participation in the inaugural session today a source of pride and pleasure for 
me. 
There  is  a  wide-range  of  subjects  being  considered  by  a  galaxy  of  eminent  scholars  and 
policy-makers, but I will confine my comments in the inaugural address to rural credit. The subject has 
always been at the core of RBI’s activities. Telugus’ seem to have been playing a special role in the 
design  and  implementation  of  rural  credit  policies  in  India.  The  monumental  work  of  All-India  Rural 
Credit  Survey  of  1951-52  was  the  contribution  of  a  Committee  in  which  half  the  membership  was 
Telugus. Rural Electrification Corporation and NABARD have been led by Telugus and had Telugus 
as  Chairmen,  for  a  large  part.  I  cannot  recall  any  economist  who  could  equal  Professor  CH. 
Hanumantha  Rao  in  research,  publication  and  policy  involvement  in  the  field  of  rural  credit.  In  the 
context  of  economic  reforms,  Professor  Rao  has  published  two  papers  which  constitute  a  treasure 
trove for all those interested in rural credit. The first titled `Policy Issues Relating to Irrigation and Rural 
Credit  in  India’  (1993)  makes  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  problems,  prospects  and  tasks.  The 
second, titled “Reform Agenda for Agriculture” (2003) proposes specific credit reforms in the light of 
experience gained and makes a strong pitch for “a major change in the mindset.” But being Telugus, 
we are  individualistic and tend  to differ  - sometimes  politely.  Let me  illustrate:  Shri M.  Narasimham 
Garu, the Bhishma-Pitamaha of the Financial Sector Reforms in India (1991) recommended redefining 
of and reduction in priority-sector lending, describing some of it as “behest lending”. Professor Rao 
promptly disagreed (1993) with him on redefining priority sector lending though there was agreement 
between  the  two  on  phasing  out  of  concessional  rates  of  interest.  Before  proceeding  further,  it  is 
appropriate  to  co-opt  Shri  Montek  Singh  Ahluwalia  as  a  Telugu  or  an  Andhraite  since  he  lived  in 
Hyderabad and had his schooling - perhaps the secret of the solid foundation for scholarship.  
There  are  several  concerns  in  relation  to  rural  credit  which  are  generally  expressed  in  terms  of 
inadequacy,  constraints  on  timely  availability,  high  cost,  neglect  of  small  and  marginal  farmers,  low 
credit-deposit ratios in several States and continued presence of informal markets. It is held that while 
the commercial banks are more focused in improving efficiency and profitability, they have tended to 
give comparatively less priority to rural credit. Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and Co-operatives appear 
to face serious problems of governance as well as operational efficiency. It is argued that most part of 
the  Co-operative  Credit  structure  is  multi-layered,  under  capitalized,  over-staffed  and  under-skilled, 
often with mounting non-performing assets while in a few cases resulting in erosion of public deposits 
as  well.  Many  of  the  RRBs  also  appear  to  share  most  of  these  problems,  though  there  are  some 
vibrant and viable institutions in this category. These problems relating to rural credit have been well 
documented  and  several  policy-approaches  were  made  to  remedy  the  situation.  However,  there  is 
some element of dissatisfaction that overall situation in regard to rural credit is not improving to the 
desired level inspite of such a series of actions. It is a matter of concern that cognizable success is 
eluding  the  policy-makers,  at  a  time  when  increasing  commercialization  warrants  a  big  thrust  in 
institutional  credit  to  agriculture.  There  is  thus  a  discernible  widespread  intellectual  recognition  that 
while immediate measures are undertaken to increase the flow of credit to agriculture, there is a need 
to review the policy of rural credit in a comprehensive and thorough manner. 
The  current  strategy  adopted  by  RBI  to  increase  the  flow  of  credit  may  be  summarized  as  follows. 
First,  the  coverage  of  rural  credit  is  extended  to  include  facilities  such  as  storage  as  well  as  credit 
through  NBFCs.  Second,  procedural  and  transactional  bottlenecks  are  sought  to  be  removed, 
including elimination of Service Area Approach, reducing margins, redefining overdues to coincide with 
crop-cycles,  new  debt  restructuring  policies,  one-time  settlement  and  relief  measures  for  farmers 
indebted to non-institutional lenders. Third, Kisan Card Scheme is being improved and widened in its 
coverage while some banks are popularizing General Credit Cards (GCCs) which is in the nature of 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
clean overdraft for multipurpose use, including consumption. Fourth, public and private sector banks 
are  being  encouraged  to  enhance  credit-delivery  while  strengthening  disincentives  for  shortfall  in 
priority  sector  lending.  Fifth,  the  banks  are  urged  to  price  the  credit  to  farmers  based  on  actual 
assessment of individual risk rather than on a flat rate depending on category of borrower or end-use 
while ensuring that interest-rates charged are justifiable as well as reasonable. In brief, the thrust is on 
enhancing  credit-delivery  in  a  regime  of  reasonable  credit-prices  within  the  existing  legal  and 
institutional constraints and to this limited extent there has been “ a major change in the mindset”, that 
Professor Rao desired.  
In  this  background,  the  agenda  for  future  consists of  five  parts.  First,  there  is  a  need  for  legal  and 
institutional changes relating to governance, regulation and functioning of rural cooperative structure 
and Regional Rural Banks who have to be critical instruments for rural credit in future. In this regard, it 
is useful to note the nature of competition and accountability to shareholders governing the functioning 
of  commercial  banks  which  would  make  their  foray  into  rural  credit  predominantly  subject  to 
commercial  considerations.  The  changes  warranted  in  cooperatives  as  well  as  RRBs  involve  deep 
commitment of state-governments and have significant bearing on political economy. Thus, the current 
thrust to improve credit-delivery may soon face limits unless the legal and institutional changes are 
agreed  upon  and  acted  upon  in  good  faith  in  a  timely  fashion.  It  is  the  fervent  hope  of  RBI  that  a 
consensus will develop soon on these fundamental changes that are essential for achieving the broad 
policy objectives. 
Second,  there  are  overhang  problems  of  non-performing  loans  and  erosion  of  deposits  in  both 
cooperatives  and  RRBs.  There  is  some  assessment  of  magnitudes  of  losses  and  capital  needs  in 
RRBs while in the case of cooperatives the data are not yet firm. It may not be appropriate to continue 
to permit institutions that are not solvent to seek and accept public deposits and hence RBI favours 
early  restructuring  and  recapitalisation.  There  is  an  inevitable  fiscal  impact  of  any  scheme  of 
recapitalisation which has to be transparent and has to bear all the costs of overhang issues as well as 
capital adequacy to assure continued solvency and safety of public deposits in future. Such a one-time 
fiscal  support  is  justifiable,  urgent  and  essential  for  several  reasons,  including  that  “There  Is  No 
Alternative” and delayed response could end up being more expensive. The current acceleration in 
credit-delivery can be sustained in the medium term, if such fiscal support from States and Centre is 
firmly put in place soon to revive or reorganize rural cooperative structure and RRBs. 
Third, there is a need to foster credit culture to make enhanced rural credit a lasting phenomenon. A 
benign  credit-culture  is  one  which  encourages  appropriate  credit  price,  credit-delivery  under 
transparent conditions of lenders’ as well as borrowers’ liabilities and incentives for repayment rather 
than default. Measures that counter such a benign credit culture are often well-intended, but as the 
experience  so  far  has  shown  they  tend  to  be  seriously  counter  productive.  There  is  a  need  for  a 
consensus in this regard, so that, rural credit system in India is compatible with our goals of higher 
growth and better equity. In this regard, it is necessary to recognise that expansion of credit in some of 
the States which have low credit-deposit ratio depends on conducive credit culture capturing factors 
relating to governance and commercial viability. 
Fourth, on the critical issue of risk-mitigation, it is held that experiments with crop or credit-insurance in 
India  have  not  been  very  satisfactory  so  far.  In  fact,  many  farmers  argue  that  where  compulsory 
insurance is resorted to, it increases the burden of borrowing from institutional sources and once the 
transaction costs are added, the overall costs exceed the Prime Lending Rates significantly. There are 
several risks that a farmer faces, and of these future price and monsoon conditions are most severe 
and almost entirely beyond the control of the farmer. While Minimum Support Price is a mechanism 
that has served us well, its cost-effectiveness is subject to debate and in any case the coverage is 
limited to cereals like rice and wheat and in some areas cotton. The farmer faces the risks of monsoon 
conditions and usually the adverse climatic conditions are widespread in a geographical area, with the 
result  severe  limits  are  set  on  private-insurance.  Prof.  CH.  Hanumantha  Rao  flagged  the  issue  of 
strategy  to  reduce  risks  as  one  of  the  four  major  areas  of  long-term  planning  (in  1993)  but  they 
covered only water conservation, venture capital and insurance promotion, where viable. Perhaps, it is 
necessary  to  recognize  that  if  some  elements  of  insurance  are  abinitio  not  viable,  extending  credit 
becomes more risky and hence constrained.  
Finally, in the light of the above, there is merit in considering a comprehensive public policy on risk-
management in Agriculture, as not only a means of relief for distressed farmers but as an ingredient 
for more efficient commercialized agriculture. The components of such a policy have to be worked out 
in detail, but illustratively, the public-policy could consider some of the elements described here. First, 
establishing a well articulated, objective and independent assessment of impact of adverse monsoon 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
conditions and appropriate relief to farmers on an assured basis. Second, facilitating farmers to assure 
themselves of a price for all their products before harvesting, or even sowing the seed, through a well 
regulated  network  of  Forward,  Futures  and  Options  markets.  Third,  establishing  and  implementing 
liability  of  suppliers  for  any  shortfall  in  quality  or  assured  supply  in  vital  inputs  such  as  seeds, 
pesticides, power and water. Fourth, gradually eliminating and replacing price-subsidies with outlays 
on risk mitigation for farmers in the broadest sense and Fifth, positioning flexibility in extending rural 
credit  within  a  broad  framework  of  such  a  comprehensive  public  policy  on  risk-management  in 
Agriculture. 
Let me conclude by thanking Dr. S.K. Rao and Dr. MahendraDev for inviting me to join this intellectual 
feast. I have great pleasure in inaugurating the seminar and look forward to hearing the luminaries like 
Dr. Arjun Sengupta, Dr. Yogender Alagh and Dr. R. Radhakrishna. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
