Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The Financial Process Exchange (FPX)  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the official launch of The 
Financial Process Exchange (FPX), Kuala Lumpur, 28 October 2004. 
 in 
in  designing  and  participating 
Yang Berbahagia Dato’ Amirsham bin A. Aziz 
Chairman of MEPS (Malaysian Electronic Payment System (1997) Sdn. Bhd), 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here this morning on the occasion of the launching of the Financial Process 
Exchange or the FPX. Today’s launch of the multi-bank Internet payment platform marks another step 
forward in enhancing the financial infrastructure of the Malaysian financial system.  
In this more integrated and dynamic environment, the retail banking frontier of the future is defined by 
the range of services that are accessible to the consumer. Increasingly, technology is no longer an 
inhibiting  factor  in  the  payment  services  offered  by  banks.  Indeed,  expedient  fund  transfers  and 
account  access  flexibilities  are  now  apparent  elements  that  differentiate  banks  to  the  discerning 
customers.  
Of importance is that investment in technology is vital in meeting the changing consumer requirements 
and  the  need  for  banking  institutions  to  continue  to  invest  in  information  technology  in  this  more 
competitive environment. IT applications in financial services, especially in the payments industry, are 
complex  and  scale-dependent.  It  is,  therefore,  imperative  that  the  financial  industry  is  collectively 
engaged 
industry-wide  payment  system  platforms.  The 
interdependencies and synergies arising from a collective approach will generate mutual benefits and 
cost savings. Benefits range from a consistent and standardised application of rules and processes, to 
seamlessly harnessing the individual institution’s respective infrastructure and promotional activities to 
realise cost savings arising from the sharing of scarce capital. 
In  the  quest  for  efficiency  in  the  payment  systems  of  the  nation,  an  essential  task  for  the  banking 
industry is thus to strengthen the focus on meeting the specific demands of the consumers, and at the 
same time, forging alliances in common infrastructure building. The FPX is a right step forward in this 
direction.  The  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  will be  further  enhanced with  the  FPX  that  reduces 
transaction costs and contributes to the overall functioning of the economy. This advancement forward 
can  only  be  successfully  achieved  when  there  is  active  participation  by  the  banking  institutions, 
individuals  as  well  as  businesses,  in  utilising  and  promoting  the  system  nation-wide.  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia strongly encourages all banking institutions and users to participate in the FPX to exploit its 
full  potential,  a  process  that  would  contribute  towards  the  competitive  positioning  of  the  Malaysian 
economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Economic expansion hinges on the effective intermediation function of the financial system, and the 
efficiency of funds flow is integral to the overall functioning of the system. To gain significance as a 
trading  nation,  the  strengthening  of  commercial  facilities,  including  e-commerce,  is  pivotal  to  the 
process. While the reality of the Internet boom in the nineties brought many e-commerce proponents 
to  revalidate  their  expectations,  the  Internet  provides  us  with  an  outreach,  other  than  wireless 
technology, that surpasses any other known media. As a result e-commerce through the Internet has 
been gaining significance and its potential should not be discounted.  
In meeting this trend, the FPX is indeed a welcome development as a payment system that leverages 
on banking institutions’ Internet banking services to provide on-line assurance of payments, enables 
payment references to accompany payments to facilitate reconciliation of transactions, and provides 
an efficient and cost-effective settlement mechanism. The system is intended to support the various 
initiatives  of  the  private  sector  and  the  government  in  e-commerce,  through  the  use  of  an 
industry-wide payment platform that would have a more comprehensive out-reach to users, compared 
to  the  existing  bank-centric  models.  It  is  our  hope  that  the  FPX  would  facilitate  e-commerce 
transactions  and  encourage  businesses  to  undertake  process  re-engineering  to  reach  out  to  wider 
markets, facilitate end-to-end e-commerce transaction flows and reduce operating costs through the 
use of modern day technology. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The payment system landscape is continuing to evolve - shaped for the most part by the availability of 
various electronic payment infrastructures and the consumers’ adoption pattern. It is noted, however, 
that while a vast array of electronic payment systems and instruments have been introduced against a 
background of more flexible regulatory policies and advancements in technology, the use of cheques 
remains pervasive in Malaysia. More than 90% of the non-cash retail payments in Malaysia are made 
by  way  of  issuing  cheques,  albeit  at  a  slower  average  annual  growth  rate  of  2%  in  the  recent  two 
years, compared to the use of the Inter-Bank Giro which has increased at the rate of 197%. In most 
developed  countries,  the  use  of  cheques  has  declined  to  negligible  levels  compared  to  electronic 
payments.  These  trends  underpin  the  need  for  the  banking  institutions  to  further  intensify  efforts  to 
encourage  consumers  and  businesses  to  use  the  electronic  payments  systems.  Promotional 
programmes  and  greater  consumer  education  activities  also  have  to  be  escalated  to  promote 
confidence in Internet transactions and the use of electronic means of payments.  
The  need  to  build  up  consumer  awareness  is  essential  in  an  environment  that  is  becoming 
increasingly  challenging  and  complex.  Consumers  need  to  be  informed  and  convinced  that  the 
payment  infrastructure  is  safe,  efficient  and  reliable,  and  that  there  is  an  adequate  consumer 
protection mechanism for consumers to be able to confidently use and enjoy the advantages of a low 
cost  and  effective  payment  system.  One  of  the  main  challenges  is  to  combat  fraud.  The  rising 
incidences  of  Internet-based  identity  theft  and  phishing  scams  globally  require  the  banks  to  remain 
vigilant  about  the  possible  security  risks  and  employ  effective  security  measures  and  internal 
procedures to protect their customers. Banks should remain one step ahead in this endeavour. In this 
regard,  I  wish  to  congratulate  the  banking  institutions  for  completing  the  chip-based  ATM  cards 
migration,  and  introducing  EMV-compliant  credit cards and  terminals  to  combat  fraud, a  technology 
leap that was indeed a challenging task. While the conversion of the credit card infrastructure to be 
EMV-compliant  is  an  ongoing  effort,  I  wish  to commend  the  industry  players, the  issuers,  acquirers 
and the affected merchants, particularly the petrol industry, for their positive response towards meeting 
the migration deadline. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  desired  migration  to  an  electronic  payments  environment  will  not  only  be  engineered  through 
secured  system  architecture  and  active  promotional  programmes,  but  also  induced  by  greater 
transparency. Banks need to be more transparent in the delivery and pricing of financial services, and 
highlight the underlying motivation and activities that banks undertake in prescribing financial services. 
Pricing will affect consumers’ preference and behaviour. In this regard, banks need to understand their 
own cost structure and price the payment services accordingly, to provide the incentive for the shift to 
electronic  payments  to  take  place.  To  foster  greater  efficiency  in  the  payments  system,  its  charges 
relative to other means of payments need to be structured accordingly to encourage greater use of the 
electronic channels as the preferred mode. These moves also need to be complemented with ample 
provision of electronic payment methods that are comparable to the other means of payments in terms 
of its reach and convenience.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Bank Negara Malaysia attaches great importance to payment system efficiency and will also continue 
to  promote  its  security,  reliability  and  efficiency,  together  with  the  industry  and  payment  service 
providers, to foster an innovative payments industry. The FPX platform is an excellent example of this 
collaborative effort, and I wish to commend MEPS, and the pilot group of banks and corporations for 
their  tremendous  effort  and  commitment  in  developing  the  FPX  solution.  The  launching  of  the  FPX 
marks an important milestone in the development of Malaysia’s payments system.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 63/2004
