T T Mboweni: The South African banking sector - an overview of the past  
10 years 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  year-end  media 
cocktail function, Johannesburg, 14 December 2004. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Over the past decade, South Africa has established a well-developed banking system which compares 
favourably with those in many developed countries and which sets South Africa apart from many other 
emerging market countries. At the end of 2004, we find ourselves with a more mature banking sector, 
with a moderate level of private-sector indebtedness and a respectable and first-rate regulatory and 
legal  framework.  South  African  banks  are  well  managed  and  utilise  sophisticated  risk-management 
systems and corporate-governance structures in conducting the business of a bank. 
South Africa’s banks are regulated in accordance with the principles set by the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision. Consequently, our banks comply with international sound practice and offer a 
sophisticated banking system to the public. Customers have online, real-time, nationwide access to 
bank accounts 24 hours a day, everyday of the year. South Africa’s political transformation, together 
with the relaxation of exchange controls and the liberalisation of African economies, has resulted in 
South  Africa  becoming  an  increasingly  important  financial  centre.  South  Africa  is  now  also  well 
positioned to provide global services through the international offices of our banks and the presence of 
international banks in South Africa. 
Structure of the South African banking sector 
2.  
Currently,  there  are  38  registered  banks  in  South  Africa.  This  number  consists  of  15  South  African 
controlled  banks,  6  non-resident  controlled  banks  (subsidiaries),  15  local  branches  of  international 
banks,  and  two  mutual  banks.  In  addition,  44  international  banks  have  authorised  representative 
offices in South Africa. Representative offices, however, may not take deposits.  
Five major groups continue to dominate the South African banking sector. These groups are the Absa 
group,  the  Standard  Bank  group,  the  FirstRand  Bank  group,  Investec  and  Nedcor.  In  1994,  these 
groups  represented  83.8  per  cent  of  the  total  assets  of  the  banking  sector  and,  currently,  they 
represent 87.4 per cent of the banking sector. The remaining 12.6 per cent of assets in the banking 
sector are currently held by the other 31 banks, excluding the two mutual banks.  
Initially, the number of medium to small local banks increased steadily over the past decade. During, 
the  latter  part  of  1999,  however,  these  banks  faced  liquidity  pressures, which led  to  many of  these 
medium to small banks exiting from the banking system. This downward trend reached its lowest point 
with  the  placement  of  Saambou  Bank  into  curatorship  in  February  2002  and  the  subsequent 
integration of BOE Bank into Nedbank. From the last quarter of 1999 to the end of March 2003, some 
22 banks exited the South African banking system. It can be said, however, that this phenomenon was 
due  more  to  a  consolidation  of  the  broader  banking  sector  than  a  failure  of  the  medium  to  small 
banking sector. Currently, small local banks constitute 3.1 per cent of the total banking sector assets, 
in comparison to 21.7 per cent in 1994.  
As a result of the political isolation of South Africa in the mid-1980’s, international banks terminated 
their  operations  in  South  Africa.  Immediately  prior  to  the  advent  of  the  democratically  elected 
government  in  1994,  few  international  banks  were  doing  banking  business  in  South  Africa. 
Amendments  to  the  Banks  Act  in  1994,  however,  allowed  not  only  representative  offices  and 
subsidiaries of international banks to be established in South Africa, but also branches of international 
banks. Following the opening of South Africa’s financial system in 1994, international participation in 
the  local  banking  industry  increased  significantly,  from  3  per  cent  in  1994  to  9.5  per  cent  of  total 
banking sector assets by the end of October 2004.  
   1/7 
Periods of change in the banking sector 
3.  
Following South Africa’s re-entry into international financial markets in 1994, locally registered banks 
have increasingly been expanding their operations into other countries. At the same time, international 
banks  have  been  expanding  their  operations  into  South  Africa.  Besides  adding  further  depth  and 
sophistication to the South African market, these  foreign banks began to tap into the South African 
labour market. Consequently, the arrival of these predominantly resourceful and experienced banks 
posed formidable challenges to local banks. In a quest to survive and excel, South African banks had 
to devise means to adapt to the new terrain. As a result of the increased competition, lending margins 
have been placed under greater pressure, and several banks have had to expand their businesses 
and enter markets with slightly higher credit-risk profiles. 
Currently, the major banks offer a wide range of services to both individual and corporate customers. 
One-stop relationship banking, with an emphasis on universal banking, instead of isolated services, 
has  gained  in  importance  during  the  past  few  years.  Nevertheless,  several  banks,  especially  small 
local and foreign banks continue to service niche markets, where they hold some form of competitive 
advantage. 
Trends in South African banks over the past decade 
4.  
Generally, the South African banking sector remained fairly stable during the past decade. The first 
part of the past decade was characterised by global financial turbulence and banking crises in many 
countries. In general, the South African banking sector showed itself to be remarkably resilient during 
the crises experienced. The latter part of the decade was characterised by a significant depreciation of 
the South African currency and, in 2002, we experienced our own banking instability. Fortunately, and 
owing particularly to the solid foundations upon which our banking system is based, 2003 and 2004 
were marked by greater stability.  
Balance-sheet structure 
(i)  
The  aggregated  balance  sheet  of  all  banks  in  the  South  African  banking  sector  grew  from 
R344.6 billion  as  at  end  December  1994  to  R724  billion  as  at  end  December  1999.  By  the  end  of 
October 2004, total assets had grown to a record high of R1.436 trillion. Loans and advances grew 
continuously over the past decade, from R270.8 billion as at end Dec 1994 to R 1.104 trillion as at end 
October 2004. Domestic deposits from the public remained the main source of funding for the banking 
sector  over  the  past  ten  years  and  amounted  to  R888  billion  in  October  2004  (as  opposed  to 
R241.9 billion as at end December 1994). 
Profitability 
(ii)  
The  efficiency  of  the  banking  sector  can  be  determined  by  expressing  operating  expenses  as  a 
percentage of total income. Currently, the international benchmark for efficiency is 60 per cent. In the 
past, South African banks were able to keep this ratio below or close to the international benchmark. 
The ratio, however, has increased from 60.2 per cent in 1999 to 67 per cent in 2002. The high volatility 
in  efficiency  in  2002  indicates  that  the  South  African  banking  sector  was  indeed  experiencing 
problems with profitability in the first six months of 2002. This deterioration is confirmed by the return 
on  equity  of  5.4  per  cent  (smoothed  over  12-months)  and  the  return  on  assets  of  0.4  per  cent 
(smoothed over 12-months) as at the end of June 2002. Since 2002, however, the efficiency ratio has 
improved and, as at the end of October 2004, the efficiency of the banking sector was 65.2 per cent. 
By the end of October 2004, the return on equity and the return on assets of the banking sector had 
similarly improved.  
Capital adequacy 
(iii)  
The  change  in  focus  of  the  regulatory  authorities  from  direct  controls  to  a  more  market-based 
approach has been accompanied by an emphasis on proper capitalisation, sound risk-management 
procedures and greater disclosure. South Africa adheres to the capital-adequacy guidelines for banks 
promulgated  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  The  requirement  to  maintain  capital 
equal to the full ratio of 8 per cent of risk-weighted assets was changed to a rate of 10 per cent by the 
   2/7 
Registrar  of  Banks  in  2001.  By  end  of  October  2004,  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole  had  a 
capital-adequacy ratio of 13 per cent (up from 9.5 per cent in December 1994). 
Non-performing loans 
(iv)  
Of  great  significance  was  a  decrease  in  the  growth  of  total  non-performing  loans  during  the  past 
decade. After reaching a peak of R29.2 billion in March 1999, growth in total non-performing loans 
declined to R23.8 billion as at end December 2003. During 2004, total non-performing loans continued 
to decrease to a level of R20.9 billion. Provisioning by banks remained adequate throughout the past 
decade despite non-performing loans being high in the late nineties, as mentioned earlier.  
Reaction of the regulator to the small to mid-sized banking crises 
5.  
It  is  common  cause  that  the  South  African  banking  sector  experienced  certain  mini-crises  over  the 
past decade. None was more concerning than the instability experienced by small to mid-sized banks 
during the period of the Saambou problem. Saambou Bank experienced a liquidity crisis, emanating 
from negative market perceptions, a profit-warning announcement and the sale of Saambou shares by 
two  of  the bank’s  executive  directors. At  the  time, Saambou was the seventh  largest  South  African 
bank and had both a large retail deposit base and a well-established branch network.  
In  order  to  prevent  a  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  small  to  mid-sized  banking  sector,  Saambou  was 
placed  under  curatorship.  Unfortunately,  this  led  to  further  withdrawals,  not  only  from  the  smaller 
banks but also from larger banks. This loss of confidence significantly affected the sixth largest bank 
at the time, BOE Bank, indicating that the lack of confidence could move up the scale and not only 
down the scale.  
Since such a trend could not be supported, the South African Reserve Bank entered into consultations 
with the National Treasury, which ultimately issued a guarantee to all depositors that the government 
would fund their withdrawals. This action sent a signal to the market that the authorities were serious 
about maintaining the stability of the banking sector.  
Several  lessons  have  been  learnt  from  the  small  to  mid-sized  banking  crises.  First,  owing  to  the 
special nature of banks, all key players, including, for example, external auditors, analysts, the media 
and rating agencies, should appreciate the nature of banking and act responsibly when dealing with 
the banking sector.  
Second, the regulatory authorities must also be mindful of the fact that all their actions, combined and 
separately, constitute signals to the market and that greater problems may result if a bank in distress 
is not handled in a manner that provides certainty.  
Third, the regulatory authorities have also learnt to treat with circumspect institutions that apply for a 
banking licence, but which have only the interests of the individual shareholder and not the interests of 
the depositor base in mind when making business decisions. An institution can no longer be allowed 
to be registered to conduct the business of a bank and, then, simply to ride on the coat tails of the 
name “bank”, whilst at the same time not conducting deposit-taking business or not acting responsibly 
in the interests of the depositor base, but rather in the interests of an unobtainable share price. 
Fourth,  the  Registrar  of  Banks  needs  to  be  mindful  of  “boutique”  banks  that  are  not  fulfilling  the 
definition  of  the  “acceptance  of  deposits  form  the  general  public”  and,  on  the  asset  side  of  their 
balance sheet, are not acting “in the interest of the general public”. 
Fifth, as a result of the problems prevalent in the small to mid-sized banking sector during the past 
decade, and especially towards the latter part of the decade, the South African Reserve Bank adopted 
a policy framework for dealing with banks in distress. This policy framework serves to provide clarity 
on the process in place for not only dealing with banks in distress, but also preventing problems in one 
bank spreading to other banks. It is, however, only a framework to guide the approach taken, and the 
particular  approach  has  to  be  decided  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  depending  on  the  specific 
circumstances.  
Sixth,  in  addition  to  the  policy  framework  for  dealing  with  banks  in  distress,  the  Registrar  of  Banks 
emphasised  the  importance  of  sound  corporate  governance  in  banks.  In  order  to  investigate  the 
standard  of  corporate  governance  within  the  South  African  banking  sector,  the  Registrar  appointed 
Adv  J  F  Myburgh  SC  to  conduct  a  review  of  the  status  of  compliance  with  sound  corporate-
governance practices within the five largest banking groups in South Africa during 2002.  
   3/7 
Among  Adv  Myburgh’s  findings  were  that,  generally  the  banks  investigated  were  committed  to 
adherence  to  and  application  of  high  standards  of  corporate  governance;  the  banks  on  their  own 
initiative reviewed their corporate-governance principles from time to time; and corporate governance 
in the banks was generally sound but vigilance was required to ensure continued compliance with the 
best practice in corporate governance which is evolving in South Africa and internationally.  
Myburgh’s recommendations were, inter alia, that the board of a bank should consist of no more than 
about  16  members;  a  bank’s  board  should  not  have  more  than  about  four  executive  directors;  the 
majority of non-executive directors should be independent directors with immediate effect; and banks 
should  aim  for  the  majority  of  their  directors  to  be  independent  directors  within  not  more  than  five 
years.  
The  Registrar  of  Banks  accepted  the  recommendations  made  by  Adv  Myburgh  and  is  dedicated  to 
reviewing the commitment to sound corporate governance in the banking sector on an ongoing basis 
and is currently reviewing corporate governance in the remaining “non-big five” banks.  
It  needs  to  be  stressed,  however,  that  the  objective  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  world 
wide can never be to avoid the failure of financial participants, and, that, in a sound system, there will 
be failures. Instead, the objective is to strive for an optimal balance between, on the one hand, the 
cost  of  controls  and  intervention  in  order  to  address  market  failures  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
anticipated  benefits  of  regulation  and  supervision.  The  need  for  a  sound  relationship  and  proper 
coordination between the fiscal authorities and the regulator can also not be overemphasised. 
Emergence of the “four-pillar” policy 
6.  
The four pillar policy relates to having a minimum number of substantial banks (so called “pillars”) on 
which  the  domestic  banking  industry  relies  and  discourages  the  merger  between  any  of  those  four 
banks.  The  primary  reasons  for  such  a  policy  relate  to  the  maintenance  of  minimum  levels  of 
competition, in the interests of prudential and systemic stability, in order to avoid the spread of risk and 
to promote reliance on a broader platform of institutions.  
Currently, Australia relies heavily on the “four-pillar” policy, which originated in 1990 from its previous 
“six-pillar” policy. New Zealand, which effectively has the same major banks as Australia, is protected 
by the Australian policy. The Australian “six-pillar” policy discouraged mergers between any of the four 
major banks and two major life insurance companies. The Australian government determined that it 
would be anti-competitive for the four big banks and two big insurance companies to merge.  
In  1997,  however,  the  Australian  government  scrapped  its  “six-pillar”  policy  after  the  Wallis  Inquiry 
concluded  that  increased  competition  would  achieve  lower  costs,  better  services  and  higher 
efficiencies  for  consumers.  Nevertheless,  the  Australian  government  determined  that  there  was 
insufficient  competition  to  allow  mergers  among  the  big  four  banks  and  thus  the  “six-pillar”  policy 
became the “four-pillar” policy. 
According to the South African Minister of Finance, who has responsibility for national financial policy, 
South Africa also follows a “four-pillar” policy. Recently, the Minister stated that South Africa maintains 
a  “four-pillar”  policy  of  having  four  big,  locally  owned  banks  regulated  by  the  Office  for  Banks.  The 
“four-pillar” policy in South Africa lay at the heart of considering the Nedcor Bank bid for Stanbic. The 
arguments advanced and conclusions drawn at the time conformed to that principle. 
Current indications are that a number of international banks are interested in acquiring one or two of 
our four pillars. Even if such interested was approved, it seems important to the Reserve Bank that 
there  still  remain 
four  pillars  upon  which  our  banking  system  rests.  The  presence  of 
internationally-owned  banks  will  most  certainly  introduce  more  competition  which  in  theory  should 
benefit consumers. 
The authorities will therefore have to examine each application to buy into one of our four pillars on a 
case by case basis. The world is changing very fast and the regulatory authorities cannot be seen to 
be standing in the way of globalisation and rapid changes. These changes should be welcome as they 
are indicative of the increasingly positive outlook for South Africa. The authorities have therefore to 
face up to the task of anticipating and keeping abreast of changes to meet the new challenges and 
opportunities.  ‘Nothing  is  stable  except  stability’  and  progress  is  measured  by  ‘constantly  changing 
when circumstances change’, as the great philosophers of old would say. 
   4/7 
7.  
Current challenges for banking policy, especially in view of international banks’ 
interest in acquiring local banks 
Closely related to the consideration of a four-pillar policy in a country is a consideration of whether 
international ownership of any of those “pillars” should be permitted and, if so, on what conditions. In 
that regard, the banking system of New Zealand serves as a good example of a country that, whilst 
having  predominantly  non-resident  owned  banks,  has  maintained  a  sound  financial  system  for 
decades.  
Should international interest in our local banks culminate in international ownership, the supervisory 
regime would have to follow the internationally agreed framework of “home-host” banking supervision. 
This  is  already  in  operation  in  that  South  African-owned  banks  have  a  presence  abroad  and 
internationally-owned banks  have a  presence  in  South  Africa.  The success  of  such  a  system  relies 
largely on both the home-country and the host-country regulator ensuring compliance with the Basel 
Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and the various guidelines flowing therefrom. In that 
regard, regulators seek to ensure that their requirements do not obstruct home-country requirements 
and,  consistent  with  meeting  their  responsibilities,  dovetail  as  much  as  possible  with  those 
requirements.  
Maintenance of a sound and efficient financial system and an ability to respond to a crisis effectively 
are  crucial  prerequisites  for  a  country’s  economic  and  social  welfare.  Therefore,  host-country 
supervisory arrangements are essential, as are structures for coordinating home and host supervision. 
Home-country and host-country supervisors should be able to rely on and support one another at all 
times. 
When banking groups have international shareholders, it is important for the host-country supervisor 
to be able to rely on the shareholder of reference in times of need. 
Challenges going forward 
8.  
Three important challenges face the South African banking system, including bank supervisors, in the 
forthcoming number of years. These challenges are the implementation of the New Capital Accord, or 
Basel II, as the Accord is commonly known; the provision of the broader access to banking services; 
and the full implementation of anti-money laundering measures. 
Basel II 
(i)  
The principles of Basel II are intended to align capital-adequacy requirements more closely with the 
key  elements  of  banking  risks  and  to  provide  for  banks  to  enhance  their  risk-measurement  and 
risk-management  capabilities.  The  revised  capital  framework  is  furthermore  an  attempt  to  adapt  to 
new developments and instruments and to be neutral towards financial innovation. Although the aim is 
not to stifle innovation, the framework is also not intended to encourage capital arbitrage. Basel II will 
evidently bring with it a higher supervisory and compliance burden, because of the Accord’s greater 
complexity. 
The Office for Banks has embraced the principles contained within Basel II and is of the opinion that 
Basel  II  is  suitable  for  application  in  both  G10  and  non-G10  countries,  since  it  provides  a  menu  of 
approaches  suitable  for  both  sophisticated  and  the  least  sophisticated  banks.  Implementation  of 
Basel II  will  be  one  of  the  high-priority  strategic  focus  areas  of  the  Registrar  of  Banks  in  the 
forthcoming number of years. Basel II will be implemented within the South African banking sector on 
1 January 2008. Parallel runs will take place during 2007. The Office for Banks has and will continue 
to direct resources towards developing a supervisory framework involving all approaches offered by 
the new Accord.  
Basel  II  will  have  a  significant  impact  not  only  on  banks,  but  also  supervisors,  who  will  have  to 
re-engineer their processes and tailor their organisational structures to meet the Basel II standards. In 
collaboration  with  other  supervisors,  the  Office  for  Banks  is  currently  developing  its  Basel  II 
implementation  strategy.  This  process  requires,  amongst  other  things,  a  thorough  understanding  of 
the  provisions  of  Basel  II,  the  design  of  appropriate  supervisory processes  and  the  development  of 
complementary tools to discharge supervisory duties. Ultimately, the new capital-adequacy framework 
has  the potential  to  improve  risk  management  in  banks  and  to align  economic  capital  more  closely 
with regulatory capital. Co-operation between banks and supervisors, between supervisors of different 
   5/7 
countries  and  between  different  banks  is  therefore  essential  for  the  successful  implementation  of 
Basel II.  
The Accord Implementation Forum established by the Registrar of Banks and representing banks and 
various other stakeholders is functioning well and is assisting the banking sector and the regulator with 
identifying and addressing the risks that may arise prior to and during the implementation of systems 
designed to ensure compliance with Basel II.  
There  will  be  continued  amendment  of  the  regulatory  framework  and  the  supervisory  process  and 
procedures, as well as development of complementary tools, in order to cater for the requirements of 
Basel II.  
Broader access to banking facilities  
(ii) 
One of the most topical issues in the current South African financial landscape is the need to extend 
access to banking facilities on a wider basis than is currently the case. In South Africa, the regulation 
and  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  poor  has  largely  been based  on  exemption  notices  to  the 
Banks Act. The South African Reserve Bank announced through the Bank Supervision Department’s 
2002, Annual Report, that it envisaged amending the regulatory framework in order to allow for the 
establishment of different classes of banking institutions, such as second-tier and third-tier banks. 
Draft legislation has been published by the National Treasury in the form of the Dedicated Banks Bill 
and the Co-operative Banks Bill, as a means of providing access to the banking sector to interested 
participants and thus ensuring a flow-down of banking services to the wider community. It is essential, 
however, that the new legislation should ensure that the business of such institutions is conducted in a 
safe and sound manner, conducive to the orderly growth of the financial sector, whilst contributing to 
poverty  reduction  in  both  rural  and  urban  areas.  Comment  on  the  Dedicated  Banks  Bill  and  the 
Co-operative Banks Bill may be provided until the end of January 2005.  
Anti-money laundering 
(iii)  
The  Financial  Intelligence  Centre  Act,  2001  (FIC  Act),  imposes  duties  on  certain  institutions  to 
introduce anti-money-laundering measures, to train their employees, to report suspicious transactions 
to  the  Financial  Intelligence  Centre  (FIC)  and  to  retain  client  information.  The  banking  sector  has 
therefore begun a concerted campaign to comply with the FIC Act and to fulfill the sector’s obligations 
in terms of local legislation and international guidelines.  
In  May  2002,  South  Africa  applied  for  membership  of  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF),  an 
intergovernmental body that develops and promotes policies, nationally and internationally, to combat 
money laundering. South Africa was granted FATF membership in June 2003.  
As  from  February  2003,  banks  and  several  other  institutions  have  been  reporting  suspicious 
transactions that may involve money laundering to the FIC. Banks have to make detailed reports of all 
unusual  and/or  suspicious  transactions  to  the  FIC.  In  addition,  banks  have  to  report  the  number  of 
such  reports  to  the  Registrar  of  Banks.  Although  this  has  been  a  challenge  for  banks,  resulting  in 
additional system and resource requirements, banks have shown a commitment to comply with their 
duties. 
The Bank Supervision Department has an obligation to monitor compliance by our banks with the FIC 
Act and other anti-money laundering guidelines. In order to ensure compliance with the requirements 
of the FIC Act, a circular was issued in December 2002. The circular provided guidelines on the types 
of measures that banks had to implement in order to prevent them being used to launder the proceeds 
of crime. In terms of the circular, each bank has to furnish the Bank Supervision Department with a 
detailed  plan,  with  time  frames  by  which  the  bank  intended  to  achieve  full  implementation  of  and 
compliance with the FIC Act and the FIC Regulations.  
The  initial  deadline  of  30 June  2004  by  which  banks  had  to  verify  the  identities  of  some  17  million 
clients was extended to a range of new deadlines, starting on 31 October 2004 for high-risk clients 
and ending on 30 September 2006 for the lowest risk clients.  
The Bank Supervision Department, in its role as a supervisory body, will continue to monitor progress 
with the implementation of anti-money-laundering measures. It is also the intention of the Registrar of 
Banks to incorporate anti-money-laundering measures into the planned on-site visits to banks. 
   6/7 
Conclusion 
9.  
In summary, therefore, the South African banking sector remains stable, and we are convinced that 
further growth of the industry may be expected in 2005. Such growth, however, will be accompanied 
by certain challenges. Besides preparing for the implementation of Basel II, South African banks will 
continue to be encouraged to follow international sound corporate governance practices. Furthermore, 
the  Office  for  Banks  remains  mindful  of  the  need  for  banks  to  ensure  that  the  objectives  of  the 
Financial  Services  Black  Economic  Empowerment  Charter  are  met.  For  the  Charter  to  succeed, 
co-operation by all stakeholders is a necessity, and the South African Reserve Bank will continue to 
support and assist banks in meeting their objectives. Taking into account the strengths of our banking 
sector,  we  can  look  forward  to  a  sector  that  can  continue  to  establish  itself  as  one  of  the  most 
sophisticated and integrated banking sectors in the world. 
   7/7 
