Mervyn King: What fates impose - facing up to uncertainty 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Eighth British Academy Annual 
Lecture 2004, London, 1 December 2004. 
The references can be found on the Bank of England’s website. 
I am indebted to David Aikman, Gertjan Vlieghe and Tony Yates who worked closely with me on the subject of this lecture over 
a long period. They should truly be regarded as co-authors. I am also very grateful to John Campbell, Gerd Gigerenzer, Robert 
May, Jim Poterba and many colleagues at the Bank for helpful comments and discussions. I would like to thank Tony Leandro 
(Actuarial Profession), the Met Office, Helen Bray and Adrian Gallup (both of the Government Actuary’s Department) for help in 
gathering and interpreting data used in this lecture. Kath Begley provided excellent research assistance. 
 “What fates impose, that men must needs abide; 
It boots not to resist both wind and tide”. 
(William Shakespeare, Henry VI part 3, Act IV Scene 3) 
Introduction 
1. 
My subject tonight is risk: how we think about, how we talk about, and how we manage risk. So let me 
start by thanking all of you for coming and taking the risk of spending an hour with a central banker. 
Few  writers  have  put  central  bankers  in  their  place,  but  one  of  them  was  Nancy  Mitford,  whose 
centenary  we  celebrated  last  Sunday.  In  The  Pursuit  of  Love  and  Love  in  a  Cold  Climate  she 
describes the marriage of Linda, the heroine, to the son of the Governor of the Bank of England. The 
marriage between Linda and the incredibly boring Tony is doomed from the outset. As Lady Montdore 
explained, “Bankers don’t seem to be much to look at - so extraordinarily unsuitable having to know 
them at all, poor things, let alone marry them”. 
I don’t suppose Lady Montdore would have come to this lecture, but if she had I would point out to her 
that life is full of surprises. Risk, luck, fate, uncertainty, probability theory - we all have names for the 
game of chance. Most decisions in life involve risk. Sometimes we embrace it, as when we enjoy a bet 
on the Grand National, and sometimes we avoid it, as when we insure our houses against fire. The 
playing of the hand we are dealt may be a pleasure in bridge but a burden in life. We accept that Lady 
Luck has her part to play in our personal lives. But in our collective life - public policy - the role of 
probabilities  rarely  takes  centre  stage.  An  informed  discussion  of  public  policy  issues,  however, 
requires an analysis of the risks and uncertainties involved. Whether in policies for health or transport, 
matters monetary or meteorological, in times of war and peace, decisions should reflect a balance of 
risks. Yet policy debates continue to be permeated by the “illusion of certainty”.1
The  reluctance  to  give  adequate  prominence  to  risks  may  reflect  the  fact  that  many  of  us  feel 
uncomfortable  with  formal  statements  of  probabilities.  Probability  theory  is  relatively  recent  in  our 
intellectual history, dating back to a flowering of ideas around 1660 from Pascal, Leibniz, Huygens and 
others.2  Despite  advances  since  then,  statistical  thinking  remains  prone  to  confusion  and  is  often 
avoided. Television weather forecasts in Britain rarely employ the language of probabilities used by 
the  meteorologists  themselves.  Professor  Gigerenzer  of  the  Max  Planck  Institute  in  Berlin  has 
demonstrated in a series of studies how poorly doctors, lawyers, and other professionals understand 
probabilities.  And  despite  Seneca’s  maxim  that  “luck  never  made  a  man  wise”,  airport  bookshops 
stock titles on how to become rich by successful investors and entrepreneurs who are confident that 
their success is the result of outstanding business acumen rather than good fortune. 
Many of these misunderstandings stem from a failure to grasp basic statistical concepts. Juries are not 
informed that, in a country of our size, multiple cot deaths are likely to occur several times a year, that 
several  people  will  have  DNA  that  matches  the  incriminating  sample,  and  that  in  themselves  these 
                                                      
1  To use the phrase of Professor Gerd Gigerenzer who has done more than anyone to draw attention to the lack of public 
understanding of risk. 
2  For an intellectual history of probability theory see Hacking (1975) and Bernstein (1996). 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 1
coincidences are not evidence of guilt. Bookshops do not stock such titles as “I would have been a 
billionaire if only Lady Luck had been faithful”.3
In my lecture tonight I want to illustrate two propositions. First, in a wide range of collective decisions it 
is vital to think in terms of probabilities. We cannot avoid taking decisions, so we must accept the need 
to analyse the uncertainty that inevitably surrounds them. H.G. Wells is often reported as saying that, 
“Statistical  thinking  will  one  day  be  as  necessary  for  efficient  citizenship  as  the  ability  to  read  and 
write”.  And  that  is  even  more  true  today  when  we  are  inundated  with  statistics  from  every  quarter. 
Second, in order that public discussion can be framed in terms of risks, the public needs to receive 
accurate and objective information about the risks. Transparency and honesty about risks should be 
an essential part of both the decision-making process and the explanation of decisions. 
I want to illustrate those two propositions by considering as an example public policy about pensions - 
an  issue,  you  might  think,  of  particular  interest  to  many  of  us  in  the  Academy.  When  the  Pensions 
Commission reported in October, it highlighted the financing gap in our present system. But we must 
not lose sight of the equally important question of what are the risks incurred in pension provision and 
how should they be shared among us? It is not my intention to make any recommendations. That is for 
the Pensions Commission next year, and the Government in its turn. But I do want to show that risk is 
at the heart of the issue. 
The nature of risk 
2. 
“In this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes” wrote Benjamin Franklin in 
1789. Great man though Franklin was, it is clear that there is indeed substantial uncertainty both about 
death, or at least its timing, and the contributions or taxes required to pay for our pensions. 
When thinking of how much to save for retirement, there are three main risks to consider. First, how 
much will we be earning in the future? Second, what will be the rate of return on our savings? Third, 
how long are we likely to live? Tonight I shall focus exclusively on longevity risk - the uncertainty about 
how long we shall live - in order to focus on my two propositions about probabilistic thinking and public 
policy.4
None of us know how long we shall live. But we can assess our chances by looking at the experience 
of  others.  A  key  distinction  is  between  individual  and  collective  risk.  Chart  1  plots  the  observed 
mortality rates at different ages for women in England and Wales in 2002, the most recent year for 
which  detailed  data  are  available.  (A  similar  story  can  be  told  for  men).  The  most  common  age  of 
death  for  women  was  87,  but  many  died  at  very  different  ages.  Mortality  among  individuals  varies 
greatly - individual risk. 
But there is also significant uncertainty about the average length of life of a generation as a whole - 
collective risk. Longevity has changed markedly over time. Chart 2 shows female mortality in England 
and  Wales  in  both  1902  and  2002.  It  shows  the  remarkable  reduction  in  infant  mortality  during  the 
twentieth century as well as the fall in mortality in middle age. 
Of  particular  relevance  to  decisions  on  pensions  is  the  expectation  of  life  conditional  on  reaching 
retirement  age.  That  is directly  relevant  to  the  purchase of  an  annuity  on  retirement.  Over the  past 
century  the  normal  retirement  age  in  public  service  in  this  country  has  been  constant  at  age  60. 
Chart 3  shows  the  distribution  of  deaths  by  age  conditional  on  having  reached  the  age  of  60  in 
England and Wales in both 1902 and 2002. A woman who was 60 in 1902, and subject to the mortality 
rates of that year, would have expected to live for another 14½ years. By 2002 that expectation had 
increased to 23½ years. 
Individual risk - that we die either earlier or later than the average for our cohort - can be insured by 
taking  out  life  insurance  against  early  death  or  by  purchasing  an  annuity  to  insure  against  a  later 
                                                      
3  Among recent discussions of misperceptions of probability are Gigerenzer (2002) and Taleb (2001). 
4  There is a large literature on uncertainty about earnings and productivity growth; see, for example, MaCurdy (1982), Abowd 
and Card (1989) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). Uncertainty about future returns on financial assets is the essence of the 
modelling of financial markets. An excellent introduction to this area is contained in the two 2003 Nobel lectures by Robert 
Engle (2004) and Clive Granger (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2004
death.5  Collective  risk  -  that  average  expectation  of  life  will  rise  or  fall  in  the  future  -  cannot,  by 
definition,  be  shared  among  members  of  the  same  generation.  The  principle  of  insuring  individual 
longevity risk is that those who live longer than average can be paid using the contributions of those 
who die earlier than average. But if the average itself rises all contributions must increase - there is no 
possibility for insuring changes in the average from within the cohort. Can we quantify this risk? The 
expectation of life has risen significantly over the past century. But how will it change in the future? To 
answer that question we need to model and quantify longevity risk. 
Modelling and quantifying risks 
3. 
Quantitative modelling has been one of the great advances of the social sciences over the past fifty 
years. But forecasts, whether of longevity or any other economic or social variable, inevitably require a 
judgment about how far the past can inform us about the future. Projecting longevity is fraught with 
difficulty. In his First Essay on Population, Malthus wrote in 1798 that “with regard to the duration of 
human life, there does not appear to have existed, from the earliest ages of the world, to the present 
moment, the smallest permanent symptom, or indication, of increasing prolongation”. We know now 
that in 1798 life expectancy in Britain was around 40. Today it is nearly 80. 
There  is  no  agreed  method  of  forecasting  life  expectancy.  The  most  widespread  approach  is  to 
assume that life expectancy will gradually approach some limit determined by medical knowledge and 
our choice of lifestyle. A key uncertainty is what the limit to life is, and demographers have pursued 
many ways of estimating it.6 But successive forecasts of the limit to life have been disproved as actual 
life  expectancy  data  surpassed  the  supposed  limit.  Chart  4  plots  the  forecast  limits  to  female  life 
against  the  life  expectancy  achieved  by  the  longest  lived  female  population.  As  life  spans  have 
increased, forecasts of the limit to life have been revised up. 
The  fact  is  that  we  simply  do  not  know  how  life  expectancy  will  change  in  the  future.  Unforeseen, 
indeed unimagined, developments in medical science could change the prospects for life expectancy 
radically.  In  the  end  we  have  to  face  up  to  our  ignorance.  Providing  insurance  against  longevity, 
whether as private annuities or public pensions, rests on an ability to calculate the risks involved. But 
our present degree of knowledge means that, in the terminology of Frank Knight (1921), there is both 
risk, which can be quantified, and uncertainty, which cannot. 
The extent of past uncertainty about life expectancy can be seen in the revisions to its forecasts made 
over the past 20 years by the Government Actuary’s Department. Nor has the financial sector itself 
proved better at forecasting. Chart 5 shows successive forecasts of expected length of life for men 
aged  60  published  by  the  Actuarial  Profession,  a  body  of  life  assurance  companies  and  annuity 
providers. It shows how reductions in mortality were expected by the industry to lead to rises in length 
of life. For example, the pink line shows the Actuarial Profession forecast made in 1980 that a man 
who  was  60  in  that  year  could  expect  to  live  another  20  years.  At  that  time,  it  was  thought  that 
someone who reached 60 in 1999 would live a further 21 years. But by 1999 the forecast was that a 
man of 60 would live another 26 years. Over a twenty year period, expected length of life was revised 
up  by  5  years.  Length  of  life  has  risen  faster  than  the  industry  anticipated,  as  can  be  seen  by  the 
                                                      
5  The first estimates of mortality rates using bills of mortality from the City of London were published by John Graunt in 1662. 
But the widespread use of such data to price annuities began only with the calculations of Richard Price in 1780 and the 
Institute of Actuaries in 1869. In Holland more accurate calculations of the prices of annuities date back to de Witt in 1671. 
See Poterba (2004). 
6  Manton et al (1991) and Caselli and Vallin (2001) describe alternative approaches to inferring the limit to human life. Some 
estimates assume that life expectancy will converge to that of the longest-lived population; for example, that life expectancy 
in the West will rise to that in Japan, the country with the highest life expectancy. But the level in Japan has itself increased 
significantly over the past century. So what determines Japan’s life expectancy? Another approach is to examine how life 
expectancy  might  change  if  everyone  adopted  lifestyle  patterns  that  increase  longevity.  Mormons  and  Seventh  Day 
Adventists seem to live longer than the rest of us, but exactly which aspects of their lifestyle we should adopt is not entirely 
clear.  See,  for  example,  Enstrom  (1989).  Yet  another  approach  is  to  work  out  the  contributions  that  different  human 
diseases make to premature death, and calculate the hypothetical life expectancy that would result if medical science were 
to be able to eliminate these diseases. This ‘cause elimination’ approach was adopted in the 1950s by Pichat. The number 
derived was 75. This is the number that the UN used until the early 1980s in their population projections. The number used 
from then on has been about 85, based on a similar approach by Benjamin (1982) and Olshansky et.al. (1990). And the 
evidence on a limit to increases in the human lifespan is mixed; see for example, Kannisto et.a.l. (1994) and Wilmoth and 
Horiuchi (1999). 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 3
upward shifts over time both in the forecasts of expected life and in the rate at which it was expected 
to increase.7
That there are large and unavoidable uncertainties in forecasting longevity is clear. The key unknowns 
are evolutions in lifestyle, diseases and the ability of medical science to combat them. No amount of 
complex  demographic  modelling  can  substitute  for  good  judgements  about  those  unknowns.  The 
danger of relying on computer modelling is well illustrated by the World Health Organisation’s early 
estimates of the future spread of AIDS, which, at the time, was a significant unknown in forecasting life 
expectancy even in developed countries. AIDS was first recognised in 1981. The virus responsible for 
AIDS, which we now call HIV, was identified in 1984. To date, around 20 million people are thought to 
have died from the disease worldwide. The proportion of those who are infected with HIV who go on to 
develop AIDS is now thought to be close to 100%. But the spread of HIV, and hence AIDS, has been 
very uneven. At the end of last year the percentage of adults infected with HIV was estimated at 0.2% 
in the United Kingdom, 21.5% in South Africa, 37.3% in Botswana, yet only 3.9% in Angola. 
Why do infection rates differ so much between countries? In the 1980s the World Health Organization 
and associated researchers made rather optimistic projections of the impact of AIDS on populations in 
Africa  using  extremely  detailed  computer  models  of  population  structure.  Complex  demographic 
models  were  combined  with  strong  simplifying  assumptions  about  sexual  behaviour.  Unfortunately, 
this led the modellers to ignore those factors most critical to the spread of AIDS. They assumed that 
the probability of transmitting the HIV infection was a function of the number of sexual acts, not the 
number of partners of infected persons. But it is crucial to distinguish between the two.8 Ten acts with 
one  partner  have  a  smaller  impact  on  transmission  of  the  infection  than  one  act  with  each  of  ten 
different partners. As Professor (now Lord) May, President of the Royal Society, pointed out, ignoring 
this simple and crucial distinction led to a serious underestimate of the rate at which AIDS was likely to 
spread.9 By building elaborate models of demographic variables for which a great deal of information 
was available and making simple assumptions for behaviour about which little was known, the large 
models used by the World Health Organisation produced misleading results. The fact that few data on 
sexual behaviour were available was not a good reason for focusing on demographic variables - the 
researchers were looking for the key under the lamp-post rather than where it fell. 
Quantitative  models  are  obviously  essential  to  explain  empirical  evidence.  But  the  idea  of  a  single 
comprehensive  model,  whether  of  a  population  or  an  economy,  which  can  capture  all  the  relevant 
features  to  explain  all  phenomena  is  an  illusion.10  There  is  no  substitute  for  thinking  about  the 
underlying  process  which  is  generating  the  data.  Robert  May’s  article  “Uses  and  Abuses  of 
Mathematics  in  Biology”,  published  earlier  this  year,  should  be  compulsory  reading  for  anyone 
involved in public policy. In pointing to the dangers of models so complex that intuition is impossible, 
he writes, “It makes no sense to convey a beguiling sense of ‘reality’ with irrelevant detail, when other 
equally important factors can only be guessed at. … Remember Einstein’s dictum: ‘models should be 
as simple as possible, but not more so’” (May, 2004). 
In  many  areas,  successful  public  policy  depends  on  a  quantitative  analysis  of  risks  by  experts  and 
researchers.  It  is  important  that  the  general  public  understand  that  such  assessments  are  only 
judgments. To enhance confidence in those judgments experts need to engage in a debate among 
themselves about what they know and what they do not know. On the Bank of England’s Monetary 
Policy Committee the nine members debate among themselves our current state of knowledge of the 
                                                      
7  The data in Chart 5 are for occupational pension holders of Actuarial Profession member institutions. These individuals are 
typically wealthier than the rest of the population, and for that reason tend to live longer. 
8  Peterman et. al. (1988) found that the probability of infecting a partner was unrelated to the number of sexual acts with that 
partner. 
9  The large models made the further simplifying assumption that the rate took one of only two values. In fact, it varies widely 
among  the  population.  Robert  May,  and  his  colleague  Roy  Anderson,  showed  that  a  key  driver  of  the  proportion  of  the 
population  eventually  infected  was  the  “variance  of  the  rate  of  acquisition  of  new  sexual  partners”.  Simulations  of  the 
proportion  of  the  population  ultimately  infected  with  AIDS  are  sensitive  to  that  variance,  and  plausible  differences  in  the 
number of their partners among different people changed the estimate of the proportion likely to be infected from 25% to 
90%. 
10  Many non-economists believe that economists use a single “model” to explain all economic phenomena. Hence the interest 
of many commentators in “the model” that is alleged to generate the forecasts of inflation and economic growth published by 
the Bank of England. But, as we never cease pointing out, the Bank uses not one but many models to help us understand 
particular aspects of economic behaviour. The relevant models change from one forecast to another. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2004
behaviour  of  the  economy.  The  results  of  that  discussion  are  published  once  a  month,  and  the 
Committee, as it did yesterday, appears regularly in front of Parliamentary committees. So I turn now 
to the question of how information and judgments of risks can be communicated to the general public. 
Communicating about risks with the public 
4. 
Although  it  is  often  impossible  to  be  precise  about  the  risks  surrounding  a  decision,  it  is  vital  that 
policymakers  resist  the  temptation  to  communicate  a  false  sense  of  certainty.  Two  key  principles 
should govern the communication of risks to the public. First, information must be provided objectively 
and  placed  in  context  so  that  risks  can  be  assessed  and  understood.  Second,  experts  and  policy-
makers must be open about the extent of our knowledge and our ignorance. Transparency about what 
we  know  and  what  we  don’t  know,  far  from  undermining  their  credibility,  helps  to  build  trust  and 
confidence in policy-makers. 
(Mis)understanding probabilities 
(a) 
The  first  principle  states  that  information  about  probabilities  should  be  placed  in  context.  A  simple 
example illustrates the difficulty we all have in interpreting probabilities when the context is unclear. 
The  stock  market  is  volatile  and  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  predict  over  short  periods.  At  the 
beginning of the week the chance of the market rising over the following week is roughly the same as 
the chance of its falling. So if I were to predict the direction of the market movement correctly for five 
successive weeks you might think that I knew something you didn’t. Indeed, you might be willing to 
subscribe to an investment service with that sort of track record. So let me explain to you how one 
might  create  the  illusion  of  clairvoyance.  Select  around  6000  or  so  names  and  addresses  from  the 
London  telephone  directory.  Divide  the  names  into  two groups.  To  the  first  write  predicting that  the 
market will rise over the coming week. To the second write predicting a fall in the market. At the end of 
the week keep the 3000 or so names who were given the correct prediction and discard the others. 
Divide those names in turn into two groups. To the first predict a rise in the market and to the second a 
fall. Repeat this process for five weeks, at which point there will be around 200 people to whom we 
could write the following letter. “You may well have been sceptical when you received our first letter, 
but by now you will know that we have worked out the secret of predicting successfully the direction of 
movement  of  the  stock  market.  You  know  that  our  method  really  works.  To  subscribe  to  our 
investment service please send £5000 by return”. 
Quite what our President, as the former Deputy Chairman of the Financial Services Authority, would 
make of this scheme I do not know. But it illustrates vividly that the interpretation of ex post outcomes 
depends critically on understanding the ex ante process which generated those outturns. 
Another example shows that it is not just lay people who find statistical inference difficult. Experts of all 
kinds do too. The advent of DNA profiling in the 1980s led to the use of match probabilities in criminal 
cases. The jury is told that the probability of finding a match between the sample taken from the scene 
of the crime and the DNA of the defendant is, for example, only 1 in 500,000. That is sometimes taken 
as evidence that the probability of the defendant being innocent is also only 1 in 500,000. Such an 
inference is incorrect. In a city such as London where there might be about 5 million people who could 
have  committed  the  crime,  around  ten  people  would  have  DNA  that  matched  the  relevant  sample. 
Hence, in the absence of any other evidence, the probability that the defendant is guilty, far from being 
overwhelming, is only one in 10. Of course, in practice other evidence is usually available. But this 
incorrect statistical reasoning has swayed enough cases to be given its own name - the prosecutor’s 
fallacy.11
The cases of Sally Clark and Angela Cannings, both convicted and imprisoned for the alleged murder 
of  their  own  children,  show  the  desperate  consequences  of  the  false  use  of  statistics  to  create  a 
presumption  of  guilt  to  resolve  the  cause  of  apparently  inexplicable  events.  Both  women  were 
convicted by juries which had in all likelihood been influenced by the assertion that the probability of 
two  cot  deaths  in  the  same  family  was  extraordinarily  low.  That  assertion  was  based  on  the 
assumption that cot deaths in the same family were independent events, a view for which there was 
                                                      
11  See, for example, Thompson and Schuman (1987). 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 5
no scientific evidence and which is a priori implausible.12 The assumption of independence was crucial 
to the prosecution evidence against Sally Clark that the odds of two cot deaths in a family such as 
hers  were  1  in  73  million  and  so  would  be  expected  only  once  a  century.  Given  the  complex  and 
conflicting medical evidence, it would not be surprising if that striking and simple statistic had played a 
role  in  helping  the  jury  come  to  its  conclusion.  In  fact,  as  pointed  out  by  Professor  Ray  Hill,  the 
statistical evidence on cot deaths suggests that in England and Wales we should expect several cases 
a year.13 Thankfully, both women were eventually released after winning their appeals, albeit largely 
on other grounds. 
Why  then  do  probabilities  cause  us  so  much  difficulty?  Our  understanding  of  probabilities  evolved 
through counting the frequencies of various events, whether the number of days in summer on which it 
rains or the outcomes of tossing a coin. All this was part of our evolutionary experience long before the 
concept  of  probability  was  invented  in  the  seventeenth  century.  In  his  book  Reckoning  with  Risk, 
Gigerenzer argued forcefully that risks should be presented not as probabilities but in terms of natural 
frequencies, which correspond to our experience in counting events. Although people do understand 
probabilities  in  familiar  contexts,  such  as  betting  on  horse  races  or  tossing  a  coin,  it  is  not  easy  to 
calculate odds when the context is unfamiliar. 
Explaining probabilities 
(b) 
How  then  can  we  best  present  information  about  risks  to  the  public?  Both  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee and the Met Office face this problem almost every day: the former in explaining the outlook 
for inflation and the latter in forecasting the weather. Both have independently developed similar visual 
representations of forecasts that avoid the use of the word “probability”. 
Chart 6 shows the forecast for inflation over the next three years published by the Bank of England in 
its latest Inflation Report on 10 November 2004. It is in the form of a ‘fan chart’. We do not say that in 
our view inflation will be 2%, or any other number. Such a statement is incoherent because a forecast 
is inherently probabilistic. So we represent the uncertainties by the coloured bands in Chart 6.14 Their 
interpretation is as follows. If we found ourselves in economic circumstances identical to today’s on 
100 occasions, we would expect that inflation would lie within the darkest central band on only 10 of 
those occasions. As we increase the width of the coloured section by moving from the dark central 
band to the lighter shades of red further out, the number of outturns that we think will lie within the 
section  increases.  The  bands  are  drawn  so  that  the  number  of  outturns  increases  by  10  for  each 
change of colour intensity. The inflation outturn would be expected to lie somewhere within the entire 
coloured area on 90 out of 100 occasions. 
On the same day that the Bank of England produced its forecast for inflation, the Met Office produced 
a forecast for the temperature in various towns over the following ten days. Chart 7 shows this ‘plume 
chart’,  as  the  Met  Office  refers  to  its  fan  charts,  for  the  town  of  Reading.  I  will  leave  a  detailed 
explanation to meteorologists, but the interpretation of the temperature plume chart parallels that of 
the inflation fan chart closely. The width of the plume chart indicates the degree of uncertainty about 
future temperatures, and different colours suggest different probability bands. And the probability of 
the  central  temperature  projection  -  in  this  case  the  solid  blue  line  -  is  extremely  small.  I  am  not 
suggesting that the BBC use such charts in its forecasts, but surely it might give a little more freedom 
to the meteorologists to use probabilistic thinking in describing the outlook. 
Such charts can also be used to illustrate uncertainty about longevity. Chart 8 constructs a fan chart 
for female life expectancy at birth in the United Kingdom derived from the latest forecast published by 
the  Government  Actuary’s  Department.  The  width  of  the  fan  chart  shows  how  forecasts  of  life 
expectancy are  likely  to  change  in  the  future, as  new  information  and  ideas about mortality  evolve, 
                                                      
12  To understand the concept of independence consider the example of a church spire that is struck by lightning several times. 
Is this just coincidence (implied by the assumption that the strikes are independent of each other) or does the spire have 
certain characteristics that lead it to be struck regularly? Given our knowledge of spires and lightening the latter is more 
plausible. Similarly, there may be characteristics, genetic or other, and still largely unknown, that make particular families 
more likely to experience cot deaths than others. 
13  Hill (2002) and (2004). See also Dawid (2004) and Eggleston (1978) for a discussion of the difficulties courts find with the 
concepts of conditional probability and Bayes’ theorem. 
14  The forecast for inflation is based on the assumption that interest rates follow the path expected by financial markets over 
an average of the fifteen days prior to the finalisation of the Inflation report. 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2004
causing  forecasts  to  be  revised  -  assuming  that  news  about  life  expectancy  arrives  in  the  future  at 
about the same rate as in the past. The colour shading depicts the same probability bands as used in 
the fan chart for inflation that I showed earlier. Chart 8 illustrates the uncertainty about longevity. 
Of  course,  statistics  and  their  visual  representation  can  be  both  used  and  abused.  The  design  of 
charts  has  gone  backwards  since  that  (shown  as  Chart  9)  of  Napoleon’s  march  to  Moscow  and 
subsequent retreat constructed in 1861 by Charles Joseph Minard, Inspecteur-Général des Ponts et 
Chaussées  and,  appropriately  given  tonight’s  theme,  en  retraite.  Brilliant  in  conception  and  the 
quantity of information which it conveys, the chart shows the devastating losses suffered in Napoleon’s 
fateful Russian campaign of 1812. So I do not underestimate the difficulties of promoting the better 
understanding  of  statistics  in  discussions  of  public  policy.15  Too  often  figures  are  bandied  about 
without a careful description of where they came from and what they might tell us. As we learn from 
the Rime of the Ancient Statistician (with apologies to Samuel Taylor Coleridge): 
Figures, figures, everywhere 
Enough to make us sink 
Figures, figures, everywhere 
But none to help us think. 
The second key principle governing the explanation of risk to the public is the open recognition of the 
limits  of  our  present  knowledge.  The  failure  to  do  that  is  damaging  to  public  confidence  in  policy-
makers. The BSE affair showed the danger of claiming greater certainty than the science warranted. 
And in the Angela Cannings case, the Court of Appeal observed that, “not so long ago, experts were 
suggesting  that  newborn  babies  should  lie  on  their  tummies.  That  was  advice  based  on  the  best-
informed analysis. Nowadays, the advice and exhortation is that babies should sleep on their backs - 
Back to Sleep. This advice is equally drawn from the best possible known sources”. As the Court of 
Appeal pointedly continued, “It is obvious that these two views cannot both, simultaneously, be right”. 
Expert advice is invaluable, but it is not infallible. As Robert May said recently, “open contention of 
opinion is exactly what has served science so well over the centuries, and I believe we simply must 
learn to extend this openness to all forms of science advice in policy-making. Such open publication of 
advice,  and  frank  admission  of  areas  of  uncertainty,  ultimately  engenders confidence”  (May,  2003). 
That is the spirit in which the Monetary Policy Committee was created and continues to function. The 
challenge is to extend that spirit to other areas of policy.16
Effective communication of the relevant risks is vital. Thinking about how to present information may 
seem  to  be  the  role  of  a  spin  doctor.  But  whereas  a  spin  doctor  wishes  to  claim  certainty  for  the 
correctness of his master’s decision, presenting accurate information about risks to the electorate at 
large  is  essential  to  democratic  accountability.  As  one  of  the  more  illustrious  members  of  the 
profession  might  have said,  “spin  doctors  don’t  do doubt”.  That is  the  trouble  with  much debate  on 
public policy. As Voltaire put it, “Doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is an absurd one”.17
Managing risks 
5.  
Managing risks is about sharing risks with others. By finding ways of pooling risks we share both the 
upside  and  downside  with  others.  This  is  beneficial  because  typically  we  dislike  extremes.  In  the 
language of economics, we are ‘risk averse’. 
A key part of managing risk is the design of institutions that determine the ultimate incidence of risk. 
The Pensions Commission performed a valuable service in making us aware of the size of the shortfall 
in our current savings to finance future pension provision. It will report next year on various ways of 
closing  this  funding  gap.  But  there  is  an  additional  and  fundamental  question  of  how  to  design  a 
pension system which shares risk optimally among individuals and generations. 
Longevity  risks  are  both  individual  and  collective  in  nature.  Collective  risks  raise  difficult  issues  of 
fairness between generations. Individual risks are easier to handle. 
                                                      
15  On the use and misuse of statistics see Best (2001) and Briscoe (2000). An outstanding analysis of common mistakes in 
visual representations of statistical data can be found in Tufte (1983, 1990). 
16  Robert  Rubin,  former  US  Treasury  Secretary  in  the  Clinton  Administration,  has  stressed  the  importance  of  probabilistic 
thinking in policy-making (Rubin and Weisberg, 2003). 
17  Letter to Frederick the Great, April 16, 1767. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 7
In  theory,  individual  longevity  risks  can  be  pooled  through  private  annuity  markets.  As  long  as  the 
provider of the annuity, typically an insurance company, knows how long we will live on average, then 
additional payments to the long-lived will be exactly offset by fewer payments to the short-lived. By 
pooling risks, annuity providers can offer insurance against longevity. But to offer a single annuity is 
risky. In Sense and Sensibility, Fanny Dashwood explains to her husband the drawbacks of providing 
an annuity to his family: “if you observe, people always live forever when there is any annuity to be 
paid them. An annuity is a very serious business; it comes over and over every year, and there is no 
getting rid of it”.18
Only  a  small  fraction  of  savings are  invested  in annuities.19  One explanation  for  this  is  that  annuity 
providers find it difficult to distinguish the healthy from the sick ex ante, the former purchasing more 
annuities than the latter, leading insurance companies to offer annuities on less attractive terms thus 
discouraging  their  purchase.20  This  “adverse  selection”  is  important  -  it  is  approximately  20%  more 
expensive to buy annuities as an individual than in a group scheme.21
Collective  risks  raise  additional  problems.  Longevity  risk  to  a  particular  cohort  can  be  shared  only 
across generations. Those generations who are alive today can pool risks through financial markets. 
But  sharing  across  all  generations,  including  the  unborn,  requires  collective  or  public  insurance 
through variations in the national debt.22
Consider an annuity provider who faces the risk that an increase in the average longevity of its pool of 
annuitants will lead to a shortfall in its funds. The annuity provider would clearly like to hedge this risk 
in some way. One way of doing that would be for it to have assets on its balance sheet that pay out 
more if the average longevity of its annuitants increases. Financial markets are currently developing 
‘longevity bonds’ along these lines.23
The interest rate on longevity bonds is linked to some measure of unexpected changes in average life 
expectancy. In the case of the recently announced European Investment Bank-BNP Paribas bond, the 
payout each year for the next 25 years will be a fixed sum multiplied by the proportion of people in 
England and Wales who were 65 in 2003 that are still living in that particular year. So if five years from 
now 90% of the cohort are still alive, the payment in that year will be 90% of the fixed sum. The cash 
flows to a buyer of this bond will decline over time, but decline less rapidly if people live longer. 
The demand for such a hedge against longevity risk we might expect to come from pension funds and 
other providers of annuities. The supply might come from lifeinsurance companies, who benefit from 
increased  longevity  to  the  extent  that  fewer  early  deaths  mean  lower  claims,  and  financial 
intermediaries  collecting  the  savings  of  those  younger  investors  prepared  to  bear  some  of  the 
longevity risk of the old.24
How  close  private  markets  can  get  to  providing  the  optimal  amount  of  risk  sharing  is  hard  to  say. 
Private annuity markets which could pool individual longevity risk are small. For collective longevity 
risks, the burden of unexpectedly high longevity for a particular cohort should be spread over as many 
generations as possible. In theory, this provides a potential role for government to share risks across 
generations. 
                                                      
18  Fanny Dashwood is claiming that annuities lead to “moral hazard” to use the modern jargon: the provision of an annuity 
changes behaviour in a way that increases life expectancy. 
19  See  Yaari  (1965)  and  Davidoff  et  al.  (2003).  For  a  discussion  of  pension  arrangements  in  the  US  see  Diamond  (2003, 
2004). 
20  For a theoretical study of annuity provision under adverse selection, see Brugiavini (1993). 
21  Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), for instance, note that 65 year old men who voluntarily buy annuities live about 20 percent 
longer than other men. Pauly and Zeng (2003) found that in the United States adverse selection made it impossible for a 
private market in prescription drug insurance to function. 
It is possible that families, or more accurately dynasties, can provide such insurance themselves through changes in the 
bequest  which  they  make  to  their  descendants:  passing  on  a  larger  bequest  if  the  current  generation  dies  earlier  than 
expected and a smaller bequest if it survives for longer than expected. But only a small proportion of bequests seems large 
enough to act as a buffer in this way. 
22 
23  As far as I am aware, the first instrument offering a return specifically to aggregate longevity was issued by Swiss Re, a 
large reinsurance company, in 2003. 
24  To the extent that insurance companies offer both life insurance and annuities, they may be able partially to hedge the risks. 
8 
 BIS Review 73/2004
There  are  two  ways  in  which  government  involvement  can,  in  principle,  improve  risksharing.  First, 
collective  schemes,  whether  compulsory  or  employer-based,  avoid  the  costs  of  adverse  selection 
associated  with  individual  provision.  Second,  by  combining  taxes  on  current  employees  with  deficit 
finance (i.e. taxes on future employees), statefunded pensions can transfer risks across generations in 
ways  private  markets  cannot.  Alternatively,  the  government  could  issue  its  own  longevity  bonds. 
Private  annuity  providers could  use  them  to  hedge  aggregate  longevity  risk.  By  assuming  longevity 
risk the government would make it possible for the private sector to purchase such bonds and in turn 
support a private market in annuities. 
What  has  happened  in  Britain  over  the  past  few  years  has  been  that  the  impossibility  of  obtaining 
longevity risk insurance has been a contributory factor to the sharp decline in private sector provision 
of  defined  benefit  pensions.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  membership  of  private  sector  defined  benefit 
pension schemes that are still open is estimated to have fallen by 60% (Pensions Commission, 2004). 
It is not clear why the market has not developed an annuity or pension product indexed to aggregate 
longevity which would allow financial institutions to pass the collective longevity risk onto the policy-
holders. What is clear is that individuals have now been asked to take on more and more risk because 
the absence of annuities means that they now bear both individual and collective aspects of longevity 
risk. There is something to be said for the view that longevity risk is more efficiently shared collectively, 
leaving the private sector to provide insurance against individual mortality. The question of who should 
issue and who would buy longevity bonds merits further study.25
I have so far discussed only longevity risk. Clearly, any discussion of pension reform must include also 
the other key collective risks: to productivity, rates of return and fertility among others. We do not, of 
course,  start  with  a  clean  slate.  Existing  government  institutions  -  whether  by  design  or  default  - 
already have important risksharing properties. Means-tested pensions and other benefits, as well as 
the National Health Service, already give the government a major role in the sharing of risks. 
But in reforming our pension system, it is important to separate two issues. First, how should we pay 
for  the  cost  of  present  pension  commitments?  Second,  what  is  the  right  structure  for  our  pension 
system:  which  risks  should  be  borne  individually  and  which  collectively?  A  debate  is  needed  over 
whether present arrangements imply too much or too little sharing of risk. 
We should remember also that insurance is based on ignorance - ignorance of the outcomes facing 
each  individual.  But  knowledge  can  turn  risk  into  certainty.  The  advent  of  genetic  testing  could 
undermine a private market in insurance against longevity and illhealth. Even if insurance companies 
could not require testing as a condition of insurance, the fact that tests were available could increase 
even  further  the  degree  of  adverse  selection  in  such  insurance  markets.  Pooling  risks  caused  by 
unequal genetic inheritance might no longer be feasible. Insurance would become instead a question 
about redistribution, and hence a matter for public policy. 
Conclusions 
6.  
In this lecture I have stressed that most public policy decisions are a matter of the balance of risks. 
There  is  no  certainty.  Indeed,  it  is  the  illusion  of  certainty  that  undermines  much  public  debate.  As 
Bertrand Russell said, “The whole problem of the world is that fools and fanatics are always so certain 
of themselves, but wiser people so full of doubts”. 
Recognising  and  modelling  risks  means  understanding  the  limits  to  our  present  knowledge. 
Communicating risk is about transparency. When information on risks is provided to the public, it is 
often in a form that is hard to assess. Thinking carefully about communication is important to the level 
of public debate. The quantity of information is less relevant than its quality - sometimes less is more. 
And  managing  risk  means  making  choices  -  collective  choices  -  on  the  basis  of  a  rational  shared 
assessment of the risks involved. 
We cannot avoid uncertainty. So let us face up to it. 
 
                                                      
25   The question of who should bear collective longevity risk has been discussed by Blake and Burrows (2001), Blake (2003), 
Dowd (2003), Cox and Lin (2004a, 2004b), Willets (2004), Auerbach and Hassett (2002) among others. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 9
  10 
 BIS Review 73/2004
  BIS Review 73/2004 
 11
  12 
 BIS Review 73/2004
 BIS Review 73/2004 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 13
13
 14 
 BIS Review 73/2004
