Lars Heikensten: The Riksbank and risks in the financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Risk  Management 
conference, Stockholm, 16 November 2004. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this  conference  on  corporate  risk  management.  I  founded 
listed in the programme for this two-day conference concepts such as confidence, risk evaluation and 
communication of existing risks. These are concepts that regularly come up in the Riksbank’s work on 
financial stability - work that has been given increasing focus in recent years. 
This is no surprise. Let me take you back in time twelve years, to autumn 1992. All of the Swedish 
banks had suffered substantial loan losses. The international credit market had almost no confidence 
in them as a group, regardless of how great the losses the individual banks had suffered. They were 
facing severe financing problems. 
The Government and the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) therefore faced a choice - to make a very 
rapid decision to provide the banks with support without actually knowing how extensive this support 
would  have  to  be  or  to  suffer  a  financial  crisis  with  unforeseeable  consequences  for  the  Swedish 
economy.  The  decision  made  was  the  only  reasonable  solution  -  to  save  the  Swedish  banks. 
However, the Riksdag was forced to make a decision, without the necessary information on the extent 
and  causes  of  the  crisis,  which  could  have  cost  the  central  government  budget  SEK  100  billion  or 
more.  
Even countries that have not experienced a financial crisis at first hand are now spending more time 
on stability work. Although financial stability issues have always been important to central banks, the 
speeches  made  by  my  colleagues  at  other  central  banks  more  often  take  up  these  questions  now. 
These issues also appear more often on the agenda of the international meetings I participate in. The 
increased complexity of the financial markets with new operators and new instruments and the fact 
that  connections  between  the  countries  have  increased  have  contributed  to  added  emphasis  on 
stability work. 
Why is financial stability important? 
Why should the authorities spend time and energy on this? The primary reason is the important role 
played by the financial system. Every day each of us sitting here uses the financial system in some 
way;  either  to  make  payments,  to  save  or  borrow  money  or  to  obtain  help  with  some  form  of  risk 
management. A huge amount of payments flows through the system. The Swedish payment system 
has  a  daily  turnover  of  around  SEK  500  billion.  This  means  that  in  less  than  a  week  the  turnover 
corresponds to the entire annual Swedish GDP!  
While the importance of the financial system has increased, the number of crises in different countries’ 
systems  has  also  increased.  The  crises  that  break  out  are  proving  more  costly.  Calculations  made 
show  that  the  crises  that  took  place  between  1975  and  1997  have  on  average  cost  developing 
countries 10 per cent of GDP in lost production.1 The corresponding cost for emerging economies was 
12 per cent. Most of the crises - around 30 of them - have taken place in emerging economies. 
Oversight of the financial system is necessary because the system fulfils important functions and the 
effects  of  a  financial  crisis  can  be  extensive.  The  banks’  inherent  properties  make  oversight 
particularly  difficult.  Their methods  of  financing  - deposits  or  loans  from other  banks  -  could  rapidly 
disappear, while their assets take longer to realise.  
Problems  in  one  individual  bank  could  spread  to  other  banks  and  thus  create  risks  for  the  entire 
system.  One  reason  for  this  is  that  the  banks  have  liabilities  to  one  another  because  of  loans  or 
securities trading or quite simply because they all participate in the payment system. Another reason is 
that they all have similar operations and can therefore suffer in the same ways if problems arise in the 
world around them. As in the case of the Swedish banking crisis, contagion effects can arise merely as 
                                                      
1  
“Financial crises’ characteristics and indicators of vulnerability”, IMF World Economic Outlook, May 1998, Chapter 4. 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
a result of other operators suspecting that there are links between the institutions, even if this is not 
the case. These suspicions can be self-fulfilling prophecies.  
The  latter  shows  how  important  it  is  that  the  participants  and  users  of  the  financial  system  have 
confidence in its functioning. The Commission on Business Confidence wrote in its final report that it is 
important to have a basic assumption that agreements will be upheld in the economy as a whole, and 
that this is essential in the financial sector.  
If this trust is lost, it can create difficulties for the banks to conduct their activities and thereby for the 
financial  system’s  functioning.  However,  it  is  not  merely  confidence  in  the  individual  banks  that  is 
essential to the efficient functioning of the financial system. The participants in the system must be 
able to rely on all of its parts. This means that the oversight role in practice covers more than just the 
obvious work of overseeing the banks in the payment system. The Riksbank must also to some extent 
analyse developments in the financial markets and any tendencies in these that might lead to threats 
to stability.  
What is financial stability and why should the Riksbank concern itself with it? 
What  is  financial  stability?  There  is  no  unequivocal  definition  of  stability.  It  is  often  described  as  a 
negative - the absence of instability in the financial markets that would hamper growth. The Riksbank 
usually focuses on systemic risk in its analyses and the aim there is to prevent problems spreading 
from one operator to others and having repercussions for the real economy.  
The  work  on  financial  stability  has  many  dimensions.  We  must  look  at  the  institutions  active  in  the 
financial markets; monitor how borrowers and other operators who could affect the banks behave and 
how the infrastructure supporting the financial system functions.  
It is difficult to determine which problems could constitute a threat to the system. Let me take the IT 
bubble  in  1999  and  2000  as  an  example.  If  the  banks  had  financed  the  many  newly-started  IT 
companies, they would have been hard hit when the air went out of this market. This would in turn 
have had repercussions for the real economy. However, it was not the banks who acted as venture 
capitalists here. This meant that the risk of shocks in the economy as a whole was less.  
Another  example  is  what  happened  at  Barings  Bank  a  few  years  ago,  when  one  of  their  foreign 
exchange  traders  speculated  and  lost  around  SEK  10  billion.  The  Bank  of  England  refrained  from 
intervention  and  did  not  provide  the  bank  with  any  support,  although  a  major  bank  was  suffering 
serious  problems  that  eventually  caused  its  failure.  This  is  because  Barings’  problems  were  not 
expected to have any serious repercussions for the system as a whole and thus were not a stability 
issue.  As  in  other  sectors,  bankruptcies  do  occur.  This  is  normal  and  also  important  for  market 
discipline.  
The fact that the concept of stability is slightly vague and difficult to define, as well as covering many 
different functions and operators, is of course one reason why it is difficult to determine when a threat 
to  the  system  arises.  It  is  also  very  rare  that  crises  can  be  forecast.  If  we  describe  a  crisis,  it  is 
probably already happening.  
It is difficult on the whole to describe different nuances of financial stability. Perhaps a financial system 
is  either  stable  or  instable.  When  is  one  situation  more  stable  than  another?  The  lack  of  clearly 
measurable goals for financial stability makes it difficult to be clear on this point. One means of dealing 
with this, apart from discussing possible threats and risks, is to focus on the resilience of the system. 
How large a shock can the banks manage without any threat to their survival? By testing how hard 
potential risks would hit the banks’ resilience, we can gain an idea of how robust, or stable, the system 
is. 
The  Riksbank’s  most  important  tool  for  influencing  financial  stability  is  our  analysis.  Credible  and 
knowledgeable analysis can probably often be used to influence and convince market operators. Our 
analysis  can  also  provide  support  to  the  Government  and  to  Finansinspektionen  who  have  more 
instruments at their disposal. 
Given all of these difficulties, why should the Riksbank devote itself to stability work? One reason is 
the central role we play in the payment system. The Riksbank, together with the commercial banks, 
forms the hub of this system. Together we supply instruments of payment. The banks distribute the 
banknotes  and  coins  we  issue.  They  also  hold  current  accounts  connected  to  the  giro  system  and 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
operate charge card systems. The Riksbank supplies accounts in the RIX payment system that the 
banks can use to make large-value interbank payments.  
Another reason is that there is a correlation between the other objective of our operations - to maintain 
price stability. A stable financial system is a necessary condition for successful inflation-targeting. The 
Riksdag  has  therefore  given  the  Riksbank  has  the  task  of  “promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment 
system”. 
How does the Riksbank work with financial stability? 
Our task can be said to consist of two parts - preventing crises and being prepared to manage them 
should they nevertheless arise. The preventive work involves overseeing the financial markets and the 
institutions active in them, and also participating in the design of the regulatory framework.  
Oversight 
The  regular  oversight  of  stability  entails  both  detecting  potential  risks  that  can  arise  in  the  financial 
system and assessing the financial institutions’ strength to resist any problems that nevertheless arise.  
The  Riksbank  presents  its  analysis  of  possible  risks  and  of  the  banks’  resilience  in  its  Financial 
Stability  Report,  published  twice  a  year.  The  next  report  will  be  published  in  two  weeks’  time.  The 
intention  is  to  convey  our  view  of  the  risks  and  the  banks’  resilience  to  participants  in  the  financial 
markets, as well as to others with responsibility for, or interest in, these issues. Hopefully, the report 
can contribute to a well-informed debate on the stability of the Swedish financial system and influence 
those participating in the system. The Riksbank can also use the Financial Stability Report to show 
how we work to achieve the objectives the Riksdag has set us.  
The  layout  of  the  report  provides  a  good  insight  into  the  way  we  work.  It  begins  with  a  review  of 
international events, describing growth and prices in the financial markets and on various assets. In 
this  context,  the  analyses  and  assessments  of  developments  outside  the  Swedish  borders  play  an 
increasing role, in line with the ongoing internationalisation process.   
After describing the environment in which the banks and their borrowers operate, we devote a chapter 
to a survey of how the borrowers - households and firms - have been affected. What is the level of 
indebtedness and the ability to service debts? Are there any risks entailed in their actions? If things go 
well for the banks’ borrowers, they normally go well for the banks. 
Developments over the past five years, with the Swedish banks increasingly investing abroad, have 
meant  that  a  substantial  percentage  of  their  borrowers  are  in  other  countries  -  mainly  in  the  Baltic 
region.  This  means  that  our  analyses  cannot  focus  exclusively  on  Sweden;  we  must  also  take  into 
account developments in, for instance, neighbouring Nordic countries. 
The banks own actions can also affect the stability of the payment system. What strategic choices do 
the banks make? Profitability is an important component here - if the banks’ profitability is poor, it may 
drive them to invest in more risky projects in an attempt to regain profitability. What loan losses might 
the banks suffer in the future? By looking at the quality of the banks’ assets, we link the analysis of the 
banks to the analysis of the borrowers. Might the banks suffer liquidity problems? We study the banks’ 
financing capacity to obtain an impression of this. 
The final chapter contains an analysis of the financial infrastructure. This must function so efficiently 
that any problems arising within an individual financial institution or sub-market will not spread to other 
participants or markets. Nor should there be any problems in the infrastructure resulting from shocks 
to  the  systems  themselves.  Analysis  of  the  infrastructure  is  made  difficult  by  the  fact  that  it  also 
requires  fairly  detailed  insight  into  how  different  computer  systems  are  constructed  -  technological 
issues thus become more important here than in other areas.  
Each  report  concludes  with  one  or  more  articles.  These  articles  give  us  an  opportunity  for  more 
in-depth analysis of various fields or for presenting the results of various studies. This is all done with 
the  aim  of  increasing  our  knowledge  and  making  us  even  better  at  analysing  and  overseeing  the 
financial system.  
Although the standard layout of the report provides some form of framework for our analysis work, we 
are  constantly  developing  our  analyses.  Conditions  change,  with  new  operators,  risks  and 
technological developments.  
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
Crisis management 
No matter how good we are at overseeing the financial system - and how well we succeed in making it 
more robust without losing too much efficiency - it is impossible to completely eliminate the occurrence 
of crises. We therefore need to be prepared to manage a crisis if one should nevertheless occur. If a 
crisis occurs, it is necessary to assess the scope and consequences as quickly as possible and to take 
the right measures to reduce the potential problems. We do not want a repeat of the dilemma faced by 
the Riksdag in 1992.  
The  Riksbank  can  provide  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  a  bank  suffering  problems.  The 
requirements for this are that the problems are so serious as to threaten the stability of the system and 
that the bank is sufficiently sound to be able to survive in the long term if given assistance now. In 
other cases, the Riksdag decides whether or not financial support should be given, as tax-payers may 
be affected.  
One difficulty is determining whether a bank fulfils these requirements in a crisis situation, when there 
is often considerable confusion and everything happens so quickly. By being well-prepared we have 
the possibility to decide whether or not a bank should receive assistance from us. The enormous flows 
in  the  payment  system  mean  that  all  banks  are  dependent  on  being  able  to  receive  incoming 
payments  in  order  to  send  their  own  outgoing  payments.  If  this  chain  of  payments  is  broken,  for 
instance, if a bank suffers liquidity problems, there is a risk of contagion effects. In our planning work 
for managing an acute financial crisis, we work on the assumption that we will have between two and 
three  hours  to  make  decisions  on  possible  liquidity  support.  It  would  be  impossible  to  make  these 
decisions  so  quickly  if  we  did  not  already  have  well-founded  knowledge  of  the  various  banks.  The 
day-to-day  oversight  work  is  thus  a  necessary  condition  for  assessing  whether  financial  stability  is 
threatened in the event of a crisis.  
Future challenges 
A lot has happened in the Riksbank’s work on financial stability. When we began our stability work in 
the  mid-1990s  we  were  almost  pioneers.  The  work  began  with  a  handful  of  people  working  with  a 
relatively narrow focus - to detect at an early stage any vulnerability in the banking system that could 
lead to a new bank crisis.  
As I mentioned earlier, stability work has gradually become more important to a growing number of 
countries.  Reminders  of  the  effects  of  financial  crises  have  rained  down  on  us  in  recent  decades 
- Mexico 1994, Asia 1997-1998, Russia and LTCM 1998 and Argentina 2001. To mention but a few. 
Many  central  banks  have  these  issues  on  the  agenda  as  often  as  monetary  policy  issues.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, they also play an increasingly important role in many of the international contexts 
we participate in.  
If I am to mention a couple of examples, these would be the Bank for International Settlements, which 
now devotes a much larger part of its analysis capacity to stability issues, and where we are members 
of a couple of groups entirely focussed on stability. The most well-known work is that being done on 
the  new capital  adequacy  rules -  Basel  II.  Another example  is  the work  the Riksbank  is heading  in 
surveying central banks’ work on oversight of the financial infrastructure. The Riksbank is also heading 
the  work  on  reviewing  the  principles  for  how  public  authorities  should  work  with  regard  to  banking 
supervision.  
Within the European System of Central Banks we are taking part in the work on producing a European 
stability  report.  The  Riksbank  is  also  heading  the  working  group  that  analyses  issues  regarding 
cross-border  banks  with  a  special  emphasis  on  crisis  management.  This  group  reports  to  both 
Frankfurt and Brussels. 
The fact that our analysis work has developed since we published our first report in 1997 does not 
mean that we can rest on our laurels. We have taken outside assistance in our endeavour to focus 
and develop our analysis work. A few weeks ago, we presented the assessment of our work on the 
Financial Stability Report made by an American researcher, a manager at IMF and a manager from a 
Swedish  commercial  bank  over  the  year.  Happily,  the  three  authors  considered  that  we  essentially 
devoted ourselves to the right issues and used the right approaches. However, they also presented 
some interesting suggestions for improvements.  
Several  of  their  recommendations  concerned  how  we  motivate  and  explain  our  role  in  the  stability 
work. They thought we should be clearer when describing our objectives, and also with regard to the 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2004
boundary  between  our  work  and  that  of  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority) as well as to why we write a report twice a year. Most of what I have tried to describe now, 
in  other  words.  These  are  good  suggestions  that  we  are  taking  into  account  in  the  report  to  be 
published in two weeks’ time.  
The authors had other suggestions that I think are good, but probably require more time for discussion 
within the Riksbank and for possible implementation. The possibility of including a standing chapter 
that describes our view of a number of current stability issues of a more political nature is interesting. 
One advantage is that it would give us a reason to jointly develop an overall view on issues of this 
nature a couple of times a year. Today this is done on an ad hoc basis, in connection with responses 
to  submissions  or  in  connection  with  some  form  of  reasoning  in  the  Financial  Stability  Reports. 
However,  a  change  of  this  type  requires  considerable  additional  work  for  those  working  on  the 
analyses  and  would  also  take  up  more  of  the  Executive  Board’s  time  than  at  present.  It  therefore 
needs to be considered in the light of other commitments.  
There are other areas of the assessment where I am more undecided. One of the recommendations 
was that we should regularly take into account other operators in the infrastructure than the banks and 
institutions. I agree that it is important to look further afield, not just in obvious places, when trying to 
identify  threats  and  shocks.  We  should  most  probably  take  some  steps  in  this  direction.  However, 
there are also risks entailed in this suggestion. One strength of our method of working has been the 
concentration on central, systemically-important issues. If we broaden our commitments we may be 
forced to give up some of this depth, and what we publish may be more difficult to grasp.  
Some  of  the  recommendations  concerned  international  connections  in  the  stability  work.  Increased 
international surveillance is one of their recommendations that we are happy to follow. The integration 
of financial systems is increasing all the time and requires that we raise our gaze to take in the world 
around us. We already have this aim, but much remains to be done. 
Another  aspect  of  internationalisation  that  is  emphasised  concerns  crisis  management.  We  are 
encouraged to continue with our crisis management exercises, but to carry them out together with our 
European  colleagues.  This  is  an  important  issue  that  we  discussed  in  more  depth  in  the  Financial 
Stability  Report  published  a  year  ago.  We  observed  then  that  an  integrated  financial  market  has 
positive effects on the economy as a whole, but that it entails challenges for those of us who oversee 
the system. As the banking systems in different countries become more dependent on one another, 
the contagion risks will increase further. Given this, it is important to identify what roles are played by 
the  different  authorities.  Who should  bear  the  main  responsibility  if  one  of  Nordea’s  Finnish  branch 
offices were to suffer problems - we or our colleagues in Finland?  
Conclusion 
Let me round off with a hope that I have been able to arouse your interest in financial stability issues. 
As you of course know, developments in the financial system in recent years have been very rapid and 
made substantial, new demands on all involved. This includes the Riksbank. 
Following  our  own  crisis  experiences,  the  Riksbank  became  engaged  in  these  issues  earlier  than 
many  other  central  banks.  However,  over  time  financial  stability  issues  have  moved  further  up  the 
agenda in central bank circles. We are now engaged in a number of projects together with colleagues 
from other central banks, finance ministries and financial supervisory authorities in other countries.  
Parallel with this work we are trying to gain a more in-depth understanding of our own and to develop 
our communication. Little by little we are taking up new issues that are important for financial stability. 
We have received further ideas from the assessment group we engaged last year. We clearly do not 
lack challenges. But this is what makes the work at the Riksbank so exciting.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 5
