Timothy F Geithner: Challenges facing the global payments system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the SIBOS 2004 Atlanta Conference, Atlanta, 14 October 2004. 
 I am pleased to have the chance to address SIBOS 2004. This is an important forum for us because a 
strong  and  efficient  payments  infrastructure  is  a  vital  strategic  asset  for  the  U.S.  and  the  global 
financial system.  
I want to take this opportunity to talk about some of the forces shaping the evolution in this strategic 
infrastructure, the challenges they present, and the implications for participants, system operators, and 
the central banks who oversee them. In this context, I will try to identify some of the major priorities we 
see over the medium term in strengthening the safety and soundness and the operational resilience of 
the global payments and settlement system.  
Over  the  past  15  years,  we  have  brought  about  a  major  global  effort  to  reduce  the  potential  for 
systemic  risk  emanating  from  the  key  elements  of  the  payment  infrastructure  -  the  large  value 
payments systems and the securities and foreign exchange settlement systems. Particularly notable 
are the 1989 G-30 standards on clearance and settlement systems, the Lamfalussy Report, the launch 
of CLS bank, and the paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial 
System.  These,  and  the  series  of  internationally  agreed  standards  for  payments,  securities,  foreign 
exchange settlement systems set by central banks, securities regulators, and the private sector, have 
engendered a remarkable set of changes to improve safety and soundness and operational resilience 
in this increasingly global system. 
These are the types of efforts where the return is almost never quantifiable, for the pay-off comes in 
the  avoidance  of  crisis  and  a  better  balance  between  efficiency  and  risk.  By  reducing  settlement 
periods  and  moving  more  of  the  world  to  real  time  gross  settlement,  delivery  versus  payment  and 
payment  versus  payment  systems,  these  changes  have  made  a  major  difference.  They  have 
significantly improved the capacity of the financial system to absorb shocks, to handle stress, and to 
reduce the risk of broader damage or contagion from financial failure in any part of the system.  
This  is  and  must  be  a  collective  effort.  It  requires  collaboration  between  the  official  sector  and  the 
private sector here in the United States and in the other major economies. And it requires collaboration 
among the major central banks. Because of the shared interest of participants and the central banks in 
finding the right balance between efficiency and risk, and because of a widespread recognition of the 
more  integrated  nature  of  national  financial  systems,  success  in  this  area  would  not  have  been 
possible in the past and will not be possible in the future without continued close cooperation between 
the official and private sectors, within and across national borders.  
I am very pleased to be part of an institution that has been at the center of these initiatives. We expect 
to continue to play that role in the future.  
It is worth stepping back a bit to describe some of the broad forces shaping the payments system that 
need to inform our priorities going forward.  
• 
We expect to see very rapid growth in the overall volume of financial transactions and the 
accompanying burdens on the payments infrastructure. In the mature economies, particularly 
in the U.S. and the U.K., we have seen the volume of financial transactions increase much 
more rapidly than GDP. This trend, which has much to do with the nexus of technology and 
financial  innovation,  shows  no  sign  of  slowing.  With  the  bulk  of  world  GDP  and  savings 
outside the United States, a significant share of it in countries growing more rapidly than the 
United  States  and  with  substantial  financial  development  still  ahead  of  them,  it  seems 
reasonable  to  plan  for  a  world  in  which  this  extraordinary  trajectory  of  growth  in  financial 
transactions continues.  
As national financial systems become more integrated and financial institutions more global, 
payments systems increasingly operate across countries and legal regimes, and the scale of 
cross-border financial transactions has increased dramatically. The payments infrastructure 
of the global financial system is a complex patchwork of national and cross-border systems, 
not  seamless,  not  uniform,  but  closely  connected.  This  increases  the  exposure  of  any 
 BIS Review 59/2004 
 1
settlement system to developments across borders. And it means that the major international 
financial  institutions  face  a  substantially  greater  diversity  of  exposures,  given  the  multiple 
systems in which they operate.  
Payments  activity  has  become  more  concentrated  in  a  smaller  number  of  global  financial 
institutions; fewer major participants in payments systems now account for a larger share of 
volume and exposures in those systems. This has important implications for how we think 
about  the  vulnerability  of  the  system  to  a  financial  or  operational  failure  and  about  the 
financial resources that system operators need to maintain.  
The growth in the over-the-counter derivatives market has advanced much more rapidly than 
the  speed  of  improvement  of  important  parts  of  the infrastructure  that  support  the  market, 
including  contract  documentation  and  post-trade  processing,  and  the  certainty  of  the  legal 
arrangements for cross-product netting. This introduces a potential source of uncertainty that 
can complicate how counterparties and markets respond in conditions of stress.  
The  increased  risk  of  terrorist  attacks  and  increased  sophistication  of  cyber  attacks  on 
electronic  networks  have  added  new  dimensions  to  the  traditional  concerns  of  safety  and 
soundness and operational resilience.  
   These broad forces present significant challenges for payments participants, system operators, and 
central  banks.  Deciding  how  we  meet  these  challenges  raises  the  classic  tension  about  how  to 
balance  the  public  benefits  of  greater  stability  and  the  increased  costs  that  are  the  price  of  the 
additional margin of safety.  
We  believe  the  systemic  importance  of  the  payments  infrastructure  means  that  central  banks  and 
system participants have a common interest in acting together to address the evolving risks. 
Let me identify some of the major priorities we see in this area that require further collaboration.  
Higher standards for the core of the system
During the past few years, central banks and securities commissioners have developed new standards 
for the design, operation, and oversight of payments and securities settlement systems. These new 
standards  have  been  proposed  for  incorporation  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Policy  Statement  on 
Payments System Risks. We are in the process of working, together with other U.S. supervisory and 
regulatory  agencies,  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  the  affected  U.S.  systems  meet  these  new 
standards.  
We feel that it is especially important for the entities that form the heart of payments and settlement 
systems to work toward higher standards for safety and soundness and operational resilience. Given 
the increased scale of activity handled by these entities, the greater concentration among the major 
participants, and the increased exposure to cross-border activity, these systems today need to meet a 
more exacting set of standards, and of course this is also true for entities that are less systemically 
important. 
More specifically, we would like to see a greater focus on strengthening risk management practices 
and ensuring that the financial resources of system operators are adequate to deal with the risks to 
which  they  are  exposed.  We  also  would  like  to  see  a  more  determined  effort  to  provide  more 
transparency and clarity in these systems’ procedures and settlement activity, so that participants and 
members have a heightened understanding of their obligations and exposures in a situation that would 
test a system’s risk controls.  
The  safety  and  soundness  standards  for  payments  and  settlement  infrastructure  have  been 
complemented by sound practices for operational resilience. During the past three years, core clearing 
and  settlement  organizations  in  the  U.S.  have  come  a  long  way  toward  meeting  more  demanding 
objectives for recovery and resumption. Going forward, it is important that the major firms maintain a 
level  of  resilience  that  is  commensurate  with  their  essential  positions  in  the  financial  system.  Over 
time, we expect firms will take advantage of cost-effective improvements in technology and business 
processes to increase, where needed, the geographic diversification of their back-up sites.  
We  also  expect  senior  management  at  each  firm  to  assure  itself  through  rigorous  testing  that  their 
firms  can,  in  fact,  rapidly  recover  or  resume  their  important  settlement  activity.  We  also  need  to 
continue to pay more attention to how to reduce the threat of cyber-attacks. Beyond the direct financial 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2004
losses from criminal activity, these threats pose a broader risk to confidence in the integrity of financial 
institutions,  payments  systems,  and  ultimately,  the  global  payments  network.  This  is  a  growing 
challenge, and it will require a major ongoing commitment of resources. 
Within the Federal Reserve, we have worked very hard to raise the resilience and security of our own 
operations. We have made major investments to enhance the back-up facilities for Fedwire. We hold 
ourselves to very high standards, subject our systems to exacting contingency tests, and coordinate 
these efforts closely with other U.S. payments systems.  
We  are  also  continuing  to  work  on  ways  to  improve  the  security  and  availability  of  the 
telecommunications network that is so vital to the functioning of the financial sector. A private sector 
group sponsored by the New York Fed, the Payments Risk Committee, has enumerated best practices 
that financial institutions and payments utilities can adopt to avoid telecommunications outages and to 
facilitate  rapid  recovery  should  an  outage  occur.  We  are  also  working  closely  with 
the 
telecommunications industry, through the Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions, to help 
improve network diversity and avoid single points of failure for voice and data lines.  
Payments risk challenges facing system participants 
The reliability of a payments or securities settlement system depends not just on the system’s design 
and  operation,  but  also  on  the  quality  of  the  risk  management  exercised  by  the  participants 
themselves. The combination of individual and collective efforts to manage exposures, a discipline that 
must  be  performed  both  by  the  participants  and  the  system  operator,  is  necessary  to  achieve 
reliability.  
The increased specialization of the back office operations of the largest financial institutions makes 
this  challenge  more  difficult  to  meet.  To  realize  greater  economies  of  scale,  global  banks  often 
separate their payments and securities business into tightly confined specialties.  
To  ensure  that  the  various  risks  that  arise  across  these  specialized  payments  functions  are  pulled 
together and managed on an integrated basis, banks needs to bring the same discipline to payments 
risk they have brought to the management of credit and market risk, where best practice aggregates 
risk on a consolidated basis across the full range of activities of the institution. We believe that it is 
important for banks to carefully monitor a comprehensive profile of their payments system exposures, 
and to assign clear responsibility for that function in one place in the institution.  
I  noted  earlier  the  value  of  transparency  of  rules  and  procedures  for  payments  systems,  but  this  is 
useful only if participants make use of that transparency. Both the operator and the participants should 
know  the  rules  of  the  road.  In  complex  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  each  firm  should  fully 
understand its exposures and how they are changing across the board, and not just on a business line 
by  business  line  basis.  Participants  need  to  understand  how  the  system’s  procedures  would  affect 
them in the event they came under stress, and how these procedures would be applied to others in 
the event a major firm had difficulty settling on the system.  
Transparency is important also to ensure that the major system participants play their appropriate role 
in  holding  the  operators  of  payments  systems  to  high  standards.  Participant  or  member  discipline 
should  complement  the  work  of  payments  system  overseers,  in  a  role  analogous  to  the  market 
discipline applied by counterparties to financial institutions.  
Clearing and settlement arrangements for OTC derivatives
As  we  look  at  the  evolution  of  the  global  payments  system,  one  critical  area  that  deserves  further 
attention by market participants and central banks is the clearing and settlement arrangements for the 
over-the-counter derivatives market. This is an area where the innovation that has driven rapid growth 
has not been matched by a comparable investment in the infrastructure for post-trade processing.  
Because  of  the  relatively  slow  development  of  clearing  and  settlement  services  for  the  OTC 
derivatives market, dealers and their counterparties have been forced to assume and manage risks 
that are largely avoidable. Unexecuted confirmations create unnecessary legal risk for counterparties 
and can add to replacement cost risk. Delays and errors in settlement add cost and liquidity risk.  
There are a number of important efforts by the private and official sectors that offer the promise of 
progress. The effort underway by the industry to standardize documentation, automate confirmation 
BIS Review 59/2004 
 3
procedures, and match and reconcile payment flows is very important. The Fed has played a role in 
shaping  recommendations  for  close-out  netting  on  a  cross-product  basis,  and  has  been  strongly 
supportive  of  efforts  to  put  these  provisions  into  U.  S.  law.  Adoption  of  the  Hague  Securities 
Convention  by  countries  around  the  world  will  improve  legal  certainty  for  cross-border  collateral 
arrangements,  which  is  important  for  bilateral  counterparties,  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  And 
there are new market-led initiatives underway to bring some utility-type clearing services to the present 
bilateral arrangements for OTC derivatives.  
These efforts to improve the clearing and settlement infrastructure for the OTC derivatives market are 
important  because  they  help  make  it  easier  for  firms  to  understand  and  manage  their  bilateral  risk 
exposures.  Markets  work  better,  particularly  in  times  of  stress,  when  firms  are  able  to  operate  with 
greater certainty about their direct counterparty exposures.  
In this context, it is worth reflecting on whether it makes sense to build on these efforts by developing 
and  utilizing  central  counterparty  clearing  arrangements  in  the  more  standardized  part  of  the  OTC 
derivative  market.  To  be  sure,  poorly  designed  central  counterparties  can  increase  risk,  and  they 
necessarily  concentrate  operational  risk.  But  well  designed  central  counterparties  can  play  an 
important role in reducing systemic risk in markets.  
This is a complicated challenge for instruments that are inherently complex and constantly evolving, 
and  for  which  calculating  exposures  can  be  difficult.  And  attracting  a  critical  mass  of  strong 
participants can be daunting. But it makes sense to think about whether use of a centralized clearing 
utility  could  provide  significant  advantages  over  the  present  bilateral  arrangements  by  increasing 
transparency,  enabling  multilateral  netting,  and  providing  centralized  risk  controls,  collateral 
management,  and  margin  requirements.  To  the  extent  these  advantages  can  be  realized,  a 
centralized  utility  can  reduce  the  risk  of  damaging  contagion  from  a  failure  of  a  financial  institution 
affecting overall market liquidity. By making some types of losses more predictable, they can reduce 
the incentive for firms to withdraw liquidity from and reduce exposure to other counterparties that they 
believe might have credit exposures to the failed institution.  
Global integration of payments systems  
The increase in cross-border financial activity, the global reach of the largest financial institutions, and 
as  a  consequence  the  greater  transnational  scope  of  many  payments  systems  have  provided  a 
compelling rationale for cooperation to set a higher level of international standards for payments and 
settlement  systems.  These  same  dynamics  may  lead  eventually  to  a  more  uniform  international 
platform for payments and settlement concentrated on a much smaller number of systems. But we are 
not there yet. 
The myriad of different systems that make up the global network means that payments now cross a 
complicated mix of legal, technological, and supervisory borders. And this means banks are exposed 
to  settlement  risk  in  a  remarkably  large  number  of different  value  transfer systems.  One  large U.S. 
internationally active financial institution now operates in 400 separate payments systems around the 
world.  
Differences  in  legal  regimes mean  different  netting arrangements,  collateral requirements,  close-out 
procedures,  and  bankruptcy  implications.  Differences  in  operating  platforms  and  communications 
standards can increase operational risks.  
To meet the challenge of ensuring that this global network of individual payments systems is reliable, 
resilient  and  efficient  requires  a  more  integrated  and  comprehensive  approach.  This  is  true  for  the 
participants that are most exposed to the diversity of risks in this network of systems. And it is true for 
the official entities as well, because the growing number of cross-border payments systems require an 
effective framework of cooperation if we are to provide effective oversight.  
One important challenge faced by banks that operate across many different financial centers is how to 
meet their global liquidity needs.  
To meet the rising expectations of their customers, and simultaneously fulfill their own internal needs, 
the  largest  and  most  active  banks  in  the  payments  business  would  prefer  to  mobilize  their  liquidity 
globally. But the reality is that the total liquidity available to a global bank is fragmented.  
Surplus  liquidity  in  one currency  at one  location cannot  always  be  readily converted  into  liquidity  in 
another currency or in another market. An institution’s liquidity at a specific location is dependent, to a 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2004
large extent, on the size of its payment flows, its capital, and the volume of marketable securities and 
other eligible collateral that is housed in that location. These factors often determine what is available 
either to gain access to daylight liquidity from a central bank, or to meet a clearinghouse’s margin or 
collateral requirements, or to borrow overnight in an emergency.  
In this context, we welcome the work underway in the private sector to develop better arrangements 
for the more efficient use of collateral globally including greater cross-border pledging of securities that 
can help meet liquidity needs, in normal times and in conditions of stress. Central banks have a range 
of  options  to  help  meet  exceptional  liquidity  needs,  and  we  have  demonstrated  that  we  have  the 
capacity to move very quickly in extremis. But we think the banking community, securities depositories 
and  global  custodians  can  do  a  lot  to  take  advantage  of  new  technology  to  put  in  place  stronger 
market arrangements to meet these needs.  
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasizing  once  again  our  shared  interest  in  ensuring  that  our  payments 
infrastructure meets the highest standards for safety and soundness and operational resilience. The 
design of payments systems is the product of different perspectives on how to balance the ideal with 
the practical. This balance needs to be revisited over time. The global financial system we live in today 
is  a  very  different  system  than  the  present  network  of  national  systems  was  designed  to  support. 
Technological advances provide us with a new set of tools to make what may seem optimal from a 
systemic perspective more practical.  
We will continue to work closely with the private sector in designing effective ways to deal with the full 
range  of  new  challenges  from  increased  financial  integration  and  increased  concentration,  greater 
complexity, and new threats to operational security and continuity. And we will work hard, as we have 
in the past, to try to find the right balance between the broad objectives of stability and security and 
the efficiency of the system.  
BIS Review 59/2004 
 5
