Sir Andrew Large: Financial instrument accounting 
Speech by Sir Andrew Large, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the 13th Central Banking 
Conference, London, 22 November 2004. 
 Introduction 
The recent furore over IAS 39 - the international accounting standard for financial instruments - has 
resulted in a situation which I think all agree is unsatisfactory. We now effectively have two versions of 
IAS 39, one proposed by the IASB, the other by the European Commission. 
I  probably  do  not  need  to  emphasise  that  meaningful  accounting  standards  and  their  effective 
implementation  are  highly  relevant  to  any  central  bank’s  responsibilities  for  financial  stability.  They 
help  to  ensure  the  safe  and  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  So  it  is  essential  that 
accounting standards have a clear economic rationale, promote comparability and secure adequate 
disclosure. Only in that way can investors, creditors and others judge the positions and risks being run 
by  financial  institutions  and  hence  exert  market  discipline,  and  perverse  incentives  be  avoided. 
Together these can make an important contribution to financial stability. 
I suggest later that, despite intensive work to improve accounting standards for financial instruments in 
recent years, fundamental issues with financial stability implications remain to be resolved. One crucial 
question is: “Who and what are accounts for?” Another more specific issue is the appropriate role of 
fair value data. So what I want to do this morning is to discuss these issues in turn before commenting 
on the way forward regarding IAS 39. I should add that while IAS 39 applies to all users of financial 
instruments, I illustrate its implications below with particular reference to banking. 
Who and what are accounts for? 
It is widely accepted that published audited accounts are prepared first and foremost for the owners of 
a business, that is the shareholders. However, it is often maintained that this information also meets 
the needs of other stakeholders, including creditors, customers, employees and so on. 
And so it does up to a point. Yet there are many users who have an interest in the financial position of 
a firm. On the face of it, it would be rather surprising if a single presentation was ideal for all of them. 
Let me try to illustrate this for the financial world - where the Bank’s financial stability remit runs - by 
looking at the respective needs of shareholders, depositors and regulators of banks. 
Shareholders are particularly interested in the returns being earned by a bank (its profitability), both 
current  and  prospective.  They  are  looking  mainly  at  the  economic  value  of  the  going  concern.  The 
focus of depositors, regulators and authorities concerned with systemic stability, on the other hand, is 
likely to be on whether bank liabilities will be repaid on demand or when due. Two specific examples 
may help to illustrate these different perspectives: the treatment of “own-credit risk” and the valuation 
of sight deposits. 
“Own-credit risk” arises from the “fair value option” in IAS 39, which allows an entity to fair value not 
only its assets but also its liabilities. On that basis, the value of liabilities, including deposits, should fall 
as  an  entity’s  creditworthiness  deteriorates.  Here  we  find  a  difference  of  perspective  between 
shareholders on the one hand and debt holders, including depositors (and by extension regulators and 
central banks), on the other. In an economic sense, given that the equity interest in a company cannot 
fall below zero, as net worth diminishes debt holders bear a growing proportion of reductions in asset 
values.  But  this  approach  is  in  tension  with  the  understandable  concern  of  bank  depositors  and 
regulators about the capacity of banks to repay liabilities at par when due, and who therefore want 
measures of net worth constructed on that basis. 
A separate issue arises in arriving at a fair valuation of sight deposits. For such deposits, there is 
typically a difference between the contractual maturity (zero) and the behavioural maturity (the time 
over  which  sight  deposits  are  held  in  practice).  Since  the  interest  paid  on  such  deposits  is  almost 
always  less  than  the  market  discount  rate,  once  any  maturity  greater  than  zero  is  admitted  the  fair 
valuation  of  the  deposit  will  be  less  than  par.  But  once  again,  depositors  are  likely  to  be  more 
interested in the financial strength of a bank assessed on the basis that deposits are ascribed their full 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
nominal  value.  Moreover,  any  suggestion  in  public  accounts  that  deposits  are  worth  less  than  par 
could undermine the confidence on which the whole construct of banking is based. 
These illustrations suggest that different users of accounts may, at least to an extent, want information 
produced  on  different  bases.  And  the  simple  fact  is  that  we  will  not  be  able  to  make  progress  if 
different users all assert that their way of calculating or presenting the numbers is uniquely correct. I 
suggest, therefore, that the users of accounts should recognise that they may in reality need to adjust 
them to suit their particular purposes - something ratings agencies and other analysts have done for 
many years. It is encouraging that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has adopted precisely 
that approach in promulgating various adjustments for regulatory purposes to data based on IAS 39. 
Against that background, it would seem helpful if accounting standard setters required supplementary 
disclosures in published accounts which would allow different users to make such adjustments. This is 
important given that, unlike regulatory, fiscal and other public authorities, many private sector users 
are not in a position easily to obtain information beyond that put in the public domain. 
Let me turn now to IAS 39 itself as it impacts on the banking industry. 
IAS 39 and the banking industry 
IAS 39 has proved controversial with bankers for reasons which stem partly from specific features of 
banking, and partly from the implications of the wider use of fair values, particularly in accounting for 
hedges and in so far as they may lead to greater volatility of published profits. 
Some pros and cons of fair value accounting 
The debate about the use of fair values raises a number of important issues, including the relevance of 
unrealised valuation changes, the appropriate assumptions on the holding period and the reliability of 
fair  values.  It  also  raises  a  question  about  the  extent  to  which  accounting  valuations  should  move 
away from a going concern paradigm to break-up valuations, which, at least at first sight, is closer to 
what “fair values” represent. But at the same time, fair values are in some ways more forward looking, 
since  expectations  about  the  future  performance  of  assets  and  liabilities  are  reflected  in  market 
valuations. It will not have escaped you, however, that the move in recent years to a more securitized 
world,  with  increased  capacity  for  rapid  risk  transfer,  encourages  the  appetite  for  a  more  forward 
looking approach. 
A  fair  value  approach  has  a  number  of  other  attractions.  For  example,  it  promotes  consistency  of 
valuation  of  instruments  in  different  financial  sectors,  something  increasingly  important  given  the 
fungibility between banking, securities and insurance. It will generally lead to more timely recognition 
of losses (for example, on bank loans), and it captures the crystallisation of market risk in non-trading 
positions.  Moreover,  fair  value  accounting  is  consistent  with  the  increasing  use  of  mark-to-market 
techniques in risk management. Such techniques in part reflect a progressive but fundamental shift 
from the traditional banking approach of holding assets until maturity to today’s approach of managing 
on the basis of continually assessing the opportunity cost of maintaining the existing balance sheet. It 
is  clearly  beneficial  to  transparency  if  publicly-available  accounting  information  as  far  as  possible 
reflects the basis on which management actually run a business. 
However, there are a number of complications associated with the wider use of fair values.  
First, there is a question as to how one can obtain robust fair values for instruments which are not 
priced, even indirectly, in reasonably deep and liquid markets. Model-based valuation techniques may 
be used, but they may not be analogous to genuine market clearing prices. The issues here include 
determining  the  conceptual  basis  for  valuation  (“the  model”),  obtaining  the  necessary  inputs,  and 
avoiding slavish adherence to a model which may in some circumstances deliver misleading results. In 
other words how, and to what extent, can human judgement properly be used to modify the model? 
Second, there is the question of the economic relevance of unrealised gains and losses - particularly if 
they  are  not  immediately  realisable.  For  example,  while  information  on  changes  in  the  fair  value  of 
bank loans conveys useful economic insights, it needs to be interpreted carefully. In many cases, a 
gain cannot be realised “up front” given the absence at present of developed secondary markets in 
bank loans - even if securitisation may be increasing in that area. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
Volatility 
Further  concerns  about  wider  use  of  fair  value  accounting  relate  to  the  possible  implications  for 
volatility  in  financial  markets  and  in  the  economy  more  widely.  In  my  view,  there  is  an  important 
distinction  to  be  drawn  between  accounting  rules  which  capture  accurately  the  volatility  inevitably 
present in the real world, and “spurious” volatility introduced by the accounting rules themselves. 
Few  I  hope  would  suggest  that  we  should  remove  genuine  economic  volatility  from  accounting 
numbers. It is surely better for users to apply their own smoothing to data if they think that is justified 
rather  than  impose  smoothing  rules,  which  can  both  be  arbitrary  and  may  serve  to  obscure  the 
underlying data, through obligatory accounting standards. 
Recent experience in the US and the UK is encouraging in these respects. The widening use of fair 
values does not seem to have had an adverse impact on the stability of the US financial system, on 
the  equity  prices  of  US  banks,  or  on  banks  in  Europe  which  have  adopted  US  or  international 
accounting standards. And the move in the UK to a pensions standard with a strong fair value flavour 
(FRS 17) initially led to strong reactions, but over time I think has led to a better understanding of the 
actual economics of pension arrangements. 
At the macro-economic level, concern has been expressed that greater use of fair values could have a 
procyclical impact. Banks’ assets might be marked up in booms, as perceived credit risk declined, so 
boosting  banks’  capital  base  and  capacity  for  further  lending.  However,  for  the  concerns  about 
intensifying economic cycles to be realised two linkages would need to operate. First, the impact on 
bank capital would have to increase the volume of bank lending and, second, the increase in bank 
lending would need to have significant implications for real activity. Neither linkage can be taken for 
granted, and in any case discretionary policy action, whether monetary or prudential, by the authorities 
may mitigate any pro-cyclical effects. 
As  I  have  indicated,  we  do,  however,  need  to  avoid  accounting  rules  which  introduce  spurious 
volatility. An example, to which I will return in a moment, is the hedge accounting under IAS 39. 
The “mixed attribute” model 
The drawbacks of fair values in some contexts have led to widespread support in the banking industry 
for  retaining  the  current  “mixed  attribute”  accounting  approach.  While  IAS  39  requires  trading 
instruments,  derivatives  and  many  securities  to  be  measured  at  fair  value,  bank  loans  generally 
continue  to  be  measured  at  historic  cost.  However,  the  debate  about  IAS  39  has  highlighted  some 
difficulties with this mixed approach as it is presently formulated. 
The area of greatest difficulty has proved to be hedges which straddle the two measurement bases, 
where so-called hedge accounting comes into play. 
One example of this is the use of interest rate swaps to manage the interest rate risk in a portfolio of 
fixed rate loans funded from floating rate deposits. Without modification of the mixed attribute model, 
such hedges could actually create, not reduce, accounting volatility, because derivatives are required 
to be marked to market, that is measured at “fair value”, while loans are generally booked at cost. This 
to me would seem perverse indeed! 
Another  important  example  arises  with  the  use  of  credit  derivatives  as  hedges.  This  has  proved 
difficult more generally to fit into the IAS 39 framework. 
I should add that the sheer complexity of the hedge accounting rules is also an issue, as the debate in 
Europe about the treatment of sight deposits and prepayments, and the problems at Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac in the US, well illustrate. We need to ensure that the rules themselves do not result in 
perverse behaviour as people try to find a way around them. 
The way forward 
So where do we go from here? 
All of the above factors have complicated the debate on IAS 39. And in my view, the only way forward 
is first to take a few steps back, before work starts on re-engineering the standard. I believe that many 
of those interested in the debate would be supportive of this approach. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 3
We perhaps need to look again at the process for considering, and reaching a conclusion about, the 
fundamental “design parameters” some of which I have touched on today. This is no small task, but if 
agreement  could  be  reached  on  the  fundamentals,  these  could  be  stated  as  clear  principles  in  a 
preamble  to  any  new  standard,  to  guide  the  more  detailed  requirements.  And  it  might  enable  the 
widely-held vision of a less detailed and prescriptive standard to be realised, to replace the hundreds 
of pages of complex rules. 
To address this, however, raises three questions: (i) On what is early consensus necessary? (ii) How 
should the transition be approached? And (iii) What does this mean in institutional terms? 
Early consensus 
Early agreement seems to me particularly important in three areas. 
The first is to review the conventional understanding on who the accounts are for, and clarify how the 
different interests of different stakeholders are to be met. 
The second is to agree where the standard should be placed along the spectrum between historic cost 
and fair value measurement. A particularly difficult conceptual question in this area is: precisely what 
economic meaning is there in so-called fair valuation of instruments in which (a) there is little or no 
secondary market, or (b) there is a market, but a clear intent to hold an instrument to maturity? 
Finally, the implications of any increase in measured volatility will need to be assessed. Here, I see a 
need  for  a  process  of  communication  and  education  by  companies  and  others  to  shareholders, 
analysts and other interested parties, which should form part of the transition to any new standard. 
Transitional considerations 
Once  the  above  objectives  have  been  agreed,  it  will  be  important  to  articulate  where  we  are,  and 
where we want to be, and then to identify the optimal migration path. Is it to be a gradual transition or a 
big  bang?  Such  decisions  would  need  to  consider:  the  rapidly  moving  environment  of  the  financial 
industry,  and  regulatory  techniques;  how  to  ensure  comparability  is  maintained;  and  the  costs, 
especially in system terms, of alternative migration paths. 
Procedures for setting international accounting standards 
A  final  issue  concerns  the  procedures  for  setting  accounting  standards.  Concerns  have  been 
expressed by some about whether public sector interests, in particular, are adequately represented in 
the process. There is of course a clear public interest in meaningful reporting and adequate disclosure. 
I am sure that standard setters in this, as in other areas, are alive to these issues. Equally they have - 
and in my view quite rightly - a concern to avoid, or at least minimise, the influence of overtly political 
factors.  In  considering  the  future  of  the  IASB’s  governance,  I  am  sure  that  the  Trustees  will  be 
reflecting carefully on the issue of what constitutes legitimate public policy interests and how best to 
respond to them. 
Concluding Remarks 
To sum up, the importance of meaningful and reliable accounting information is clear. It reflects the 
growth  of  publicly-traded  markets,  coupled  with  rapid  growth  in  innovation  and  complexity.  The 
potential for opacity has therefore increased, so it is essential that accounting standards are clear and 
capture  the  economic  substance.  This  is  important  for  the  various  stakeholders,  and  for  financial 
stability generally. 
It  is  also  important  that  the  actual  processes  for  developing  accounting  standards  command 
widespread support from companies, investors, creditors and the public authorities. I have set out a 
few steps that might be of relevance in achieving this.  
On IAS 39 specifically, it would seem to me sensible to try first to reach consensus on the fundamental 
issues I started with before moving to detailed drafting of a new accounting standard. This will require 
a  continuing  effort  on  the  part  of  standard  setters  to  engage  all  interested  parties,  flexibility  from 
everyone  involved  and  a  high  level  of  transparency  within  the  process.  A  lofty  goal  perhaps,  but 
important if the benefits are to be secured and we are to avoid the cacophony of today. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2004
In conclusion, although I have focused on controversies in accounting, we should recognise that we 
may  be  on  the  threshold  of  a  truly  significant  step  forward  in  accounting  practice.  From  next  year, 
companies  throughout  the  European  Union  will  be  using  the  same  set  of  high  quality,  international 
accounting standards. And there is the tantalising prospect of convergence between international and 
American standards. The challenge now is to realise the full potential of these changes. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 5
