Marion Williams: Information technology and education - investing in our 
future 
Welcome address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the opening 
ceremony of the Information Technology Fair “Information Technology and Education: Investing in Our 
Future”, Bridgetown, 8 November 2004. 
 Minister  of  Education  and  Sports,  the  Honourable  Reginald  Farley;  partners  in  this  project, 
representatives of commercial banks, principals of secondary schools, teachers and students of the 
four schools touring the exhibition this morning, management and staff of the Central Bank, ladies and 
gentlemen:  
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the Central Bank for the Information Technology (IT) Fair 
for  students  of  Secondary  Schools.  Our  theme  for  this  IT  Fair  is  “Information  Technology  and 
Education - Investing in our Future”. It is an innovative addition to the Bank’s Secondary Schools’ 
Outreach Programme which the Bank has sponsored for over two decades. 
The Central Bank’s Outreach programme was started in the 1980’s as the Bank attempted to raise the 
level of economic intelligence in Barbados through a sustained educational programme. The Bank was 
of the view that constituents of the Bank and future employees, leaders and business people, should 
be targeted through a continuing educational programme in economics. 
Hence, the Schools’ Outreach programme was started. It initially targeted business students through 
its lectures on the economy, and was coordinated by our first public relations officer, Carl Moore. In 
recent times, however, the Bank has expanded the programme to include topics such as Finance and 
Accounting, Investing, the Stock Exchange, CSME and others. 
The  programme  has  helped  the  students  to  better  grasp  subjects  that  are  often  considered  too 
technical, or even too difficult, as we have tried to present the lectures in a simple manner. To achieve 
this, we have insisted that lecturers draw on every day experiences to explain difficult concepts. 
Additionally,  I  am  informed  that  students  have  found  that  the  interaction  and  exchanges  with  the 
Bank’s economists have assisted them in preparing for the School Based Assessment projects and 
their  examinations  in  the  Caribbean  Secondary  Education  Certificate  (CSEC)  and  Caribbean 
Advanced  Proficiency  Examinations  (CAPE)  programmes.  On  that  note,  I  wish  to  commend  the 
Research Department and Public Affairs for sustaining this programme that is so integral to the Bank’s 
community outreach. Dr. Daniel Boamah and his team, and before that Dr. DeLisle Worrell and his 
team, have done an excellent job in making sure that our young people have a fuller understanding of 
economic affairs to take them through life. I would also like to acknowledge the staff of Banking and 
Currency, Mr. Tony Johnson, former analyst at the Central Bank and officials of the Barbados Stock 
Exchange who, in recent times, have presented lectures. 
Today, we are embarking on a completely new aspect of the Schools’ Outreach Programme. The idea 
for  an  IT  Fair  was  born  out  of  a  request  from  a  group  of  teachers  for  a  demonstration  of  how 
information  technology  is  put  to  work  in  the  banking  community.  The  Management  Information 
Systems Department, ever so cognizant of the importance of the benefits of a hands-on approach to 
IT,  readily  embraced  the  idea.  Together  with  Public  Affairs,  the  Barbados  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Finance,  Prism,  and  seven  IT  vendors  -  Cable  and  Wireless,  IBM,  Vision  Systems,  Sunbeach, 
Regional  Business  Systems,  Illuminat  and  Fujitsu-  ICL-  the  Bank  will  demonstrate  how  information 
technology is employed in the work environment. Since we are a financial institution, we felt it prudent 
to show you how technology is used in the banking community as well. Hence, there is a special booth 
on payment systems, which will display how cheques are cleared and processed electronically. 
What we have endeavoured to do as we demonstrate the use of technology in the work environment, 
is to embrace a lot of the issues covered in the CSEC and CAPE syllabuses. Consequently, the nine 
booths  will  focus  on  IT-related  topics  such  as  Application  Development  and  Programming 
Collaboration,  Computer  Hardware  Technology,  Edutech  Software,  Internet  and  High  Speed 
Networks, Mobile and Wireless, Networking and Security. 
In addition to demonstrating and reinforcing the theoretical constructs of IT, the fair will show you how 
information technology can improve efficiencies and effectiveness for businesses and the country as a 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 1
whole  domestically,  and  in  their  interaction  with  the  world.  Indeed,  the  Bank  has  set  as  one  of  its 
long-term goals the attainment of greater efficiencies in its business practices and the promotion of the 
growth of IT as an indispensable business tool. We pledge, therefore, to continue to be in the forefront 
of the information and technological revolution in Barbados. 
We did not hesitate to embrace this IT fair as part of our corporate and social responsibility. I hope that 
through  this  expo  the  students  will  be  primed  not  only  for  their  exams  but  also  for  the  work 
environment. On that note, it is my wish that as you interact with the exhibitors, you will be encouraged 
to consider careers in programming. Programming would make us creators of the technology rather 
than  simply  users.  Unfortunately,  programming  is  attracting  few  graduates,  despite  the  potential  it 
offers for job creation, business development and economic wealth. The example of India is one we 
might wish to draw on. Our students have the intelligence; what is needed is the training, the exposure 
and the will. 
In  closing,  let  me  express  my  appreciation  to  all  those  who  have  played  a  part  in  transforming  the 
Bank’s environs, namely the Frank Collymore Hall and the Grande Salle, into an IT learning setting 
and  especially  to  Janice  Marshall  who  approached  me  with  the  idea,  and  to  her  staff  who  were 
intimately involved in the hosting of this fair. To the students who will be the focus of this fair over the 
next three days, I encourage you to be as open and as inquisitive as you wish to be as you move from 
booth to booth. I hope, too, that you see this event as a veritable investment in our future-yours, the 
Bank’s and the country’s. 
I would especially like to thank Novaline Brewster for looking after the logistics of this event. 
I thank you all for being here today. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2004
