Toshihiko Fukui: The euro-dollar regime and the role of the yen - their impact 
on Asia  
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  13th  International  Monetary 
Symposium,  “The  euro:  five  years  on  -  Implications  for  Asia”,  organised  by  the  Institute  for 
International  Monetary  Affairs  and  the  Delegation  of  the  European  Commission  in  Japan,  Tokyo, 
12 November 2004. 
 The euro as a key currency 
1.  
Let me begin today by reiterating that the birth of the euro in 1999 was an epoch making event. It was 
an enormous task to say the least in the context of the international currency system. I remember the 
endless discussions leading up to January 1999, asking if the euro could or should be launched at all. 
There were even discussions on the potential breakup of the euro. The euro has come a long way 
since then, and I am here speaking about an “euro-dollar regime.” Today, we can discuss the euro’s 
potential  to  bring  a  sea  change  to  the  global  financial  architecture,  without  being  criticized  for 
fantasizing.  I  should  congratulate  my  colleagues  at  the  European  Central  Bank  for  this  significant 
achievement.  
The euro meets a number of criteria to function as a key currency alongside the dollar. First, the ECB 
has  succeeded  in  building  up  confidence  as  the  guardian  of  the  euro,  maintaining  price  stability. 
Second, the size of the euro area economy is equivalent to that of the United States. Third, there has 
emerged a deep and liquid capital market in euro-denominated financial instruments.  
In the past five years, the importance of the euro has increased considerably. I will let some numbers 
speak for themselves. We can count more than 50 countries that link their currencies to the euro. More 
foreign exchange reserves are held in euro: between end-1999 and end-2003, the share of the euro 
increased  from  14%  to  20%.  Furthermore,  during  the  same  period,  the  share  of  outstanding 
euro-denominated bonds has increased to 30% from 20% in cross-border issues.  
How would this emergence of the euro impact the global economy?  
Looking at a currency’s function as the vehicle of international transactions, it would be most rational 
and  economical  if  there  were  single  global  currency.  There  are  obviously  economies  of  scale  and 
network externalities. On the other hand, from the perspective of a store of value, it would be desirable 
to diversify one’s currency exposures.  
Having said this, I would like to focus on the potential competition between currencies. The position as 
a  key  currency  is  not  easily  threatened.  Inertia  here  plays  a  large  role.  In  such  a  situation,  the 
economy  of  the  key  currency  is  easily  tempted  to  focus  its  economic  policy  on  domestic 
considerations. In today’s globalized economy, this could lead to undesirable ripple effects on the rest 
of  the  world,  through  the  fluctuations  of  the  external  value  of  the  key  currency.  If  we  have  two 
competing currencies, and the role of the key currency is contestable, competition between them could 
lead to more attention to the external value of key currencies. This should have a positive effect on the 
stability of the global financial system.  
The role of the yen and its challenges 
2.  
In this context, what kind of role can or should the yen perform?  
I am a firm believer in the potential of the Japanese economy. Therefore, I believe that the yen can 
and should play a larger role in the global market. Looking back, Japanese prices have been stable for 
a long time. In addition, I can count a few more strengths: one of the largest pool of savings in the 
world; strategic location in Asia - the center of global growth; and state-of-the-art IT technology. These 
strengths  must  be  funneled  into  the  strengthening  of  the  whole  Japanese  economy  through 
appropriate economic policies. This, in turn, would assure the place of the yen in the global economy.  
What are such policies? The answer boils down to two factors: one is to support the private sector to 
realize a vibrant economy and the other is to build efficient and liquid financial markets. In other words, 
policies must support structural reforms. Reforms not only in the private sector but also in the public 
sector are important. From the central bank’s point of view, it is our responsibility to contribute to the 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 1
sustainable growth of the economy through the maintenance of price stability. We must also enhance 
credibility  through  transparent  formulation  of  policies.  The  central  bank  also  has  a  role  to  play  in 
invigorating financial markets. We are redoubling our efforts as a key player in the market and as a 
provider of market infrastructure.  
Considering  the  deepening  economic  relations  between  Japan  and  the  rest  of  Asia,  Asia  should 
benefit if the use of the yen could be facilitated. The yen could become a viable alternative in both 
fund management and fund raising. Asia’s strong demand for capital and Japan’s vast pool of savings 
could be a win-win combination.  
Asia’s single currency - a dream or a vision? 
3.  
If the yen could play a larger role in the global economy, does it mean that Asia would become an “yen 
economic  area?”  More  generally,  could  there  emerge  a  currency  that  becomes  an  anchor  in  the 
region? Furthermore, could we see a common currency area in Asia?  
For  the  near  future,  you  would  agree  that  this  is  quite  unlikely.  Economic  structures  of  Asian 
economies  are  not  only  diverse  but  also  ever-changing.  Against  this  background,  foreign  exchange 
regimes vary greatly.  
Without  a  convergence  of  economic  conditions,  it  would  be  most  inappropriate  to  lose  flexibility 
through  the  adoption  of  an  artificial  framework,  be  it  a  currency  peg  or  a  single  currency.  Such  an 
adventure could lead to an accumulation of imbalances within the system. Looking back on Japan’s 
experience, such imbalances would always be corrected with a vengeance. This is a lesson that we 
should never forget.  
Even if we concur that currency integration in Asia is probably a dream in the short term, could it be a 
vision in the medium to long term? In Europe, it took about 50 years before the euro was introduced. 
My Chinese friends often tell me that 50 years is just a blink of the eye in their four-thousand-year 
history.  Nevertheless,  in  this  rapidly  changing  global  economy,  Asia  could  have  a  single  currency 
50 years from now.  
If this vision is to be realized, economies of the region must pass a few tests.  
First,  we  need  to  see  further  deepening  of  Asian  countries’  mutual  dependence  through  division  of 
labor. In this process, Asia would become more important in the global economy.  
Second, we need the development of vibrant financial markets, capital markets in particular, in yen 
and other Asian currencies. In this context, liberalization of cross-border capital flows within the region 
is a key element.  
Last but not least, we need to build both domestic and global confidence towards economic policies of 
Asian economies.  
Already, I see encouraging developments in this direction. With regard to the first point, we are seeing 
a significant strengthening of economic linkages between Asian economies through trade and direct 
investment. For example, Asia’s share in Japan’s trade increased to around 45% in 2003 from around 
30%  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990’s.  For  the  second  point,  cooperative  efforts  to  develop  regional 
financial markets are beginning to bear fruits. An example is the Asian Bond Fund II project, being 
developed  by  the  11  central  banks  of  EMEAP  economies,  where  EMEAP  central  banks  will  jointly 
invest in local currency denominated funds. As regards the third point, central banks in the region are 
now firmly focused on price stability and there is considerable progress in financial system reforms in 
each economy.  
These encouraging signals are, if anything, rather endogenous and market driven in their nature.  
Yet, if we are to seriously explore the possibility of a single Asian currency, strong political will is going 
to be essential at some stage.  
This  is  because,  if  the  Asian  economies  are  to  achieve  convergence  at  a  high  level,  rather  painful 
reforms are indispensable. This is obvious if we look how difficult it is in Europe to comply with the 
Stability and Growth pact.  
The introduction of a single currency by itself does not solve problems in each economy. Neither does 
it yield economic growth. The full potential of a common currency can only be realized in so far as 
respective economies tackle structural problems in the process of achieving a monetary union.  
2 
 BIS Review 67/2004
Asian  economies  would  experience  significant  dislocations  if  they  were  to  form  a  monetary  union 
without disciplined economic policies. In this context, we are paying attention to see if Europe could 
succeed  in  advancing  structural  reform  and  achieve  stronger  growth  by  exploiting  the  heightened 
economic potential brought about by the introduction of the euro.  
Before  I  finish,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  Asian  integration  would  probably  be  soft-structured. 
Each Asian economy should endeavor to increase the attractiveness of their economy and currency 
for the time being. Initially, this would mean additional flexibility. We can then share our experiences. 
At  the  same  time,  we  should  ensure  that  cultural  diversities  in  the  region  would  be  translated  into 
creative energy, and not clashes of culture. Only then would we realize stable regional currencies, and 
the dream of a single currency would become a vision.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 67/2004 
 3
