Toshihiko Fukui: The current situation and outlook for the Japanese economy  
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Kisaragi-kai 
meeting, Tokyo, 11 November 2004. 
 Today I will talk about the Bank of Japan's assessment of the economy and the thinking behind its 
conduct of monetary policy with reference to the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter 
termed the Outlook Report) published in October 2004.  
Recent economic developments 
I.  
The  Japanese  economy  is  currently  in  the  process  of  recovery.  Since  the  early  1990s,  it  has  on  a 
number  of occasions  appeared  to  be  entering  a recovery  phase.  Each  time, however,  the  recovery 
soon ran out of steam and the economy slipped back into recession. These recessions were without 
exception  marked  by  deep  troughs.  Excesses  in  production  capacity,  the  work  force,  and  debts, 
coupled with weakness in the financial system, increased the severity of the slowdowns.  
The 1990s have often been called Japan's “lost decade,” but they have not passed entirely without 
accomplishment. On the contrary, there has been progress in structural adjustment over this period, 
as excess production capacity and debts have been dealt with. On the managerial front, new forms of 
collaboration  have  emerged  between  firms  regardless  of  the  sectors  to  which  they  belong,  and 
individual firms have aggressively undertaken new and innovative investment, raising their ability to 
generate  new  products  and  services  offering  high  value  added.  The  fruits  of  these  endeavors  are 
clearly  visible  in  recent  corporate  profitability.  According  to  the  forecast  in  the  September  Tankan 
(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the ratio of current profits to sales for fiscal 
2004 should exceed the peak reached during the recovery phase of the 1990s, and is expected to 
attain a level comparable to the high point of the bubble period. Underpinned by such broad-based 
efforts by firms, the current economic recovery may be viewed as having a stronger foundation than 
previous ones.  
Turning  to  the  economic  environment  in  which  Japan  finds  itself,  we  observe  continued  worldwide 
economic  expansion  led  by  countries  such  as  the  United  States  and  China.  In  the  United  States, 
productivity  surged  in  the  1990s  reflecting  continuing  technological  innovation,  particularly  in  IT. 
Moving  into  the  first  decade  of  the  21st  century,  despite  a  brief  period  of  adjustment  following  the 
bursting  of  the  IT  bubble,  since  2002  the  economy  has  been  in  a  recovery  phase  and  has  been 
achieving high  growth.  Although  the  rise  in crude  oil  prices and  slowdown  in  demand  for  IT-related 
goods  have  recently  been  restraining  the  pace  of  economic  growth,  it  appears  likely  that  the  U.S. 
economy will continue to expand at a steady and sustainable pace. China continued to achieve high 
economic  growth  as  it  increasingly  adopted  open-market  policies  throughout  the  period  from  1992, 
when  Chinese  leader  Deng  Xiaoping  made  a  famous  speech  during  his  tour  of  southern  China,  to 
2001,  when  it  joined  the  World  Trade  Organization.  Its  presence  in  the  global  economy  is  growing 
rapidly.  Although  there  is  a  risk  of  investment  overheating,  the  fundamentals  remain  in  place  for 
continued robust growth. It is worth mentioning the projections by the International Monetary Fund for 
growth in the world's real GDP in 2004 and 2005 - at 5.0 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively - which 
support the view of continuing worldwide economic expansion.  
Against the background of economic expansion overseas, Japan's exports and production are likely to 
continue increasing, and in turn, corporate profits and business fixed investment are expected to rise, 
reflecting the efforts of firms in Japan mentioned earlier. Thus, the economy is expected to continue 
recovering  underpinned  by  a  virtuous  cycle  where  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  the 
employment  situation  leads  to  an  increase  in  household  income  and  furthermore  household 
consumption.  In  the  Outlook  Report  published  in  October,  the  majority  of  the  nine-member  Policy 
Board forecast real GDP growth for fiscal 2004 ranging from 3.4 to 3.7 percent, with the median at 3.6 
percent. Comparable figures for fiscal 2005 ranged between 2.2 and 2.6 percent, with the median at 
2.5 percent. Although ostensibly this represents a slowdown, it should be noted that the growth rate 
for  fiscal  2004  is  pushed  up  by  the  high  growth  rate  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2003.  In  fact,  the 
figures suggest that the Japanese economy is in the process of shifting to a sustainable growth track.  
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
Turning to prices, domestic corporate goods prices are likely to continue increasing for the time being 
owing partly to rising domestic and international commodity prices, particularly crude oil prices. It is 
noticeable, however, that higher corporate productivity and restraint on labor costs have meant that 
consumer  prices  remain  relatively  resistant  to  increases  in  economic  activity,  and  this  tendency  is 
likely  to  persist.  In  the  Outlook  Report,  the  forecasts  provided  by  the  majority  of  the  Policy  Board 
members  envisioned  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI;  excluding 
fresh  food,  on  a  nationwide  basis)  for  fiscal  2004  as  ranging  between  minus  0.2  and  minus  0.1 
percent, with the median at minus 0.2 percent, and for fiscal 2005 as ranging between minus 0.1 and 
plus 0.2 percent, with the median at plus 0.1 percent. I will return to this subject in more detail later in 
my remarks.  
Forecasts  are  always  subject  to  qualification.  Factors  that  may  cause  either  positive  or  negative 
deviations from the forecasts in the Outlook Report published in October include (1) developments in 
overseas  economies,  including  movements  in  crude  oil  prices  and  demand  for  IT-related  products; 
(2) developments  in  domestic  private  demand;  (3)  developments  in  domestic  financial  and  foreign 
exchange  markets;  and  (4)  issues relating  to  the health  of  the  financial  system  and  the  disposal of 
nonperforming loans. Details on these factors are provided in the Outlook Report. Here, I will touch 
upon two issues with an important bearing on the direction of both overseas and domestic economies, 
that is, crude oil prices and demand for IT-related goods.  
Crude oil prices are hovering around the highest level ever recorded: West Texas Intermediate (WTI) 
crude oil prices have been around 50 U.S. dollars per barrel. While prices for light crude oil (which has 
a  larger  gasoline  component)  have  surged,  those  for  heavy  crude  oil  (with  a  smaller  gasoline 
component)  have  remained  at  a  relatively  low  level,  with  the  unprecedented  large  price  difference 
continuing between the two. Thanks to its large refining capacity for gasoline, Japan's imports of crude 
oil are concentrated among medium and heavy crude oil, so that the rise in the overall price of crude 
oil imported to Japan is relatively small. In addition, considering factors such as the consumption of oil 
per  unit  of  real  GDP,  which  is  about  70  percent  of  that  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  the  highly 
efficient utilization of energy resources in Japan, the direct impact of crude oil prices is not expected to 
be particularly large for the time being.  
More  worrisome  is  the  indirect  impact  from  overseas  economies.  If  crude  oil  prices  remain  at  high 
levels, major energy-consuming nations will see their household spending power adjusted for inflation 
come under pressure, considerably affecting economic activity. Some observers claim that the rise in 
crude oil prices will cause a decline in the pace of expansion of the global economy, and as a result 
push down crude oil prices. However, there is considerable uncertainty as to when this endogenous 
mechanism  will  come  into  play.  Meanwhile,  the  fact  is  that,  given  the  limited  supply-side  potential 
vis-à-vis  rising  demand  and  the  further  threat  to  the  supply  side  offered  by  heightened  geopolitical 
risks, the risk of a further rise in crude oil prices cannot be ruled out completely. So far, there seems to 
be  very  little  risk  of  a  slowdown  in  the  global  economic  expansion,  but  developments  in  crude  oil 
prices, along with their effects on the world economy, will have to be monitored closely.  
Equally  important  are  developments  in  demand  for  IT-related  goods.  At  present,  the  Japanese  IT 
industry, which had witnessed an unintended buildup in levels of stocks, has been in the process since 
the  summer  of  adjusting  production  and  the  level  of  stocks  in  response  to  the  slowdown  in 
international demand for IT-related goods. This adjustment is very likely to be mild, since not only have 
firms adopted a more cautious production stance and been quick to take action with regard to stock 
levels,  but  also  the  base  of  IT-related  demand  has  been  expanding  in  response  to,  for  example, 
growth  in  the  market  for  digital  household  appliances.  However,  on  top  of  the  volatility  and 
unpredictability of worldwide demand for IT-related goods, the widespread international division of the 
production  process  has  meant  that  it  is  increasingly  becoming  difficult  to  gain  a  clear  picture  of 
developments in IT-related sectors. There is a risk, therefore, of an unexpected fall in shipments that 
may lead to a sizeable adjustment. In this connection, sales around the year-end both at home and 
abroad will have to be monitored closely.  
Three features of the current recovery phase 
II.  
Next, I would like to discuss some of the more distinctive features of the current recovery phase. The 
first  of  these  is  the  recovery  in  the  household  income  situation  which,  although  production  and 
corporate profits continue to increase, remains moderate to date. The second is the fact that, in spite 
of  the  moderate  nature  of  this  recovery  in  household  income  conditions,  household  consumption 
continues to show some positive movements. The third feature is the underlying price trend, with the 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
year-on-year  change  in  consumer  prices  continuing  to  register  a  slight  decline  notwithstanding  the 
ongoing  economic  recovery.  Since  there  is  a  close  relationship  between  these  features  and  the 
outlook for the Japanese economy projected in the Outlook Report, I would like to explain the Bank's 
view of each of them in turn in some detail.  
Moderate improvement in the household income situation 
A.  
The  course  of  the  current  recovery  has  seen  the  pace  of  decline  in  household  income  gradually 
shrinking, with 2002 marking the low point. However, the year-on-year change in household income 
has yet to turn positive, even this year.  
Movements in household income can be decomposed into movements in the number of employees 
and in the average wage per worker. Looking at movements in the number of employees, we see that 
although there has been a general decline in recent years, since the middle of 2003 the year-on-year 
growth  rate,  while  fluctuating  on  a  monthly  basis,  has  moved  into  positive  territory.  Within  these 
figures,  we  observe  that  while  numbers  of  regular  employees  continue  to  decline,  numbers  of 
so-called “non-regular employees” - in other words, part-time and temporary workers as well as those 
working  on  pro  rata  contracts  -  have  continued  to  increase  rapidly,  so  that  the  proportion  of 
non-regular  employees  in  the  work  force  has  expanded  significantly.  Statistics  compiled  by  the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications show that non-regular employees now make up about 
30 percent of all employees.  
On the other hand, while the rate of decline in the average wage per worker has been abating, the 
year-on-year  change  remains  slightly  negative.  The  point  here  is  the  significant  influence  of  the 
increase in non-regular employees just mentioned. There is inevitably a substantial difference in the 
average  wages  of  regular  employees,  consisting  mostly  of  long-term  company  employees  and 
managers, and of non-regular employees who work mainly on fixed assignments. When the proportion 
of non-regular employees, with their lower average wages, increases, this pushes down the overall 
average wage per worker. In fact, looking at the wages of both regular and non-regular employees, we 
see that since 2003 they have finally either stopped declining or started to rise. Clearly, it is the rise in 
the proportion of non-regular employees in the work force that is responsible for the continuing decline 
in the average wage per worker.  
Of relevance in this regard, as firms strive to restrain their labor costs by making aggressive use of 
part-time and temporary workers, is the progress made in the deregulation of the labor market, and in 
particular amendments that have relaxed the laws governing the employment of temporary workers. 
Another  factor  likely  to  have  played  a  role  is  firms'  increasing  emphasis  on  raising  profitability.  For 
example, the share of labor in income distribution, i.e., household income divided by nominal GDP, 
which remained at a high level throughout the 1990s, has now been declining at a significant rate for 
several years and has recently been hovering below its 1980s average. Such movements in labor's 
share are likely to have been influenced by changes in firms' attitudes to corporate management, as 
they  take  effective  advantage  of  deregulation  of  the  labor  market  to  review  the  distribution  of  their 
income between capital and labor.  
I often hear the claim that Japan's economic recovery has not made itself properly felt. The delayed 
recovery of household income which we have been discussing may well be one reason for this. From 
the standpoint of the individual, if his or her wages do not increase, then it is perfectly natural that he 
or she has no genuine sense of a recovery. However, when we consider the extremely high level of 
corporate profits, it seems reasonable to expect that the beneficial effects of this will gradually feed 
through from the corporate to the household sector and at some point household income will start to 
increase.  Some  firms  have  commented  that  there  may  be  a  limit  to  the  increase  in  the  number  of 
non-regular employees because job-specific skills and expertise cannot be fully shared and passed on 
among such employees. In fact, there are signs that the increase in the proportion of part-time workers 
in  the  work  force  has  recently  been  slowing  slightly.  In  this  context,  we  will  continue  to  carefully 
monitor these and other developments in household income.  
Firmness in household consumption 
B. 
The second feature of the current recovery phase is that, despite the fact that the improvement in the 
household income situation has remained moderate, household consumption has continued to show 
some positive movements. Although household consumption recovering ahead of household income 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
is  a  phenomenon  often  seen  in  the  United  States,  it  is  almost  unprecedented  in  Japan,  where 
households are usually unwilling to borrow to spend.  
The  recovery  in  household  consumption  in  the  absence  of  a  significant  improvement  in  household 
income has occurred not only as a result of structural factors such as Japan's changing demographics, 
meaning that there is a larger proportion of elderly people who have a higher propensity to consume, 
but also because the propensity to consume among elderly people has itself been rising recently. A 
number of reasons may be put forward for this rise. For example, there are those who point to the 
influence  of  the  nursing  insurance  scheme  introduced  in  2000.  Our  view  at  the  Bank  is  that  a 
significant  contribution  has  been  made  also  by  firms'  efforts  to  gain  a  better  grasp  of  the  needs  of 
customers  and  to  provide  them  with  new  and  attractive  products  and  services  that  meet  their 
requirements. Firms that have tailored their marketing strategies to specifically target the elderly have 
induced  the  latter  to  part  with  some  of  their  liberal  endowment  of  disposable  financial  assets.  For 
example, it is said that flat-panel TVs and expensive guided tours are most actively purchased by the 
elderly.  
Moreover, a recovery trend has also been discernible recently in the propensity to consume of people 
other than the elderly. It seems that firms have succeeded in inducing consumption across a range of 
customer age groups. A breakdown by spending behavior shows that spending is increasing in a wide 
range of areas: these include travel both within Japan and abroad, education geared toward lifelong 
learning and self  improvement,  and  health  and  sports-related  services.  This  suggests  abatement  of 
pessimism about future household income as the economy continues to recover. In this regard, the 
momentum  for  recovery  in  household  consumption  may  be  expected  to  receive  a  further  boost  as 
household income starts to increase.  
Divergence between developments in economic activity and prices 
C.  
As I mentioned earlier, consumer prices have recently been less responsive to increased economic 
activity.  The  third  feature  of  the  current  recovery  phase  is  therefore  the  divergence  between 
developments in economic activity and prices. Underlying this divergence is the fact that firms are now 
able to produce a greater number of products more efficiently and at a lower labor cost.  
Higher productivity has been achieved in a number of ways. Firstly, as in previous recovery phases, a 
cyclical mechanism has been working to put to good use idle labor and capital. Secondly, labor and 
capital resources have been used more efficiently than in previous recoveries, due both to firms' own 
streamlining  efforts  and  to  deregulation  in  various  fields.  Thirdly,  there  may  have  been  steady 
long-term  improvements  in  economic  efficiency,  due  to  technological  innovation,  especially  the 
progress made in IT. At the same time, on the wage front, firms have been restraining labor costs by 
hiring part-time and temporary workers instead of regular employees.  
As a result of this higher productivity and wage restraint by firms, unit labor costs, or labor costs per 
unit  of  output,  have  been  declining  significantly  for  the  past  few  years  and  have  reached  an 
unprecedented low level. The declining unit labor costs have absorbed rises in various other costs, 
stopping  consumer  prices  from  increasing  despite  the  continued  economic  recovery.  The  current 
decline  in  prices  thus  seems  to  be  undergoing  a  qualitative  change:  from  being  rooted  in  a  large 
outgap, it has gradually sprung more from improvements in productivity and firms' efforts to trim labor 
costs to enhance their competitiveness.  
It is unlikely, however, that this situation will continue forever. It is undoubtedly the case that higher 
productivity  increases  the  potential  supply  capacity,  causing  a  temporary  easing  of  labor  market 
conditions which is unfavorable to wage increases. Nevertheless, so long as a rise in productivity does 
not  occur  continuously,  sooner  or  later  the  labor  that  has  been  freed  up  will  be  re-employed  and 
wages will start to rise. Along with developments in wages and household income, we will also need to 
monitor closely whether productivity gains will slow as the economic recovery continues, or whether 
they will continue to increase due to deregulation and innovations in IT.  
Another factor that has caused prices to be less responsive to increased economic activity is firms' 
caution  about  changing  their  price-setting  stance  in  view  of  intensified  competition.  Materials  prices 
and  intermediate  goods  prices  are  clearly  rising  at  present  according  to  the  corporate  goods  price 
index,  reflecting  the  surge  in  domestic  and  international  commodity  prices.  Many  firms  have  so  far 
avoided passing this rise in costs on to final goods prices and have kept prices unchanged for the time 
being,  with  some  claiming  that  they  have  been  unable  to  raise  final  goods  prices  because  of 
consumers'  price  sensitivity.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  keep  a  careful  eye  on  firms'  price-setting 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2004
stances,  which  may remain  constant  or  change  as  the rise  in  materials  prices  gradually spreads  to 
intermediate goods prices in line with the continuing economic recovery.  
This divergence between developments in economic activity and prices is not a development unique to 
Japan. Industrialized countries around the world, including the United States and the United Kingdom, 
have  been  experiencing  a  similar  phenomenon.  The  extent  of  the  divergence  varies  of  course  by 
country and region. However, one common factor is increases in productivity and structural changes in 
the labor market, specifically deregulation and changes in the attitudes of employers and employees. 
Another  potential  factor  is  the  reduction  in  price-setting  power  suffered  by  firms  all  over  the  world, 
following  the  advance  of  economic  globalization.  The  intensified  competition  in  the  global  market 
economy may perhaps be explained by the major shifts in political, economic, and social frameworks 
after World War II, including the entry of East European countries into the global economy after the fall 
of  the  Berlin  Wall,  the  miraculous  growth  achieved  by  Asian  economies,  as  well  as  the  rise  of  the 
BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) as regional economic powers. Whatever the case, assessing 
price  developments requires  a  firm  grasp  of  the  issues underlying  them,  and in  this regard,  we  will 
continue to monitor carefully the situation surrounding prices both at home and abroad.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
Three and a half years have passed since the Bank introduced the quantitative easing framework, in 
which  current  account  balances  are  used  as  the  main  operating  target.  The  Bank  has  made  a 
commitment, unprecedented in the history of central banks, to continue with the quantitative easing 
policy until the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) 
registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. With this commitment, the Bank has continued 
to provide ample liquidity. In the current situation where consumer prices have been less responsive to 
the  economic  recovery,  the  commitment  has  contributed  to  stabilizing  expectations  about  future 
interest  rates  and  thereby  market  interest  rates,  and  this  situation  has  allowed  firms  to  continue  to 
enjoy low funding costs. Furthermore, as returns on investment increase with the recovery, returns net 
of  funding  costs  are  expected  to  rise  gradually.  Thus,  the  positive  effect  of  the  commitment  on  the 
economy,  acting  via  interest  rates,  will  strengthen  as  corporate  profits  increase  along  with  the 
economic recovery. With the upsurge of business initiatives in the private sector and the recovery on a 
more solid track, the economy will eventually achieve sustainable growth and overcome deflation.  
In  the  Outlook  Report  published  in  October,  the  median  forecast  of  Policy  Board  members  is  for 
consumer prices to post a small year-on-year rise in fiscal 2005. However, the economy could deviate 
from the scenario set out in the outlook, either above it or below it, and future developments in prices 
may be influenced by movements in various factors, including crude oil prices, productivity, and labor 
costs. As things stand, it is uncertain whether or not an occasion will arise during fiscal 2005 requiring 
the  present  monetary  policy  framework  to  be  changed.  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  more 
specifically  the  timing  of  the  termination  of  the  current  monetary  policy  framework  and  the  pace  at 
which  the  Bank  will  raise  short-term  interest  rates  to  keep  them  consistent  with  actual  economic 
conditions, depends on future developments in economic activity and prices. If higher productivity and 
other factors continue to a large extent to contain upward pressure on prices as the economy moves 
to a sustainable and balanced growth path, this will likely give the Bank more latitude in conducting 
monetary policy.  
Central  banks  should  respond  appropriately  and  flexibly  to  changes  in  economic  and  financial 
developments. As the effects of monetary policy are transmitted first of all via the financial markets, it 
is extremely important that the appropriate monetary policy be communicated to market participants in 
a lucid manner. On occasion, speculation of various kinds arises about the future conduct of monetary 
policy in financial markets. Market expectations thus have the potential to become extremely unstable 
in  the  future  as  the  end  to  the  unprecedented  monetary  easing  approaches.  To  prevent  the 
emergence  of  this  kind  of  instability,  the  Bank  will  endeavor  to  offer  a  lucid  explanation  of  its 
assessment  of  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  the  thinking  behind  its  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. Furthermore, the Bank will continue to enhance its communication with market participants so 
that they will be better able to judge and predict the future conduct of monetary policy. The content of 
this communication will depend on future developments in the economic and financial situation.  
Some may comment that the explanation of the thinking behind the Bank's conduct of monetary policy 
and communication with market participants in the October Outlook Report is abstract and difficult to 
understand. This is to an extent inevitable, since the response of monetary policy must depend on the 
economic and financial situation at the time. In the current instance, the Bank's decision to present its 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 5
thinking in the Outlook Report was taken under the premise that central banks and market participants 
should broadly share, to the extent possible, a common understanding about the conduct of monetary 
policy.  This  should  make  it  possible  to  avoid  undue  speculation  when  changes  are  made  to  an 
unprecedented policy framework such as the current quantitative easing. With this in mind, the Bank 
will continue to maintain effective communication with market participants.  
6 
 BIS Review 66/2004
