Jens Thomsen: Brief overview of the Danish economy  
Statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark, 
at the meeting of the Danish Economic Council, Copenhagen, 30 November 2004. 
 The  cyclical  analysis  of  the  Chairmanship  of  the  Danish  Economic  Council  is  in  line  with  other 
analyses: the Danish economy is in an upswing, driven by strong growth in domestic demand. This 
contributes to bringing down unemployment and raising labour force participation. The latest national 
accounts figures indicate that growth is slowing down, but these figures are often revised significantly 
and thus uncertain. It goes without saying that it is prerequisite to Danish economic development that 
the international cyclical scenario does not weaken markedly. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  agrees  with  the  Chairmanship  that  fiscal  relaxation  is  not  required.  Fiscal 
policy must be formulated for the medium term, based on the 2010 plan. Short-term fiscal adjustments 
tend to have unwanted effects. 
Obviously,  structural  measures  must  be  taken  to  keep  the  surplus  on  public  finances  at 
1½-2½ per cent of GDP. Here, the report points out that the lack of new employment-policy initiatives 
gives cause for concern. 
Chapter  1.4’s  discussion  of  wage  competitiveness  scarcely  touches  on  the  issue  of  productivity 
development. How can it be that Danish wages have been rising faster than those of our competitors 
for a number of years and the effective krone rate has risen, while the employment level has been 
high, and has recently begun to rise again, and we have enjoyed a sound (and rising) surplus on the 
current  account?  This combination  is  worthy  of  a  few  comments,  including  the  issue  of  productivity 
growth, even if it is not obvious what is cause and what is effect. 
As far as excise duties are concerned, it should be emphasised that some of these are highly sensitive 
to  cross-border  trading.  Therefore,  changes  in  relative  prices  may  have  great  consequences.  The 
same applies to duties on pesticides. A ban on pesticides would be most effective if accompanied by a 
similar ban in our neighbouring countries. 
The proposal to introduce a tax allowance for maintenance and repair of one’s own home seems to 
conflict with the efforts to expand the tax base and reduce tax rates. 
The views advanced on the Stability and Growth Pact are pertinent. Clearly, the task is to increase the 
incentive to consolidate in the good times in order to avoid easing fiscal policy as seen in Germany 
and France in 2001 and 2002. 
Introduction of exceptions for certain expenses, such as investments, will add to the already significant 
technical calculation problems. Moreover, not all investments are equally appropriate for strengthening 
the future potential for growth. 
While the proposal on tradable deficit permits is interesting, it may be difficult to put into operation. 
   1/1 
