Zhou Xiaochuan: Gold market functions to hedge against risks 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 2004 London Bullion 
Market Association Annual Precious Metals Conference, Shanghai, 6 September 2004. 
 I  would  like  to  congratulate,  on  behalf  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  in  my  own  name,  the 
convening of 2004 London Bullion Market Association Annual Conference on Precious Metals. Relying 
on improved infrastructure and as a cohesive force in the national economy, Shanghai is developing 
various  types  of  financial  markets.  Any  of  these  markets,  be  it  a  foreign  exchange  market,  a  bond 
market, a futures market or a gold market, serves as an important center that connects and influences 
the rest of the country. This is why it is so encouraging and appropriate to hold this year’s Precious 
Metals Conference in Shanghai. 
London gold market is the biggest as well as the oldest gold market in the world. In 1804, London 
replaced  Amsterdam  to  become  the  world’s  gold  trading  center;  in  1919,  London  gold  market  was 
formally founded; and in 1982, London futures market for gold declared its foundation. Currently, the 
London gold market is trading at a per week volume of 2-3 billion U.S. Dollars, accounting for 43% of 
the world’s total gold transactions, establishing itself into not only the world’s largest gold sales market, 
but also a governmental gold trading market for most of the world’s central banks. It is even a major 
force in influencing the gold prices in many other countries and regions.  
As the administrator of London gold market, LBMA enjoys authority as well as fame in world’s gold 
circle.  And  each  year  in  different  cities  of  the  world,  LBMA  holds  its  global  annual  conference  on 
precious metals - one of the world’s most important international conferences of the gold industry. The 
Shanghai conference creates conditions for exchange and cooperation between market participants in 
China and the world and will promote the reform and opening up of China’s gold market. 
Compared  with  the  time  honored  London  gold  market,  Chinese  gold  market  is  only  two  years  old. 
However  considerable  progress  has  been  achieved  with  the  market  notably  expanded,  investment 
ratio  rapidly  improved,  pricing  mechanism  gradually  formed,  investment  instruments  diversified  and 
market  participators  increased.  By  the  end  of  2003,  Shanghai  Gold  Exchange  already  had 
108 members.  The  transaction  volume  in  2003  was  235.35  tons  or  22.962  billion  RMB,  of  which 
148.62 tons were actually delivered. China’s gold production of the same year was 200 tons. A sound 
prospect for Chinese gold market is unfolding. 
International gold market and colleagues present at this conference have paid a lot of attention to the 
past and present of Chinese gold market, but the future of a reformed and open market is of even 
greater concern to all of us. So today, I would like to associate myself in the discussion of the future of 
the  market  where  I  see  three  transformations:  first,  transformation  from  a  market  majoring  in 
commodity  transactions  to  financial  transactions;  second,  transformation  from  spot  transactions  to 
futures transactions; third, transformation from a domestic market to an international market. 
1. 
To transform Chinese gold market from one for commodity transactions to one for financial 
product transactions. Gold as a commodity has the multi-characters of a currency, a financial 
product and an ordinary kind of good. Globally speaking, gold is phasing out as a currency, 
but  the  thriving  investments  in  gold  demonstrates  its  financial  characters  and  its 
indispensability as an investment instrument. In all the major international financial centers, 
gold  market  is  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  markets  consisting  of  the  money  market, 
securities market and foreign exchange market. 
As an ordinary commodity, gold has become a consumption product for the urban and rural 
residents  after  the  reform  and  opening  up.  The  gold  market  can  meet  the  demand  of  the 
consumers, and the gold producing or consuming enterprises. But gold is yet to be cultivated 
as a financial instrument for investment and store of value. Transaction of gold as a financial 
product  is  still  restricted  in  China,  and  it  has  not  been  brought  into  full  play  the  financing 
function of the gold market. 
How can we transform the gold market into a financial market from its present stage as a 
commodity market? The current situation presents individual investment in gold as a realistic 
answer  to  this  question.  Our  total  domestic  household  savings  amount  to  as  high  as 
12 trillion RMB, readily conditioned for investment in gold or rather turning the asset of the 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
2. 
3. 
ordinary people from currency into gold. From the macro-economic perspective, it creates an 
additional  channel  to  convert  savings  into  investment  balancing  the  demand  and  supply. 
From the micro-economic perspective, allowing people to hold assets in gold can improve 
social welfare benefiting both the country and its people. Also, the dual characters of being 
an  ordinary  commodity  and  a  currency  allow  gold  to  well  hedge  against  risks.  So  it  is 
practical to develop individual gold trading business. 
Transform the gold market from spot transactions to gold derivatives transactions. There are 
two  major  types  of  transactions  in  the  international  gold  market:  the  traditional  spot 
transactions  taken  place  basically  in  the  gold  markets  of  London,  Zurich  and  Hong  Kong; 
and  the  futures  transactions  including  gold  options,  forwards  and  swaps  basically  on 
Chicago  Board  of  Trade,  New  York  Mercantile  Exchange,  the  Mid-America  Commodity 
Exchange  and  Tokyo  Commodity  Exchange.  A  fledged  gold  derivatives  market  can 
effectively function for market players to hedge against risks and carry out investment and 
financing.  
The  current  major  form  of  gold  transaction  at  Shanghai  Gold  Exchange  is  firm  order  spot 
transaction. With the development of Chinese gold market, we will phase in a variety of gold 
derivatives including forwards and futures. In February and August this year, Shanghai Gold 
Exchange  has  put  forward  successively  T+5  and  deferred  delivery  products  in  addition  to 
spot transactions. The attempts help the enterprises to fix costs, further preserve value, and 
avoid  the  uncertainties  in  production  costs  caused  by  price  fluctuations.  Currently,  the 
deferred delivery is done on a trial basis by means of down payment. The transaction could 
be settled before, after or on the contracted date as negotiated by the buyer and seller. The 
price is decided on the day of transaction. This product avails gold producing and demanding 
enterprises to hedge against risks, diversifies tools for investment and enlarges the variety of 
transactions  on  the  market.  The  PBC  will  conduct  further  research  on  gold  forwards  and 
futures provided that financial risks can be effectively contained. 
To integrate Chinese gold market into the international market. We all know that the present 
Chinese gold market is a relatively closed one with membership accessible only to domestic 
gold producers, intermediate consumers and commercial banks; exports and imports have 
not been liberalized; and no round-the-clock synchronized transactions with the international 
market.  Therefore,  we  plan  to  open  the  market  further  in  an  effort  to  solve  the  above 
problems, fuse the Chinese gold market into the global market and create conditions to forge 
our market into a global player.  
We see as central bankers, that developed gold market can help to compliment the monetary policy 
instruments  and  improve  macro-economic  management.  This  is  because  gold  still  apparently 
demonstrates its character as a currency in the modern financial system. Even after the collapse of the 
Bretton  Woods  System,  the  price  of  gold  is  still  an  important  index  for  central  banks  to  evaluate 
inflation. Also, all central banks still hold considerable amount of gold as government reserves. Gold 
reserves,  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  quota  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  form  a  nation’s 
international  reserves  that  can  be  used  to  weather  risks.  The  establishment  and  development  of 
Chinese gold market symbolizes a preliminary completion of a financial market system consisting of 
the  money  market,  securities  market,  insurance  market  and  the  foreign  exchange  market.  An 
improved financial market system will serve as a firm and effective micro-economic basis for macro 
economic adjustment. So we aim at realizing these three transformations to establish a secure, and 
effective  gold  trading  system  where  hedging  instruments  are  widely  available,  and  to  foster  the 
development of the gold market. This is to be achieved with the joint efforts of out colleagues from the 
world financial circle especially colleagues of the gold industry, and my colleagues in China.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
