Zdeněk Tůma: EU enlargement and monetary integration  
Remarks by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the 3rd ECB Central Banking 
Conference “The New EU Member States: Convergence and Stability”, Frankfurt, 21-22 October 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It has been only recently since we had become members of the European Union. It is only natural that, 
once the immediate effects of the enlargement have subsided, policy-makers´ attention should shift 
towards the next step - monetary integration of the twenty-five current EU member states.  
The first thing to be considered when discussing European monetary integration is how the different 
countries will go about adopting the euro. There is no universal strategy that can be used by all new 
EU member states. The euro may either be adopted rapidly, or after a longer interim period. In the 
pre-EMU  period,  the  emphasis  can  be  put  either  on  ensuring  the  low  inflation  required  by  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  domestically,  or  on  importing  it  by  fixing  the  exchange  rate.  The  key  factors  that 
determine which strategy to adopt are, in my opinion, the size and flexibility of the domestic economy, 
the current monetary-policy regime and its credibility as well as the state of public finances.  
Specifically, small countries that have lived with fixed exchange-rate regimes for the last ten years, 
and have thus developed economies flexible enough to compensate for fixed exchange rates will most 
likely benefit from faster adoption of the euro. They are also likely to rely on importing price stability 
from  abroad  during  the  interim  period.  Larger  countries  that  have  invested  heavily  in  developing  a 
credible independent monetary policy but still have more to do in the area of fiscal policy reforms and 
flexibility of domestic economies, will probably opt for  a more cautious approach. They are likely to 
prefer  avoiding  double  regime  switches,  opting  instead  for  a  smooth  and  fast  transition  from  the 
current regime to euro adoption.  
The Czech Republic belongs to the latter group. The Czech strategy for euro adoption is based on a 
cautious  timescale.  In  the  pre-EMU  period,  we  want  to  ensure  low  inflation  domestically,  not  by 
importing it. In the strategy, we have pointed to the years 2009-10 as the most likely entry date. In 
comparison to other new EU member states, this timescale had been viewed as relatively cautious. 
However, it should be said that other countries in the region have recently pushed back their initially 
more optimistic estimates. The primary reasons for this more cautious timescale are - in all cases - 
fiscal developments.  
In  the  pre-EMU  period,  we  will  continue  targeting  inflation.  This  strategy  has  gained  a  substantial 
degree of credibility in the Czech Republic since its introduction in 1997. Our inflation target for the 
period beyond January 2006 is set at 3% (for CPI), which should allow us to fulfil the monetary side of 
Maastricht convergence criteria, and at the same time to reflect the long-term real convergence needs 
of  the  Czech  economy.  In  our  experience,  inflation  targeting  is  capable  of  producing  a  sufficiently 
strong  nominal  anchor  for  the  economy,  and  consequently  also  of  stabilising  the  exchange  rate, 
obviously in the absence of large external shocks.  
Hence,  in  favourable  circumstances,  inflation  targeting  will  allow  us  to  achieve  price  and 
exchange-rate  stability  simultaneously.  Should  circumstances  become 
the 
simultaneous achievement of both will be difficult no matter which monetary strategy is adopted. That 
is why we do not consider ERM2 to be a policy regime superior to the current regime. In line with this 
stance, we have agreed with the government to stay out of the ERM2 mechanism for the time being. 
We  plan  to  introduce  ERM2  after  conditions  for  meeting  all  Maastricht  criteria  within  a  two-year 
timeframe have been established.  
There  is  still  a  number  of  issues  to  be  discussed,  let  me  address  two  of  them.  First,  is  inflation 
targeting compatible with ERM2? Second, what is the impact of policy debate about the modifications 
to the SGP on our forthcoming effort to meet the Maastricht criteria? As far as the compatibility of the 
two regimes is concerned, namely inflation targeting and ERM2, the specific arrangements have not 
yet emerged from our ongoing debate. We believe that relying on the economic analysis and intuition 
rather than on background legal documents as a guide, there is no need to modify the current strategy 
significantly. It will be able to deliver both price and exchange-rate stability. However, monetary policy 
alone cannot guarantee the smooth progress of adopting the euro. It is of crucial importance that the 
whole policy mix is supportive of this goal. The recent failure to enforce SGP rules in the existing euro 
favourable, 
less 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
area should not be taken as an excuse for postponing fiscal reforms in the new EU member states. On 
the contrary, it should be interpreted as a warning signal that the Maastricht criteria should be met by a 
sufficient margin prior to euro adoption in order to create an adequate buffer for difficult periods.  
Having said that, I would like to emphasise that monetary integration is not only about the adoption of 
the euro by the new EU members; it is a more general process - a continuous improvement of our 
common  institutional  framework,  monetary  strategy  and  analytical  techniques.  There  is  a  very  solid 
foundation  upon  which  to  build  a  common  future  for  our  twenty-five  countries.  This  year  the  euro 
celebrates its fifth anniversary. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the ECB for the successes 
achieved  so  far.  The  currency  changeover,  the  lack  of  historical  euro-data,  the  need  to  build  the 
credibility  of  the  newly  established  central  bank  -  these  were  all  challenges  that  were  successfully 
overcome. The euro has emerged as a stable, highly credible, and important international currency. As 
a  result,  we  can  now  discuss  the  monetary  integration  of  all  current  EU  member  states  with 
confidence.  
The word “integration” can mean different things in different circumstances. For me today, it means 
that all current EU member states will contribute as much as they can to these improvements with their 
own  ideas,  knowledge  and  experience.  The  new  ESCB  members  are  prepared  to  contribute  their 
share. They have gained a wealth of experience from a decade of economic transformation, a decade 
during which they used a wide variety of monetary policy strategies, from inflation targeting to currency 
boards, in order to deliver low inflation. Let me mention just a couple of lessons that were learnt:  
• 
how to make decisions and produce good-quality economic forecasts when faced with large 
uncertainty (eg. about available data)  
how to bring the economy back to low inflation after a series of supply-side shocks and how 
efficient communication is crucial in such circumstances  
and  that  maintaining  low  inflation  is  much  easier  providing  fiscal  discipline  and  policy 
co-ordination can contribute to the task.  
  These issues will surely be familiar to others. The knowledge gained during the transformation period 
will  enrich  the  policy  debates  of  the  ESCB´s  councils  and  working  groups.  This  is  how  monetary 
integration will happen on a day-to-day basis both in countries that already use the euro and in those 
that will introduce it in the future.  
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
