Erkki Liikanen: The IMF - internal governance, crisis management and its 
involvement in low-income countries 
Statement by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Governor of the International 
Monetary  Fund  for  Finland,  on  behalf  of  the  Nordic-Baltic  Constituency,  at  the  Joint  Annual 
Discussion, Washington DC, 3 October 2004. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honoured  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  on  behalf  of  the  Nordic-Baltic  constituency 
consisting  of  Denmark,  Estonia,  Iceland,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Finland.  We  are 
gathered here in Washington at a time when the IMF has just passed the 60 year mark. This milestone 
gives us an excellent opportunity to reflect on the main challenges of this institution. 
I start with a comment on the economic outlook. The overall picture is quite comforting, even though 
higher  oil  prices  have  added  to  the  downside  risks.  The  main  challenge  now  is  to  establish  a  firm 
foundation for sustainable growth. 
The  opportunity  offered  by  the  present  situation  should  be  used  to  address  global  imbalances,  to 
move towards more sustainable fiscal positions and to press ahead with structural reform. The recent 
agreement to continue the Doha trade round was a welcome step forward in our efforts to bringing the 
fruits  of  sustainable  growth  to  all.  Industrial  countries  must  shoulder  their  responsibilities  for  the 
progress  made  in  trade  liberalization,  and  low-income  countries  need  to  take  action  to  ensure  the 
reduction of trade barriers between them.  
I want to focus first on surveillance and the Fund’s internal governance, second on our way of dealing 
with crises, and third on the Fund’s involvement in low-income countries. 
The Fund needs to become more candid in its surveillance… 
First, is the question of surveillance. In Fund terminology, surveillance has a positive ring; it is about 
shared economic security. In recent years, increased transparency has made the Fund’s surveillance 
more accessible. The move to presumed publication of the Fund’s reports is the latest achievement in 
this field, and it is important that we continue to encourage all member countries to follow this new 
policy. 
The recent biennial review provided us with valuable information about the state of surveillance and 
guidance on the way forward. It is important to deepen the coverage of regional and global spillovers 
and  to  improve  the  integration  of  bilateral,  regional  and  multilateral  surveillance.  The  Fund’s 
surveillance over euro area policies is a good example in this respect. We might sometimes disagree 
on policy conclusions, but I appreciate the comprehensive and candid view given on the policies of our 
region.  The  Nordic-Baltic  constituency  includes  countries  either  inside  or  closely  linked  to  the 
European  Union,  and  for  that  very  reason  we  have  a  wider  interest  on  the  issue.  Having  been 
personally involved in European cooperation for a long time, I appreciate the “outsider view” that the 
Fund can bring to the European discussion. 
Of course, becoming better at multilateral and regional surveillance is dependent on the quality and 
efficiency  of  bilateral  surveillance.  The  Fund  staff’s  own  report,  together  with  the  Independent 
Evaluation Office’s (IEO) report on the Fund’s Role in Argentina, served as an eye-opener for many of 
us. The evaluation report makes a convincing case concerning the shortcomings of surveillance in this 
instance. I quote, “Little substantive discussion took place with the authorities on whether or not the 
exchange rate peg was appropriate for Argentina over the medium term, and the issue received scant 
analysis within the IMF” unquote. 
The  Fund  gave  the  authorities  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  for  too  long  and  did  not  acknowledge  that 
temporary positive developments were not supported by structural changes. None of us want to see a 
repetition of this, and therefore we need to emphasize reform and insist on having structural issues of 
macroeconomic importance adequately addressed in Fund surveillance and programs. 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 1
…while further improving internal governance 
The  evaluation  report  also  shows  that  there  is  a  need  for  further  discussion  on  how  to  enhance 
internal decision-making and ensure that our representatives in the Executive Board are fully informed 
about all issues relevant to the decision-making process. Critical decisions are, however, sometimes 
made outside the Board. This undermines the ability of the Board to exercise the powers that we as 
Governors have given them. It also calls into question the accountability of this institution. On top of 
this, it may weaken the credibility the Fund vitally needs. 
In  this  respect  the  clarity  that  the  exceptional  access  criteria  bring  to  decision-making  is  most 
welcome. The use of this promising vehicle has been limited to date. The exceptional access criteria 
focus on the early involvement of the Executive Board. A well-informed and alert Board is the best 
guarantee that the staff and management do not prejudge the Board’s decisions. It is up to all parties 
concerned to make sure that the agreed rules are followed. 
Enhancing the voice and participation of developing countries in the Fund’s decision-making process 
is  another  important  area.  The  Nordic-Baltic  constituency  is  in  favour  of  improving  developing 
countries’ participation in international fora and is ready to consider realistic measures to achieve this. 
One way to do this is to increase basic votes. 
interesting  discussion  has  centred  on 
There is a need to change our way of dealing with crises 
Secondly, is the question of the way we prevent and handle crises. The Fund’s success in preventing 
and  handling  crises  is  not  measured  by  the  amount  of  finance  it  disburses.  Precautionary 
arrangements  have  become  more  and  more  common  in  recent  years.  I  have  noted  the  latest 
suggestion  to  create  a  so-called  policy  monitoring  arrangement.  However,  it  is  an  open  question 
whether there would be demand for such an arrangement or whether the existing tools can serve the 
same purpose that a policy monitoring arrangement is supposed to do. 
Another 
framework  and  on 
considerations of its proper functioning. In general, I feel that the existing framework with early Board 
involvement  should  be  left  unchanged  for  the  time  being.  We  should  make  sure  that  we  apply  the 
exceptional  access  criteria,  as  they  are  defined,  in  order  to  have  a  predictable  and  equitable 
framework in place. 
The call for a strong exceptional access framework is reinforced by the fact that there has been limited 
progress  on  other  aspects  of  the  crisis  resolution  framework.  Issues  related  to  private  sector 
involvement  have  been  put  on  the  back  burner  for  too  long,  making  the  current  system  still  tilted 
towards bailing out the private sector. It is a welcome development that the use of collective action 
clauses  has  become  so  widespread,  but  we  should  also  develop  other  tools  to  involve  the  private 
sector. The Fund’s lending into arrears policy provides guidance on how to react in such a situation, 
but I believe that the policy would benefit from more operational criteria that would make the policy 
easier  to  apply.  Well-defined  rules  on  debt  restructuring  do  not  have  to  lead  to  easier  defaults  but 
rather to a more predictable and orderly process. 
the  exceptional  access 
Stepping up our efforts to reduce poverty in low-income countries 
Thirdly,  is  the  question  of  the  international  community’s  efforts  to  reduce  poverty  in  low-income 
countries  and  on  the  role  the  Fund  can  play  in  this,  without  compromising  its  core  function.  The 
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals depends on sound policies, good governance, and 
adequate  financing.  Trade  liberalization  especially  in  agricultural  products  would  give  a  boost  to 
low-income  countries.  Ensuring  better  and  equal  access  to  basic  services  such  as  education  and 
health  care,  reducing  poverty  and  underpinning  a  more  equal  income  distribution,  would  help  to 
enhance and sustain growth. 
An operational framework for debt sustainability would enable both the countries themselves and the 
donors to better tailor policies to be consistent with the countries’ long-term debt sustainability. Further 
work  on  a  debt  sustainability  framework  would  also  facilitate  our  discussion  about  what  is  needed 
beyond  the  present  HIPC  Initiative.  The  decision  to  extend  the  initiative  for  two  more  years  was  a 
welcome move in order to ensure equal treatment of eligible countries. However, there is a need to 
consider new ways of addressing long-term growth and sustainability issues in both HIPC as well as in 
other low-income countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2004
