Plenderleith: Developments in the gold market 
Speech by Mr Ian Plenderleith, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the London 
Bullion Market Association Biennial Dinner, London, 26 October 2004.  
 I want first to thank you very warmly for the chance to join you this evening. It is a particular pleasure 
for me because, having spent the main part of my career in the City of London at the global centre for 
gold  trading,  I  now  find  myself  back  up  the  supply  chain  working  in  the  country  that  is  the  leading 
global gold producer. So it is a great privilege for me to join this notable gathering of the glitterati of 
both camps, so gracefully hosted by the London Bullion Market Association.  
Arriving this morning from South Africa, where summer on the highveld is now in full bloom, to the 
cold, damp, gloom of an English October dawn was a salutary reminder of the realities of globalisation. 
But, as evidenced by the attendance here this evening, globalisation is no new phenomenon for the 
gold market. Gold has been a global monetary asset since at least the days of King Croesus of Lydia - 
whose habit of sprinkling gold dust on his food made me look rather carefully at the salt and pepper on 
the table this evening; and gold has been a store of value and a source of beauty in artefacts for a lot 
longer.  
It is by recognizing the global nature of the gold market that the LBMA has been able to raise its act in 
promoting and serving the gold market around the world, and in the process help strengthen London’s 
position  as  the  pre-eminent  international  financial  centre.  That  LBMA  membership  has  this  year 
exceeded  the  100  mark  reflects  the  value  it  is  delivering,  and  I want  therefore  to  pay  tribute  to  the 
excellent  work  lead  by  Simon  Weeks,  your  Chairman,  Jeremy  Charles,  your  Deputy  Chairman, 
Stewart Murray, your Chief Executive, Martin Stokes, your immediate past Chairman, and their team 
of  dedicated  committees  and  staff.  Their  efforts  have,  for  example,  helped  the  Good  Delivery  List 
remain the world standard of bar quality: the procedures the LBMA have put in place for pro-actively 
monitoring  the  List are  a welcome  and  successful  initiative  in  ensuring  that  technical standards  are 
maintained. The LBMA’s contribution to strengthening the regulatory framework, and the steps it has 
taken  to  improve  the  transparency  of  market  data,  are  also  welcome  progress  towards  meeting 
modern  market  standards.  Alongside  these  initiatives,  the  LBMA’s  information  and  educational 
programme, through its conferences and seminars, has been well-focused and continues to provide 
valuable opportunities for industry issues to be debated. We in South Africa are particularly delighted 
that next year’s conference is to be held in our country and we look forward to welcoming you to a 
decent climate and outstanding wines. We regard your visit as good practice for hosting the soccer 
World Cup in 2010 - though we hope it will be a somewhat less intimidating experience.  
Looking  back  over  the  past  year  or  so,  there  have  been  some  notable  developments  in  the  gold 
market. I want to touch on just two.  
First, the news in April that NM Rothschild were withdrawing from gold trading marked a sad moment 
in  the  long  history  of  the  London  market.  That  they  chaired  the  London  Gold  Fixing  for  85  years, 
continuously  from  its  inception  from  1919,  may  not,  I  suppose,  be  entirely  in  line  with  modern-day 
precepts  of  corporate  governance,  but  it  represents  a  long-running  commitment  to  promoting  the 
quality and international reach of the London market which has played an important part in maintaining 
its pre-eminence. We all owe a great debt of gratitude to the House of Rothschild and I want tonight to 
pay unreserved tribute to the contribution they have made over the years.  
The market, nonetheless, will continue, and I was delighted to see the decision to move to conducting 
the fixing by telephone, which I believe was the means by which it was originally conducted in 1919 
before  moving  to  more  gracious  surroundings  at  Rothschilds.  This  is  a  delicious  illustration  of  the 
paradox, of which I have become increasingly aware, that part of the process by which we edge our 
way into the future is by inadvertently re-inventing the past. 
The other notable event to which I want to allude is the renewal from last month of the Central Bank 
Gold Agreement. Though widely expected, this is welcome evidence of the continuing ability of central 
banks to work together to align their interests and those of the markets in a sensible arrangement for 
orderly  marketing.  The  LBMA’s  input  to  this  process,  through  its  survey  of  the  views  of  market 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
participants,  was  well-timed  and  helpful.  There  are,  of  course,  plenty  of  other  fields  where  we,  as 
central banks, and our governments need to show a similar dedication to international good order in 
addressing potential imbalances. 
Elsewhere, of course, the market has continued to digest significant shifts in the trading environment. 
Earlier this year, prices reached a 15-year high, and are now again close to that level. On the producer 
front, the process of consolidation amongst mining companies has continued, though not all of them, 
as recent events have shown, entirely in harmony. De-hedging has also continued. That process - in 
either direction - is of course a perfectly normal commercial activity, but I strongly advise you to find a 
better term than “de-hedging’, because friends of the countryside - never very well disposed to mining 
operations - might be inclined to take ‘de-hedging’ as an environmentally-unfriendly activity designed 
to flatten the landscape. It has, of course, had much that effect on leasing rates. I assume that is why 
much is written these days about the contango - which, again, the uninitiated might be forgiven for 
supposing was the gold market’s distinctive contribution to resolving the Argentinian debt crisis.  
Before  leaving  the  past  year,  I  want  to  recognize  one  other  notable  personal  contribution  to  the 
standing of gold - Kelly Holmes’ outstanding achievement in winning two of the most thrilling Olympic 
gold medals any of us can ever wish to see. I mention this particularly because it gave rise to my own 
personal golden moment of the past year. As you may know, Kelly Holmes trains in South Africa, and, 
by chance, my wife and I found ourselves alongside her at the security check at Johannesburg airport 
a few weeks ago. She was carrying her gold medals, and so had to produce them for inspection. While 
we were admiring them, we were interrupted by the public announcement that our flight was ready for 
boarding and we were warned that it would take 15 minutes to get to the gate, whereupon I found 
myself, to my horror, saying “Well, if we stick with Kelly, it should take us only 47 seconds” - a remark 
so crass that my wife quite rightly refused to speak to me for most of the rest of the flight. 
With  these  and  other  challenges,  or  in  my  case  bloopers,  behind  us,  what  now  are  the  prospects 
looking forward? Here, I think the prospects for the gold market can best be described in much the 
words that tended to be used in my own personal career performance assessments by my superiors 
over  the  years:  in  the  medium  term,  the  fundamentals  look  quite  promising,  but  in  the  short  run, 
performance has been erratic and the outlook is uncertain. 
If one looks at the fundamentals, I think a good reason for being positive about the medium term - and 
a factor that is sometimes not given sufficient attention - is that gold has the benefit, uniquely so far as 
I  am  aware,  of  enjoying  demand  from  four  separate  markets:  it  is  a  core  ingredient  in  high-quality 
artistic  artefacts,  notably  jewellery;  it  has  applications  in  industrial  production;  it  is  a  universal  and 
long-standing outlet for private financial investment; and it is a monetary asset. Other commodities or 
artefacts share some of these sources of demand, but none covers the field so comprehensively. I do 
not, for example, think that my wife would be too thrilled if I have her a lump of coal, or even a can of 
petrol, for Christmas. 
Of these four markets, a striking feature - and again, a feature that I do not think gets enough attention 
-  is  that  over  the  years  demand  for  fabrication,  notably  jewellery,  has  consistently  outrun  current 
mining production. Current production, on the supply side, and fabrication, on the demand side, are 
not of course the whole picture. The stockpile held by central banks can be, and has at times been, an 
important influence on price expectations; but the Central Bank Gold Agreement has helped to provide 
stability  in  this  area  in  recent  years.  Equally,  supply  can  fluctuate  depending  on  scrap  sales  and 
producer  hedging  or  de-hedging  activity.  But  the  underling  balance  of  demand  and  supply,  viewed 
over the longer run, strikes me as a good deal more healthy than in sometimes suggested. 
Jewellery  fabrication  remains  the  major  source  of  demand,  and  here  prospects  seem  to  me  to  be 
generally  encouraging.  As  the  global  economy  extends  its  recovery,  and  as  emerging  market 
economies  make  further  progress  in  raising  living  standards  for  their  large  populations,  higher 
continuing levels of consumer spending should bring increased demand for high-value artefacts, as 
indeed  luxury  good  retailers  around  the  world  are  already  noticing.  There  should  be  increasing 
opportunities here for the gold industry to expand jewellery sales. But, to reap the full benefits, it will be 
important  that  efforts  are  put  into  design  quality,  product  innovation  and  plain,  straightforward 
marketing.  LBMA  members  might  wish  to  reflect  whether  enough  emphasis  is  placed  on  these  key 
industry-support elements - particularly marketing.  
Industrial  use  of  gold  is  smaller  scale,  but  nonetheless  not  insignificant,  and  may  also  benefit  from 
continuing global economic growth. But the other main source of demand is for gold as a personal 
financial  investment.  Here,  as  with  jewellery,  there should  be excellent  opportunities  for broadening 
the market as rising personal wealth stimulates wider interest in gold-related investments. But here, 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2004
too, I wonder whether we do not sometimes not so much undersell the product as approach it from the 
wrong  angle.  Economists,  of  course,  have  always  struggled  to  rationalize  the  merits  of  gold  as  a 
financial investment. But economists, as I have learnt from personal experience, can all too often fall 
into the trap of being presented with something that works in practice, and objecting, “That’s all very 
well, but you’ll never make it work in theory!” Perhaps for this reason, we tend too often to promote 
gold as some kind of exotic alternative investment - as asset that best gains in value when everything 
else is collapsing. Gold is thus presented as a hedge against disaster. But its value concept should 
perhaps  be  put  more  constructively,  as  an  asset  with  distinctive  characteristics  that  offers  its  own 
prospects of long-run return, based on a rational analysis of supply and demand dynamics; and one 
that, as such, has a part to play, less at some times, greater at other times, in a diversified financial 
portfolio.  
Financial  investment  in  gold  also  seems  to  me  to  be  an  area  where,  in  degree,  as  with  jewellery 
demand,  the  gold  industry  can  help  to  shape  its  own  future.  Products  designed  to  attract  broader 
private investment demand have been with us for some time. Initially the focus was mainly on bullion 
coins - led by the British sovereign and the South African krugerrand, which seem to me to set the 
standard for solid reliability, though maybe I am biased, and followed by a galaxy of imitators, of which 
my favourite is the golden nugget, which seems to me to border on the indecent and can only have 
come out of Australia. More recently, financial engineering has entered the field and is producing a 
range  of  outlets  to  reach a  wider  investing  public.  The  London  Stock  Exchange’s  initiative  in  listing 
Gold  Bullion  Securities  is  welcome  in  this  field.  But  as  rising  personal  wealth,  particularly  in  the 
newly-emerged economies, seeks outlets for its savings, there must be much that the gold industry 
can do to maximize investment interest in gold.  
In  this  vein,  I  want  to  leave  you  with  a  vision.  Earlier  this  year  -  a  year  in  which  we  have  been 
celebrating ten years of democracy in South Africa - the South African National Assembly took delivery 
of  a  new  mace,  the  symbol  of  the  sovereignty  of  Parliament  and  a  tangible  manifestation  of  the 
strength of the democratic process that has taken root in South Africa in the past decade. The head of 
the mace is an 18-carat gold book inscribed with the preamble to the Constitution in all the national 
languages. There are, I believe, currently around 185 sovereign nations in the world. All of them, and 
their regional and municipal governments, and their state bodies, not to speak of their commercial and 
social institutions, have emblems of their authority and gold will in most cases be the natural choice for 
such  prominent  instruments.  With  gold  occupying  such  a  powerful  place  in  our  emotions,  I  am 
confident that, provided we take advantage of the opportunities, the gold market has a long and fruitful 
role to play in the future, and I commend the work of the LBMA in pursuing that goal.  
It is with great pleasure therefore that I ask you all to join me in wishing continuing success and good 
fortune to the London Bullion Market Association.  
BIS Review 63/2004 
 3
