Jean-Pierre Roth: The Swiss National Bank’s new inflation forecast 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2004. 
 Economic  growth  in  Switzerland  has  lost  some  of  its  momentum.  For  this  year,  however,  we  still 
anticipate economic growth to be close to 2%. In the coming year, we expect the economy to expand 
by 1.5% to 2%. On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain unchanged at 0.75%, 
we  expect  an  annual  inflation  rate  of  1.1%  in  2005  and  1.3%  in  2006.  Less  dynamic  growth,  the 
weaker  US  dollar  and  the  decline  in  excess  liquidity  have  dampened  the  anticipated  inflationary 
pressure somewhat. The target range for the three-month Libor rate will therefore be left unchanged at 
0.25-1.25% and the rate will again be kept in the middle of the range. The National Bank’s monetary 
policy continues to have an expansionary effect. Should unexpected developments push up the Swiss 
franc sharply, we will take appropriate action. 
Allow me to explain our decision. It is based on the outlook for price developments in the coming three 
years  as  summarised  in  our  new  inflation  forecast.  The  graph  depicts  the  current  and  the  previous 
inflation  forecasts.  The  dash-dotted  green  curve  reflects  the  September  forecast.  Like  the  current 
forecast, it was based on the assumption of the three-month Libor rate remaining unchanged at 0.75% 
in the following three years. We can see from the graph (blue line) that inflation in the third quarter of 
this  year  was  insignificantly  higher  than  we  had  forecast  in  September.  The  dashed  red  curve 
represents the new forecast. It begins in the fourth quarter of 2004 and ends in the third quarter of 
2007. 
The new forecast differs from the previous ones in three points. Firstly, the projected inflation is higher 
until the third quarter of 2005. Secondly, the inflationary uptrend sets in half a year later. And thirdly, 
inflationary  pressure  has  decreased  in  the  long  term,  which  is  evidenced  by  the  lower-lying  curve. 
There are significant economic facts behind these three deviations, which I would like to comment on. 
Slightly higher inflation in 2005 
1.  
The increase in the anticipated inflation until the third quarter of 2005 is predominantly attributable to 
the rise in oil prices. At the September assessment, the price of Brent in London stood at USD 41. By 
the end of October, the price had surged to over USD 50 before dropping back to around USD 40. 
Higher prices of oil products were the main cause for the rise in inflation in the last few months. Annual 
inflation  between  May  and  September  hovered  around  1%.  A  fresh  spurt  in  oil  product  prices  in 
October and November triggered a rise in annual inflation to 1.3% and 1.5% respectively. According to 
the  new  inflation  forecast,  the  annual  rate  of  inflation  will  increase  to  1.5%  on  average  in  the  first 
quarter of 2005. We presume that oil prices will tend to go down. Consequently, inflationary pressure 
will subside somewhat, particularly towards the end of 2005. With an unchanged monetary policy, we 
are likely to see an inflation rate of 0.9% in the first quarter of 2006. 
Continued recovery 
2.  
In order to assess inflation in the medium term, economic prospects are paramount. During a phase of 
economic  recovery,  as  we  are  currently  experiencing,  how  rapidly  the  capacity  utilisation  rate 
increases is important from a monetary policy perspective. 
Even though GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2004 is likely to be lower than we projected in the 
September  assessment,  we  expect  the  Swiss  economy  to  expand  by  close  to  2%  this  year.  The 
upswing will continue next year. We anticipate a growth rate of 1.5% to 2% for the whole of 2005. The 
fact  that  the  economy  braved  the  oil  price  hike  and  the  stronger  franc  is  testimony  to  a  robust 
recovery. 
There  is  less  uncertainty  now  as  to  the  inflation  prospects  for  next  year.  Utilisation  of  economic 
resources, which is slowly increasing, will not lead to any additional pressure on prices in 2005. As 
can be gleaned from the new inflation forecast, improved capacity utilisation is likely to have an impact 
on price development only in the course of 2006. 
   1/3 
The current inflation forecast for the medium term, ie for the coming two years, is characterised by a 
similar course to the one charted in September. In the new forecast, the point at which inflation will 
begin  to  climb  again  has  been  postponed  by  half  a  year.  If  monetary  policy  remains  unchanged, 
annual inflation will be 1.1% in 2005 and 1.3% in 2006. 
Lower inflation in the longer term 
3.  
After having discussed the medium-term inflation prospects, allow me now to move on to the long-term 
prospects. 
The assessment of inflation prospects in the longer term depends on a number of factors, such as the 
development of monetary and credit aggregates and different asset prices. Long-term forecasts are 
fraught  with  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  In  spite  of  this,  a  central  bank  must  make  a  sound 
assessment of the effects of its monetary policy in the longer term. The need for a forward-looking 
stance is due to the fact that monetary policy has its strongest effect on prices only after a lag of two to 
three years. 
M1  was  5.4%  below  the  year-earlier  level  in  November;  M2  was  down  by  approximately  3%.  M3 
increased by 1.4%. Although there is still ample provision of liquidity, it has dwindled as a result of the 
latest  developments.  Compared  with  the  September  assessment,  we  have  therefore  made  a 
downward correction of our inflation projection for the years 2006 and 2007. 
According  to  our  September  forecast  -  based  on  an  unchanged  three-month  Libor  rate  of  0.75%  - 
inflation  would  have  climbed  to  2.9%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2007.  With  an  unchanged  monetary 
policy,  the  current  forecast  predicts  an  increase  of  only  2.3%.  At  the  end  of  the  new  forecasting 
horizon  in  the  third  quarter  of  2007,  inflation  would  stand  at  2.6%.  The  lower  long-term  inflation 
forecast  suggests  that  there  is  currently  more  room  for  manoeuvre  in  maintaining  an  expansionary 
monetary policy course. 
Exchange rate 
4.  
The dollar has plummeted since October. It has lost 7.9% vis-à-vis the Swiss franc. Notwithstanding 
the sharp fluctuations of the dollar, the franc has remained virtually unchanged against the euro. The 
depreciation of the dollar has a direct impact on the Swiss economy in that it undermines the price 
competitiveness of the export industries. Moreover, a weak dollar also exerts an indirect influence by 
clouding growth prospects in Europe, our largest sales market. 
The appreciation of the franc has tightened monetary conditions. At the same time, the weaker dollar 
has a dampening effect on import prices and, consequently, on inflation prospects. 
Continuation of expansionary monetary policy 
5. 
I  will  now  come  to  my  concluding  remarks.  The  inflation  forecast  shows  that  the  process  of 
normalisation of monetary policy has not yet ended. In light of my comments it should nevertheless not 
be difficult to understand our decision to leave the three-month Libor rate at 0.75%. Since inflationary 
pressure  is  expected  to  ease  in  the  long  term,  there  is  no  need  to  take  a  further  step  toward  a 
normalisation of interest rates at this point in time. In addition, the stronger franc has already resulted 
in more restrictive monetary conditions. With our decision to keep the three-month Libor rate on hold, 
we  are  adhering  to  our  current  monetary  policy  course:  we  are  making  use  of  our  monetary  policy 
leeway to support growth without jeopardising long-term price stability. 
Every  forecast  and  every  decision  is  fraught  with  uncertainty.  Should  unexpected  events  delay 
economic  recovery  or  push  up  the  Swiss  franc  sharply,  we  shall  take  appropriate  action.  For  such 
cases, the Swiss National Bank keeps all its options open. 
   2/3 
       Observed inflation December 2004 
 Inflation forecast on September 2004 with Libor at 0.75%  
and of December 2004 with Libor at 0.75% 
  3/3 
