William R White: Making macroprudential concerns operational 
Speech  by  William  R  White,  Economic  Adviser,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  a  Financial 
Stability Symposium organised by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 25-26 October 2004. 
 Introduction 
In recent years, we have witnessed many bouts of financial instability arising from a wide diversity of 
proximate causes: operational problems, institutional failures, short-term problems in the functioning of 
financial  markets,  mean  revisions  in  overextended financial  markets,  and  contagion  across  markets 
and  between  countries.1  In  this  paper,  I  focus  on  problems  arising  from  financial  overextension  or 
systemic imbalances since they often lie at the heart of other observed problems. 
As  hypothesised  in  a  recent  paper,2  the  increasing  incidence  of  financial  instability  arises  from  the 
coincidence of three secular trends. The first is liberalisation of global markets for goods and services. 
Together with advances in technology, and technology transfer to such giants as China and India, this 
has  contributed  to  disinflationary  pressures  globally  over  an  extended  period.  The  second  is  the 
liberalisation of financial markets, which, again together with advances in technology, has increased 
the  likelihood  of  justified  optimism  (favourably  affecting  credit  and  resource  allocation)  turning  into 
unjustified  optimism  which  breeds  boom-bust  cycles.  The  principal  manifestations  of  this  have 
historically  been  rates  of  growth  of  credit,  asset  prices  and  fixed  investment  well  above  historical 
norms; in effect, imbalances. The third secular trend has been the narrowing focus of “independent” 
central banks on the objective of constraining the rate of growth of prices of currently produced goods 
and services, regardless of other short-term developments. Echoing insights from an earlier literature,3 
the  “elasticity”  of  the  financial  system  has  increased  while  at  the  same  time  policy  resistance  has 
decreased. Rupture is commonly the end product of such overextensions. 
The  dynamics  of  cycles  of  this  sort  can  vary  widely,  but  they  have  three  common  features.  First, 
lending and debt levels rise sharply in the upturn. Second, credit originators tend in the upswings to 
generate common exposures and thus all become vulnerable to the same shocks subsequently. Third, 
the  appetite  for  risk,  the  health  of  the  financial  system  and  the  state  of  the  real  economy  tend  to 
become endogenous. In the upswing, the appetite for risk rises, with initially positive effects on the real 
economy and the financial system, which further stimulates risk-taking. In the downswing, this dynamic 
process goes into reverse, with accumulated consumer and corporate debt loads weighing down the 
economy even in cases where the financial system initially remains quite healthy.4 Whether a weak 
financial system constrains the real economy, or whether a weak economy eventually threatens the 
financial system, the central point is the endogeneity of all variables of interest. Evidently this makes 
forecasting outturns particularly difficult, especially when we add in the non-linearities associated with 
both interactive processes and discrete bankruptcy events. 
What do we mean by macroprudential concerns? In effect, they have to do with avoiding the kind of 
problems  just  described,  with  their  attendant  heavy  costs  in  terms  of  output  and  employment.  The 
policy challenge is to find ways of reconciling the unquestioned benefits in efficiency arising from each 
of the three secular trends with the occasional risks arising from their joint evolution over time. 
How  can  we  make  these  macroprudential  concerns  operational?  Two  things  seem  to  be  required. 
First, there must be a convincing assessment that systemic imbalances are emerging which have the 
potential to impose economic costs. This issue of “vulnerability indicators” is touched on in Section 1. 
Second,  given  such  an  assessment,  the  incentives  must  be  in  place  to  allow  the  instruments  of 
                                                      
1   Examples of each are provided in White (2004). 
2  See Borio and White (2004). 
3   See Laidler (1999), Chapter 2. 
4   The health of the financial system will initially be supported by lower interest rates should monetary policy be eased in the 
face  of  an  economic  slowdown.  However,  if  lower  rates  and  the  search  for  yield  also  encourage  a  continuation  of  the 
risk-seeking  investment  behaviour  which  characterised  the  upturn,  this  could  feed  back  negatively  on  the  health  of  the 
financial system over time. See White (2004). 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
macroprudential  policy  to  be  used  appropriately.5  In  Section  2  the  core  elements  of  an  “idealised” 
macroprudential framework to respond to systemic imbalances are laid out. They include the possible 
use of prudential instruments as well as the use of monetary policy, and also the possible interaction 
between these policy instruments. In this regard, some consideration is given to the kind of institutional 
relationships  that  might  best  contribute  to  good  macroprudential  policy.  In  Section  3  a  long  list  of 
existing impediments (disincentives) to the suggested use of macroprudential instruments is surveyed. 
Section 4 concludes with a consideration of some practical steps that might be taken to reduce these 
disincentives. 
In  a  recent  paper,  Houben  et  al6  distinguish  between  three  states  of  the  financial  world:  stability, 
impending instability and actual instability. This paper deals only with the second state of affairs, and 
thus  has  nothing  to  say  about  issues  of  crisis  management  and  crisis  resolution.  However,  the 
recognition  that  eventual  crises  could  have  heavy  fiscal  costs  would  seem  to  imply  that  Treasury 
officials might also be interested in both constructing and participating in a macroprudential framework 
that operates effectively. Just as war is too important to be left to the generals, financial stability may 
be too important to be left to the prudential authorities and the central bankers. 
Evaluating macroprudential risks 
1. 
How can we best evaluate whether systemic imbalances are building up in such a way that they justify 
a  policy  response?  In  principle,  the  task  is  to  evaluate  the  expected  loss  arising  from  these 
imbalances, where this is the multiple of the probability of financial stress times the loss given stress, 
and to compare this to the costs associated with the use of policy instruments to avoid the problem. 
No aspect of this calculus is easy. The probability of financial stress can be increased by many factors, 
but can as well be reduced by other developments occurring simultaneously. Consider, for example, 
how the capacity of time-varying risk weights to promote procyclicality under Basel II can be offset by 
the  spreading  culture  of  risk  management  engendered  by  the  same  process.  The  costs  associated 
with a prospective “bust” (the loss given stress) will also depend on a myriad of factors, not least the 
health  at  the  time  of  the  three  principal  components  of  the  financial  sector:  financial  institutions, 
markets and the underlying infrastructure. This said, the historical record indicates quite clearly that 
the economic costs of financial crises are very likely to be some multiple of percentage points of GDP. 
Finally, the costs of using policy instruments to avert macroprudential risks must also be assessed. 
Higher  interest  rates  to  lean  against  a  boom  might  have  the  effect  of  driving  inflation  rates  below 
targeted  levels.  Moreover,  from  a  Schumpeterian  perspective,  such  a  policy  might  stop  out  the 
“creative” aspect in the process of creative destruction and put the economy on a permanently lower 
growth path.  
These difficulties admitted, many official agencies are paying increasing attention to data that might 
throw  some  light  on  macroprudential  vulnerabilities.  The  IMF  has  suggested  a  list  of  Financial 
Soundness Indicators for individual countries, and uses them in the context of their Financial Sector 
Assessment Programs. The Committee on the Global Financial System, which meets at the BIS, also 
compiles statistics bearing on the evolution of balance sheets over time (especially debt positions) for 
the  major  economies,  and  on  the  exposure  to  risks  of  various  sorts  (liquidity,  credit  and  market)  in 
major financial markets. While welcome, none of these indicators in themselves give much of a flavour 
of how vulnerabilities of various sorts might interact with systemic implications. In effect, they are micro 
data grossed up to macroprudential dimensions. Accordingly, they provide information neither about 
the distribution of risks nor about the interplay between market participants which can cause one kind 
of risk to suddenly be transformed into another.7 A parallel might be drawn with the stress tests now 
being conducted regularly by many of the larger financial institutions. These commonly indicate that 
                                                      
5   An analogy can be drawn with the workings of FIDICIA in the United States. When an indicator (capital ratio) falls below 
certain benchmark levels, the regulatory authorities are required by law to act in certain ways! 
6   See Houben et al (2004). 
7   By way of example of such transformations, consider the currency mismatch problem in Mexico in 1994. Banks were both 
lending and borrowing in dollars, and had essentially a matched book. They were therefore bearing no market risk. Their 
customers, however, were borrowing in dollars in spite of their revenues being mostly in pesos. When the peso collapsed, 
many of these companies proved unable to service their debts. The default of so many companies threatened the survival of 
the  Mexican  banking  system;  in  effect,  market  risk  turned  into  counterparty  risk.  During  the  LTCM  crisis,  fears  about 
counterparty risk led to a drying-up of market liquidity which eventually forced official intervention. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
institutions are well prepared to meet most individual shocks, but they rarely consider a configuration 
of  shocks  generated  endogenously  in  the  system.  In  particular,  these  stress  tests  rarely  consider 
circumstances in which other major players, some initially more vulnerable than others, are reacting 
similarly and simultaneously to a shared set of exposures. 
Some of my colleagues at the BIS have recently developed an interesting methodology for evaluating 
the probability of financial stress, which also has the merit of being quite simple. Using only ex ante 
information,  Borio  and  Lowe  (2002a)  demonstrate  econometrically  that  financial  crises  in  industrial 
countries are likely to be preceded by some combination of sustained above normal rates of growth of 
credit, asset prices and investment. In a separate paper, Borio and Lowe8 show that the same pattern 
applies for emerging market countries, with overvalued exchange rates also playing a role in predicting 
crises. These models have the added advantage of producing a relatively low level of false positives. 
Recent work by Morris Goldstein and Philip Turner (2004) puts the emphasis on currency mismatch 
problems in emerging market economies, cases where borrowers have liabilities that must be serviced 
in foreign currency whereas revenues are denominated in domestic currency. They conclude that the 
loss given stress (in particular, currency depreciation) is positively related to the degree of currency 
mismatch in the debtor economy. A similar calculus might reveal the exposure of creditor countries 
today  to  a  possible  further  depreciation  of  the  US  dollar,  given  that  virtually  all  exposure  to  US 
borrowers is in US dollars. Clearly, all of the work referred to in this paragraph is at an early stage of 
development and further refinements could well pay big dividends. 
A further reason for wishing to develop better measures of expected loss given financial stress is that 
current measures can be seriously misleading.9 Consider first the currently available methodologies 
for measuring credit risk. The risk assessments of rating agencies tend to rise more in recessions than 
in the preceding upturn, a reaction more to the materialisation of risks than to their build-up. Banks’ 
internal ratings also tend to improve in good times, presumably because banks often look only a short 
time ahead and simply extrapolate recent default experience. As for quantitative models for evaluating 
credit  risk,  most  do  not  incorporate  macro  variables  and  rely  heavily  on  such  market-determined 
variables as equity prices and credit spreads. Unfortunately, these are precisely the variables that are 
most likely to be biased by the market’s excessive optimism during periods when serious imbalances 
are emerging. Finally, it should be noted that, when calculating expected losses, none of the above 
approaches recognises that the probability of default of a given credit tends in practice to be highly 
correlated with the loss-given-default.10
Core elements of a macroprudential framework 
2. 
The  objective  of  a  macroprudential  framework  is  to  limit  system-wide  financial  excesses  that  could 
feed back on the real economy with significant economic costs. The relevant authorities must use the 
instruments at their disposal to limit the expected losses arising from such developments, recognising 
that common exposures of financial institutions and market participants can exacerbate the financial 
and economic cycle in both directions. Moreover, common exposures also mean that the authorities 
face  a  significant  problem  of  “fallacy  of  composition”.  That  is,  recommending  what  might  be 
appropriate  for  a  single  market  participant  could  well  exacerbate  system-wide  problems  should 
everyone do the same thing for the same “good” reason. 
How can the insights above be translated into better operational policies? The first point to note is that 
traditional  microprudential  standards  and  codes  of  good  behaviour  still  need  to  be  strongly 
encouraged.  If  individual  institutions  are  well  managed,  if  markets  function  efficiently  and  if  the 
infrastructure supporting the financial system is strong, then incidents of financial stress are likely to be 
less  frequent  and  the  associated  costs  reduced.  The  attention  paid  to  such  issues  by  the  various 
committees that meet at the BIS,11 the Financial Stability Forum and the Bretton Woods institutions 
attests to their importance. 
                                                      
8   See Borio and Lowe (2004). 
9  On this, see Borio (2003), pp 13-14. 
10  See Altman et al (2002). Also Lowe (2002). 
11  The  BIS  has  a  committee  of  national  experts  to  deal  with  each  of  the  constituent  elements  of  the  international  financial 
system.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is  concerned  with  banks  (and  the  International  Association  of 
Insurance Supervisors with insurance companies). The Committee on the Global Financial system monitors the functioning 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 3
However, given a macroprudential focus, the nature of the monitoring of the components of the system 
must change. Particular focus must be put on those parts of the system likely to have knock-on effects 
elsewhere. From this perspective, banks, as suppliers of liquidity to the system, are more important 
than  insurance  companies.  By  the  same  token,  large  financial  firms  should  receive  more  careful 
monitoring for imprudent behaviour than smaller firms whose failure might be more easily absorbed 
without  systemic  implications.  Indeed,  their  capital  requirements  might  be  calculated  differently  to 
reflect such externalities. Finally, given the growing importance of markets - for the provision of credit, 
the  transfer  of  risk,  and  the  management  of  risk  by  financial  institutions  -  it  is  crucial  that  markets 
continue to function properly under all circumstances. The implication is that market surveillance must 
be strengthened under a macroprudential framework. 
The most important guiding principle for a macroprudential framework would be that policies need to 
be applied more symmetrically over the cycle - tightened as vigorously in the up phase as we observe 
easing in the down phase. This has a number of implications for the conduct of prudential policy and 
for  monetary  policy.  As  for  the  former,  means  must  be  found  to  ensure  that  the  capital  of  financial 
institutions  is  built  up  during  cyclical  upswings.  This  would  have  the  dual  merit  of  both  restraining 
excesses  during  the  upswing  and  providing  a  cushion  to  moderate  the  downturn,  when  it  does 
eventually materialise. As for monetary policy, a tightening response in the face of growing imbalances 
would again moderate the worst excesses and could obviate the need for subsequent radical easing. 
In an environment of initially low inflation, a more symmetric policy over the cycle would also lower the 
likelihood of policy rates ratcheting down over successive cycles to approach the zero lower bound. 
This  could  become  a  significant  problem  if  deflation  were  also  to  emerge  in  such  an  environment. 
While this suggestion concerning symmetry might seem strange to some, it simply parallels the earlier 
suggestion  for  more  aggressive  tightening  of  fiscal  policy  during  upturns.  More  symmetry  over  the 
cycle  in  the  operation  of  fiscal  policy  is  needed  to  help  avoid  the  continuous  ratcheting-up  of  debt 
levels over time. 
Implementing prudential policy in the manner suggested might be done in various ways. To the degree 
that  financial  regulators  felt  sceptical  about  their  capacity  to  evaluate  the  changing  probability  of 
systemic  stress,  they  might  be  inclined  to  eschew  a  discretionary  response  and  to  focus  on  some 
simple  rule-based  procedures  to  govern  private  sector  behaviour.  Goodhart  and  Danielsson  (2001) 
suggest  relating  certain  prudential  norms  to  the  rate  of  growth  of  loans  or  of  asset  prices.  These 
prudential  norms  might  apply  to  the  pricing  of  risk,12  to  the  accumulation  of  provisions  for  losses 
(expected  losses)  or  to  the  accumulation  of  capital  (unexpected  losses).  Indeed,  the  Spanish 
authorities have already implemented a system of “dynamic provisioning” which ensures that loan loss 
provisions rise with loan levels, on the assumption that loss experience going forward will be the same 
as the average loss experience based on historical experience over the full cycle. 
Presuming that regulators did feel more confident in their prediction that systemic imbalances were 
rising to dangerous levels, they might also have recourse to more discretionary action. In particular: 
cash  reserve  ratios  and  secondary  liquidity  requirements  might  be  increased.  Loan-to-value  ratios 
might  be  tightened,  repayment  periods  shortened,  collateral  requirements  strengthened  and  margin 
requirements for speculative trading increased. Such measures were very commonly used in industrial 
countries 20 or 30 years ago and have been used more recently to good effect in both Hong Kong 
SAR and Singapore. In the former case, the avowed purpose was not to stop the perceived property 
boom, but rather to ensure that the banks would remain healthy even in the event of a subsequent 
bust.  Finally,  and  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  it  should  be  noted  that  fiscal  measures  might  also 
prove useful in some circumstances. Reducing the extent to which debt service charges (particularly 
for  housing)  could  be  deducted  from  taxable  income  would  probably  have  an  effect.  Other  fiscal 
changes (eg turnover taxes in the housing market) might also be thought useful.13  
Implementing monetary policy as suggested above might also be done in a variety of ways. A more 
rule-based approach might focus on the rates of growth of monetary aggregates or credit aggregates, 
similar  to  the  way  policy  tended  to  be  conducted  in  some  countries  in  the  1970s.  The  difference, 
                                                                                                                                                                      
of markets, and the vulnerabilities of the system as a whole. Finally, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems 
oversees an important part of the underlying infrastructure of the system. 
12   Goodhart made this point again in his Per Jacobsson Lecture (2004). 
13  A recent study by the Group of Ten Contact Group (2003) into the microeconomic policies contributing to the turbulence in 
asset prices is worth reading in this regard.  
4 
 BIS Review 71/2004
however,  would  be  that  the  policy  tightening  would  be  as  much  directed  to  heading  off  incipient 
financial  excesses,  with  a  potential  for  financial  instability,  as  it  would  be  to  resisting  inflationary 
pressures.  A  two-pronged  approach,  a  variation  on  the  current  approach  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, might then have something to recommend it.14 Goodhart (2004) and a host of others have also 
suggested  ways  in  which  credit  growth  and  asset  price  increases  might  be  linked  more  tightly  to 
subsequent movements in policy rates.  
In contrast, monetary policy might rather be used in a highly discretionary way to respond to growing 
imbalances  that  were  judged  by  policymakers  to  threaten  financial  instability.  Arguably,  this  is  the 
approach  that  has  recently  been  taken  by  both  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia. In the face of rapid increases in housing prices, and an associated rapid increase in both 
household debt and household spending, both central banks raised policy rates even though actual (if 
not  necessarily  projected)  inflation  was  well  under  control.  Similarly,  in  Sweden  the  monetary 
authorities did not lower rates by as much as might have been expected given an undershoot of their 
inflation target. They cited their concern about very rapid increases in house prices as the reason. 
Cooperation  among  official  agencies  pursuing  macroprudential  objectives  would  ideally  begin  with 
agreement  that  a  problem  was  emerging.  A  first  step  in  providing  official  resistance  to  emerging 
imbalances might be statements of concern, presumably with one voice from different sources. Akin to 
the “signalling” function of foreign exchange intervention, this might be sufficient to moderate the rate 
of  growth  of  credit,  asset  prices  and  investment.  One  possibility  would  be  that  market  participants 
might be prompted to question the inherent soundness of their current investment strategies. Another 
might be that they would begin to develop concerns about more concrete policy measures which might 
result in their current investment strategies becoming less profitable and/or more risky. The likelihood 
of this happening would of course depend on the respect with which official views were regarded and, 
more importantly, on the credibility of the implied threat of action.  
In  all  likelihood,  and  this  would  certainly  be  true  in  the  early  days  after  the  establishment  of  a 
macroprudential framework, talk alone would not suffice to alter market sentiment. In the first instance, 
the  official  community  might  turn  to  tighter  prudential  regulation.  This  has  the  advantage  of  directly 
targeting an important source of concern; namely, the health of the financial system. Moreover, were 
the excesses largely confined to certain sectors, regulatory guidance as to exposure levels might be 
particularly  useful.  At  a  later  stage,  if  required,  the  monetary  authorities  might  begin  tightening 
monetary policy. The advantage of this instrument is the broad scope of its impact, which could help to 
moderate a generalised tendency in the economy towards the development of imbalances. Perhaps 
the conclusion to be drawn is that both prudential and monetary instruments might have to be used 
jointly as described, recognising that over time the need to have recourse to the latter would decline as 
the credibility of official threats became better established.  
What  kinds  of  processes  and  institutional  arrangements  between  official  agencies  would  best 
contribute to the efficient pursuit of a macroprudential agenda? Perhaps the most serious problem to 
avoid  is  that  of  macroprudential  concerns  falling  between  the  cracks.  That  is,  while  each  agency 
recognises that a problem is emerging, it feels that it is the responsibility of some other agency to do 
something about it. One possible answer would be to create a committee involving all those concerned 
with systemic stability, but with a mandate to ensure macroprudential monitoring and the appropriate 
policy  response.  In  some  countries,  this  would  imply  widening  the  mandate  of  already  existing 
committees set up to ensure a consistent official response to crisis resolution.15 The committee might 
well be chaired by the central bank representative given that central banks have a more “top down” 
perspective,  focusing  on  the  system  as  a  whole,16  while  prudential  agencies  (or  central  bank 
supervisory  departments  for  that  matter)  have  traditionally  approached  issues  from  the  “bottom  up” 
perspective of individual institutions.  
                                                      
14   The  ECB  was  denied  responsibility  for  supervisory  oversight  on  the  grounds  that  this  might  dilute  its  commitment  to 
monetary stability. It is ironic that, more recently, the ECB has justified retention of the second pillar on the grounds that it 
can provide an early warning of financial excesses.  
15   See Goodhart et al (2002). 
16   Central banks would also be more likely to incorporate macroeconomic considerations into their analysis. Thus, the build-up 
of corporate or household debt might be thought worrisome even if the health of financial institutions was not thought to be 
at risk.  
BIS Review 71/2004 
 5
It  is  notable  that  a  committee  of  this  type  already  exists  at  the  international  level  -  the  Financial 
Stability Forum - though not yet in most national jurisdictions. This committee brings together senior 
Treasury,  central  bank  and  supervisory  officials  from  systemically  important  countries,  along  with 
representatives of the major international financial institutions and the standing committees of the BIS. 
The committee routinely assesses financial vulnerabilities arising from conjunctural developments as 
well  as  from  ongoing  structural  change.  While  the  committee  as  such  has  no  powers  -  it  is  not  a 
super-regulator17 - the insights gained from its deliberations seem on occasion to have led to changes 
in domestic prudential if not yet monetary policies. The Forum might also have a role to play in the 
event of an international financial crisis needing management or resolution. Fortunately, this capacity 
has not been tested to date.  
Current impediments to effective macroprudential action 
3. 
The previous section has set out an “idealised” framework for the implementation of macroprudential 
policies. In addition to the many legitimate questions that might be raised about the desirability of the 
suggestions  made,  there  are  a  number  of  practical  impediments  to  implementation  of  any  sort  of 
macroprudential framework. Forbearance can be an issue at the systemic as well as the institutional 
level.  Some  of  these  impediments  are  of  a  general  nature,  others  affect  prudential  authorities  in 
particular, while still others affect the conduct of the monetary authorities. After identifying the nature of 
these impediments, consideration is then given as to how they might be removed.  
In addition to normal bureaucratic inertia, the principal impediment to implementing macroprudential 
policies in practice is uncertainty as to the significance of potential systemic problems. The evaluation 
problem mentioned above is serious. Moreover, it has probably become more so in recent years given 
the  massive  structural  changes  under  way  in  the  financial  industry,  characterised  above  as 
securitisation, consolidation and globalisation. Market mechanisms now allow the wholesale transfer of 
risks,  and  the  final  resting  place  is  more  unclear  than  ever  before.  While  no  one  really  knows,  the 
common presumption is that these risks are now safely in the hands of those who can best bear them. 
Consolidation is also viewed by some as a positive development, increasing the diversity of revenue 
flows  into  financial  firms  and  reducing  risk.  Others,  however,  point  to  an  associated  degree  of 
concentration in certain markets that is unprecedented, and the implications of which cannot thus far 
be reliably assessed. Globalisation has likewise allowed a welcome dispersion of shocks, in the view 
of  some,  while  increasing  the  chance  of  contagion  in  the  view  of  others.  The  central  point  is  that 
uncertainty  about  the  seriousness  of  a  problem,  particularly  if  a  number  of  agencies  must  be 
convinced,  is  likely  to  be  a  significant  impediment  to  action.  As  the  French  put  it  so  well,  “Dans  le 
doute, abstiens-toi”. 
A closely related problem is that policy action to curb excesses in the private sector is bound to be 
resisted since private gains are at stake. At the intellectual level, the suggestion that the public sector 
knows  better  than  the  collective  wisdom  of  “the  market”  will  be  vigorously  disputed.  Those  finding 
themselves inside bubbles (ex post) are always unable to recognise it ex ante. At the practical level, 
lobbyists, lawyers and enlisted media will be used to sell the idea that “this time it’s different” and that 
there need be no policy resistance to macroprudential concerns.  
A  final  general  concern  is  that  policymakers  will  commonly  have  no  clear  idea  of  what  effect  their 
policy actions might have. In part, this is for the same reasons that cast doubt on whether there is a 
macroprudential problem in the first place. But, in addition, such uncertainty will be compounded by 
the fact that financial imbalances may already be very well developed by the time agreement can be 
forged  on  the  need  to  act.  An  example  of  this  kind  of  problem  is  being  seen  in  the  United  States, 
where policy rates are now being raised back towards more “normal” or “natural” levels after a long 
period of exceptionally easy monetary policy. The reliance on “measured” policy moves, and the care 
taken  to  communicate  the  Fed’s  policy  intentions,  attests  to  the  delicate  situation  in  which  the 
authorities now find themselves. Heavy debt accumulation by households and increased leverage by 
financial firms raise the prospect of a different response to policy tightening than might earlier have 
been expected. Growing suspicions as to the continued reliability of domestic measures of inflationary 
pressures (“gaps”) in an increasingly globalised real economy only add to the uncertainty. 
                                                      
17   In the light of the globalisation process in the financial industry, a number of commentators have suggested the need for an 
international  super-regulator.  See  Eatwell  and  Taylor  (1998)  and  Currie  (1999).  Political  realities,  particularly  but  not 
exclusively in the United States, make this a non-starter for the foreseeable future.  
6 
 BIS Review 71/2004
There  are  particular  impediments  to  prudential  authorities  behaving  as  suggested  above.  First,  and 
perhaps most important, they do not have a macroprudential culture. It is a big leap for supervisors, in 
large part lawyers and accountants by training, and used to evaluating the health of single institutions, 
to  think  systemically.  Shocking  systems  of  simultaneous  equations  to  see  the  effects  on  market 
clearing  conditions  is  not  their  natural  pastime.  Moreover,  it  is  an  even  bigger  leap  for  prudential 
authorities to be convinced that action is needed when the financial system seems healthy, and only 
the corporate and household sectors seem overextended. Surely, they would argue, this is someone 
else’s  responsibility.  A  second  very  practical  concern  is  that,  in  most  jurisdictions,  the  prudential 
authorities do not have the power to use prudential instruments in the way recommended. Acquiring 
such  rights  would  probably  involve  a  long  and  difficult  political  process.  Consider,  for  example,  the 
strong opposition already being mounted by the accounting profession and the tax authorities to the 
idea of forward-looking provisioning for expected losses. How the use of such instruments, effectively 
imposed  from  outside,  might  be  reconciled  with  the  current  trend  to relying more  on  financial  firms’ 
internal assessments of the risks they are bearing is a closely related question.  
Third,  there  is  the  fallacy  of  composition  problem  referred  to  above.  How  could  the  prudential 
authorities  convince  individuals  to  behave  in  ways  that  seemed  to  conflict  with  their  own  best 
interests? They would have to be persuaded both that it was in the common good of all to do so,18 and 
that other providers of credit would not be “free riders” gaining new customers even as they practiced 
restraint. Finally, and closely related, prudential policies to reduce “excesses” in the financial system 
would have to be quite comprehensive, or else the demand for credit would simply shift to unregulated 
sectors and new sources of such credit would arise. Indeed, a large and growing proportion of credit is 
already provided directly through markets rather than regulated financial institutions. Considerations 
such  as  these  imply  that  the  use  of  monetary  policy  might  also  have  to  be  contemplated19  if 
imbalances in the financial system are to be effectively constrained. 
Unfortunately,  along  with  the  general  impediments  against  the  use  of  policy  for  macroprudential 
purposes, other considerations militate against the specific use of monetary policy. The first of these is 
that monetary policy is generally committed to the objective of domestic price stability, whether in the 
context of a formal “inflation targeting framework” or not. If rates must be raised for macroprudential 
reasons when inflation is under control, then the inflation target may be undershot. Some worry that 
this could undermine the credibility of the whole regime. At the very least, there is an inconsistency 
that  will  need  to  be  publicly  and  convincingly  explained.  Moreover,  in  a  world  of  liberalised  capital 
flows, there is the problem that higher interest rates might serve to draw in foreign capital in significant 
ways. A stronger exchange rate might lower domestic prices and increase the undershoot of the target 
inflation rate. Conversely, actions taken to prevent the exchange rate from rising (intervention) might 
conceivably result in an increase in domestic liquidity that would fuel imbalances rather than moderate 
them. 
Finally,  it  may  prove  (indeed  has  proved) difficult  to get  policymakers  to  focus  on  the simultaneous 
occurrence of a number of developments as the only reliable indicator that imbalances are building up. 
Rather,  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  suggest  that  the  macroprudential  approach  comes  down  to 
“targeting asset prices”, and various well known objections can be raised to this. Which of many asset 
prices should be targeted? What should be the targeted level? Would interest rates high enough to 
“burst the asset price bubble” not cause enormous damage elsewhere in the economy? This narrow 
focus on asset prices as the core of the problem will have to be replaced by a broader conceptual 
framework if anything practical is to be done about macroprudential concerns using monetary policy. 
Can current impediments be removed? 
4. 
Given enough conviction that a macroprudential framework is needed, steps could be taken to deal 
with  some  of  the  above  impediments  to  its  effectiveness.  The  phrase  “given  enough  conviction”  is, 
however, crucial since there will clearly be both costs and risks involved with changing the status quo. 
In this spirit, what follows are less recommendations than possibilities to be evaluated.  
                                                      
18   In this context, safety nets are a major complication. Why should a firm worry about systemic problems if it feels that it will 
somehow be made whole by the state? 
 See Borio and White (2004). 
19 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 7
It was suggested above that uncertainty as to whether macroprudential imbalances were approaching 
dangerous levels would militate against a policy reaction. That is because tighter policy would clearly 
have  costs  in  terms  of  either  economic  efficiency  or  lost  output.  The  assumption  underlying  this 
reaction, however, is that policymakers have an objective function that they are trying to maximise. 
The question that should be asked is whether policymakers ought not rather to be following a minimax 
strategy that focuses on avoiding truly bad outcomes. With such an approach, uncertainty about the 
possible build-up of financial imbalances that could led to heavy costs would in fact tilt the balance 
more towards preventive action by the official sector. The bias to inaction could be reduced even more 
by research studies. One objective would be to indicate the extent to which internal governance and 
market discipline could be shown historically to have promoted rather than impeded procyclicality in 
the  financial  system.  Another  might  simply  be  to  improve  further  the  reliability  of  the  promising 
indicators of financial vulnerability suggested by Borio and Lowe, among others. 
The  fact  that  there  would  initially  be  no  popular  support  in  the  private  sector  for  macroprudential 
policies could be overcome through better education. Recall that there was no popular support initially 
for  the  battle  against  inflation,  but  eventually  the  pursuit  of  this  objective  became  the  conventional 
wisdom. The fact that so many central banks already publish financial stability reviews indicates that 
such an education effort is already under way. The danger that repeated warnings without subsequent 
crisis might threaten credibility could be offset by more systematic references to the preventive actions 
undertaken in response to such warnings. In addition, emphasis might be given to observed changes 
in private sector behaviour generated by the establishment of a macroprudential framework. Again, an 
analogy can be drawn with changes in the process of forming inflationary expectations after central 
banks credibly committed themselves to this objective. 
Uncertainty  as  to  the  effects  of  implementing  macroprudential  policies  could  also  impede  policy 
reaction. Yet, it bears repeating that the longer imbalances are allowed to build up the greater such 
uncertainty becomes. The interaction of high debt levels, financial leverage and higher interest rates, 
for  example,  clearly  threatens  non-linear  responses.  The  way  to  avoid  this  problem  is  rather  to  act 
early, in a pre-emptive way, with as much clarity as possible about both the objective of policy and 
how the authorities intend to achieve it.  
Turning  to  the  impediments  affecting  the  proposed  behaviour  of  prudential  regulators,  the  current 
“culture”  of  microprudential  surveillance  could  with  time  be  complemented  by  macroprudential 
concerns. More meetings between the various official agencies concerned would eventually generate 
a  shared  trust,  a  shared  set  of  objectives,  and  a  shared  understanding  of  problems  and  potential 
solutions.  This  is  the  process  that  Kapstein  (1992)  describes  as  accounting  for  the  remarkable 
success  of  the  Basel Committee  over  the  course  of  the  years.  If  this  can occur  at  the  international 
level,  surely  it  would  also  be  possible  at  the  national  level?  As  noted  above,  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum  is  already  providing  an  international  example  of  inter-agency  cooperation,  as  are  the  now 
regular  meetings  taking  place  at  the  BIS  between  the  G10  Governors  and  their  respective 
counterparts from the independent regulatory agencies.  
The fact that prudential agencies do not in general have the power to use macroprudential instruments 
is not surprising. Given that to date there has been no agreement that a problem exists, no priority has 
been given to implementing solutions. However, were there to be a growing public conviction of the 
need  for  an  effective  macroprudential  framework,  the  opposition  of  special  interest  groups  would 
gradually  be  overcome.  Moreover,  legislative  means  would  more  easily  be  found  to  support 
achievement of the objective desired. This said, the capacity of participants in a liberalised financial 
system  to  find  ways  around  regulatory  constraints,  not  least  through  markets,  puts  limits  on  the 
effectiveness  of  such  macroprudential  measures  and  points  again  in  the  direction  of  a  monetary 
response.  
An important impediment to the use of monetary policy to mitigate macroprudential problems is that 
higher  interest  rates  could  drive  forecast  CPI  (say)  inflation  below  some  targeted  or  desired  level. 
Some worry that this might lead the public to believe that the authorities were no longer interested in 
stabilising prices, and that this might encourage inflationary expectations over time. Recognising this 
as a logical possibility, the first point to make is that it is not at all obvious how a policy that drives 
inflation below target would raise inflationary expectations. The second point is that a macroprudential 
framework can be described in ways that are fully consistent with retaining concerns about prices as 
the primary objective of monetary policy. If measured inflation is low, higher interest rates to respond 
to  macroprudential  concerns  may  drive  it  to  unacceptably  low  levels.  However,  if  the  financial 
excesses  are  not  checked,  the  bust  following  the  boom  seems  likely  to  push  inflation  lower  still. 
Resisting the financial excesses, and avoiding the worse of the two outcomes, can then legitimately be 
8 
 BIS Review 71/2004
described as consistent with the pursuit of price stability, albeit over a somewhat longer horizon than 
central banks commonly target today. Recognising that a boom-bust sequence at low inflation could 
result  in  continuously  falling  prices,  such  a  policy  might  even  be  described  as  insurance  against 
deflation.  Since  nominal  rigidities  can  (although  they  need  not)  make  deflations  resistant  to  policy 
stimulus,20 insurance of this sort might be cheap at the price.  
The problem of capital inflows being generated by higher interest rates is a potentially serious one. 
One  possibility  might  be  a  measured  use  of capital  controls.  Another  possibility  would be  to  let  the 
exchange rate rise, accepting unwanted near-term disinflationary pressures (especially in the traded 
goods sector) as the price to be paid for avoiding still stronger downward pressures on prices over the 
longer term. The least attractive option would seem to be massive foreign exchange intervention, as 
currently practiced by a number of Asian countries, which further compounds the underlying problem 
of excess credit creation both at home and abroad.  
The final impediment to the use of monetary policy for macroprudential purposes, technical difficulties 
having to do with a focus on asset prices, will only be removed when these narrow questions are put 
into  a  broader  conceptual  framework  for  evaluating  macroprudential  concerns.  For  some,  this  will 
require a paradigm shift which will not be easily achieved. If one believes that financial imbalances are 
truly dangerous, this must be considered an unfortunate constraint on policy. In contrast, for those that 
do not believe in such dangers, the fact that monetary policy will continue along the same successful 
path it has followed for over a decade will seem fully satisfactory. 
References 
Altman, E I, A Resti and A Sironi (2002): “The link between default and recovery rates: effects on the 
procyclicality of regulatory capital ratios”, paper presented at the BIS Conference on “Changes in risk 
through time: measurement and policy options”, BIS Working Papers, no 113, Basel, July. 
Borio, C E V (2003): “Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation?”, 
BIS Working Papers, no 128, Basel, February. 
Borio, C E V and P Lowe (2002a): “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus”, 
BIS Working Papers, no 114, Basel, July. 
———  (2002b):  “Assessing  the  risk  of  banking  crises”,  BIS  Quarterly  Review,  Basel,  December, 
pp 43-54. 
——— (2004): “Securing sustainable price stability: should credit come back from the wilderness?”, 
BIS Working Papers, no 157, Basel, July. 
Borio,  C  E  V  and  W  R  White  (2004):  “Whither  monetary  and  financial  stability?  The  implications  of 
evolving policy regimes”, BIS Working Papers, no 147, Basel, February. 
Currie, C (1999): “The need for a supra-mega regulator for the next millennium - is there evidence?”, 
presentation at the Global Financial Conference, Istanbul, 7-9 April. 
Eatwell,  J  and  L  Taylor  (1998):  International  capital  markets  and  the  future  of  economic  policy: 
a proposal for the creation of a world financial authority, mimeo (Ford Foundation). 
Goldstein, M and P Turner (2004): Controlling currency mismatches in emerging markets, International 
Institute of Economics, Washington DC. 
Goodhart, C (2004): “Some new directions for financial stability”, Per Jacobsson Lecture, 27 June. 
Goodhart,  C,  D  Schoenmaker  and  Paolo  Dasgupta  (2002):  “The  skill  profile of  central  bankers  and 
supervisors”, European Financial Review 6, pp 397-427, Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Goodhart, C and J Danielsson (2001): “The inter-temporal nature of risk”, 23rd SUERF Colloquium on 
“Technology  and  finance:  challenges  for  financial  markets,  business  strategies  and  policymakers”, 
Brussels, October. 
Group of Ten, Contact Group (2003): Turbulence in asset markets: the role of micro policies, January. 
                                                      
20   For an analysis of such phenomena see Chapter 4 of the 73rd Annual Report of the BIS. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 9
Houben, A, J Kakes and G Schinasi (2004): “Towards a framework for financial stability”, Netherlands 
Bank, Occasional Studies, vol 2/no 1. 
Kapstein,  E  B  (1992):  “Between  power  and  purpose:  central  bankers  and  the  politics  of  regulatory 
convergence”, International Organisation, 46 (1, Winter): pp 265-87. 
Laidler, D (1999): Fabricating the Keynesian revolution: studies of the inter-war literature on money, 
the cycle, and unemployment, Cambridge University Press. 
Lowe,  P  (2002):  “Credit  risk  measurement  and  procyclicality”,  BIS  Working  Papers,  no  116,  Basel, 
September. 
White, W R (2004): “Are changes in financial structure extending safety nets?”, BIS Working Papers, 
no 145, Basel, January. 
10 
 BIS Review 71/2004
