Rafael Buenaventura: Raising the bar on consumer banking service 
Speech  by  Mr  Rafael  Buenaventura,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines),  at  the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the  Philippines’  (BMAP)  30th  anniversary  of 
upgrading bank-marketing practice, Makati City, 26 August 2004. 
 Introduction 
Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the  Philippines  (BMAP), 
follow bankers, ladies and gentlemen: good evening. 
I am deeply honored to take part in this celebration, marking BMAP’s 30th year of upgrading bank-
marketing practice in the country. 
This year’s theme of “Customer service in the marketing mix of financial products” rightly emphasizes 
the importance of banks’ clients in influencing an institution’s success. 
Consumer banking 
Over  the  last  couple  of  years,  the  Philippine  banking  system  has  experienced  strong  growth  in 
consumer  banking  services.  Credit  card  receivables  for  example,  grew  by  an average  25.2  percent 
annually from 2000 to 2003. This has allowed more ordinary people without access to credit to now 
have access and on clean basis. 
However, this growth has also come with a price in the form of increased volume of bad accounts. 
Many of the problems were traceable to the fact that some new cardholders did not really understand 
the  obligations  and responsibilities  that came with  them.  As  a result,  past  due credit card  accounts 
rose an average 40.4 percent, a pace much faster than the new ones granted. The number of credit 
card-related complaints also rose dramatically. 
It  is  in  this  regard  that  we  should  work  hand  in  hand  in  channeling  more  efforts  towards  customer 
education and protection. 
For  its  part,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP)  issued  various  regulations  geared  towards 
protecting both the industry and the public. For instance, in 2002 we issued Circular No. 349 which 
significantly tightened rules on credit card and other lending operations by requiring banks and their 
subsidiary  credit  card  companies  to  ascertain  that  cardholders  are  capable  of  fulfilling  their 
commitments and by setting credit limits based on their net take home pay. Moreover, the BSP took a 
more proactive stand by creating the Consumer Education Committee in January of this year to help 
improve basic financial literacy. 
I commend BMAP together with the Credit Card Association of the Philippines (CCAP), the Bankers 
Association  of  the  Philippines  (BAP),  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks  (CTB)  and  the  Rural  Bankers 
Association of the Philippines (RBAP) for taking a similar stand and creating a multi-sectoral team for 
the conceptualization of a service code for consumer banking in the Philippines. 
Service code for consumer banking 
The service code that is expected to be out in the next quarter of this year is a voluntary code that sets 
minimum service standards to be observed by banks in the conduct of consumer banking services. It 
is aimed at strengthening relationships between banks and its clients, and promoting transparency for 
clients to have better understanding of what to expect from banking products and services. 
Conclusion 
In closing, I strongly encourage everybody to support our initiatives to improve consumer banking in 
the Philippines. Subscribing to the code will be advantageous to both you and your clients, and to the 
banking system as a whole. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
At the end of the day, our banking industry, like any business, stands or falls on the goodwill of our 
customers. 
Again, congratulations and a pleasant evening to all! 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
