David Dodge: Economic and financial trends in Canada 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Finance Committee, Ottawa, 26 October 2004.  
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  committee  twice  a  year,  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  These 
meetings help us keep Members of Parliament and, through you, all Canadians informed about the 
Bank’s views on the economy, and about the objective of monetary policy and the actions we take to 
achieve it. 
Since  we  last  met,  we  are  pleased  to  have  issued  Canada’s  new  $20  bank  note  with  enhanced 
security features. The new note began circulating on 29 September.  
Last  Thursday,  we  released  our  October  Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  reviews  economic  and 
financial trends in the context of Canada’s inflation-control strategy.  
When Paul and I appeared before this Committee last April, we told you that the economy was judged 
to  be  operating  significantly  below  its  potential.  That  is  no  longer  the  case,  because  the  Canadian 
economy  has  grown  faster  than  was  projected  in  last  April’s  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  the  July 
Update. This stronger growth was largely due to a surge in exports. The economy is now operating 
near its production capacity and continues to adjust to global economic developments. 
The  Bank’s  base-case  projection  for  the  period  to  the  end  of  2006  calls  for  aggregate  demand  for 
Canadian  goods  and  services  to  expand,  on  average,  at  about  the  same  rate  as  potential  output. 
Given  the  effects  of  higher  oil  prices  and  the  past  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  the  Bank 
projects economic growth to be slightly less than 3 per cent in 2005, and slightly more than 3 per cent 
in 2006.  
With  the  economy  expected  to  remain  near  its  production  capacity  throughout  this  period,  core 
inflation is projected to move back up to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005. That is the same 
projection that we made last April. However, given the path suggested by futures prices for crude oil, 
the Bank expects total CPI inflation will rise to the top of the 1 to 3 per cent target range in the first half 
of 2005, before falling slightly below core inflation in early 2006. 
Against this background, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate to 2.5 per cent on 19 October. 
The  base-case  projection  assumes  further  reduction  of  monetary  stimulus  over  time,  to  keep  the 
economy near its production potential and to achieve the inflation target. I want to emphasize that the 
pace of interest rate increases will depend on the Bank’s continuing assessment of the prospects for 
factors that affect pressures on capacity and, hence, inflation.  
There  are  significant  risks  and  uncertainties  around  this  base-case  projection,  related  to  the 
adjustment to changes in the global economy, including changes in commodity prices and exchange 
rates. The risks surrounding global economic prospects relate primarily to the evolution of oil prices, 
the pace of expansion in China, the way in which current account imbalances in the United States and 
East Asia will be resolved, and geopolitical developments.  
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
