Li Ruogu: Reform the governance of the IMF 
Speech  by  Mr  Li  Ruogu,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  on  the  Seminar  on 
Governance of the Bretton Woods Institutions, Washington DC, 1 October 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to be invited by the annual meeting organizers to share with you my views on 
the  governance  issues  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions,  especially  on  the  occasion  of  their 
60th anniversary. 
The main problem of the governance of the IMF and its negative implication 
I.  
As we all know, the IMF was established sixty years ago as a global monetary cooperative institution, 
with  the  aim  to  help  member  countries  adjust  international  balance  of  payments  and  stabilize 
exchange rate movement. The quota has been set as the key factor to determine voting powers and 
access  to  Fund’s  resources  of  member  countries.  When  the  Fund  was  constituted,  the  quota 
distribution was decided by the political and economic situation at that time. Due to this reason, the 
quota share of the U.S. was as high as 36 percent and that of UK 17 percent. Obviously, few industrial 
countries dominated the Fund’s governance in its very early days. Nevertheless, to reflect the equity of 
member countries - though in a very limited way - each member country was assigned 250 basic votes 
in addition to its votes determined by quotas. And the basic votes accounted for 11.3 percent of the 
total votes at the inception of the IMF. 
The following decades have witnessed great changes in global political and economic environment, 
including emergence of many newly independent sovereign countries, collapse of the Bretton Woods 
system, the oil crises in the 1970s, the international debt crises in the 1980s, booming international 
private  capital  flows  throughout  most  1990s  and  subsequent  capital  account  crises  in  several 
emerging  markets  in  the  late  1990s.  The  Fund  responded  with  expansion  of  its  memberships  from 
40 to 184, augmentation of quota size by almost 37 folds and allocations of Special Drawing Rights 
(SDR)  between  late  1960s  and  1980s.  However,  these  phenomenal  developments  haven’t  been 
accompanied  by  fundamental  improvement  of  the  governance  structure  within  the  Fund.  The  main 
problem of its governance is that the decision-making mechanism has not reflected the rapidly 
evolving political and economic environment and principles used for allocating quotas when 
the Fund was established has been abandoned resulting in a small group of member countries 
easily  forming  majority  votes  and  exercising  veto  powers.  Thus,  the  IMF  doesn’t  belong  to  its 
majority members but a few from Europe and North America. As Table 1 and Chart 1 show, over the 
past 60 years, the G-7 countries have kept their quota share, as a group, above 45 percent and that of 
U.S. above 17 percent. Although the quota share of developing countries increased from 30 percent to 
36 percent, this more reflected the increasing memberships of developing countries. What is more, the 
basic vote has never been touched upon in every round of quota increase, resulting in a sharp drop of 
share of basic votes to 2.1 percent of total votes today. 
What have been the negative implications of the main problem in the Fund’s governance? 
First, the dominant voting powers of a small group of countries have kept the Fund away from 
any policy initiative that may benefit the global community as a whole in the long run, but not 
in the interest of those countries in the short run. The issue of quota increase can serve as a vivid 
example. Before 1990s, since the industrial countries had had demand for the Fund resources for their 
balance of payments adjustment, especially in the 1970s, the initiatives of quota increase had been 
easily  adopted.  However,  when  these  countries  became  creditors  or  concerned  about  their  veto 
powers, their motives to promote quota increase have significantly lessened, except for those that had 
strong  incentive  to  increase  their  quota  shares.  Many  people  believe  that  these  were  the  major 
reasons  underlying  the  no-increase  decisions  in  the  tenth  and  twelfth  reviews,  though  the  share  of 
quota against world trade was at a very low level in the 1990s and the international capital flows were 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
increasingly volatile. The lack of resources to response to emerging markets crises finally forced the 
major stakeholders in the Fund to agree a quota increase in 1998 through the eleventh quota review. 
Second, developing countries have had enormous disadvantages in setting rules of games in 
the  Fund,  which  have  weakened  their  ability  to  protect  their  own  interests  as  well  as  their 
ownership to implement the Fund’s programs. As mentioned earlier, single majority, which can be 
easily formed by a small group of countries, is required when many policy decisions are put for votes. 
In  this  vein,  in  not  few  cases,  policy  decisions  were  approved  without  fully  engaging  all  member 
countries or even regardless of objection or abstention from developing countries. One unfair rule I 
would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  is  the  lack  of  diversity  of  representatives  in  the  senior 
management, which developing countries have fought against for quite a long period of time. But up to 
now,  only  one  Deputy  Managing  Director  is  selected  from  developing  countries.  Without  fully 
participating in rule setting and influencing policy decision, the ability of developing countries to protect 
their  own  interests  has  been  weakened.  They  may  have  difficulties  in  insisting  on  their  own 
development ideology and path that may be more feasible. A lesson every one could recall was the 
Fund’s premature suggestion on advancing capital account liberalization in developing countries in the 
1980s  and  1990s  when  their  financial  systems  remained  vulnerable.  As  a  result,  some  emerging 
markets  suffered  severe  capital  account  crises  in  the  late  1990s.  Another  negative  impact  of  this 
undemocratic decision mechanism is that it have weakened the ownership or increased reluctance of 
developing  countries  to  implement  the  Fund’s  programs.  The  Fund  can  use  conditionality  to  urge 
member countries to reform their governance, can we also find binding conditionality for the Fund to 
make improvement in its representation? Can we also set up conditionality for developed countries to 
achieve the official development aid goal of 0.7 percent of their GNP? 
How to reform the Fund’s governance 
II. 
Since  the  Asian  crises,  the  Fund  has  taken  some  efforts  to  reform  its  own  governance,  including 
increasing transparency of policy decision and taking some administrative measures to enhance the 
working capacity of Executive Offices of some developing country constituencies. But, these haven’t 
touched upon the fundamental problems in the Fund’s governance as I mentioned earlier. Let me put 
forward several thoughts in relation to the improvement of the Fund’s governance. 
To  democratize  its  voting  structure  is  key  to  break  the  deadlock  in  reforming  the  Fund’s 
governance. The work of quota formula revision needs to be finished as soon as possible, to 
reflect  the  rapidly  changing  world  economy  and  comparative  strength  of  member  countries. 
During this process, the variables that can broadly reflect the strength of developing countries should 
not be discounted. At the same time, an increase of the Fund’s quota size is also warranted, taking 
consideration of the magnitude of world trade and international capital flows. Moreover, to what extent 
the basic votes can be increased should be further studied. 
In addition, we could also explore the possibility of persuading some major industrial countries 
to give up parts of their quota shares to developing countries. Nevertheless, I take full note of the 
difficulties  in  consolidating  the  quotas  of  the  member  countries  in  the  euro  area,  which  may  be  as 
equally  difficult  as  persuading  the  U.S.  to  forgo  its  quota  portion.  To  be  balanced,  simultaneously 
requesting  both  U.S.  and  EU  countries  to  consider  giving  up  parts  of  their  quota  shares  might  be 
feasible. 
Along with changing the voting structure, we may also consider reforming the voting majority 
requirement  on  major  policy  decisions.  The  special  majority  requirement  on  some  key  policy 
issues,  such  as  quota  increase  and  revision  of  Articles  of  Agreements  may  be  reduced  from 
85 percent to three fourths (75 percent) or two thirds (66 percent), thus no one single country being 
able to veto the related decisions. 
Last but not least, it is also imperative to reform the management structure of the Fund. In light 
of large number of developing countries only represented by 10-11 Executive Directors in the Fund, 
adding another chair of ED elected from developing countries could be considered. As to the senior 
management, it is wise to consider increasing one to two DMD positions for developing countries over 
the  next  few  years.  Furthermore,  the  diversification  of  staff  is  also  very  important.  It  may  also  be 
feasible to allocate proximately thirty percent of senior staff positions to qualified staff recruited from 
developing  countries,  thus  greatly  helping  bring  new  perspectives  to  the  Fund  and  find  out  well-
tailored development path for member countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
Mr. Chairman, I clearly understand that the road towards a better governance of the IMF may be as 
bumpy as it was in the past sixty years. But, this is an irreversible journey. The intensified economic 
globalization and rapid development of developing countries demand a significant improvement in the 
governance  structure  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions,  under  which  nations  realize  common 
prosperity through mutual respect, equitable dialogue and interest sharing. It is my firm believe that, 
with persistent pursuit from the developing world, and deep insight, forward vision, political courage 
and concerted efforts of the international community, the IMF will much better serve the interests for all 
of its members. 
Thank you all. 
 
 
Table 1 
Percentage of quota shares of member countries 
from 1945 to 20041 
Total 
quota 
(billion 
SDR) 
Number 
of total 
member-
ship 
Quota 
share of 
industrial 
countries 
 Number of 
industrial 
countries 
Quota 
share of 
G-7 (%) 
Quota 
share of 
U.S. (%) 
Quota 
share of 
developing 
countries3 
Number of 
developing 
countries 
7.5 
40 
70 
20.9 
102 
28.8 
116 
64 
69 
39.0 
133 
64.7 
61.1 
141 
63.2 
90.0 
146 
63.1 
135.2 
175 
62.0 
212.0 
182 
61.6 
 14 
22 
22 
22 
22 
24 
24 
 58.0 
54.5 
36 
27 
23 
30 
36 
31 
 88 
94 
50.3 
21.5 
35.3 
111 
49.2 
21.0 
36.8 
119 
48.9 
20.0 
36.9 
124 
48.0 
20.0 
38.0 
151 
46.0 
17.4 
38.4 
158 
Year2 
1945 
(Original 
membership) 
1966 
(4th Quin-
quennial 
Review) 
1970 
(5th General 
Review) 
1976 
(6th General 
Review) 
1978 
(7th General 
Review) 
1983 
(8th General 
Review) 
1990 
(9th General 
Review) 
1998 
(11th General 
Review) 
1  Data from Silent Revolution (Boughton), IFS.   2  Year in which the quota review was completed, i.e., when the Board of 
Governors’ Resolution on quota increases was approved. The Tenth Review in 1995 and the Twelfth in 2003 did not provide 
for an increase in quotas.    3  Developing countries include transition economies. 
  BIS Review 58/2004 
 3
Chart 1 
Note: Data from IFS. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2004
