L Wilson Kamit: Central bank initiatives - liberalisation of foreign exchange 
control 
Address  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the  Annual 
Papua New Guinea Mining Conference, Sydney, 6-7 December 2004. 
 2. 
Honorable  Ministers  Bart  Philemon,  Sam  Akoitai,  Puka  Temu  and  Sir  Moi  Avei,  Government  and 
industry  representatives,  distinguished  participants,  ladies  and  gentlemen;  I  want  to  thank  the 
organizers for inviting me to address this conference. 
The subject of my presentation under the topic of Central Bank Initiatives is, “Liberalization of Foreign 
Exchange  Control”.  It  is  now  more  than  eighteen  months  that  we  at  the  Bank  of  PNG  have  been 
deliberating on the subject. It took me until mid November to decide what we should do. I am sure that 
many of you are asking; why did it take so long? 
In the last ten years the Central Bank has had two traumatic experiences: 
In September and early October 1994, Papua New Guinea was facing a classical balance of payments 
crisis.  The  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  at  that  time  was  at  minus  US$ 164 million,  and  was 
declining at a fast pace. As you all know a country may default on its domestic debt, but it can become 
bankrupt on its foreign debt, and at that time PNG was faced with this situation. 
In October 1994, three options were presented to the Government to deal with the crisis: 
1. 
A further devaluation of 25.0 to 30.0 percent, after the devaluation of 12.0 percent on the 
12th of September 1994, and retaining the fixed exchange rate regime. The experience in 
other countries showed that such measures did not solve the problem. 
Using  exchange  controls  to  ban  foreign  currency  transactions  and  rationing  of  foreign 
currency by the Central Bank. 
The floating of the Kina against the other currencies. 
3. 
On  the  10th  of  October  1994,  the  then  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Julius  Chan  who  was  also  the  Acting 
Minister for Finance decided to choose the best of three very tough options, and that was to float the 
kina. 
The Sandline saga, the El Nino drought, the Asian Financial crisis and the loss of confidence by the 
public on the management of the economy, brought us to the verge of a second balance of payments 
crisis towards the end of 1998 and early 1999. 
In both cases the Bank of PNG used the exchange control regulations to assist in cushioning these 
shocks, and building up the depleted level of foreign exchange reserves. 
It is important to note that the first crisis was all our own doing. The foreign currency inflows from the 
mining and petroleum exports were at their peak, at hundreds of millions of United States dollars per 
annum. The Government of the day decided that we could afford a highly expansionary fiscal regime. 
The planned budget deficit for 1993 was at 5.0 to 6.0 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). It was 
obvious that it was far from being sustainable even in the short term, when the tax flows from mining 
and  petroleum  exports  were  expected  to  be  high.  In  the  medium  to  longer  term  it  was  a  recipe  for 
disaster. The public reacted as expected, by loosing confidence in the kina. 
In 1997 and 1998, the Government of the day did nothing to mitigate the economic impact of these 
shocks.  To  maintain  some  resemblance  of  stability,  the  Central  Bank  used  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves to support the exchange rate. In spite of heavy intervention in the foreign exchange market, 
the  value  of  the  Kina  declined  at  a  fast  rate,  from  around  US$ 0.70  in  1997  to  $0.34  in  less  than 
2 years  to  1999.  As  was  the  experience  in  other  countries,  currency  devaluations  do  not  stop  the 
outflow  of  foreign  currency;  on  the  contrary  it  accelerates  it.  The  Central  Bank  did  not  have  the 
independence to rein in the monetary expansion, resulting mainly from a high budget deficit and to be 
able to stop the pressure on the kina. 
In  1994,  it was agreed  that  a  floating exchange  rate  is  inconsistent  with  foreign  exchange  controls. 
The recommendations were to retain the foreign exchange regulations until the reserves are built up to 
a comfortable level that can withstand any adverse impact of liberalization of foreign exchange control. 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 1
In  2000,  upon  the  enactment  of  the  new  Central  Bank  Act  (CBA),  the  subject  was  revisited.  It  was 
concluded that the foreign exchange controls should stay in place as they are, at least until the Central 
Bank has developed appropriate monetary instruments to achieve the objective of price stability. 
The  election  driven  2002  budget,  and  the  large  built  in  fiscal  deficit,  were  the  first  time  the  Central 
Bank  could  test  the  instruments  it  developed,  mainly  the  use  of  interest  rates,  to  counter-act  an 
expansionary  fiscal  policy and  try  to  maintain  price stability.  The  other  question  that  we  needed  an 
answer  to  was;  will  the  public  believe  that  the  Bank  of  PNG  is  going  to  use  its  independence  to 
achieve the objective of price stability. 
The developments in 2002, and even more so in 2003, was a clear vote of confidence in the actions 
and  the  instruments  the  Central  Bank  employed  to  maintain  price  stability.  The  Bank  succeeded  in 
managing a relatively smooth moderate decline in the exchange rate until October 2002. 
The turnaround in macroeconomic management was the introduction of a supplementary budget by 
the  Somare  Government  in  September  2002,  which  successfully  reduced  the  budget  deficit  to 
sustainable levels. The 2003 Budget was a further step in fiscal responsibility by reducing the budget 
deficit to below 2.0 percent of GDP. In early 2003, the public realized that the Government is willing to 
take  the  hard  decisions  to  maintain  a  highly  responsible  fiscal  stance,  complemented  by  major 
increases in the prices of Papua New Guinea’s internationally traded commodities, the path to stable 
prices, low inflation and interest rates was set. 
Based on the highly responsible fiscal stance of the Government, a steady appreciation of the kina 
and the increase in the foreign exchange reserves ensured in late 2003 and early 2004. Then I asked 
the Bank of PNG staff and advisors to prepare for the liberalization of foreign exchange controls. The 
Bank of PNG considers that the main preconditions for liberalization of the controls were sufficiently 
achieved, mainly the stable macroeconomic environment shown by: low inflation levels to those similar 
to the industrial nations, reduction in the budget deficit to sustainable levels, significantly high level of 
foreign  exchange  reserves,  sustainable  current  account  deficit,  a  stable  and  competitive  exchange 
rate regime and flexible use of indirect instruments for monetary policy. In addition, the financial sector 
has the capacity to ensure bank soundness and prudent management of interest rate risk. 
After the passing of the 2005 budget, which maintains the continued responsible fiscal stance of the 
previous  three  budgets,  there  is  nothing  preventing  the  Bank  of  PNG  from  finalizing  the  exchange 
control liberalization that was started in 1994, by floating of the kina. 
I’m pleased to announce today that effective from January 2005, for all practical purposes, many of 
the  requirements  for  foreign  exchange  control  approvals  will  be  replaced  with  EXEMPTIONS  and 
reporting  obligations  by  authorized  dealers  will  be  tightened.  To  be  more  precise,  let  me  give  you 
some details: 
1. 
All  remaining  trade  and  services  transactions  (such  as  limits  on  remittances)  or  what  we 
define as Current Account transactions will be liberalized; 
There  will  be  no  timing,  such  as  3  months  retention  period,  for  the  repatriation  of  export 
proceeds. We will closely monitor the inflows reported by the authorized dealers reports for 
our balance of payments statistics. 
Foreign currency inflows, loan or equity will be freed up. The recipients will be requested to 
report on the inflows and their terms for balance of payments statistical purposes. 
There  will  be  no  currency  clauses  in  mining  and  petroleum  agreements.  The  existing 
agreements are in place, but for practical purposes they can be seen as non-existent. 
There  will  be  no  restrictions  on  capital  outflows.  The  lenders  and  equity  investors  will  be 
required to report on transactions for balance of payments statistical purposes. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
These changes basically mean that the Bank of PNG will no longer be required to review, analyse and 
grant exchange control approvals in all circumstances, but will rely on detailed reporting and impose 
severe administrative penalties to ensure compliance with reporting requirements by licensed financial 
institutions. 
There are many other details being worked on by the Bank staff and our lawyers. A new set of Foreign 
Exchange  Control  Notices  will  be  published  and  gazetted.  The  new  rules  will  be  simple  and  easily 
understood by all those that transact foreign exchange. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2005
The  liberalization  of  foreign  exchange  controls  is  one  more  step  towards  encouraging  foreign 
investment in Papua New Guinea. We need investment in all sectors of the economy to increase and 
diversify economic activity, and improve the standard of living of our people. A stable macro economic 
environment, the outcome of a highly responsible fiscal policy that resulted in low inflation, low interest 
rates  and  a  stable  exchange  rate  are  necessary  but  not  sufficient  conditions  to  achieve  high 
sustainable long-term economic growth. 
For this to materialize we need to have substantive improvements in the physical infrastructure and 
efficient low cost utilities. The Government is in the process of privatizing the utilities, and investing in 
infrastructure. This will strengthen the role of the private sector to be the engine that drives investment 
and economic growth. 
Given  the  very  stable  economic  conditions  in  PNG  now  and  in  the  medium  term  and  a  stable  and 
strong financial system, the Bank of PNG is taking this bold initiative to remove the impediments to 
allow the free flow of funds between the rest of the world and PNG consistent with the Government’s 
investment policy. The country needs this change, and we at the Central Bank are ready to do all we 
can  in  the  areas  of  our  responsibility  to  provide  an  enabling  environment  for  foreign  private  sector 
investment. I therefore invite you to do business and invest in Papua New Guinea. If you already have 
a business in our country you are encouraged to expand it. 
Thank you all. 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 3
