Alan Greenspan: Future of the social security programme and economics of 
retirement 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Special Committee on Aging, US Senate, Washington DC, 15 March 2005.  
 Mr.  Chairman,  Senator  Kohl,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to 
discuss the issues of population aging and retirement. In so doing, I would like to emphasize that the 
views I will express are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. 
The economics of retirement are straightforward: Enough resources must be set aside over a lifetime 
of  work  to  fund  consumption  during  retirement.  At  the  most  rudimentary  level,  one  could  envision 
households  actually  storing  goods  purchased  during  their  working  years  for  use  during  retirement. 
Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into producing the stored goods could be 
diverted  to  the  production  of  new  capital  assets,  which  would  produce  an  even  greater  quantity  of 
goods and services for later use. In the latter case, we would be raising output per worker hour, our 
traditional measure of productivity. 
The  bottom  line  in  the  success  of  all  retirement  programs  is  the  availability  of  real  resources  at 
retirement. The financial systems associated with retirement plans facilitate the allocation of resources 
that supply retirement consumption of goods and services; they do not produce goods and services. A 
useful test of a retirement system for a society is whether it sets up realistic expectations as to the 
future availability of real resources and, hence, the capacity to deliver postwork consumption without 
overly burdening the standard of living of the working-age population. 
In  2008,  the  leading  edge  of  what  must  surely  be  the  largest  shift  from  work  to  retirement  in  our 
nation's  history  will  become  evident  as  some  baby  boomers  become  eligible  for  Social  Security. 
According to the intermediate projections of the Social Security trustees, the population 65 years of 
age  and  older  will  be  approximately  26  percent  of  the  adult  population  in  2030,  compared  with  17 
percent  today.  This  huge  change  in  the  structure  of  our  population  will  expose  all  our  financial 
retirement  systems  to  severe  stress  and  will  require  adjustments  for  which  there  are  no  historical 
precedents. Indeed, retirement, generally, is a relatively new phenomenon in human history. Average 
American life expectancy a century ago, for example, was only 47 years. Relatively few of our citizens 
were able to enjoy many postwork years. 
One  consequence  of  the  sizable  baby  boom  cohort  moving  from  the  workforce  to  retirement  is  an 
inevitable slowing in the growth of gross domestic product per capita relative to the growth of output 
per worker. As the ratio of workers to population declines, so too must the ratio of output to population, 
assuming  no  change  in  the  growth  of  productivity.  That  result  is  simply  a  matter  of  arithmetic.  The 
important  economic  implication  of  that  arithmetic  is  that,  with  fewer workers relative  to  dependents, 
each  worker's  output  will  have  to  support  a  greater  number  of  people.  Under  the  intermediate 
population  projections  of  the  Social  Security  trustees,  for  example,  the  ratio  of  workers  to  total 
population will shrink about 7 percent by 2030. This shrinkage means that, by 2030, total output per 
person will be 7 percent lower than it would be if the current population structure were to persist. The 
fact that a greater share of the dependents will be elderly rather than children will put an additional 
burden on society's resources, as the elderly consume a relatively large share of per capita resources, 
whereas children consume relatively little. 
This inevitable drop in the growth rate of per capita GDP relative to the growth of productivity could be 
cushioned  by  an  increase  in  labor  force  participation,  which  would  boost  the  ratio  of  workers  to 
population.  Increasing  labor  force  participation  seems  a  natural  response  to  population  aging,  as 
Americans not only are living longer but are also generally living healthier. Rates of disability for the 
elderly have been declining, reflecting both improvements in health and changes in technology that 
accommodate the physical impairments that are associated with aging. In addition, work is becoming 
less physically strenuous and more demanding intellectually, continuing a century-long trend toward a 
more conceptual and a less physical economic output. 
Despite the improving feasibility of work at older ages, Americans have been retiring at younger and 
younger ages. For example, in 1940, the median age of retirement for men was 69; today, the median 
age  is  about  62.  In  recent  years,  labor  force  participation  among  older  Americans  has  picked  up 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 1
somewhat, but it is far too early to determine the underlying causes of this increase. Rising pressures 
on retirement incomes and a growing scarcity of experienced labor could induce further increases in 
the  labor  force  participation  of  the  elderly  and  near-elderly  in  the  future.  In  addition,  policies  that 
specifically encourage greater labor force participation would also lessen the necessary adjustments 
to consumption. Workers nearing retirement have accumulated many years of valuable experience, so 
extending  labor  force  participation  by  just  a  few  years  could  have  a  sizable  impact  on  economic 
output. 
Another way to boost future standards of living is to increase saving.1 We need the additional saving in 
the  decades  ahead  if  we  are  to  finance  the  construction  of  a  capital  stock  that  will  produce  the 
additional real resources needed to redeem the retirement claims of the baby boomers without having 
to severely raise claims on tomorrow's workers. 
However,  by  almost  any  measure,  the  required  amount  of  saving  that  would  be  necessary  is 
sufficiently  large  to  raise  serious  questions  about  whether  we  will  be  able  to  meet  the  retirement 
commitments already made. Much has been made of shortfalls in our private defined-benefit plans, 
but the gross underfunding currently at $450 billion, although significant as a percentage of the $1.8 
trillion  in  assets  of  private  defined-benefit  plans,  is  modest  compared  with  the  underfunding  of  our 
publically administered pensions. 
At present, the Social Security trustees estimate the unfunded liability over the indefinite future to be 
$10.4 trillion. The shortfall in Medicare is calculated at several multiples of the one in Social Security. 
These numbers suggest that either very large tax increases will be required to meet the shortfalls or 
benefits will have to be pared back. 
Because benefit cuts will almost surely be at least part of the resolution, it is incumbent on government 
to convey to future retirees that the real resources currently promised to be available on retirement will 
not  be  fully  forthcoming.  We  owe  future  retirees  as  much  time  as  possible  to  adjust  their  plans  for 
work, saving, and retirement spending. They need to ensure that their personal resources, along with 
what they expect to receive from government, will be sufficient to meet their retirement goals. 
Conventional  advice  from  personal-finance  professionals  is  that  one  should  aim  to  accumulate 
sufficient  resources  to  provide  an  overall  replacement  rate  of  about  70  percent  to  80  percent  in 
retirement.  Under  current  law,  Social  Security  promises  a  replacement  rate  of  about  42  percent  for 
workers  who  earn  the  economywide-average  wage  each  and  every  year  through  their  careers  and 
about  56  percent  for  low-wage  workers  who  earn  45  percent  of  the  economywide-average  wage.2 
Assuming that taxes are capped at the current 12.4 percent of payroll, revenues will be sufficient to 
pay only about 70 percent of current-law benefits by the middle of this century. Thus, for the average 
worker,  a  replacement  rate  of  only  about  30  percent  would  be  payable  out  of  contemporaneous 
revenues, assuming that benefit reductions are applied proportionately across the board. For a low-
wage worker, the payable replacement rate would be about 40 percent. Assuming that the goal is still 
to replace 70 percent to 80 percent of pre-retirement income, average workers by the middle of this 
century  should  be  aiming  to  replace  about  45  percent  of  their  pre-retirement  income,  rather  than 
today's  33  percent,  out  of  some  combination  of  private  employer  pension  benefits  and  personal 
saving. 
The required increases in private saving would be less to the extent that Social Security tax increases 
are part of the solution. However, to avoid any changes in replacement rates, the Social Security tax 
rate would have to be increased from the current 12.4 percent to about 18 percent at the middle of the 
century. 
 Once we have determined the level of benefits that we can reasonably promise, we must ensure that 
we will have the real resources in the future to fulfill those promises. When we evaluate our ability to 
meet  those  promises,  focusing  solely  on  the  solvency  of  the  financial  plan  is,  in  my  judgment,  a 
mistake.  Focusing  on  solvency  within  the  Social  Security  system,  without  regard  to  the  broader 
macroeconomic  picture,  does  not  ensure  that  the  real  resources  to  fulfill  our  commitments  will  be 
                                                      
1   Additionally, we could borrow from abroad, which would build up the capital stock. In so doing, however, we would also build 
up a liability to foreigners that we would have to finance in the future. 
2   The replacement rate is the ratio of Social Security benefits to wages in the year preceding retirement. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2005
there.  For  example,  if  we  build  up  the  assets  in  the  Social  Security  trust  fund,  thereby  achieving 
solvency, but offset those efforts by reducing saving elsewhere, then the real resources required to 
meet future benefits will not be forthcoming from our economy. In the end, we will have accomplished 
little  in  preparing  the  economy  to  meet  future  demands.  Thus,  in  addressing  Social  Security's 
imbalances,  we  need  to  ensure  that  measures  taken  now  to  finance  future  benefit  commitments 
represent real additions to national saving. 
We need, in effect, to make the phantom "lock-boxes" around the trust fund real. For a brief period in 
the  late  1990s,  a  common  commitment  emerged  to  do  just  that.  But,  regrettably,  that  commitment 
collapsed  when  it  became  apparent  that,  in  light  of  a  less  favorable  economic  environment, 
maintaining balance in the budget excluding Social Security would require lower spending or higher 
taxes. 
Last year, Social Security tax revenues plus interest exceeded benefits by about $150 billion. If those 
funds had been removed from the unified budget and "locked up" and Congress had not made any 
adjustments  in  the  rest  of  the  budget,  the  unified  budget  deficit  would  have  been  $564  billion.  A 
reasonable hypothesis is that the Congress would, in fact, have responded by taking actions to pare 
the  deficit.  In  that  case,  the  end  result  would  have  been  lowered  government  dissaving  and 
correspondingly  higher  national  saving.  A  simple  reshuffling  from  the  unified  accounts  to  the  lock-
boxes  would  not  have,  in  itself,  added  to  government  savings;  but  higher  taxes  or  lower  spending 
would have accomplished that important objective. 
The  major  attraction  of  personal  or  private  accounts  is  that  they  can  be  constructed  to  be  truly 
segregated from the unified budget and, therefore, are more likely to induce the federal government to 
take those actions that would reduce public dissaving and raise national saving. But it is important to 
recognize  that  many  varieties  of  private  accounts  exist,  with  significantly  different  economic 
consequences. Some types of accounts are virtually indistinguishable from the current Social Security 
system, and the Congress would be unlikely to view them as truly off-budget. Other types of accounts 
actually do transfer funds into the private sector as unencumbered private assets. The Congress is 
much more likely to view the transfer of funds to these latter types of accounts as raising the deficit 
and would then react by taking measures to lower it. 
*** 
Failure  to  address  the  imbalances  between  our  promises  to  future  retirees  and  our  ability  to  meet 
those promises would have severe consequences for the economy. The most recent projections by 
the Office of Management and Budget show that spending on Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid 
will rise from about 8 percent of GDP today to about 13 percent by 2030.3 Under existing tax rates and 
reasonable assumptions about other spending, these projections make clear that the federal budget is 
on an unsustainable path, in which large deficits result in rising interest rates and ever-growing interest 
payments that augment deficits in future years. But most important, deficits as a percentage of GDP in 
these simulations rise without limit. Unless the trend is reversed, at some point these deficits would 
cause  the  economy  to  stagnate  or  worse.  Closing  the  gap  solely  with  rising  tax  rates  would  be 
problematic; higher tax rates rarely achieve a comparable rise in tax receipts, and the level of required 
taxation could in itself severely inhibit economic growth. 
In light of these sobering projections, I believe that a thorough review of our commitments - and at 
least  some  adjustment  in  those  commitments  -  is  urgently  needed.  The  necessary  adjustments  will 
become ever more difficult and larger the longer we delay. No changes will be easy. All programs in 
                                                      
3   The projections for Medicare and Medicaid should be viewed as highly uncertain. Health spending has been growing faster 
than the economy for many  years, the growth fueled, in large part, by significant increases in technology. How long this 
trend will continue is extremely difficult to predict. We know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to 
advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Technological innovations can greatly improve the 
quality  of  medical  care  and  can,  in  some  instances,  reduce  the  costs  of  existing  treatments.  But  because  technology 
expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential to add to overall spending - in some cases, a great deal.  
In implementing policy, we need to be cognizant that the uncertainties - especially our inability to identify the upper bound of 
future demands for medical care - counsel significant prudence in policymaking. The critical reason to proceed cautiously is 
that new programs quickly develop constituencies willing to fiercely resist any curtailment of spending or tax benefits. As a 
consequence, our ability to rein in deficit-expanding initiatives, should they later prove to have been excessive or misguided, 
is quite limited. Thus, policymakers need to err on the side of prudence when considering new budget initiatives. Programs 
can always be expanded in the future should the resources for them become available, but they cannot be easily curtailed if 
resources later fall short of commitments. 
 BIS Review 17/2005 
 3
our budget exist because a majority of the Congress and the President considered them of value to 
our society. Adjustments will thus involve making tradeoffs among valued alternatives. The Congress 
must choose which alternatives are the most valued in the context of limited resources. In doing so, 
you  will  need  to  consider  not  only  the  distributional  effects  of  policy  changes  but  also  the  broader 
economic  effects  on  labor  supply,  retirement  behavior,  and  national  saving.  The  benefits  to  taking 
sound, timely action could extend many decades into the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2005
