I J Macfarlane: Global influences on the Australian economy 
Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian Institute of 
Company Directors, Sydney, 14 June 2005. 
 Let me start by saying what a pleasure it is to be here before such a distinguished gathering at the 
Australian Institute of Company Directors. I have not spoken on the economy since February, so I will 
take  this  opportunity  to  do  so  today.  My  main  topic  is  how  global  and  domestic  influences  are 
interacting on the Australian economy. But before doing that I would like to say a few words about 
monetary policy, in particular how it is formulated. 
As readers of the financial press, you will have encountered reports nearly every day of some new 
economic statistic being released, and some pundit giving an opinion of what this implies for future 
movements in interest rates. You could be forgiven for thinking that the formulation of monetary policy 
was simply a matter of collecting the latest month’s statistics, weighing them up to see whether they 
were strong or weak on balance, and then adjusting interest rates accordingly. This very short-term 
view of monetary policy arises because journalists have to write a story every day and economists in 
financial institutions have to advise their dealing rooms every day. But monetary policy is a much more 
slowly evolving process than this, and there are elements in the process that are more important than 
the evaluation of the latest statistics. The first of these is to have a clearly enunciated framework of 
what monetary policy is seeking to do, and the second is to have a view of how the world economy is 
evolving and how it is affecting Australia. Let me now say a little more about each of these subjects. 
What can monetary policy achieve? 
Views about what monetary policy can and cannot achieve have evolved over the past century or two. 
The  current  consensus,  based  on  the  experience  of  the  post-war  period,  is  that  the  principal 
contribution it can make to economic well-being is to maintain low and stable inflation. As a result, a 
number of countries, including Australia, have adopted a monetary policy regime based on inflation-
targeting. Ours is designed to ensure that the average rate of increase in consumer prices is between 
2 and 3 per cent. Note that it is expressed as an average over time; the actual rate does not have to 
stay  between  2  and  3,  and  in  fact  it  has  often  been  outside  that  range,  though  not  by  much.  The 
centrality of inflation in the monetary policy regime is not because inflation is all we care about. It is 
there because we believe that low inflation is a necessary condition for sustainable economic growth 
and  good  monetary  policy  is  essential  to  its  achievement.  The  results  over  the  past  fourteen  years 
provide evidence in support of this assessment. 
It is important to have a framework because there has historically been a temptation to use monetary 
policy for too many purposes. We still hear calls from time to time to raise interest rates to improve the 
balance of payments or to stop rising house prices, or, on the other hand, to lower rates because the 
economy has slowed. In the past, these and other motives often lay behind monetary policy changes, 
but now it is easier to resist such temptations because they have to be viewed within a more general 
framework based on their likely implications for future inflation. 
The world economy and Australia’s place 
The second important element is to have a view about how the world economy is evolving and how 
this  will  affect  Australia.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  the  major  macro-economic  events  that  have  affected 
Australia have to a large extent been imported rather than home-grown. In Australia, the two major 
economic events of the last century - the Depression of the thirties and the Inflation of the seventies - 
the world’s only peacetime inflation - were both part of worldwide developments. More recently, the 
international  business  cycle  has  been  the  main  determinant  of  our  own;  the  three  most  recent 
Australian recessions  of  1974,  1982  and  1990 were  part  of global  recessions.  Over  this  period,  we 
have not had an entirely self-induced recession. Our one significant deviation from the international 
business  cycle  is  that  we  did  avoid  the  (admittedly  mild)  2001  recession  that  affected  most 
G7 countries. Similarly, our inflation experience shadowed that of the OECD-area, although we were 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
later than most in bringing it down after the initial surge in the seventies; our good inflation record only 
dates from the early 1990s. 
I think it is true to say that if you wished to forecast the path of the Australian economy, and you were 
able to have foreknowledge of only one economic variable, the one you would choose would be the 
path of the world economy. That is not to say that we have no influence over our own destiny - we can 
make the situation better or worse than it would otherwise be - but we cannot escape the influence of 
the world business cycle and the other factors that feed off it. 
Once the central bank has established what it is trying to achieve with monetary policy and how world 
events  are  shaping  the  direction  of  the  Australian  economy,  then  it  is  in  a  position  to  evaluate  the 
multitude of statistics about the economy that each day brings forth. They essentially indicate whether 
the  ‘big  picture’  view of  how  the economy  is  evolving  is on  track  or not.  Mainly  they  show  whether 
events  are  happening  quicker  or  slower  than  expected,  but  in  extremis  ,  they  could  mean  that  the 
overall  assessment  was  incorrect.  There  is  so  much  semi-random  variability  in  economic  statistics 
that, unless the underlying processes are known, the statistics alone are unlikely to be able to show 
where the economy is heading; this is particularly the case if too much emphasis is placed on one 
month’s statistics. 
The current situation 
I  have  spoken  on  several  occasions  about  the  risks  that  can  develop  as  an  economic  expansion 
lengthens and economic imbalances emerge. With the Australian economy in the fourteenth year of 
expansion,  we  have  naturally  paid  particular  attention  to  these  imbalances.  The  one  that  was  most 
prominent until recently was the sharp increase in house prices and household debt. More recently, it 
has  been  the  emergence  of  capacity  constraints  in  some  parts  of  the  economy.  No-one  should  be 
surprised by this development; it would be remarkable for any economy in the fourteenth year of an 
expansion if this were not to happen. Finally, we have seen the Australian current account deficit as a 
per cent of GDP move relatively quickly from its smallest level in twenty years to its largest. These 
developments are all related, as I hope to show, but I will start my story as usual from the perspective 
of the world economy. 
After the mild recession of 2001, the world economy moved into an expansionary phase, which has 
been robust overall, but has been marked by very disparate growth rates among major regions. Two 
regions  in  particular  -  Japan  and  Europe  -  have  made  only  minimal  contributions  to  the  expansion 
which has been led by the United States, China and other East Asian countries. A notable feature this 
time is that the rest of the world, which tends to be overlooked in most assessments, has also grown 
strongly.  By  the  rest  of  the  world,  I  mean  Latin  America,  India,  the  Middle  East,  Eastern  Europe, 
former  Soviet  Union,  etc.  Overall,  despite  these  regional  divergences,  the  world  economy  has 
expanded at above-average rates over the past few years providing a very favourable backdrop to the 
Australian  economy.  Consensus  forecasts  for  2005  and  2006  are  also  for  above-trend  growth, 
although somewhat lower than last year. 
A  particular  feature  of  the  world  economy  in  this  episode  is  that  commodity  prices,  led  by  Chinese 
demand, have risen sharply at a relatively early stage of the global expansion. Apart from oil, the rises 
have been concentrated in base metals and the two bulk commodities important for Australia - coal 
and iron ore. As a result, Australia’s export prices have received a huge boost. Our terms of trade, 
which is the ratio of our export prices to our import prices, rose more quickly and to a higher level than 
anything we had experienced since the early 1970s commodity price boom (Graph 1). 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
Graph 1 
 A rise in the terms of trade is an increase in the country’s real income. We estimate it has increased 
our real income by an amount equivalent to about 1½ percentage points of GDP on average in each of 
the last two years and more is to come.1 Some of this accrues to workers in the resource sector, some 
to  domestic  shareholders  and  a  significant  amount  through  increased  taxation  and  royalties  to 
governments. When the additional income is spent, it provides a significant boost to domestic demand 
through increased consumption and investment as well as via the government sector, although some 
flows  overseas  through  imports.  In  the  past,  we have  sometimes had  difficulty  in  coping  with  these 
expansionary effects, as they pushed up inflation and added to the boom and bust character of the 
Australian economy. 
With domestic demand in Australia growing at over 5 per cent in 2002/03 and 2003/04, which is well 
above long-term potential, and with the economy approaching full capacity in a number of sectors, the 
extra domestic demand generated by the exceptional rises in the terms of trade could well have had 
serious inflationary consequences if it had continued. This was particularly so as important prices such 
as those for oil, steel, plastics, shipping and other inputs to production were rising rapidly around the 
world. It was these types of concerns that led the Bank to raise interest rates a little further earlier this 
year. 
In the event, the economic situation has evolved quite favourably, with domestic demand continuing to 
slow to what appears to be a sustainable pace. Output, as measured by GDP, has also slowed and 
some people are disappointed that GDP growth is now running at a below-average rate, but I view 
recent  events  as  a  healthy  correction,  and  certainly  a  much  better  outcome  than  several  other 
potential outcomes. There are also indications that inflationary pressures are not building as quickly as 
might have been expected earlier in the year. How has this relatively orderly slowdown come about? 
The first reason for the slowing in domestic demand is the change that has occurred in the housing 
sector. Fuelled by a rapid increase in mortgage lending, house prices rose sharply and house-building 
activity  surged  in  the  first  few  years  of  this  decade.  Over  the  past  year,  however,  we  have  had  a 
turnaround in all three; house prices have flattened, mortgage lending has slowed and house-building 
has contracted modestly (Graph 2). The direct effect of the last-mentioned is the easiest to measure; 
                                                      
1   This figure is the difference between the growth rates of real GDP and Real Gross Domestic Income for the two years to the 
March quarter 2005. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 3
house-building grew by 11.1 per cent last financial year and has contracted by 5.3 per cent so far this 
year. This means it added 0.7 per cent to the growth of demand last year and has taken 0.3 per cent 
off this year. Note, however, that as a per cent of GDP, housing is still high by historical standards. 
A second reason for the slowing in domestic demand may be the indirect effects of the change in the 
housing market. These are harder to measure, but there is some evidence that the flattening of house 
prices has led households to tighten their belts. Growth in borrowing against housing has slowed to an 
annualised rate of 10 per cent in the first four months of 2005. While this is well down from a year ago, 
it is still faster than the growth in household incomes. After several years when borrowing was much 
higher than housing investment as households withdrew equity to fund consumption, it appears that 
housing equity withdrawal has now ceased. In line with this, growth in consumption has slowed from 
5.9  per  cent  in  2003/04  to  an  annual  rate  of  3.4  per  cent  so  far  this  year.  In  other  words,  while 
households have stopped adding to their consumption by borrowing against the equity in their houses, 
there has not been a major scaling back in order to build up savings. It is hard to know whether this 
household  consolidation  will  continue,  for  how  long  it  will  last,  or  whether  it  will  intensify.  It  is  early 
times yet and the situation bears close watching. 
As  a  result  of  these  two  influences  -  the  slowing  in  consumption  and  the  fall  in  house-building  - 
domestic demand growth has fallen from just over 6 per cent to about 3½ per cent so far this financial 
year. Business investment continues to grow strongly, which is important given our need to increase 
capacity,  particularly  in  the  exporting  sector.  Strong  employment  growth  is  also  underpinning  the 
economic expansion. 
Growth of 3½ per cent in domestic demand sounds reasonable, but growth in output, as measured by 
GDP  of  only  1.9  per  cent  over  the  past  year,  sounds  less  satisfactory.  What  lies  behind  the  lower 
output growth? The simplest factor to identify is the fall in farm output of 16 per cent. Setting this aside, 
the growth in non-farm GDP is 2.6 per cent over the past year. But the more interesting story concerns 
the balance of payments, so I will conclude by saying a few words about our external trade position. 
It  is  well-known  that,  despite  the  rise  in  world  prices  for  our  resource  exports,  Australian  exporters 
have struggled to increase export volumes over recent years. In large part, this is because of the size 
and speed of the rise in demand coupled with the very limited investment in capacity that has taken 
place in the late 1990s and early in this decade. This is a worldwide phenomenon; it was because 
world  producers  were  not  able  to  increase  supply  to  match  the  increase  in  demand  that  world 
commodity prices increased in the first place. A couple of port bottlenecks in Australia also limited our 
supply response, but they are not the main part of the story. 
At the same time as export volumes remained weak, import volumes over recent years rose strongly. 
Imports were boosted by the strong domestic demand, partly reflecting the increase in real income due 
to  the  terms  of  trade  rise,  and  by  the  accompanying  rise  in  the  exchange  rate.  This  latter  factor, 
combined  with  the  worldwide  fall  in  the  prices  of  manufactured  goods,  meant  that  import  prices  in 
Australian dollars fell sharply until recently which encouraged import volumes to rise strongly. This is a 
normal  process  whereby  a  floating  exchange  rate  relieves  the  pressure  on  domestic  supply  and 
inflation, but at some cost to the balance of payments. The good news is that it does not go on forever. 
In time, export volumes begin to rise again, as I believe they are now, and the slowing in domestic 
demand feeds through into slower import growth. 
While the rising exchange rate has been an important factor over the past couple of years, if we look 
at it over the past five years or so, it did not rise as much as would have been expected on the basis of 
its past relationship with the terms of trade (Graph 3). Interest differentials in Australia’s favour also 
pointed to a larger rise in the exchange rate. This suggests that some other factors must have been at 
work  in  the  opposite  direction,  perhaps  concern  about  the  weakness  in  export  volumes  or  broader 
apprehension about the widening current account deficit itself. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2005
Graph 2 
 BIS Review 44/2005 
 5
Graph 3 
 Conclusion 
What do we make of all this? The big picture is, I think, that the world business cycle is still at an early 
stage  of  expansion,  so  we  can  expect  continued  economic  growth  over  the  next  few  years.  This, 
together with our higher terms of trade and strong investment growth in the presence of some capacity 
constraints,  is  exerting  an  expansionary  influence  on  domestic  activity  and  upward  pressure  on 
inflation,  mainly  at  the  producer  price  level,  although  we  also  expect  consumer  price  inflation  to 
increase somewhat from its present rate. 
At  the  same  time,  the  economy  is  at  present  being  affected  by  some  countervailing  forces. 
Consumption  has  slowed  and  house-building  and  farm  output  are  falling;  these  have  exerted  a 
moderating influence and may continue to do so. While there is a natural tendency to be disappointed 
that the second set of influences is now occurring, the fact is that the economy could not have taken 
on  board  the  external  situation  without  this  moderation  in  the  domestic  economy.  A  failure  to  slow 
would most probably have produced the set of economic imbalances, particularly rising inflation, that 
have  ended  previous  expansions.  In  this  respect,  the  recent  moderation  in  growth  is  more  likely  to 
prolong the expansion than bring it to an end. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2005
