Kishori J Udeshi: A BIT of tomorrow 
Keynote address by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the BFSI 
Conclave 2005 on Technology Solutions for Business Transformation, Mumbai, 7 June 2005.  
Acknowledgements for inputs are due to S/Shri A K Hirve, S Ganesh Kumar and A Madhavan.  
 The  topic  for  today’s  conclave  is  “Technology  Solutions  for  Business  Transformation”  and  I  have 
chosen  to  speak  on  “A  BIT  (Banking  and  Information  Technology)  of  Tomorrow”.  I  do  not  consider 
myself as being even computer savvy. But one does not have to be an IT professional to think of how 
IT  can  bring  about  business  transformation.  For  this,  all  that  the  banker  needs  is  to  have  vision, 
conviction and the courage to change. It is for the IT professional to make it possible. The entire world 
is looking at India for its IT services. Let us take a harder futuristic look.  
While Indian industry and agriculture contribute almost equally to GDP, industry gets four times the 
gross loans and advances from banking system than what agriculture gets. Is there no potential for a 
transformation  here  and  can  IT  not  provide  the  solution?  India  has  around  6  lakh  villages.  Bank 
penetration is around 18 villages per branch. Imagine if a bank were to set up an Information Kiosk to 
cater to a cluster of say 2 to 3 villages, what would be the outcome?  
There is no limit to the extent of usage of such a kiosk. The farmer can know, at the click of the mouse 
his  bank balance,  entries  of  debit  and  credit  in  his  account,  outstanding  loan  amount,  interest rate, 
interest charged to the account, commodity price movements, weather, expected yield and income, 
direct credit of receivables into his account, direct payment for purchases without involving cash and 
lot of other value added services, all in his native language. Such kiosks could, through arrangements, 
even  double  up  as  vending  machines.  The  possibilities  are  immense.  The  constraints  only  are 
adequate and quality power supply. But we have to be optimistic.  
And  if  you  think  that  farmers  are  uneducated  and  this  is  grandiose  thinking  let  me  quote  from 
C.K.Prahalad1: 
“The most telling comment was from a farmer captured on video by the researchers: 
 
Four months later: 
 
 
Also, ITC’s e-Choupal would not have been such a huge success and almost replaced the local mandi 
if this were not true !! 
What would the bank gain from this?  
i) 
“Even if they take away the computer, we will buy one. We need net connectivity”. 
That summarises it all. 
Only customers i.e. either as depositors or as borrowers would get the service and there is 
no gainsaying the fact that banks would benefit from both. 
It would free the farmer from the shackles of the ubiquitous moneylender and the avaricious 
middle man and most importantly banks would be providing service to the farmer and the 
common man, through the use of IT.  
“I did not know how to hold a mouse” 
ii) 
A win-win solution for both! 
If the Railways can change the entire environment of booking of tickets, checking of reservations and 
so on and provide wholesome service to the common man, why can’t our banks harness technology to 
do so?  
The future holds exciting promises for those institutions which can quickly recognise the opportunities, 
harness their strength, seize the initiative and flow across hitherto uncharted areas of activity. Banks 
and FIs have proven themselves upto this task. We are moving from the use of MICR technology to 
                                                      
1  The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid (Wharton School Publishing) 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
image based cheque processing and have successfully gone forward from ECS & EFT to RTGS. The 
INFINET  system  set  up  by  the  RBI  for  use  by  banks  has  demonstrated  that  PKI  based  messaging 
system  surpasses  international  standards  and  also  meets  the  legal  requirements  pertaining  to 
electronic  data  transmission  in  a  safe  and  secure  manner.  Banks  have  leveraged  technology  to 
provide  most  sophisticated  services  to  customers  without  their  having  to  visit  the  bank.  No  doubt, 
every change brings it’s own concomitant irritants. This is not the forum to deal with this except to say 
that these need to be addressed on a priority basis. 
Consolidation of knowledge leveraging technology is the real key to success and would put a bank 
one step ahead of the competitor. The new generation software which has excellent data warehousing 
and data mining techniques, bordering on neural network, can link all data relating to a customer right 
from the savings to fixed deposit habits, loans, credit/debit card usage, internet usage etc., to not only 
have a customer’s financial profile but also draw behavioural profile. This can be classified into group 
profiles that would enable a bank to offer products to the target groups giving the look of a customized 
product  offered  to  each  customer.  The  same  can  be  replicated  to  the  corporate  segment.  Using 
technology to the hilt is the mantra and I believe data warehousing and data mining are more in the 
nature of knowledge management rather than connecting disparate data elements. This is being done 
successfully by banks overseas. Why cannot our banks do so in India? As a typical central banker, I 
would  add  just  one  word  of  caution  here.  While  transferring  data  for  data  warehousing  banks  may 
remember that compliance to Basel II requires voluminous past data and therefore banks would need 
to  ensure  that  integrity  of  data  does  not  get  affected  through  data  transfer  operations  like  data 
cleansing.  
The  high  rate  of  technology  obsolescence  along  with  requirement  for  constant  upgradation  and 
adoption  of  newer  technology  has  necessitated  higher  capital  and  revenue  expenditure.  Therefore, 
there  is  tremendous  pressure  to  achieve  higher  rate  of  returns  on  investments  within  lesser  time 
periods than before. Already banks are in the mode of co-operation and co-existence as seen from the 
sharing  of  ATMs.  Is  it,  therefore,  not  possible  that  in  the  years  to  come  when  complex  modeling 
techniques  would  have  to  be  used  by  banks,  banks  may  share  with  other  banks  the  IT  system 
whereby  they  could  thread  their  data  and  churn  the  output  and  yet  maintain  individuality  and 
confidentiality?  This  is  a  thought  for  bankers  and  IT  professionals  to  pursue.  This  is  all  the  more 
necessary  if  you  consider  the  dimming  of  business  territories  as  another  stark  reality  of  the  future. 
More  industries  and  organisations  would  converge  their  services  resulting  in  a  hybrid  approach 
towards service delivery offerings. Banking and institutions is a visible activity of this kind.  
Service providers  have,  therefore,  become  an  extended  arm  of  financial  organisations.  Outsourcing 
services  has  its  own  challenges.  Drafting  such  legal  contracts,  giving  details  of  service  level,  etc., 
requires  expertise  not  readily  available  with  banks  and  implementing  or  enforcing  them  is  difficult. 
Thus the relationship is legal and short term in law but that of dependence and long term in reality. 
The Joint Forum of BCBS has published a paper on Outsourcing in Financial Services which deals 
with  the  risks,  issues  and  principles  in  outsourcing.  It  also  captures  the  regulatory  developments  in 
outsourcing and the cross-country measures. The Reserve Bank has constituted an internal group on 
outsourcing and based on its recommendations, regulatory guidelines would be issued.  
Security is the top most concern of a banker. IT security is all the more important. The risk arises out 
of security inadequacies or indifferent attitudes towards security issues. With regard to the former, the 
Reserve Bank has issued guidelines on various issues such as internet banking, IS Audit, Business 
Continuity Plan etc.  
As  regards  the  latter  i.e.  the  attitude  towards  security  issues,  this  is  an  HR  challenge  and  not  one 
which can be addressed so easily but is one which is the core challenge. The work force of tomorrow 
would  be  a  more  enlightened  lot,  functioning  in  a  more  educated  environment.  Continuous  skill 
enhancement  and  regular  training,  apart  from  good  compensation,  will  lead  to  better  employee 
retention and motivation in a highly challenging and changing environment. I have said this before and 
I repeat that traditional HR systems in banks would need to undergo rapid changes in the manner of 
recruitment, motivation, performance appraisal and compensation package. The sooner this is done 
the better it would be.  
India is recognised as the ultimate destination for IT talents and firms from the world over are seeking 
IT solutions from India. Our banking system too has matured and proved its resilience and capabilities. 
A combination of these two professionals i.e. banks and IT should be able to lift not just the banking 
industry but the entire economy, especially the rural sector onto a higher trajectory of growth.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
Permit me to end my address with a quote from the book “The World is Flat” by Thomas L. Friedman 
which makes one proud to be Indian. I quote, “If I have a grand daughter one day and I tell her that I 
am going to India she will say grand pa is that where software comes from”. Perhaps, a decade ahead 
it would be a little kid in Switzerland pointing to the signboard of an Indian bank and saying “Look dad 
– our bank” ! 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 3
