Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  SR-banken, 
Stavanger, 18 March 2005. 
The  speech  is  based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s 
monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Inflation Report 1/05 and on previous speeches. The text below may differ slightly from 
the actual presentation. 
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace, and there are prospects that growth will remain 
high in the year ahead. The recession was mild after the preceding expansion culminated two and a 
half  years  ago.  The  higher  rate  of  cost  inflation  in  Norway  relative  to  other  countries  was  broken 
without production being impacted to the same extent as during the recessions in the early 1980s and 
around  1990.  One  of  the  main  reasons  for  this  is  probably  that  low  inflation  in  the  1990s  and  the 
current  monetary  policy  have  anchored  expectations  of  low  and  stable  inflation  among  economic 
agents.  
The need to bring down inflation was the main reason why New Zealand, the first country to do so, 
introduced an inflation target for monetary policy at the end of the 1980s. Canada, the UK, Sweden 
and  Australia  followed  suit  later  in  the  1990s.  Inflation  targeting  has  gradually  become  the  normal 
monetary policy system in developed economies. In Norway, the Government introduced an inflation 
target in 2001. The target is set at 2.5 per cent. In the euro area, monetary policy is oriented towards 
price stability, defined as inflation below but close to 2 per cent.  
Inflation  targeting  has  proved  to  be  a  sound  system  and  particularly  well  suited  for  small,  open 
economies.  Normally,  interest  rate  setting  under  an  inflation  targeting  regime  will  also  contribute  to 
stabilising output and employment. In periods of recession, with prospects of low and falling inflation, 
the interest rate will be reduced to boost demand and prevent an inflation level that is too low. During 
an  upturn  when  there  are  prospects  of  high  inflation,  the  interest  rate  will  be  increased.  Inflation 
targeting is softer around the edges than the exchange rate regimes Norway and many other countries 
operated earlier. The system has proved fairly robust to disturbances.  
Nevertheless, the soft landing of the Norwegian economy after several years of high domestic cost 
inflation  and a  low  level  of  activity  abroad  must  not  lead  us  to  believe  that  output  and  employment 
cannot  show  pronounced  fluctuations  in  the  future.  We  cannot  expect  the  interest  rate  to  have  the 
same impact from one period to the next. The economy is also exposed to unexpected disturbances. 
As a result, we cannot fine-tune economic developments using the interest rate, but avoid the largest 
effects  when  the  economy  is  exposed  to  disturbances.  Experience  seems  to  indicate  that  inflation 
expectations  remain  stable  even  if  inflation  varies  somewhat  as  long  as  the  interest  rate  is  used 
actively  to  curb  effects.  Given  our  highly  open  economy,  we  may  have  to  accept  somewhat  wider 
variations in inflation than some other countries.  
The last time I was here, almost exactly a year ago, Norges Bank’s Executive Board had just decided 
to  reduce  the  key  rate  by  0.25  percentage  point  to  1.75  per  cent.  Since  then,  the  key  rate  has 
remained at this historically low level.  
Real interest rates are also low. From December 2002 to March 2004, the key rate was reduced by a 
total of 5.25 percentage points. The interest rate decline can be ascribed to a number of factors.  
In  late  autumn  2002,  inflation  started  to  fall.  The  inflation  projections  were  also  revised  down. 
Gradually new information about the outlook for other countries and the Norwegian economy indicated 
that inflation might be very low. Short-term interest rates fell by close to 4 percentage points. It would 
seem that it is not only changes in the real interest rate that have an influence, but also the level of 
real interest rates. Between December 2002 and March 2004, the interest rate has moved from a high 
to a low level. The real interest rate is now lower than a neutral interest rate. A real interest rate that is 
lower than the neutral rate will stimulate activity even after the effects of the interest rate fall itself have 
been exhausted.  
Calculations seem to indicate that the neutral real interest rate for Norway is between 2½ and 3½ per 
cent, and it has probably fallen somewhat in recent years.  
BIS Review 18/2005 
 1
It  takes  time  for  an  interest  rate  reduction  to  have  an  impact  on  inflation.  We  are  now  seeing  the 
effects of monetary policy decisions some of which were taken two years ago.  
The  interest  rate  has  affected  inflation  via  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  via  demand  for  goods  and 
services. In particular, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services has picked up. 
In addition, the reduction in the interest rate has probably contributed to holding up expectations of 
future inflation even when inflation is low.  
If there is confidence in monetary policy, economic agents will expect inflation to be close to target 
over  time.  This  will  provide  a  basis  for  company  budgets.  This  will  then  contribute  to  stabilising 
inflation. Many companies change their prices only once or twice a year. When they change prices, 
they probably take into account the expected rise in other prices.  
It has been important to prevent inflation expectations from falling and becoming entrenched at a low 
level.  Surveys  of  inflation  expectations  indicate  that  expectations  are  well  anchored  around  the 
inflation target in the long term.  
The first signs of the effects of the interest rate cuts appeared in the foreign exchange market. The 
interest rate differential against other countries narrowed. It became more attractive to borrow and less 
profitable to invest in the Norwegian krone. The movement in the krone exchange rate was reversed 
and it depreciated through 2003 and into 2004. However, the impact on the krone exchange rate has 
been considerably dampened because external interest rates have remained low. High prices for oil 
and gas and other export goods also contributed to an appreciation of the krone last year.  
The depreciation of the krone in 2003 contributed to restraining the fall in prices for imported goods. 
The effect occurred gradually. Companies and importers may have preferred to observe changes in 
the exchange rate over time before changing their selling prices.  
After several expensive wage settlements and a short period when the krone exchange rate was high 
had weakened profitability in the Norwegian business sector, the depreciation of the krone contributed 
to curbing the decline in activity and employment. The recession was short-lived.  
Together  with  private  consumption  and  fixed  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector,  traditional  exports 
were an important factor underlying growth in the early stages of the upturn that started in the first half 
of 2003. Prices for many of our most important export goods have risen as a result of strong growth in 
new markets. Growth in Norway’s total exports excluding oil and gas is, however, lower than import 
growth among our trading partners.  
Mainland  fixed  investment  has  gradually  become  an  important  driving  force  behind  the  upturn. 
Investment has picked up in most industries and growth was stronger than expected towards the end 
of 2004. Norges Bank’s regional network has registered rising investment in all industries. Petroleum 
investment in particular appears to be growing at a faster pace than projected. This may continue to 
boost mainland output.  
In the past few years, household demand has been underpinned by low interest rates, high real wage 
growth  and  higher  asset  prices.  According  to  preliminary  national  accounts  figures,  private 
consumption  increased  by  4.3  per  cent  last  year.  House  price  inflation  has  slowed  somewhat,  but 
remains high. Housing starts in 2004 were at the highest level for several years. Home refurbishment 
is probably also rising sharply.  
Overall,  the  supply  of  capital  to  households  has  increased  sharply.  Debt  accumulation  was  slightly 
higher than 11 per cent in 2004 and is now considerably higher than growth in household disposable 
income. This largely reflects the sharp rise in house prices since the mid-1990s.  
According to TNS Gallup’s consumer confidence indicator for the first quarter of 2005, households are 
still highly optimistic with regard to their personal finances and the domestic economy. Our regional 
network confirms this view with reports of strong growth in companies that provide goods and services 
to households. On the whole, household consumption and housing investment are projected to show 
fairly strong growth over the next few quarters.  
Despite the strong upturn in the mainland economy, the rise in the number of employed has been fairly 
modest.  Productivity  rose  quite  sharply  in  the  first  few  quarters  after  economic  growth  picked  up. 
Normally, strong productivity growth is gradually followed by an increase in employment. The current 
upturn has lasted about two years. The fairly low level of growth in employment, as measured by the 
number of employed, must be seen in the light of the sharp decline in sickness absence through 2004 
after rising for several years. The decrease in sickness absence has increased companies’ supply of 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2005
labour  and  reduced  the  need  for  new  employees.  Measured  in  person-hours  worked,  employment 
growth  was  solid  last  year.  Person-hours  worked  increased  by  2.2  per  cent  from  2003  to  2004.  A 
corollary to the increase in the number of person-hours worked is partly reduced sickness absence 
and partly three more working days in 2004 compared with 2003.  
An increase in available person-hours and increased competition and rationalisation in many sectors 
led to higher-than-normal growth in potential output last year. The economy has therefore been able to 
grow a fairly rapidly for a period without the emergence of bottlenecks in the labour market.  
In the business tendency survey, manufacturing industry reported higher output volumes and capacity 
utilisation.  Average  capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  sector  is  now  close  to  its  historical 
average. Norges Bank’s regional network reports that nearly half of the contacts would have some or 
substantial  problems  in  increasing  production  in  excess  of  planned  levels.  This  may  indicate 
approximate  balance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  economy,  and  that  capacity  utilisation  is 
about normal. A normal level of capacity utilisation is consistent with an output gap – the percentage 
deviation between actual and potential output - that is now close to zero.  
Growth in demand and output is expected to remain high in the near term. Unemployment may fall 
somewhat more quickly than has been the case over the past year. The output gap is expected to be 
positive in 2005.  
Higher  demand  for  companies’  goods  provides  scope  for  increasing  prices.  Experience  shows  that 
inflation is directly influenced by the level of capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Some of 
the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services can be attributed to higher margins in 
the business sector.  
The effects of the interest rate decline on demand, output and employment have been pronounced. It 
has taken time for inflation to pick up. This partly reflects low external interest rates and high oil prices, 
which have moderated the impact on the krone exchange rate. Higher imports from low-cost countries, 
competition and improved efficiency in Norwegian production have also kept inflation at a low level.  
Initially, it was the fall in prices for imported consumer goods that pushed down underlying inflation. 
After a period, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services also decelerated. This 
was due in particular to increased competition in some goods and service markets. At the same time, 
wage growth slowed as a result of lower capacity utilisation in the economy. A slower rise in house 
rents also contributed. Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE reached its lowest level in the first months 
of 2004. Inflation remained at less than ½ per cent until after the summer before picking up in autumn. 
Inflation moved up primarily as a result of a slower decline in prices for imported consumer goods, but 
the depreciation of the krone since the beginning of 2003 has also contributed. In addition, the rise in 
prices  for domestically  produced goods  and services stabilised,  and  towards  the  end  of  2004  there 
was a tendency towards a higher rise in prices for these goods and services.  
At  the  beginning  of  2005,  inflation  measured  by  the  CPI-ATE  was  lower  than  expected.  Prices  for 
imported consumer goods fell more than expected. It is uncertain whether this price decline was due 
to abnormal seasonal patterns or a fall in underlying inflation. The fall in prices may be related to an 
unusually warm winter, which has made it more difficult to sell winter clothing and sports equipment at 
ordinary prices. On the other hand, there are indications that prices for imported consumer goods in 
foreign currency may have fallen somewhat more than previously assumed.  
The wide variations in prices for some imported consumer goods, especially clothing and footwear, 
may entail wide monthly variations in consumer price figures. Excluding changes in prices for clothing 
and footwear, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE was 1.3 per cent in February, up from 1.1 per cent 
in January.  
Changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  particularly  in  VAT  rates  make  it  difficult  to  interpret  the  most  recent 
price  figures.  The  low  level  of  inflation  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  may  be  due  to  a  lag  in  price 
adjustment following the indirect tax changes.  
Among the companies in our regional network, the share expecting a sharper rise in selling prices is 
larger than the share expecting a slower rise in prices. TNS Gallup’s business sentiment survey gives 
a more neutral impression. Nevertheless, both surveys indicate expectations of a sharper rise in prices 
in the service sector.  
The other Nordic countries have also experienced falling inflation.  
BIS Review 18/2005 
 3
Inflation in the Nordic countries has declined, and is now relatively low in Sweden, Denmark, Finland 
and  Norway.  According  to  the  harmonised  indices  of  consumer  prices,  inflation  in  February  was 
around 1 per cent in Denmark, Sweden and Norway, while the rise in prices remained unchanged in 
Finland, as measured by 12-month changes. By comparison, price inflation in the euro area was close 
to 2 per cent.  
A common feature of the low level of inflation in the Nordic countries seems to be the trend in prices 
for imported consumer goods, even though developments have not been entirely the same in all the 
Nordic countries.  
The  upturn  is  broadly  based,  and  its  effects  are  no  less  pronounced  here  in  Rogaland.  Demand  is 
increasing in all sectors, particularly in oil-related industries and the construction sector.  
The market outlook for export-oriented and oil-related industries in the next six months is very bright 
and  optimism  is  greater  now  than  in  the  previous  round  of  interviews.  Domestically  oriented 
manufacturing has not experienced large fluctuations in demand and output to the same extent.  
It appears that growth in investment will increase in the period ahead: the high level of investment in 
the petroleum sector will contribute to higher investment growth in the offshore supplier industry. There 
are signs of rising investment in the construction industry. "Repatriation" is also being considered in 
Rogaland:  the  Gjestal  Spinneri  spinning  company  is  looking  at  the  possibility  of  investing  in  a  new 
facility in Oltedal, enabling the company to transfer production from the UK to Norway.  
Employment is rising, with the most marked increase in the construction sector. Almost a third of the 
enterprises report that shortages in the supply of qualified labour may constrain output growth.  
Through  the  past  year,  there  have  been  increasing  reports  of  higher  selling  prices.  One  in  four 
manufacturing enterprises is expecting a higher rise in prices this year than in 2004. In retail trade, two 
in three enterprises are expecting an accelerating rise in prices. The picture is mixed for the corporate 
service sector.  
Profitability is still improving considerably in all sectors. This reflects both an increase in volume and 
cost reductions.  
In  the  adopted  budget  for  2005,  the  structural,  non-oil  deficit  increases  compared  with  2004.  It 
therefore  appears  that  fiscal  policy  will  provide  some  stimulus  to  growth  this  year.  In  the  National 
Budget for 2005, the underlying rise in expenditure over the central government budget was projected 
at 5.2 per cent, which is somewhat lower than the previous year and somewhat lower than projected 
nominal  growth  in  mainland  GDP.  As  from  2006,  it  is  assumed  that  nominal  growth  in  general 
government  expenditure  will  be  approximately  the  same  as  nominal  growth  in  general  government 
revenues and that the real tax level will remain unchanged.  
Growth  in  the  euro  area  and  Japan  was  weaker  towards  the  end  of  2004  than  projected  in  the 
November  Inflation  Report.  It  appears  that  it  will  take  time  for  structural  changes  that  have  been 
implemented, in Germany for example, to contribute to an increase in output. In the US, on the other 
hand, economic growth remains firm and capacity utilisation is rising. Even though developments in 
the US economy are favourable, higher interest rates, among other factors, will gradually result in an 
increase  in  household  saving.  At  the  same  time,  the  plans  call  for  a  lower  rise  in  government 
spending. Weaker growth in US demand may imply slower growth also in other countries. In addition 
to the euro area, economic growth is expected to slow in the UK and Sweden.  
On balance, we assume that growth among our trading partners will slacken this year and stabilise in 
the years ahead.  
Growth  in  Asia,  except  Japan,  and  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  is  expected  to  moderate  but  to 
remain strong.  
Robust expansion in China and India has in particular pushed up prices for oil and other important 
commodities. Growth impulses to the Norwegian economy may therefore be somewhat stronger than 
the  overall  outlook  for  our  most  important  trading  partners  would  indicate.  High  demand  for 
commodities produced by Norway is boosting activity and is strengthening profitability for Norwegian 
enterprises.  
Partly due to very high growth in demand for oil, the average price of Brent Blend rose to almost USD 
40 per barrel in 2004. Strong economic growth, particularly in the US and China, has resulted in high 
energy consumption. So far this year, the price of Brent Blend oil has largely hovered around USD 45 
per barrel, although the price rose to more than USD 50 per barrel at the beginning of March.  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2005
Oil  futures  prices  have  also  increased.  Little  idle  production  capacity  in  OPEC  countries,  combined 
with the prospect of lower production in non-OPEC countries, has probably influenced oil prices. At the 
same  time,  there  are  prospects  of  continued  strong  demand  growth  in  important  oil-importing 
countries, such as China and some other emerging economies.  
On the other hand, US crude oil stocks are now far larger than they were at the same time last year 
and the previous year. Petrol stocks are also relatively high. This reduces the risk that low stocks and 
high petrol demand will push up the price of crude oil, as was the case last summer.  
Planned,  large-scale  projects  resulted  in  strong  growth  in  petroleum  investment  in  2004.  Due  to 
persistently  high  oil  prices  and  expectations  that  oil  prices  will  remain  high,  investment  in  the 
petroleum  sector  may  reach  record  levels  this  year.  The  investment  intentions  survey  for  the 
petroleum  sector  points  to  very  high  growth.  The  level  is  expected  to  remain  high  throughout  the 
projection period. Activity in the petroleum sector will have spillover effects on the mainland economy, 
initially on the shipbuilding industry and the construction sector.  
The  scale  of  petroleum  investment  and  its  spillover  effects  are  highly  uncertain.  The  last  time 
petroleum investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than 
had been assumed. An upturn occurred in the Norwegian economy as a whole at the same time. The 
unexpected increase in petroleum investment contributed to an economic upturn that was substantially 
stronger than projected. If oil prices rise further or remain at the current high level for a long period, 
petroleum investment may again amplify the cyclical upturn more than projected.  
Inflation among our trading partners is expected to be low over the next few years. It is likely that high 
prices for oil and other commodities will continue to push up prices for goods where wages account for 
a small portion of total costs. On the other hand, growth among most of our main trading partners will 
probably be too low for idle resources to be utilised in the next few years. Particularly in the euro area, 
wage growth is likely to be low as a result of moderate economic growth and high unemployment.  
Overall,  it  would  appear  that  international  price  impulses  via  consumer  goods  to  the  Norwegian 
economy will remain negative this year and next. There is no indication that growth in imports from 
low-cost countries is declining. For example, China’s share of footwear imports to Norway increased 
by  4  percentage  points  to  20  per  cent  in  2004.  The  share  of  clothing  imports  increased  by  2 
percentage points to 32 per cent. The decline in prices for clothing and footwear will probably continue 
in the coming years. Prices for audiovisual equipment are still falling as a result of strong international 
competition and high productivity growth.  
We assume that the effects of structural changes in these markets will gradually be exhausted towards 
the end of the projection period. External price impulses via consumer goods are expected to increase 
in pace with unit labour costs among our trading partners.  
The projections in Inflation Report 1/05, published on 16 March, are based on a gradual increase in 
the interest rate. This is in line with financial and foreign exchange market expectations. The krone 
exchange rate is assumed to move in line with the forward exchange rate. This implies that the krone 
will remain fairly stable around the current level in the years ahead.  
Growth  in  private  consumption  is  expected  to  remain  buoyant  both  this  year  and  next,  primarily 
reflecting low real interest rates, strong growth in real disposable income and a continued rise in house 
prices.  In  the  period  ahead,  higher  employment  and  wage  growth  will  continue  to  fuel  household 
demand. On the other hand, household debt has risen sharply. This implies that a normalisation of 
interest  rates  will  increase  household  net  interest  expenses.  After  a  period,  growth  in  consumption 
may be fairly low. However, we assume that households will spread consumption over time so that the 
savings ratio will continue to fall in spite of an increase in interest rates.  
Growth in housing investment is expected to ease through 2005. However, the projection for housing 
starts  is  also  very  high  for  2005.  Such  a  high  level  of  housing  starts  over  several  years  probably 
means  that  more  dwellings  will  be  constructed  than  implied  by  underlying  demand.  As  a  result, 
housing  investment  is  expected  to  decline  after  a  period.  Higher  interest  rates  and  weaker 
developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  may  also  lead  to  a  fall  in  residential  construction  after  a 
period.  
The  upturn  in  mainland  fixed  investment  is  broadly  based.  Stronger  profitability,  higher  capacity 
utilisation and solid export growth will contribute to continued investment growth in goods-producing 
industries. Demand for services is expected to continue to grow for a period ahead with an attendant 
BIS Review 18/2005 
 5
increase  in  investment  in  service  sectors.  When  growth  in  the  economy  gradually  slows  down, 
investment growth will probably slacken.  
Mainland exports of good and services from mainland Norway will also benefit from solid global growth 
this  year.  Later  in  the  period,  a  continued  loss  of  market  shares  as  a  result  of  high  cost  levels  will 
dampen export growth.  
Unemployment is expected to decline this year and next. In subsequent years, growth in demand and 
output  is  expected  to  ease,  and  unemployment  may  edge  up  again  when  capacity  utilisation 
approaches a more normal level.  
With a somewhat tighter labour market in the years ahead and rising inflation, wage growth may pick 
up. Over the past year, low consumer price inflation has probably contributed to keeping nominal wage 
increases lower than implied by labour market tightness in isolation. Low inflation has resulted in high 
growth in household purchasing power, even with moderate pay increases.  
With  a  path  for  the  interest  rate  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  in  line  with  the  baseline  scenario  in 
Inflation Report 1/05, inflation may increase gradually from less that 1 per cent today to close to 2 per 
cent in mid-2006. Under these assumptions, inflation may stabilise at around 2½ per cent at the three-
year horizon. However, continued shifts in trade patterns, with higher imports from Asia and intensified 
competition in retail trade, may prolong the period of low inflation.  
Developments in the krone exchange rate are uncertain. The real krone exchange rate measured by 
relative labour costs is strong. Historically, the real krone exchange rate has tended to return to an 
average measured over a longer period. Should this occur in today’s situation, through a depreciation 
of the nominal krone exchange rate, inflation will pick up somewhat faster than projected. If the krone 
appreciates, on the other hand, there is a risk that inflation will not move up as quickly as projected.  
Developments in line with the projections imply that the output gap will increase to about 1¼ per cent 
in 2006. As the interest rate gradually increases to a more normal level, growth in private demand will 
probably  ease,  and  capacity  utilisation  may  be  brought  down  and  stabilise.  There  is  uncertainty 
associated with developments in demand and output in the near term, partly because the interest rate 
has been low for a long period. Higher growth may rapidly trigger stronger pressures in the economy.  
Output  growth  in  Norway  is  high,  and  capacity  utilisation  is  rising.  It  may  appear  that  growth  has 
become more self-driven. The low interest rate will probably contribute to an increase in the output gap 
and inflation ahead. The operational objective of monetary policy is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent 
over time. In the conduct of monetary policy, emphasis is also placed on curbing fluctuations in output 
and employment.  
The  objective  of  stabilising  developments  in  output  and  employment  implies,  in  isolation,  a  higher 
interest rate. This will reduce the risk that capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy will become 
too high. High capacity utilisation could give rise to bottlenecks in some sectors of the economy and 
lead to a higher rise in property prices and household borrowing. This could be a source of instability 
in demand and output in the somewhat longer run.  
The  objective  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  target  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations  nevertheless 
implies a continued expansionary monetary policy. International interest rates are rising, albeit slowly 
and  from  a  low  level.  There  are  prospects  of  continued  low  inflation  for  a  period  ahead.  Even  if 
capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  rises,  there  appears  to  be  little  risk  that  inflation  will 
rapidly move up to a level that is too high. Inflation was unexpectedly low in the first months of this 
year, but in the light of our highly open economy we must perhaps expect somewhat wider variations 
in inflation than some other countries.  
The projections and assessments presented in Inflation Report 1/05 may as a whole imply that the key 
rate can after a period, and then gradually, be brought up to a more normal level.  
At its monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to leave the key 
rate, the sight deposit rate, unchanged at 1.75 per cent. The Executive Board weighed the objective of 
bringing  inflation  back  to  target  and  stable  inflation  expectations against  the  risk  that  output  growth 
may eventually be too high. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2005
