Paul Hartmann: Status and future of retirement funds in Namibia 
Address by Mr Paul Hartmann, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the Old Mutual Namibia 
“Retire right” conference, Windhoek, 23 February 2005. 
 The greatest problem about old age is the fear that it may go on too long. 
A.J.P. Taylor 
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be with you this morning and to address this distinguished gathering. I would like to 
thank  the  organisers  for  this  invitation  and  for  putting  together  this  conference.  The  theme  of  my 
remarks today is on the “Status and Future of Retirement Funds in Namibia”. 
Introduction 
As a starting point, it is necessary to recognise the principal role played by the financial system in any 
country is to provide the infrastructure to allow surplus resources to be allocated to those individuals 
and companies with deficits. The positive impact of a well-functioning financial system on economic 
growth  of  a  country  is  well  documented.  In  most  countries,  the  financial  system  extends  beyond 
traditional  banking  institutions  to  include  insurance  companies,  mutual  funds,  unit  trusts  and  other 
financial  service  providers.  These  non-bank  financial  institutions  provide  services  that  are  not 
necessarily  suited  to  banks,  but  they  also  serve  as  competition  to  banks.  Having  a  multi-faceted 
financial system, which includes non-bank financial institutions, can protect economies from financial 
shocks.  However,  in  countries  that  lack  a  coherent  policy  framework  and  effective  regulations, 
non-bank financial institutions can exacerbate the fragility of the financial system. 
There  has  been  tremendous  growth  worldwide  in  the  mobilisation  of  financial  resources  outside 
traditional  banking  systems.  Channelled  mainly  through  capital  markets,  such  rapid  financial 
diversification  is  posing  new  challenges  equally  for  investment  managers  as  for  regulators  in  many 
emerging and developing markets. The pension fund industry, in particular, has grown rapidly during 
the  past  decade,  which  is  ascribed  to  a  combination  of  demographic,  political  and  economic 
influences. 
We also take note of the widespread turbulence which is affecting almost all social security schemes 
throughout the world. In retrospect, the 1980s and 1990s may appear as one of the great watersheds 
in the development of social policy. A large number of countries are at present contemplating, planning 
or implementing major changes to their existing schemes of retirement protection. 
The  issues  surrounding  retirement  funds  which  you  are  discussing  today  are  so  multi-faceted  and 
affect so many people and households that it makes sense to host a conference of this nature. 
Importance of the retirement fund industry 
Let me start by looking at the essence and the role of the retirement funds in the economy. These 
funds  perform  various  functions  in  the  economy,  including  consumption  smoothing,  insurance  and 
redistribution of income. A key function of retirement plans is to enable individuals and households to 
smooth  consumption  over  the  life  course,  by  collecting  savings  during  people’s  working  lives  and 
providing retirement income. 
The second function of the retirement plans is the insurance. The retirement fund provides insurance 
against  a  range  of  contingencies  which  may  otherwise  adversely  affect  household  consumption. 
Uncertainty  over  the  time  of  death,  disability,  retrenchment,  retirement,  etc.,  is  a  primary  factor  in 
explaining  the  establishment  of  retirement  plans.  The  insurance  function  of  the  retirement  fund  is 
extremely  important  but  the  insurance  properties  of  the  fund  plan  are  often  not  well  understood 
especially in developing economies and, as a result, greatly undervalued. This is one area where, I 
think,  retirement  funds  should  become  more  transparent  by  reducing  the  amount  of  “small  print”  in 
their rules and contracts. 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
The third function is the redistributive function. Retirement funds, particularly the defined benefit types, 
collect contributions from one group and pay to a different group, enabling the pursuit of social norms 
and  policy  objectives  with  regards  to  the  distribution  of  income  in  society.  Further,  they  can  also 
redistribute income within generations for example by skewing entitlements in favour of women or poor 
pensioners. 
I would also like to cite some of the key roles played by these institutions in developing the financial 
sector of a country. The development of retirement funds leads to increasing demand for long term 
financial assets, thus promoting financial market development and improving the capacity to manage 
financial  risks.  They  compete  with  investment  banks  which  lead  to  more  efficient  primary  markets. 
Furthermore,  they  play  a  major  role  in  enhancing  market  discipline,  for  instance  by  stimulating 
transparency  on  securities  market,  and  they  have  the  ability  to  actively  promote  the  interests  of 
minority shareholders of the firms in which they invest. 
Future of retirement funds in Namibia 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  retirement  fund  industry  in  Namibia  has  certainly  grown  strongly  in  line 
with  the  global  trends.  In  2002,  the  assets  under  management  by  retirement  funds  totalled 
N$16.3 billion,  which  is  equivalent  to  48.5  percent  of  GDP.  This  ratio  compares  well  with  that  of 
20.3 percent in emerging markets. Among the 19 emerging market economies, only Chile, Malaysia 
and Singapore boast with higher pension fund assets in relation to GDP. 
The tremendous growth in retirement fund assets in Namibia is ascribed to several factors. As said 
before, demographic factors are at play here where our young population starts aging too thanks to 
improved  health  facilities  and  services  and  because  of  the  realisation  that  the  State  pension  is 
insufficient to provide for a decent living for the aged. The savings behaviour of Namibians has also 
changed  over  time.  Contractual  savings  of  individuals  have  by  far  exceeded  their  discretionary 
savings, meaning that the typical Namibian prefers entering into a compulsory savings arrangement 
rather than making regular, but voluntary, deposits in other savings vehicles. This also explains why 
the  growth  of  domestic  liabilities  of  banking  institutions  has  begun  lagging  behind  the  liabilities  of 
retirement funds. 
Allow me to highlight what I would regard as some of the key challenges that trustees of retirement 
funds, their members and the regulators are facing before I shed light on the future of the retirement 
funds in Namibia. 
As  industry  players,  you  are  certainly  fully  aware  of  the  high  incidence  of  HIV/AIDS  among  the 
Namibian population and its potential harmful financial impact on retirement funds and, of course, on 
the  financial  system  taken  together.  Because  many  HIV  infected  retirement  fund  members  die 
prematurely,  pension  schemes  may  find  it  difficult  to  replace  lost  contributors  with  new  ones. 
Therefore, the HIV/AIDS pandemic needs to be properly researched and factored into the rules and 
investment of funds, while NAMIFISA will also have to take a keen interest in the issue and look at 
possible options and reforms. 
Developing countries often lack the pre-existing capacity to regulate financial markets and institutions. 
Some  observers  believe  that  a  country  that  is  not  able  to  properly  manage  an  unfunded  or  funded 
public pension system, because of administrative inefficiency, shortage of skilled personnel or political 
interference,  would  most  likely  be  unable  to  regulate  and  supervise  a  private  pension  system. 
Namibia, however, seems to have done quite well in terms of setting up the regulatory framework and 
institutions to ensure smooth administration of private retirement funds. 
In  recent  years  we  have  seen  the  progressive  integration  of  the  world's  economies.  Technical 
progress, improved communications and expanded trade and investment flow have led to a growing 
globalisation  of  economic  activity.  The  impact  of  globalisation  on  retirement  funds  comes  from 
enhanced competition, raised mobility of factors of production and a greater need to diversify portfolios 
globally. Given the improved sophistication of local institutional investors in managing foreign assets, it 
is therefore understandable that the local retirement fund industry is calling for a greater opportunity to 
place offshore investments. 
Regulatory issues 
(a) 
In most emerging and developing market countries, the regulation of private pension funds is based 
on quantitative investment limits – the so-called draconian regulation. Regulators in emerging markets 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
that 
limits 
the  basis 
investment 
is  generally  defended  on 
consider investment limits to protect pensioners’ rights better than regulations based on the “prudent 
person”  rule.  The  latter  rule  requires  managers  to  follow  high  fiduciary  standards  in  investing  the 
funds. It allows fund managers to set their own investment guidelines, encourages financial innovation 
and avoids the pitfalls of government direction of funds and interference with market processes. 
the 
Prescribing  quantitative 
underdevelopment  and  lack  of  transparency  of  local  security  markets  make  them  susceptible  to 
manipulation  and  excess  volatility;  and  that  the  general  public,  pension  fund  trustees,  and  fund 
managers lack financial sophistication. Investment limits can also be prescribed with a view of obliging 
pension funds to make a greater contribution to national development in both the real economy and 
the local financial market. 
The downside of draconian regulation is that in some parts of the world they have created distortions 
in asset management, limited opportunities for diversification and, as a consequence, have hampered 
the performance of retirement funds. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, for the regulators, especially in developing countries, it is important to strike a 
suitable balance between draconian regulation, on the one hand, and absolute liberty in the way funds 
are  managed  and  invested,  on  the  other.  Draconian  regulation  is  more  appropriate  for  mandatory 
systems that are newly created in countries with shallow and dysfunctional financial systems and little 
tradition of private retirement funds. 
Today, there are numerous means through which governments regulate pension funds and these are 
not  limited  to  developing  countries,  but  could  be  found  in  many  developed  and  emerging  market 
economies. They include prohibiting or limiting investments in assets considered to be risky, volatile or 
complex, restricting investments in foreign securities and even going as far as prescribing minimum 
returns. 
The modern trend is to move away from quantitative investment restrictions and to rather empower the 
trustees  with  fiduciary  powers  to  take  sensible,  prudent,  strategic,  tactical  and  socially  responsible 
investment  decisions.  The  regulator’s  responsibilities  are  reduced  to  ensuring  high  corporate 
governance standards and reasonable returns on investments. 
Given these trends, one may ask whether the Namibian retirement fund industry is ready to assume 
greater responsibility  to manage  retirement  funds without prescriptive  investment  regulations. There 
are, in my view, two compelling reasons why I have to answer this question with a qualified no. It is my 
considered  opinion  that  we  are  not  ready  yet  and  that  some  form  of  prescription  is  necessary  to 
protect  the  investors  and  to  assure  socially  responsible  investments.  I’m  not  saying  that  boards  of 
trustees are irresponsible and would not act in the best interest of their members, but the following are 
factors that need to be considered. First, we are faced with a porous financial system, meaning that 
savings  can  flow  freely  within  the  CMA,  which,  in  my  view,  warrants  some  form  of  prudential 
intervention to allow for some domestically generated savings to be invested locally in financial and 
real  assets.  Second,  the  compulsory  nature  of  many  retirement  schemes  in  Namibia  may  warrant 
some form of prescription. Third, the short history of private retirement funds and the lack of familiarity 
by large numbers of workers with capital market instruments may justify the State’s regulatory duties. 
Many of these justifications would become less relevant over time as the reform takes root and gains 
public acceptance and as capital markets become deeper and more robust and as workers become 
financially more sophisticated. 
Retirement funds’ contribution to financial market development 
(b) 
What  role  can  retirement  funds  play  to  deepen  and  broaden  the  local  financial  market?  In  many 
emerging and developing economies, retirement funds have increased depth and liquidity in the local 
government bond market. Retirement funds in these economies, however, have had a limited role in 
the  broad  development  of  local  equity  markets  and  there  is  experience  of  equity  markets  being 
negatively affected. This is ascribed to low volumes of corporate bonds and equities which are chased 
by  increasing  pension  assets,  and  in  some  cases  causing  asset  price  bubbles.  In  a  few  countries, 
pension funds’ exposure to equities is prohibited or kept to a minimum. 
Today we know that Regulation 28 has without doubt meant a lot to the development of the Namibian 
money  and  capital  market  and  has  also  made  a  market  for  securities  issued  by  private  and  public 
sectors. The local investment requirement also paved the way for the establishment of the NSX, the 
deployment of stock brokers and asset managers. In short, the regulation was instrumental in retaining 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 3
at  least  a  portion  of  accrued  retirement  savings  in  Namibia  and  in  channelling  these  savings  into 
productive  domestic  investments  in  real  and  financial  assets.  Moreover,  a  number  of  financial 
institutions  emerged  creating  additional  employment  in  specialised  financial  disciplines  that  were 
hitherto absent in the country. 
However, Regulation 28 in its current form also has its weaknesses. The existing regulation makes 
little  distinction  between  secure  and  risky  investment  opportunities,  which  should  be  an  important 
feature of the investment policy of any fund. For example, a fund may invest up to 75 percent of assets 
in shares, debentures and unit trusts in Namibia and the rest of the CMA. Also, investment in property 
and property-based instruments, as well as equity investments, which are known for their volatility, are 
not given lower priority ranking than less volatile investment avenues. 
In this context, the large equity exposure of retirement funds in Namibia is a concern and this has also 
been amplified by the IMF Article IV mission to Namibia late in 2004. The mission concluded that there 
is a need to introduce prudential investment limits by type of assets, including specific limitations on 
the equity risk in line with international best practices. The mission further notes that this should apply 
especially to defined benefits plans which have 60 percent of their assets invested in equity. 
As far as the local investment requirement is concerned, it is interesting to note that retirement funds 
in  developed  countries  have  shown  a  clear  “home  bias”  in  their  investment  allocations  and  have 
usually stayed well within officially imposed limits. Even retirement funds operating in countries that 
have adopted the “prudent person” approach have also exhibited a strong “home bias”. Let me state, 
however, 
if  sufficient,  safe  and 
well-performing assets are available. If the local investment requirement is used as a captive source of 
funds for unproductive purposes, its benefit is lost. 
Let  me  not  dwell  further  on  the  regulatory  issues,  as  NAMFISA,  I  believe,  will  address  you  on  this 
specialist subject matter this afternoon. Suffice me to say that I expect a greater Namibian content in 
investment decision with regard to local savings directed towards retirement funds. Equally, I expect 
the  key  industry  participants  starting  to  put  up  local  systems  to  be  able  to  link  up  to  the  national 
payment system that is provided to them. 
investment  requirement  only  makes  sense 
local 
that 
the 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me conclude by restating the fact that retirement funds will continue to play 
a very important role in our economy where the twin problems of unemployment and poverty constitute 
major development challenges. I hope that you will agree with me that well-targeted and pragmatic 
government  intervention  in  this  sector  remains  indispensable  for  the  time  being.  These  are  serious 
challenges.  Finally,  of  equal  importance  to  the  development  of  retirement  funds  are  sound  macro-
economic  policies  and  financial  stability.  Retirement  funds  and  other  institutional  investors  cannot 
function  properly  in  an  environment  of  high  inflation,  unstable  monetary  developments  and 
unsustainable fiscal conditions. In this respect, I  believe, the authorities are giving you the required 
backing. 
Looking at the subjects of papers to be discussed in the course of this conference, I am convinced that 
numerous  policy  issues  will  be  raised  and  useful  recommendations  will  emerge  at  the  end  of  the 
different sessions. 
I wish you successful deliberations. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2005
