Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  CBI  Dinner,  Manchester, 
20 January 2005. 
 Now that the Christmas celebrations are over, and the decorations have been taken down, it is time for 
a much-loved New Year tradition - speculating on how much we all spent over the Christmas period. 
With over 200 coaches bringing shoppers from all round the country to the Trafford Centre over the 
weekend before Christmas, New Trafford seems to be as popular and entertaining as Old Trafford. 
Tonight,  though,  I  want  to  look  beyond  the  immediate  prospect  for  consumer  spending  and  ask 
whether the level of saving in this country is adequate to provide for our future needs. But, first, a few 
words on the immediate outlook. 
Tomorrow  the  ONS will  publish  its  first  estimate  of retail  sales  in  December. Among  the more  lurid 
headlines  reporting  sales  over  the  holiday  period  was  “Retail  Festive  Slump”,  followed  shortly  by 
reports of “Record Levels of Sales”. To interpret the experience of a few retailers - whether positive or 
negative - as a national trend is highly misleading. Of course, exactly the same happens each year. 
Last  year  newspapers  reported  “Confirmation  of  a  Disastrous  Christmas”  and  “Shoppers  Played 
Scrooge in December”. A week later the ONS said that the volume of retail sales in December rose at 
a  rate  more  than  double  the  increase  expected  by  City  economists,  and  the  headlines  became 
“Spending Spree Signals Rate Rise”. 
The  most  important  lesson  from  past  experience  is  that,  whatever  the  number  turns  out  to  be,  it  is 
foolish to put much weight on any one month’s figure, especially at Christmas. There are two reasons 
for  being  particularly  careful  about  the  interpretation  of  data  for  retail  sales  in  December.  First,  the 
figure that will be published by the ONS tomorrow will be dwarfed by the seasonal adjustment that is 
applied to the recorded data. That adjustment changes from year to year, often leading to revisions of 
the  figures  for  earlier  years.  Typically  retail  sales  in  December  are  around  20%  higher  than  in 
November. So even small errors in the estimate of the seasonal pattern of sales imply large errors in 
the estimate of the seasonally adjusted figure. As a result the monthly data can be volatile and little 
economic significance should be attached to the number for any one month. Second, retail sales are 
only part of household spending, around 40% or so. It is quite possible, indeed likely, that spending on 
services,  such  as  leisure  and  holidays,  behaves  rather  differently  from  sales  of  goods  on  the  high 
street. So retail sales are not always a good guide to movements of consumer spending as a whole. 
For  those  reasons  we  should  recognise  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  Christmas  story  will  not  be 
revealed until Easter - or possibly much later. The Monetary Policy Committee is more concerned to 
discern the meaning of the path of consumer spending over a longer time horizon. For some years the 
volume of consumer spending rose much faster than its post-war average. From 1997 to 2001 it rose 
at an average annual rate of about 4%, and calendar year growth was last below 2% in 1995. We are 
not  so  much  a  nation  of  shopkeepers  as  a  nation  that  keeps  shopping.  Behind  this  growth  was  a 
steady  rise  in  real  incomes,  driven  by  increases  in  employment  and  falls  in  the  prices  of  imported 
goods. Those price falls followed the rise in sterling in the second half of the 1990s, and the increase 
in cheap imports of manufactured goods, such as textiles, toys and electronic goods, from China and 
other  emerging  market  economies.  Over  the  past  three  years,  however,  consumer  spending  has 
decelerated and its growth has fallen to a more sustainable rate, close to its post-war average. 
The slower pace of consumption growth was the result of real income growth returning to a normal 
rate. It is striking, as the Monetary Policy Committee has said before, that for a number of years, and 
despite  the  volatility  of  house  price  inflation,  the  saving  ratio  of households  has been rather stable. 
Some commentators are exercised by the possibility of a rise in household saving and hence a further 
slowing of consumer spending. Their concern is that since consumption is the largest component of 
total demand, the path of consumer spending is crucial to the outlook for output and inflation. Such 
concerns  about  the  short  run  are  indeed  analysed  carefully  each  month  by  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee, and the results of that analysis feed into our monthly interest rate decisions. Visits like this 
give me the chance to listen to you and learn from you and other businesses about what is happening 
on the ground - not just in the retail sector but in manufacturing and services more broadly. And my 
visit  is  the  tip  of  an  iceberg  because  we  have  a  permanent  Agency  in  the  North  West  -  staffed  by 
members of the Bank who live and work here. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 1
But I want to step back from the immediate conjuncture and look further ahead. More relevant for our 
future prosperity is the question not of whether we might save too much but whether we are saving too 
little.  The  level  of  income  that  will  sustain  us  in  the  future  depends  critically  upon  how  much  as  a 
nation  we  set  aside  today.  In  other  words,  what  is  happening  to  the  national  saving  rate  -  the 
proportion of the net national product that is not consumed by either the private or public sector? 
Since  the  late  1960s  the  national  saving  rate  has  been  declining  fairly  steadily,  from  over  10%  to 
around 5%. Although saving rates elsewhere in the G7 have also fallen, they were higher than in the 
UK for most of the post-war period. Recently the gap between saving rates in the UK and the rest of 
the  G7  has  narrowed  considerably,  not  as  a  result  of  higher  saving  in  the  UK  but  lower  saving 
elsewhere. In large part this reflects changes in fiscal policy. There is ample empirical evidence that 
higher  government  borrowing  lowers  national  saving.  And  for  twenty  years  or  more  the  G7,  while 
lecturing each other and the rest of the world on the need for fiscal discipline, has continued to borrow 
more  and  more.  The ratio  of  net  public  debt  to  GDP  in  the  G7  has  more  doubled since 1980  from 
around 25% to around 60%. The UK is the only member of the G7 in which the ratio is lower than in 
1980. 
The UK has a clear framework for fiscal policy. Although rules and frameworks cannot guarantee that 
governments will pursue sustainable fiscal policies, as the large deficits in the early 1990s illustrated, 
they make deviations from medium-term sustainability more transparent. But in the rest of the G7 the 
absence of a clear framework, as in Japan and the United States, or the lack of credibility in the stated 
framework,  as  in  the  failure  to  enforce the  Stability  and  Growth Pact  in  the euro  area,  has  made  it 
easier to let the fiscal position slip. As a result, the G7 fiscal deficit is now close to its 25-year peak, 
and the average national saving ratio has halved. 
At home, the Government’s fiscal rules constrain the path of fiscal deficits. They limit borrowing, over 
the economic cycle, to the level of public investment and place an upper limit on the debt to GDP ratio 
of 40%. In assessing the fiscal position it is important to look forward and not just backward at the 
realised deficits over the past cycle. Of course, it is also important to recognise the many uncertainties 
surrounding the future path of the public finances. 
Central bankers probably talk too much about fiscal policy. Certainly, there are politicians, especially in 
Europe,  who  believe  central  bankers  confuse  the  deficits  which  dot  the  fiscal  landscape  with  all 
manner of economic evils, rather as Don Quixote confused the windmills which dotted the landscape 
of La Mancha with the terrible giants sent by some evil force. So I do not want to overstate the case 
and tilt at windmills, especially in the light of the fact that this month sees the 400th anniversary of the 
publication of Cervantes’ great novel. But it will clearly be important that the prudent approach to fiscal 
policy that has served the UK so well in recent years is continued - over the next cycle and beyond. In 
that way our national saving rate can be maintained or even raised. 
The market response to inadequate saving is higher real interest rates. Since the UK is a part of an 
open  international  capital  market,  long-term  real  interest  rates  in  this  country  reflect  the  balance 
between investment and saving, including the stance of fiscal policy, not just at home but throughout 
the world economy. Surprisingly, in the light of the fall in G7 saving, UK long-term real interest rates - 
as measured by the forward rates implied by the yields on index-linked gilts - are near their lowest 
levels  for  twenty  years.  US  and  euro-denominated  rates  are  also  low  relative  to  past  experience. 
There may be other factors that have offset the effect of fiscal policy on real interest rates, such as 
demographic  developments  and  higher  saving  and  more  open  capital  markets  outside  the  G7.  But 
there remains a risk, as discussed in the Bank’s recent Financial Stability Review, of an unwinding of 
low long-term real interest rates as the stimulus from highly accommodative monetary policies across 
the G7 economies is gradually withdrawn. 
What  do  these  arguments  mean  for  monetary  policy  today?  They  imply,  I  believe,  three  main 
challenges  for  central  banks.  First,  the  factors  that  affect  the  level  of  real  interest  rates  in  capital 
markets around the world also determine whether a given official interest rate is an expansionary or 
restraining  influence  on  demand.  When  driving  a  car  we  normally  know  whether  our  foot  is  on  the 
accelerator or the brake. That is less obvious in the case of monetary policy - hence the debate among 
economists about the level of the so-called neutral interest rate. Uncertainty about the extent to which 
monetary policy is applying the accelerator or the brake justifies central bankers’ continued interest in 
the monetary and credit aggregates which contain information about the pace of nominal activity and 
hence future inflation. 
Second, over the next few years the transition to a higher national saving rate is likely to imply a switch 
of resources from consumption in the private and public sectors to investment and net exports. It will 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2005
not be easy to achieve that while keeping inflation on track to meet the target and maintaining steady 
growth in output. It is very likely that, when the ONS publish next week their first estimate of economic 
growth in the final quarter of last year, it will show that the UK economy has now had 50 consecutive 
quarters of positive economic growth. No other G7 economy avoided falls in output over that period. 
But  we  should  recognise,  as  I  hope  the  English  cricket  team  does  tomorrow,  that  reaching  a  half-
century is no time for complacency but for renewed concentration. 
Third, the ability to buy goods from abroad at ever lower prices has kept down inflation at home and 
sustained faster growth in real incomes and consumption - just as Richard Cobden and John Bright, 
and the other founders of the Manchester School, argued more than 150 years ago. And it is not just 
consumers who are paying less for these items. Retailers are too. But the inflation rate of goods and 
services produced in the UK has been rising modestly for two years or so. That has been offset in 
large part by a fall in import prices. Although we can influence the former we have little control over the 
latter. There would be risks to output and inflation in the medium term if we were to allow inflation of 
domestically produced output to rise above target unless we were confident that falls in import prices 
would indeed continue for some years. 
The lesson that we should not place excessive weight on one month’s figures is as true of inflation as 
it is of retail sales. In December CPI inflation was 1.6%. Three months ago it was 1.1%. Six months 
ago it was 1.6%. Yet the broad outlook for the economy - a central view of continuing steady growth 
with  low  inflation  -  changed  rather  little  during  the  period.  The  MPC  cannot  fine  tune  short-run 
movements in output and inflation. 
When the MPC published its Inflation Report in November, some commentators said that inflation was 
seemingly stuck at around 1%, and that if growth were to continue at around trend then it was difficult 
to  see  why  the  Committee’s  central  view  was  that  inflation  would  pick  up  to  the  2%  target  looking 
ahead around two years or so. Since then inflation has risen by half a percentage point in only three 
months. Stating the point in that way shows how silly it is to place so much weight on small changes in 
inflation and small deviations of inflation from target. 
The appropriate response by central banks is to examine all the economic data, and to focus on the 
outlook  for  inflation  in  the  medium  term.  That  is  exactly  what  the  MPC  will  continue  to  do.  And  by 
keeping  inflation  on  track  to  meet  the  2%  target,  the  MPC  will  be  making  its  contribution  to  future 
prosperity, both in the Trafford Centre and the country as a whole. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 3
