Christian Noyer: The contribution of payment infrastructures to the European 
financial  integration  and  to  the  establishment  of  the  SEPA  (Single  Euro 
Payments Area) 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  20th  Anniversary  of  the 
European Banking Association (EBA), Paris, 23 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  join  you  today  to  celebrate  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  European  Banking 
Association (EBA), here in Paris at Palais Brongniart. First of all, I would like to give credit to the EBA 
for its strong commitment in favour of the European financial integration. This commitment has led the 
EBA to set up the large value payment system EURO 1 and the retail payment systems STEP 1 and 
STEP 2. 
Central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem,  like  any  central  bank,  have  a  keen  interest  in  securing  that  the 
financial  system  falling  under  their  monetary  competence  is  unified,  competitive  and  stable.  This  is 
essential for the European economy, considering that a high degree of financial integration enables an 
efficient transmission of the monetary policy, a better allocation of financial resources, a minimisation 
of cost of capital, as well as a fast and safe execution of payments across the so called SEPA, that is 
to say the Single Euro Payments Area. 
Different factors support the development of a fully integrated financial system at the European level. 
Today, I will emphasise a key driver of this process - payment infrastructures. In particular, I will focus 
on what has already been done in this area and on what remains to be done. 
I will start by underlining the importance, for the European financial integration, of the development of 
efficient  and  safe  payment  infrastructures.  Then,  I  will  assess  progress  made  in  this  field  since  the 
launch of the euro. I should mention immediately that my assessment is mixed. On the one hand, I 
consider that the situation is favourable for large-value payment systems. On the other hand, I can’t 
yet make the same positive assessment concerning retail payment systems. As a consequence, I will 
end my presentation by elaborating on the further developments needed to strengthen the integration 
of retail payments. 
Payment infrastructures are a necessary driver for financial integration 
1.  
Payment  infrastructures  cover  all  procedures  and  systems  used  by  financial  intermediaries  to 
exchange payment orders issued by economic agents. Accordingly, they play a fundamental role for 
the smooth functioning of the economy as a whole. Indeed, provided that they allow financial transfers 
to take place between economic agents in an efficient and safe way, payment infrastructures are a key 
support to one of the core functions of money, namely money as a means of exchange. 
In the EU, infrastructures processing payments in euro consist in a number of arrangements, which 
are  of  different  nature.  For  example,  the  exchange  of  payment  orders  in  euro  between  financial 
intermediaries  can  be  handled  within  multilateral  systems  or  within  the  framework  of  correspondent 
banking bilateral arrangements. Although there is a great number of arrangements that ensure money 
transfers between financial intermediaries, in practice, financial transfers tend to be concentrated on a 
few of them. 
Thus,  the  largest  volumes  and  values  of  payment  orders  are  currently  carried  out  in  multilateral 
payment  systems.  On  the  basis  of  several  surveys  conducted  by  the  Eurosystem  since  1999,  we 
consider that the market share of these systems is nearly 80 %, both in terms of volume and value. 
However, we should not minimise the role of correspondent banking, which holds the remaining 20 % 
of the market. Correspondent banking arrangements also show a high degree of concentration: out of 
all reporting banks to the Eurosystem’s survey, the ten largest banks account for about 80 % of the 
overall  value  of  correspondent  banking  transactions.  Moreover,  correspondent  activities  of  some 
banks are substantial and similar in size to those of some interbank funds transfer systems. 
The issue of the infrastructures diversity for payments in euro across the EU was raised prior to, and 
due to, the introduction of the euro. At that time, it was realised that diversity had drawbacks to the 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
extent  that  it  came  together  with  a  discrepancy  of  service  level  between  national  and  cross  border 
payments,  at  the  expense  of  the  latter.  With  respect  to  the  objective  of  financial  integration,  it  was 
clear that this situation could not be considered as an optimum. 
The  issue  was  taken  into  account  before  the  launch  of  the  euro.  The  re-engineering  of  payments 
processing, aiming at notably closing identified efficiency and safety gaps between cross-border and 
national  payment  infrastructures,  appeared  as  a  pillar  for  ensuring  a  high  degree  of  monetary  and 
financial integration in Europe. 
The Eurosystem has been closely involved in lifting obstacles to the European financial integration in 
particular  with  respect  to  those  related  to  payment  infrastructures,  in  support  of  market  initiatives, 
including notably those of the EBA. The rationale for such an involvement is in line with the statutory 
role  of  the  Eurosystem.  Indeed,  pursuant  to  the  Treaty,  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  the  smooth 
functioning of payment systems is one of the basic statutory tasks of the Eurosystem. Therefore, the 
Eurosystem has participated so far in the process of integration under three roles. Firstly, as a service 
provider  for  clearing  and  settlement  of  large  value  payments,  with  the  operation  of  the  TARGET 
system.  Secondly,  as  a  catalyst  of  market  participants’  efforts  for  the  creation  of  a  SEPA  for  retail 
payments. Thirdly, as an overseer of the functioning of systems processing payments in euro. 
2.  
The present situation display a significant discrepancy in the integration of payment 
infrastructures 
Let  me  now  assess  the  achievements  of  the  integration  process  of  payment  infrastructures.  The 
degree of integration depends on the segment of the payment infrastructures market. While the large 
value payments segment has already reached a high level of streamlining and consolidation and will 
further progress with the launch of the TARGET  2 system, the retail payments segment is still very 
fragmented. 
In  the  area  of  large  value  payment  infrastructures,  the  degree  of  integration  has  increased  very 
quickly.  We  should  bear  in  mind  that  EURO  1  and  TARGET  have  been  clearly  set  up  to  face  the 
challenge of the EMU. It was of great importance for large value payments, in particular those linked to 
the  money  market,  to  rely  on  systems  handling  efficiently  and  safely  cross  border  transactions. 
Moreover,  TARGET  was  a  prerequisite  for  the  effective  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy, 
because it ensures the settlement of monetary policy operations. The timeframe was particularly tight 
to build up the TARGET system. Therefore, the design of TARGET 1 was based on the principle of 
minimum harmonisation and on a decentralised architecture, with an interlinking of the national RTGS 
(Real-Time Gross Settlement Systems). 
TARGET 2, which is due to go live in 2007, will further improve the degree of integration of wholesale 
payment infrastructures. It will provide fully harmonised settlement services across Europe in real-time 
in central bank money, supported by a single price structure for domestic and cross-border payments 
and a single processing platform. This single platform will be used by all central banks of the ESCB to 
provide services to their banking community. TARGET 2 will enhance cost-efficiency and meet state-
of-the-art business continuity procedures.  
As a result, in less than ten years since the launch of the euro, the number of large value payment 
systems in euro operating in the EU will have been dramatically reduced: this number is to drop from 
21 ( i.e the 16 components of TARGET1 plus 5 privately-owned systems) down to 2 (TARGET2 and 
EURO 1). To sum up, we should shortly be on the same footing as the United States in terms of the 
integration of large-value payment infrastructures. 
On  the  retail  side,  the  situation  is  quite  different.  Indeed,  there  are  today  in  the  EU,  15  multilateral 
clearing and settlement systems in euro, almost the same number than 10 years ago, and there is no 
clear sign for the time being that this number is going to fall significantly in the short to medium run. 
The  market  is  therefore  characterized  by  this  multiplicity  of  national  multilateral  retail  payment 
systems, coexisting with various other payment arrangements such as bilateral schemes, international 
card schemes or banking “clubs”. 
It  is  fair  to  say  that  significant  steps  towards  integration  have  nevertheless  been  made  since  the 
introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. In 2002, the European banking community launched the 
SEPA project, with the final objective that by 2010 “all payments are treated as domestic as far as 
speed, security, convenience and cost are concerned”. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
However,  meeting  this  ambitious  objective  implies  a  significant  evolution  of  the  current  retail 
infrastructures  towards  a  pan  European  infrastructure,  the  so  called  PEACH,  which  will  aim  at 
reinforcing  the  global  efficiency  of  payments  in  Europe.  The  main  achievement  with  regards  to 
infrastructures until now has been the launch of STEP2, since it is the first infrastructure compliant with 
the PEACH requirements, as defined by the EPC. But there is still a significant way to go since STEP2 
handles low volumes, 170.000 payments in May 2005, and can still not offer the same level of service 
as national ACHs. 
In that context, it must be seen as a positive prospect that most national retail payment systems are 
now  preparing  themselves  to  the  implementation  of  SEPA,  through  the  spreading  use  of 
standardisation, which will allow the interoperability of infrastructures. In France for example, several 
banks  have  initiated  the  STET  project  in  view  of  SEPA.  However,  one should note  that  the  idea  of 
consolidating  the  retail  systems  platforms  is  for  the  time  being  not  really  at  the  forefront  of  market 
initiatives, even though consolidation is a source of cost savings and efficiency. 
Why such a gap in the level of integration between large-value payment systems and retail payment 
systems? I see two main explanations. First, large value payment systems have benefited from the 
incentive of the adoption of the single monetary policy in the Euro area, which made the creation of 
TARGET  mandatory.  Second,  the  integration  of  retail  payment  infrastructures  is  a  more  complex 
issue.  Large  value  payment  infrastructures  handle  only  one  type  of  payment  instrument,  the  fund 
credit transfer, whereas the diversity of retail payment instruments makes the integration of national 
retail infrastructures more difficult. In addition, the transition costs are significant and the coordination 
problems to be solved are important. 
3.  
The integration of retail payment infrastructures has become a priority on the agenda 
of the Eurosystem 
It is particularly important that the European banking community now focuses on the retail payment 
issue  and  takes  up  in  particular  the  challenge  of  creating  a  fully  integrated  retail  payment 
infrastructure.  The  stake  is  obvious  -  the  success  of  the  SEPA.  Tools  to  build  a  SEPA  for 
infrastructures are known by all of us, but I would like to mention them briefly: it deals with enforcing 
standardisation  and  interoperability  between  systems  on  one  side,  with  ensuring  equal  access  of 
financial intermediaries without considering national locations on the other side. 
The EPC expressed its commitment to deliver two pan-European payment schemes - one for credit 
transfers  and  one  for  direct  debits-  and  to  develop  a  framework  for  cards  that  will  be  available  for 
clients  by  2008.  Furthermore,  the  EPC  expects  that  “a  critical  mass  of  transactions  will  naturally 
migrate  to  these  payment  instruments  by  2010  such  that  SEPA  will  be  irreversible  through  the 
operation of market forces and network effects”. 
From  my  point  of  view,  to  be  successful,  the  new  strategy  of  the  EPC  requires  that  two  main 
conditions  are  fulfilled.  The  first  condition  is  to  make  sure  that  the  pan-European  instruments  are 
attractive for consumers. As regards this first condition, I just would like to draw your attention on one 
point: in order to be really attractive, the pan-European payment instruments need to be the “best of 
breed” that is to say that the service level to be provided should converge towards the best service 
levels in Europe. The second condition is that infrastructures are ready to support the critical mass 
effect expected in terms of adoption by customers of pan-European payment instruments. The 2010 
deadline for infrastructures to be “SEPA compliant”, as recommended by the Eurosystem, is therefore 
very important. 
This “SEPA compliance” of infrastructures implies in particular that interoperability between all retail 
infrastructures  is  ensured.  Defining  and  enforcing  requirements  for  interoperability  can  certainly  be 
part  of  the  self-regulation  space  claimed  by  the  EPC.  In  line  with  its  supportive  stance  of  market 
efforts,  the  Eurosystem,  as  Jean-Claude  Trichet  has  already  explained  to  you  this  morning,  stands 
ready to assist the banking industry in the definition and implementation of such requirements. 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  it  is  essential  that  the  efforts  put  together  by  the  banking 
industry since 2002 bear their fruit so that the SEPA becomes shortly a tangible reality for citizens, 
companies and other economic agents. Change in the functioning of payments infrastructures is to be 
a key enabler if such a result is to be obtained. The sector of wholesale payments is about to enter a 
crucial stage of consolidation due to the launch of TARGET 2 by central banks. A breakthrough is also 
necessary  on  the  retail  side:  in  the  field  of  infrastructures  this  breakthrough  should  notably  mean 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
interoperability so that through increased competition, the market selects the best infrastructures for 
the SEPA. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2005
