Ranee Jayamaha: Promoting credit culture and expediting the process of debt 
recovery 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at a workshop on 
proposed  law  on  restructuring  of  sick  industries  and  other  legal  issues  at  the  Centre  for  Banking 
Studies, Rajagiriya, 1 February 2005. 
 Honourable Mr K C Kamalasabayson, Attorney General, Mr Sumant Batra the Guest Speaker from 
India, distinguish guests, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am happy to be associated with this Workshop aimed at deliberating on vital issues relating to the 
proposed law on Restructuring of Sick Industries, and other legal and financial system issues on debt 
recovery by financial institutions. 
As you are aware, the two core objectives of the Central Bank are:  to secure economic and price 
stability and financial system stability with a view to encouraging and promoting the development of 
productive resources of the Country. Debt recovery  is one of the core elements of financial system 
stability and it depends on the performance of economic sectors, the industrial sector being one of the 
important  areas.  This  is  why  the  Central  Bank  has  been  interested  in  promoting  credit  culture  and 
expediting the process of debt recovery. 
In  recognition  of  this,  in  the  year  1990,  the  Central  Bank  was  associated  in  the  enactment  of  a 
package of fourteen Debt Recovery Related laws. One of these laws has enabled the extension to 
private  commercial  banks,  the  parate  execution  powers  ie  a  Roman  Dutch  Law  principle  to  sell 
movable and immovable property secured to a bank as collateral to recover debt without recourse to 
courts of law. Prior to the enactment of this law, the powers of parate execution were available only to 
financial institutions established by statutes passed in Parliament. I am informed that a bill prepared to 
amend this law to further widen and strengthen the powers of parate execution granted to financial 
institutions  could  not  be  passed  in  Parliament  due  to  constitutional  issues.  The  right  to  obtain 
injunctions against the execution of parate has thwarted the objectives of this law and this has resulted 
in banks being reluctant to lend to high risk borrowers even against security. With injunctions brought 
by the defaulters against the rights of exercise of parate execution by banks, the cost of recovery of 
bad debt has become phenomenal.  
Against this background, banks and financial institutions are reluctant to deal with industries that have 
become  unviable  irrespective  of  the  reason  that  has  led  to  it.  Consequently,  the  sick  and  unviable 
industries are left alone without any outside financial or other assistance.  
The exercise of parate execution powers has been debated and questioned in various fora over the 
years  and  now,  a  need  has  arisen  to  examine  whether  there  are  other  alternative  routes  to  debt 
recovery.  It  has  also  become  necessary  to  evaluate  whether  the  exercise  of  parate  powers  by 
commercial banks has achieved its objectives. According to banks and financial institutions, the very 
threat  of  parate  action  and  publicity  prompt  defaulters  to  pay  the  debt.  After  fourteen  years  of  the 
application of the debt recovery laws, it is therefore, fitting that an objective assessment be made to 
the recovery of debts through this legislation.  
The moderate development in the Sri Lankan economy in the past decade, saw a heavy demand for 
credit and the expansion of loan portfolios of banks. As banking is known to be a risky business, the 
monies placed on trust by depositors have to be prudently invested, but with a firm commitment to 
return funds to depositors when they call for it. In the circumstances, banks are duty bound to ensure 
the  safety  and  soundness  of  their  institutions  by  prudently  deploying  funds  they  mobilize.  Loan 
defaults  and  non-performing  advances  are  quite  common  in  our  part  of  the  world.  They  have 
contributed to the maintenance of high interest spreads which in turn translate into high lending rates 
as  banks  tend  to  cover  the  cost  of carrying  large  volumes  of  non-performing loans  in  their  balance 
sheets. The cost of non-performing advances is therefore a charge on profits by way of provision to be 
made for these losses. Banks lose out on interest income that is rightfully theirs. Effectively therefore, 
the good borrowers pay the price for defaulting borrowers. 
   1/2 
I  am  aware  that  banks  have  their  own  methodologies  to  evaluate  risks  when  granting  loans  and 
advances and recently, they have been adopting modern methods of credit risk mitigating techniques 
based on the Basle Principles. To begin with, the lack of adequate knowledge of the industry, poor 
credit assessment skills and ineffective follow-up and supervision of loans are the key to non-recovery 
of  debt.  A  banker  who  lends  only  against  collateral  without  looking  at  the  viability  of  the  project  is 
obviously imprudent. Sometimes, banks are not familiar with the industry to which a loan is granted - it 
is imperative that they are conversant with yields, markets and prices to be able to assess the viability 
of the project. In others, follow-up and monitoring is virtually non-existent. The close monitoring of a 
project during the gestation period or grace will often leads project to fruition and in turn will bring in 
repayment  according  to  the  repayment  plan.  These  areas  call  for  special  attention  by  banks  and 
financial institutions.  
The  banks  try  to  mitigate  these  lapses  by  the  use  of  modern  technology  and  intensive  evaluation 
processes  in  granting  loans  and  advances.  Even  these  attempts  can  be  beaten  by  unexpected 
eventualities and by willful defaulters. While credit discipline and culture are of paramount importance 
for financial institutions’ viability and the stability of the financial system as a whole, we need to strike a 
balance between the system viability and revival of enterprises/industries, in a manner that they can 
be going concerns and repay their debts. 
More  recently,  wide  publicity  has  been  given  to  Chapter  11  of  the  United  States  Bankruptcy  Code 
which  allows  a  debtor  to  continue  its  operations  under  a  re-organization  plan.  Similarly,  the  Indian 
government  initiative  in  the  form  of  Sick  Industrial  Companies  (Special  Provisions)  Act  was  passed 
with  the  objective  of  ensuring  timely  detection  of  sick  and  potentially  sick  industrial  companies,  to 
expedite  the  revival  of  potentially  viable  units  and  closure  of  nonviable  units  is  noteworthy.  We  are 
informed that India is also re-examining the provisions of this law. 
The  prevailing  labour  laws  and  parate  execution  powers  make  it  difficult  for  financially  troubled 
enterprises to restructure and continue business operations. The exercise of parate execution powers 
lead only to closure of enterprises, although the law provides for restructuring. The purchase of the 
mortgaged properties by the bank at the auction sale through the exercise of rights of parate execution 
has resulted in another undesirable phenomena, that is the accumulation of foreclosed assets on the 
balance sheets of banks.  
Undoubtedly, the closure of enterprises results in great cost to the economy by way of loss of output, 
loss of employment, defaults to creditors and low return to entrepreneurs. It is therefore, vital to have a 
sound  procedure  in  place  to  assist  ailing  enterprises  to  overcome  their  problems,  provided  the 
enterprises are commercially viable and the problems are of a temporary nature. In this context, it is 
opportune  time  for  Sri  Lanka  to  consider  the  need  for  the  enactment  of  a  law  comparable  to  the 
applicable  laws  in  other  countries  and  the  preparation  of  guidelines  for  industrial  restructuring  in 
Sri Lanka.  
Recognising the need, the Central Bank has set up a committee to review the laws for recovery of 
loans  applicable  to  banking  institutions.  The  committee  comprises  representatives  of  all  relevant 
sectors  and  it  is  working  towards  arriving  at  a  consensus  on  debt  recovery  proposals.  In  the 
meantime, the Business Recovery and Insolvency Practitioners Association of Sri Lanka (BRIPASL) 
has  had  a  series  of  discussions  and  formulated  draft  legislation  for  the  revival  of  sick  industries.  I 
appreciate the co-ordination between the two committees and their efforts in arranging this important 
workshop. 
I understand that the Keynote Speaker today, Mr. Sumant Batra from India who has acquired wide 
knowledge  on  restructuring  of  sick  industries  in  India  would  elaborate  his  experience  on  corporate 
turn-around and insolvency, and respond to similar proposals that would be made at this workshop.  
I  am  confident  that  the  eminent  speakers  from  various  fields  who  are  present  at  this  forum,  would 
provide an opportunity to the distinguished participants to share and rationalize ideas, thus ensuring 
the formulation of sound principles to be incorporated in the draft legislation on the restructuring of sick 
industries.  A  comprehensive  law  on  this  aspect  would  help  enterprises  to  become  viable  in  the 
medium to long term while enabling the banks to recover the debt and be viable financial institutions. I 
hope  today’s  deliberations  would  guide  the  relevant  committees  and  those  who  are  associated  in 
policy formulation to take this important initiative forward. 
Thank you. 
   2/2 
