Franz-Christoph Zeitler: What remains of the Stability and Growth Pact? 
Speech  by  Professor  Franz-Christoph  Zeitler,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Salzburg Seminar, Salzburg, 26 August 2005. 
 A glance at the fiscal policy reality in the euro area  
1  
Almost half of the countries in the euro area have either exceeded the 3% deficit ceiling specified by 
the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact last year or are in danger of exceeding the threshold in 
2005. Six of the ten economies which joined the EU last year have deficits of 3% or more.1  
Moreover, in a number of the countries, one-off fiscal measures are disguising the true extent of the 
structural budget problems.  
At  present,  procedural  steps  under  Article  104  of  the  EC  Treaty  (excessive  deficit  procedure)  have 
been  instigated  against six  of  the  12  euro-area countries.  And six  of  the  ten new  ember  states  are 
involved in ongoing procedures under Art. 104. 
The development of the debt ratios tells a similar story.  In seven euro-area countries the debt ratio 
overshot the 60% reference value in 2004. In three of these countries, Germany, France and Portugal, 
there has actually been a sharp increase in the debt ratio since 2000.  
In  Germany,  for  example,  the  government  deficit  exceeded  the  Maastricht  limit  in  every  year  since 
2002 and even in 2005 the deficit will not be brought back under the 3%-theshold. The consolidated 
gross  debt  ratio  in  Germany  increased  by  more  than  5  percentage  points  since  2000.  With 
approximately 65% in 2004 it is well above the 60%-limit. The high debt is effectively restricting the 
room  for  fiscal  policy.  For  1€  outstanding  debt  in  2004  nearly  5  cent  had  to  be  spent  on  interest 
expenses. With 1.4 trillion debt outstanding, in 2004 over 66 billion € had to be paid for interest.  
Given  the  progress  that  was  made  in  consolidation  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  these 
developments  are  sobering.  The  economic  downturn  which  began  in  2000  has  undoubtedly  left  its 
mark on government deficits. However, a glance at the cyclically adjusted figures shows (even bearing 
in  mind  the  uncertainty  in  these  calculations)  that  the  deterioration  of  public  finances  cannot  be 
explained by unfavourable real economic data alone; especially as the interest rate convergence and 
the  period  of  low  interest  rates  following  the  launch  of  European  monetary  union  have  significantly 
reduced the interest burden on general government.  
Overall, the cyclically adjusted deficit in the euro area rose from 1.6% in 1999 to 2.4% in 2004. During 
the same period, the unadjusted primary surplus went down from 2.9% to 0.6%.2
This  “consolidation  inertia”  is  mirrored  at  the  legislative  level  by  the  radical  changes  made  to  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. The term “pact” reflects the political consensus which underlay its creation. 
In the legal sense, it is not in fact a “pact”, meaning an agreement under international public law, but 
rather  two  Council  regulations3,  in  other  words,  secondary  European  law.  This  is  reinforced  by  the 
European Council Resolution of 17. June 1997.4 The “mother of all rules” is still the primary law under 
Article 104 of the EC Treaty and Protocol No 11 on the excessive deficit procedure.  
The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact were agreed, after a lengthy debate, by the ECOFIN 
Council on 20 March 2005 and by the Heads of State or Government at its spring meeting only a few 
                                                      
1   The  information  on  the  budgetary  figures  (including  the  cyclically  adjusted  values)  is  based  on  European  Commission 
figures on government data from spring 2005. . 
2   The primary balance is defined as the government deficit/surplus excluding interest expenditure. 
3   Council Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 of 7 July 1997 on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the 
surveillance and coordination of economic policies and Council Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 of 7 July 1997 on speeding up 
and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure, OJ C209, 2 August 1997, p 1 and p 6. 
4   OJ C236, 2 August 1997, p 1; in its judgement of 13 July 2004 (C-27/04), the ECJ also mentions the Council Resolution in 
connection with the methodology of the deficit procedure (71 et seq. of the grounds) as having “defined more precisely and 
strengthened” the Stability and Growth Pact, without deriving any further specific legal consequences from this. 
days  later.5The  Council  adopted  the  relevant  changes  to  Regulations  1466/97  and  1467/97  on  27 
June 2005.6  
As far as the results are concerned, I share the opinion held by most neutral observers: namely, that 
overall the fiscal rules have been significantly weakened. By contrast, the challenges facing a stability-
oriented fiscal policy in terms of public acceptance have grown considerably. The less stringent the 
rules, the more convincing sound fiscal policy needs to be in daily life. This is because the changes 
have made the pact less transparent. They have increased the discretion of the national institutions 
and  those  in  Brussels  and  they  have  opened  the  door  to  backsliding  in  the  form  of  generally  laxer 
budget policies.  
Even the “old” pact was weakened by the restricted sanctions mechanism arising from primary law. 
This  is  often  portrayed  as  a  case  of  “sinners  sitting  in  judgement  on  fellow  sinners”.  The  individual 
stages  of  the  procedure  are  initiated  by  the  Commission.  The  ultimate  decision-making  power  lies, 
however, with the ECOFIN Council.7 The reform has not changed this. It would have been better to 
stick to the criteria and procedures of the old pact, while at the same reversing the “burden of action” – 
as provided for in the first drafts of the Constitutional Treaty. The ECOFIN Council would then make a 
decision based on a Commission “proposal” rather than a Commission recommendation as is currently 
the  case.  This  change,  which  at  first  sight  appears  minor,  would  have  had  the  significant,  material 
consequence of obliging the Council to reach a unanimous decision if it wished to deviate from the 
Commission’s proposal.8
To a certain degree, problems with the political assessment of the deficit data had been anticipated 
from the outset. Practice has, however, brought to light an additional, unexpected problem concerning 
the  reliability  of  the  data  themselves.  Here,  the  Commission  relied  on  the  budget  and  debt  figures 
produced  by  the  national  agencies.  Great  waves  were  caused  by  Greece,  whose  fulfilment  of  the 
conditions for accession to monetary union (from 2001) was confirmed on the basis of data which later 
had to be considerably revised by a different government.9 It remains to be seen whether cases such 
as this can be prevented by the planned tightening of the statistical reporting requirements and the 
possibility of audit inspections by Commission staff of the countries’ reporting agencies.10
Ernst-Wolfgang Böckenförde, a renowned expert on constitutional law, coined the oft-quoted phrase 
that the modern, democratic free state, which is governed by the rule of law, lives by preconditions 
which  it  is  unable  to  guarantee.  A rule-based  fiscal policy also survives  on  preconditions which are 
neither  intrinsic  to  it  nor  can  be  guaranteed  by  it.  First  and  foremost  is  the  understanding  and  the 
willingness to accept the rules in force. And not simply out of respect for the “pacta sunt servanda” – or 
sanctity  of  pact  –  principle,  but  primarily  because  the  underlying  economic  rationale  is  regarded  as 
                                                      
5   Report  entitled  “Improving  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact”,  Annex  II  to  the  European  Council’s 
conclusions of 22/23 March (7619/05). 
6   Council Regulation (EC) No 1055/2005 of 27 July 2005 amending Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 on the strengthening of the 
surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies, OJ L 174, 7 July 2005, p 1; 
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1056/2005  of  27  June  2005  amending  Regulation  (EC)  No  1467/97  on  speeding  up  and 
clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure, OJ L 174, 7 July 2005, p 5. 
7   Even the member state in question is allowed to take part in the Council vote deciding whether an excessive deficit exists. 
Only in the further stages of the procedure laid down in Article 104 paragraphs 7 to 9, 11 and 12 of the EC Treaty is the 
representative of the member state in question not eligible to vote. Pursuant to Articles III-184 paragraph 6 page 4 of the 
Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, by contrast, the vote of the representative of the member state in question 
would no longer be taken into account when deciding whether an excessive deficit exists. 
8   Article 250 (1) of the EC Treaty. Article III-184 (6) p 1 of the Treaty establishing a constitution for Europe provides merely 
that the Commission has the right to make a proposal for the decision regarding an excessive deficit. 
9   According to the ECB Convergence Report, in the reference year 1999, Greece’s general government deficit was 1.6%. The 
deficit in 1999 has been revised upwards to 3.4%, thereby exceeding the 3%-limit. The deficit figures originally reported by 
the  Greek  government  for  2001-2003  were  between  1.4%  and  1.7%;  these  figures  were  corrected  in  March  2005  to 
between 3.6% (2001) and 5.2 % (2003). Moreover, the figures for 2001 and 2003 have not been validated by Eurostat, so it 
might be assumed that the final deficit figures for these years are still higher than the current reported numbers. For more 
information on the revision of the Greek deficit figures and govermnet statistics, see the “Report by Eurostat on the revision 
of the Greek government deficit and debt figures (1997-2003)”SEC(2004) 1539 of 22 November 2004. 
10   The Commission has presented a proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 3605/93 as regards the 
quality of statistical data in the context of the excessive deficit procedure COM(2005) 71 final). In its Opinion of 4 May 2005, 
OJ  C  116/11  of  18  May  2005,  the  ECB  welcomed  the  core  objective  of  the  proposed  regulation  to  strengthen  the  legal 
framework for compiling relevant budget data. 
common sense for any fiscal policy aimed at fostering growth. The economic and legal sides of the 
pact  do  not  conflict  with  each  other  –  as  is  often  claimed11  –  but  are  mutually  dependent.  This  is 
suggested by the very word “economy (Greek: oikonomia)”, which literally means “rules for managing 
a household”. Therefore, I shall now describe in brief the main reasons behind the conclusion of the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  prior  to  the  start  of  European  monetary  union.  These  are  also  the  main 
reasons for and objectives of a rule-based fiscal policy for the euro area. 
Reasons for and objectives of a rule-based fiscal policy 
2  
When the originally planned dual concept of political and monetary union was relinquished in the run-
up to EMU, it became clear that European monetary union would have to live with an asymmetry in the 
management  of  the  two  key  macroeconomic  areas,  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  A  supranational 
monetary policy has to coexist with fiscal policies, which essentially12 remain at national responsibility. 
This is by no means an absolute impediment to the successful functioning of monetary union and may 
even have certain operational advantages, for example, concerning competition between tax systems, 
social  security  systems  and  education  systems.  However,  it  also  entails  economic  risks.  Thus 
historical analyses have shown that the monetary unions of the 19th century failed largely as a result 
of mismatching fiscal policies.13
Consequently,  Article  104  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  as  well  as  the  Stability  Pact  adopted  by  the 
ECOFIN  Council  in  Dublin  in  December  1996  largely  at  the  urging  of  the  then  German  minister  of 
finance, Dr Waigel, attempt to combine the advantages of a fiscal policy which, in operational terms, 
remains  a  national  responsibility  with  the  necessity  of  a  set  of  common  rules.  There  are  four  main 
reasons for this. 
First: to avoid a conflict between fiscal and monetary policy. 
At  times  of  high  government  debt  and  higher  interest  rates  –  which  cannot  be  ruled  out  especially 
given the current historically low interest rates – there is a greater risk that attempts will be made to 
accommodate the nominal debt burden by pressuring the central bank into pursuing a laxer monetary 
policy, ie forcing it to forgo or postpone interest rate increases needed to ensure monetary stability. A 
credible monetary policy and the institutional independence of the ECB and the national central banks 
laid  down  in  Article  108  of  the  EC  Treaty  undoubtedly  provide  a  strong  counterweight  to  such 
pressure. However, the Stability Pact was not aimed at combating an existing conflict between fiscal 
and monetary policy but rather – based on the wisdom of past political experience – was designed to 
prevent such a conflict from arising in the first place. 
Second: to avoid conflicts within monetary union. 
Before the start of monetary union, market forces were able to exercise a disciplinary effect on fiscal 
policy  stances  perceived  to  be  unsound  through  corresponding  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate 
responses. Although the market reactions often came relatively late and then overshot the mark, fiscal 
policy makers always had to reckon with sanctions of this kind from the market. 
In  a  monetary  union,  public  sector  borrowers  can,  for  a  time,  hide  some  of  the  economic 
disadvantages resulting from an unsound fiscal policy under the blanket of monetary union or lessen 
the  impact  of  market  responses  to  such  a  policy  by  distributing  them  across  the  monetary  union. 
Economists  call  this  a  fiscal  externality,  others  talk  of  freeriding  or  moral  hazard:  countries  with  a 
sound fiscal policy that had to impose painful cutbacks on their citizens are forced to carry the can for 
less disciplined member states. 
In a nutshell: In a broad and liquid financial market, higher deficits of a specific country may have less 
impact on the interest rates : a stone causes greater waves when thrown into a garden pond than it 
does when thrown into a lake.  
                                                      
11   For  example,  see  Hans  Eichel  (2003)  “Der  Pakt  ist  kein  Strafgesetzbuch”;  Frankfuter  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  15  November 
2003, 12. 
12   The EU budget is of secondary importance in this context. 
13   For  example,  see:  Therresia  Theurl  (1999),  Erfolgs-  und  Misserfolgsfaktoren  von  Währungsunionen:  Historische 
Erfahrungen,  Zeitschrift für bayerische Sparkassengeschichte, 13,  129-156 . 
Those  of  us  who  regard  the  long-term  internal  cohesion  of  monetary  union  and  the  avoidance  of 
centrifugal  forces  as  a  matter  of  primary  importance  must  therefore  vehemently  urge  the  member 
states to observe the fiscal policy rules.14
Third: the interrelationship between sound fiscal policy and growth.  
It is often maintained that government deficits – regardless of the initial debt level concerned – are 
always conducive to growth. However, a glance at the facts shows that low government debt has a 
positive correlation to growth because of the resultant boost in confidence, lower tax burden, greater 
involvement and efficiency of the private sector.15
Within  European  monetary  union,  this  has  been  demonstrated  in  recent  years  by  the  example  of 
countries such as Spain, Finland, Ireland and also Belgium, which has cut its high debt level (of more 
than 140% before the launch of monetary union) to approximately 96% (in 2004) and in recent years 
has  recorded  considerably  higher  growth  rates  than  Germany,  for  example.  Canada  provides  an 
interesting  example  outside  the  euro  area.  For  the  past  seven  years  it  has  achieved  budgetary 
surpluses and its growth rate has never fallen significantly below 2%. 
Leaving  aside  the  debate  about  the  so-called  non-Keynesian  effects  of  a  fiscal  policy  aimed  at 
reducing deficits – which, by the way, also proved effective in Germany in the years following 1982 
despite all the gloomy predictions made at the time that the country “would save itself to death” – it is 
widely accepted  that a  high  debt  level  impairs  the stabilising role of  fiscal policy  even  in  respect of 
short-term  growth  stimuli.  This  is  because  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy  has  less  impact  in  an 
environment of high deficit and debt levels than in an economy with structurally sound public finances. 
The marginal utility of short-term fiscal policy stimuli decreases as debt increases owing to economic 
agents’ expectations of a later correction of the debt level and hence of the future burdens associated 
with all debt. 
Fourth: the need to tackle growing implicit government debt, in other words, the demographic burden  
resulting from ageing populations in western Europe. 
As studies by the Bundesbank and the German Council of Economic Experts have clearly shown16, in 
addition to the explicit government debt on which the public debate is focused, the impact of implicit 
promises of future state benefits from the social security systems should not be overlooked. For many 
member states, Germany in particular, these constitute a real problem in terms of the sustainability of 
public  debt.17  The  Bundesbank  estimates  that  they  have  raised  the  long-term  consolidation 
requirement to over 3½% of GDP. 
Thus, a rule-based fiscal policy is also necessary out of fairness to future generations. In the language 
of public choice economists, the Stability Pact constitutes an insurance policy against the temptation 
for politicians to purchase votes today through high borrowing at the cost of future generations. 
Criteria for a viable fiscal framework on the basis of the former Stability Pact of 1997 
3 
In order to place those fiscal and economic objectives of the Stability Pact which I mentioned earlier on 
a viable operational footing, the fiscal framework must fulfil the following criteria.18  
Simplicity, transparency and consistency – this is particularly important if the framework is to appear  
                                                      
14   For a debate along the lines of this argument see Harald Uhlig (2002), One money, but many fiscal policies in Europe: what 
are the consequences? Tilburg University. Center for Economic Research Discussion paper 2002-31.
15   The fact that sound public finances have a positive effect on an economy’s long-term growth is well documented in empirical 
growth analyses. For example, see D Romero de Avila and R Strauch (2003), Public Finances and Long-Term Growth in 
Europe – Evidence from a Panel Data Analysis, ECB Working Paper 246; S Fölster and M Henrekson (1999), Growth and 
the Public Sector: a Critique of the Critics, European Journal of Political Economy, 15, 337-358; S Fölster and M Henrekson 
(2001), Growth Effects of Government Expenditure and Taxation in Rich Countries, European Economic Review, 45, 1501-
1520. 
16   See Deutsche Bundesbank (2004), Demographic burdens on growth and wealth, Monthly Report, December. 
17   For the base year 2002, the German Council of Economic Experts estimates the present value of the implicit debt in the 
range of 270% of GDP compared with explicitly recorded debt levels of roughly 60%. 
18   See Kopits and Symanski (1998), Fiscal Policy Rules, IMF occasional paper 162. 
credible to the general public and in terms of its efficiency when applied by the member states. 
Fixed  incentives  and  sanctions  system  in  the  event  that  rules  are  breached.  Rules  without  a  fixed 
incentives and sanctions system will not be taken seriously. This applies equally to private life as it 
does to the actions of governments and states. 
Ensuring fulfilment of the medium and long-term objective of a balanced budget while providing short-
term  scope  for  “automatic  stabilisers”  (“flexibility  criterion”).  As  you  know,  automatic  stabilisers  is  a 
modern  term  for  deficits  resulting  from  cyclical  tax  revenue  shortfalls  and  additional  labour-market 
related expenditure.  
Despite  the  undeniable  political  compromise  which  characterised  even  the  earlier  pact  –  especially 
concerning  the  absence  of  an  automatic  triggering,  whether  based  on  legal  provisions  or  other 
mechanisms, of the system of sanctions – the former rules largely fulfilled these requirements. 
The key underlying principle for the medium term is clear: a budget which is balanced or in surplus. 
This provides scope for deficits in the short term to overcome cyclical shocks. A clear legal and optical 
“anchor” is provided by the 3% deficit ceiling accompanied by a fairly precise definition of exceptions 
for  natural  disasters  and severe  economic  downturns  (2%  decline  in  GDP  on  an  annual  basis  or  a 
decline of at least 0.75% or more at the Council’s discretion pursuant to the Council Resolution of 17 
June 1997). 
In particular the 3% ceiling has often been described as “arbitrary” or even “stupid” (Prodi). Of course, 
by its very nature a rule must be clearly defined and the result of an expression of political will. This 
applies  to  the  duties  of  citizens  –  for  example,  the  blood  alcohol  limit  for  drivers,  the  deadlines  for 
submitting tax returns or the limits for work-related tax-deductible expenses – just as much as it does 
to the actions of public-sector bodies. 
But the 3% ceiling was never "arbitrary". Owing to the difficulties involved in effectively defining the 
actual objective of a cyclically-adjusted balanced budget, the nominal balance was deliberately chosen 
and, at the time of the pact negotiations in 1996, the 3% ceiling defined for the deficit was regarded as 
very generous. Furthermore, the 3% ceiling is closely linked to the 60% ceiling for government debt. 
For example, assuming nominal growth19 of 5%, over time a 3% deficit would tend to lead to a debt 
level  of  60%.  Given  the  more  humble  growth  rates  to  which  we  have  grown  accustomed  in  recent 
years, a much lower deficit ceiling would be more appropriate. 
The problems and weaknesses of the old pact were not due to it being too rigid. On the contrary, they 
lay in the weakness of the political decision-making process for the incentives and sanctions system 
and in a preventive effect which was too modest. Consequently, as the European Commission20 also 
found  –  the  governments’  medium-term  stability  programmes  systematically  overstated  growth  and 
hence  budgetary  developments,  in  other  words,  opportunities  were  overestimated  and  risks 
underestimated.  
Changes made to the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 
4  
The  changes  were  agreed  on  23  March  2005  following  a  protracted  political  debate,  coordination 
between  the  German  and  French  governments  and  the  active  participation  of  the  Luxembourg 
President of the EU Council Jean-Claude Juncker. They concern both the fundamental, “preventive” 
arm of the Stability Pact as defined in Council  Regulation 1466/97 on the surveillance of budgetary 
positions, as well as the “corrective” arm laid down in Council Regulation 1467/97 on speeding up and 
clarifying the excessive deficit procedure.  
(1) In the “preventive” arm of the pact, the medium-term budgetary objective which previously applied 
to  all  member  states  (balanced  budget  or  surplus)  has  been  modified  by  country-specific 
considerations. Under Article 2a of the new Regulation, the medium-term budgetary objectives are to 
be set – taking into account the debt level and potential growth rates of the member states concerned 
– within a range of up to -1% of GDP.21
                                                      
19   Based on inflation of up to 2% in line with ECB’s stability objective, 3% real growth is assumed overall. 
20   European Commission (2005), Public Finances in EMU 
21  Targets are set only for euro countries as well as for ERM II participating countries. 
Moreover, the member states are allowed scope to deviate from the “adjustment path” (Article 5 (1) 
amended),  ie  the  path  towards  achieving  this  country-specific  objective,  if  they  are  implementing 
structural reforms, in particular the transition to a partially funded public pension system. 
In the Regulation itself,22 the reason given for the change-over to country-specific budgetary targets is 
the  “economic  and  budgetary  heterogeneity”  of  the  member  states.  This  clearly  conflicts  with  the 
underlying  concept  of  European  monetary  union,  the  key  component  of  which  is  a  single monetary 
policy based on the idea of “one size fits all”.23   
The proposition that structural reforms inevitably place a short-term burden on the budgetary position 
does not appear to be fully supported by the empirical evidence. In fact, certain essential reforms, in 
particular of pension systems but also of labour or goods markets, as well as some tax reforms (with 
no impact on tax revenue), actually have a positive effect on the budget. 
(2) The changes to the “corrective arm”, ie Council Regulation 1467/97, go even further. Pursuant to 
Article 2 (2) et seq., member states are now permitted to exceed the 3% ceiling – which is laid down in 
Protocol No 11 to the EC Treaty and thus enshrined in primary European law – not only in the event of 
a  severe  recession  or  natural  disaster,  but  also  in  the  case  of  any  negative  annual  growth  rate 
(potentially, even a small one) or very low GDP growth relative to its potential. 
Moreover,  specified  were  “all  other  relevant  factors”  to  be  taken  into  account  when  deciding  on 
excessive  deficits  in  accordance  with  Article  104 (3)  EC.  This  is  a  long  list  of  potential  exceptional 
circumstances  and  grounds  for  exemption  hindering  the  implementation  of  an  excessive  deficit 
procedure. These include “prevailing economic cycles”, “policies in the context of the Lisbon agenda“, 
measures  “to  foster  research  and  development  and  innovation”,  “debt  sustainability”,  “financial 
contributions  to  foster  international  solidarity”,  contributions  to  “achieving  European  policy  goals, 
notably the unification of Europe” (in other words: including payments relating to German reunification) 
and many more. Faced with this list, it is difficult to speak of a consistent, coherent set of rules.  
(3)  The  deadlines  for  the  incentives  and  sanctions  system  have  been  extended,  for  example,  for 
Council  recommendations  pursuant  to  Article  104  (7)  of  the  EC  Treaty,  issuing  a  warning  notice  to 
member states in accordance with Article 104 (9), non-interest bearing deposits and, ultimately, fines 
(Article 104 (11)). 
(4) Furthermore, the deadline for the correction of the excessive deficit was widened to up to two years 
in case of “special circumstances”, which are identical to the “other relevant factors” mentioned above. 
(5) One change which is more significant than the extension of deadlines but has received less public 
attention is the possibility now provided for repeating procedural steps.  In the event of “unexpected” 
economic  events,  Council  recommendations  may  be  repeated  and  a  warning  notice  reissued  any 
number of times.24
As a result, the sequential nature of the incentives and sanctions system, whereby each measure is 
succeeded by a more stringent one, is lost. However, the sequential nature of the old pact was also 
limited given that the European Court of Justice 25 had also accepted (albeit within the bounds of an 
action brought against the Council for failure to act) the possibility of virtual inaction on the part of the 
ECOFIN  Council  –  for  example,  through  the  rejection  of  Commission  proposals  for  Council 
recommendations. 
An overall assessment of the changes to the two Regulations relating to the pact must find that there 
is no evidence – at least not in any operationally viable form – of the initially publicly stated reason for 
“reforming” the pact, namely to strengthen the preventive arm. 
The  introduction  of  a  “benchmark”  of  0.5%  of  GDP  for  annual  cyclically  adjusted  budgetary 
consolidation26 corresponds to the Commission’s former practice regarding the old pact. However, it is 
likely to be less effective given that the objective of budgetary discipline has given way to a movable 
                                                      
22   Paragraph 5 of the recitals. 
23   See Otmar Issing (2005), Speech at the International Research Forum on monetary policy.  
24   See Article 3 (5) added, Article 5 (2) added. 
25  See ECJ, C-20/04 (FN4). 
26   See Article 5 (1) added, Article 3 (4) added. 
target and scarcely a single policy area remains which cannot be classified under “relevant factors” or 
special circumstances to be considered when deciding on excessive deficits.  
The  economic  rationale  of  the  new  version,  much  cited  by  politicians  in  opposition  to  a  “legal 
interpretation”, does not bear up on closer examination. For example, the flexibility provided for setting 
the  medium-term  budgetary  targets  reduces  the  margin  to  the  3%  ceiling  and  thus  increases  the 
danger  of  exceeding  this  ceiling  during  an  economic  downturn.  There  are  no  corresponding 
operational rules providing in a legally binding way for greater adjustment during an economic upturn. 
Nor is there any plausible explanation as to why expenditure in the context of the Lisbon agenda – 
which contains no less than 8 key initiatives, more than 20 integrated guidelines for growth and jobs 
and more than 100 individual measures27 – should have a different weighting when assessing a deficit 
than spending in those policy areas which are not listed, few though they are (for example, national 
antiterrorist  measures).  A  general  point  that  needs  to  be  made  in  connection  with  applying  the  3% 
ceiling is that both the logic and the applicability of a rule would appear to be called into question when 
more cases exist in which exceptions apply, rather than the rule itself. 
An  institutional  assessment  of  the  revised  pact  shows  that  the  Commission  now  has  considerably 
more scope for discretion and flexibility in its interpretation than it did under the old pact. Whether the 
Commission will be able to withstand the temptation to offer member states a benevolent interpretation 
of the “relevant factors” and exempting clauses in return for a quid pro quo in other areas (for example, 
a willingness to compromise on the question of the subsidiarity principle or projects with a budgetary 
impact) is a question that can only be answered in the light of political experience. 
I would like to conclude by recalling that long before the start of monetary union, around the time of 
the “Delors Group” consultations in 1989, there was a common consensus that fiscal-policy rules and 
sanctions are essential for  the long term viability of a single monetary policy.28 The real “aim” behind 
budgetary discipline, behind the objectives of a rule-based fiscal policy, is to maintain and strengthen 
confidence. Firm rules are designed to make this easier – this is also the socio-economic purpose of 
institutions. The more the rules are relaxed the less relief they provide. As a result, the relevant actors 
and the central banks of the Eurosystem face greater demands and challenges. 
                                                      
27   See for example Hans Werner Sinn’s contribution in CESifo Forum 2/2005. 
28   Hans Tietmeyer, Herausforderung Euro 2004, 124ff. 
