Caleb M Fundanga: Relations between the Embassy of France and the Bank of 
Zambia 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the signing ceremony of the 
memorandum  of  understanding  between  the  Embassy  of  France  and  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  Lusaka, 
18 January 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
Your Excellency, the Ambassador 
• 
•  Members of the Press 
•  Distinguished Invited Guests 
• 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  signing  ceremony  of  the  memorandum  of 
understanding (MoU), governing the conduct of French lessons, between the Embassy of France and 
the Bank of Zambia. 
For some time now, our two institutions have been collaborating closely on the details of this MoU to 
ensure  that  it  captures  the  mutual  interests  and  aspirations  of  our  two  institutions.  Although  it  has 
taken a bit of time to complete due to circumstances beyond our control, it is pleasing to note that we 
are now able to conclude it. 
Your Excellency 
Let me begin by stating the reason for our existence as a central bank. Our Mission Statement is to, I 
quote: 
“formulate  and  implement  monetary  and  supervisory  policies  that  ensure 
price and financial system stability” End of quote. 
In order for us to achieve this Mission Statement successfully, we need competent and skilled staff 
who are able to communicate effectively with a wide range of clientele at international, regional and 
national fora where the bank’s and, indeed, the nation’s interests are advanced. 
We note that whereas most of our colleagues from Francophone countries are able to speak English 
fluently,  our  employees  cannot  even  exchange  a  simple  greeting  in  French  without  the  aid  of  an 
interpreter. 
As you are well aware, Your Excellency, Zambia has eight neighbouring countries amongst whom, at 
least,  one  is  French  speaking;  two  are  Portuguese  speaking  and  the  rest  are  Anglophone.  As 
neighbours and countries falling under the same sub-regional and regional groupings, we collaborate 
a  lot  amongst  ourselves  on  a  number  of  regional  cooperation  agreements  where  inability  to  speak, 
read  or  write  French  or  Portuguese  is  sometimes  a  major  communication  barrier.  For  instance,  in 
Africa Zambia belongs to three regional groupings, namely SADC, COMESA and the African Union 
(AU).  All  these  groupings  include  Francophone  member  states,  and,  at  times,  our  interests,  as  a 
nation, have not been well articulated to our Francophone counterparts in these regional groupings 
due, in part, to our inability to communicate effectively in French. 
Further, as I stated earlier, Zambia shares a border with one of the largest and populous country in 
Africa  -  the  Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo  (DRC)  -  where  the  official  language  is  French. 
However, in spite of being neighbour to this huge market, Zambian enterprises have not captured the 
enormous  business  opportunities  offered  by  the  DRC,  largely,  on  account  of  their  inability  to 
communicate  effectively  in  French.  The  same  also  applies  to  Angola  where  there  is  a  huge 
reconstruction programme going on, in which Zambian enterprises could participate. But on account of 
communication barriers, Zambian businesses might not take advantage of our close proximity. This 
goes  to  show  Your  Excellency  that  our  reliance  on  English  as  a  lingua  franca  is  detrimental  to  our 
national interest, especially in our quest to alleviate poverty in our society. In this regard, the need for 
us  to  speak,  read  and  write  French  so  that  we  communicate  effectively  at  the  regional  and 
international level cannot be overstressed. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
Furthermore, recent developments in the global economy dictate that we should be able to interact 
effectively at various international fora where appreciation of the cultures, values and customs of other 
people is important. 
Therefore, in view of the foregoing, we, at the Bank of Zambia, have realised that there is a compelling 
need  to  overcome  our  communication  barrier  by  developing  our  employees’  multi-lingual  skills, 
particularly, in French so as to, among other things: 
(i) 
interactions  with  our  non-English  speaking 
the  required  patience 
develop 
counterparts; 
acknowledge the unique talents and contributions of others; 
uncover and show concern for the pressures and constraints which others face and modify 
the demands we may place on them; 
actively seek facts and data that explain and support others’ views and incorporate others’ 
feelings and values when restating their perspectives; and 
reduce  the  cost  of  hiring  external  interpreters  which  impacts  adversely  on  our  limited 
resources. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
their 
in 
Your Excellency 
Allow me also to state one issue that is of particular importance to, especially, developing countries, 
like  ours.  It  has  been  established  that  effective  national  capacity-building  requires  adoption  of 
international  best  practices.  But  for  a  developing  country  to  benefit  from  this  process  effectively  it 
would require citizens who are not only technically competent, but also fluent in writing, reading and 
speaking  major  international  languages,  among  which  French  is  key.  For  this  reason,  most 
professionals from Anglophone countries, Zambia inclusive, have failed to secure jobs in international 
organisations, mainly on account of their inability to  communicate in a major international language 
other  than  English,  such  as  French,  which  most  often  is  a  requirement  for  securing  employment  in 
international organisations. 
In this connection, we are happy to sign this MoU, whose principal objectives are to: 
(a) 
establish  a  framework  in  which  the  French  embassy  can  facilitate  capacity  building  in  the 
French language among the Bank of Zambia employees; 
promote multi-cultural awareness and appreciation of a diversity of languages necessary for 
bank  staff  to  transact  effectively  and  efficiently  in  social  and  professional  fora  where  the 
knowledge of French would be beneficial; and 
enhance  opportunities  for  bilateral  and/or  multilateral  co-operation  between  the  Bank  and 
relevant French-speaking authorities and clients. 
(b) 
(c) 
Notwithstanding the above, the French lessons programme is a very challenging one to our staff in 
that students are not only required to attend, at least, 90 per cent of class work conducted twice a 
week for two hours, but are also required to take examinations every ten (10) weeks; implying that 
only those employees who succeed in the examinations are allowed to proceed to the next advanced 
level. 
Your Excellency 
Following the commencement of the French lessons, I am pleased to inform you that this programme 
has already started showing encouraging results, as evidenced by the fact that at the end of the first 
segment of the beginners’ course, all those who took the examinations passed and are progressing to 
the  next  stage.  The  results  could  have  been  even  better  had  all  the  78  enrolled  students  attended 
tuition and taken the examination as scheduled. 
Let me also clarify here that some employees missed the examinations due to the call of duty and not 
out  of  lack  of  commitment.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  assure  Your  Excellency  that  as  a  sign  of 
commitment on the part of individual employees and the bank, a crush programme has been put in 
place to enable those who missed the first examination to sit for it and catch up with the rest of the 
class by April this year. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2005
Further, may I also take this opportunity to inform Your Excellency that our French lessons programme 
has become so popular among staff that we are sponsoring another class of beginners and six (6) 
more staff with appreciable knowledge of the language at the Alliance Française. 
Finally, I will be remiss in my speech if I did not thank Your Excellency for the assistance we have 
continued to receive in form of: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
To  this  end,  we,  at  the  Bank  do  sincerely  believe  that  although  this  MoU  will  expire  in  September 
2005, its legacy shall linger on and that the signing of this MoU will further cement the cordial relations 
existing between the Embassy of France and the Bank. 
I thank you. 
meeting the full cost of hiring two tutors from Alliance Francaise - Lusaka and Ndola; 
supply of study materials; 
coordination of examinations; and, most importantly, 
your unwavering moral support. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
