Loi Bakani: Development of the financial system in Papua New Guinea 
Speech by Mr Loi Bakani, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea Policy & Regulation, at 
the launch of the Lae branch of Wau Microbank, 22 April 2005. 
 to promote general stability and effective working of the financial system; and 
to supervise the financial institutions authorized by it. 
Savings and Loan Societies Revitalization Program; 
Establishment of Port Moresby Stock Exchange; and 
PNG-ADB Microfinance & Employment Project. 
Hon. Luther Wenge, MP - Governor of Morobe 
Mr. Manasupe Zurenuoc - Provincial Administrator & Master of Ceremony 
Mr. Werner Schneider - ADB Rep, Country Res. Mission 
Ms. Charlotte Smith - AusAID Representative 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to address this gathering to mark the launch of the Lae branch of the Wau 
Microbank. This occasion marks another milestone in the development of the financial system in PNG, 
which is within the heart of the Central Bank’s function as a Regulator of the financial system. 
The main functions of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, as a Regulator, are stipulated in the Banks & 
Financial Institutions Act 2000. These, among others, are: 
- 
- 
Noting  from  the  above  functions,  the  Bank  is  not  mandated  to  undertake  development  activities. 
However, over the recent years the Bank has taken on board some development activities aimed at 
developing  the  financial  and  capital  markets  in  PNG.  It  has  also  been  actively  involved  in 
strengthening  and  building  capacities  of  some  financial  institutions  so  that  these  institutions  can 
contribute effectively to the development of the financial sector. 
Some of the development initiatives that the Bank is actively involved include: 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
The Bank contributes to the PNG-ADB Microfinance & Employment Project as the Executing Agent. 
The  Project  is  guided  by  a  Steering  Committee  chaired  by  the  Deputy  Governor  for  Policy  & 
Regulation. The Bank has an internal Working Group and a Unit responsible for microfinance. This 
structure  was  established  in  full  recognition  of  the  importance  we  place  on  the  development  of 
microfinance institutions in PNG, and its role in filling the gap in provisions of financial services in the 
rural communities. 
Microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  form  a  different  tier  of  financial  institutions  that  play  an  active  part, 
through  the  informal  and  semi-formal  sectors,  in  savings  mobilization  and  the  development  of  the 
financial system. These financial institutions that serve the disadvantaged majority equally require the 
Central Bank’s supervision and some involvement in enhancing their growth. The services provided by 
the  MFIs  should  be  seen  as  complementary  to  the  services  provided  by  other  licensed  financial 
institutions (LFIs) in both the rural and urban areas of PNG. 
Other recent positive developments initiatives in this area are: the proposed partnership arrangements 
between banks and Post PNG, and separately with the Government’s District Treasury offices. 
Like all other developing countries, PNG is constantly challenged to provide answers or ways as to 
how best it can wrestle the problems associated with poverty and lack of employment opportunities. Its 
5 million population, of which 80% live in the rural areas have been denied development opportunities 
for many years, partly due to the deterioration in infrastructure conditions and lack of banking services. 
Given  these  challenges,  we  recognized  that  the  weaknesses  of  the  financial  system  needs  to  be 
addressed  in  order  to  improve  the  provision  of  financial  services  required  for  private  sector 
development.  This  includes  addressing  the  lack  of  banking  and  financial  services  in  the  rural 
communities. The recent surge in cases of various forms of money schemes are an outcome of this 
problem.  The  Central  Bank  has  taken  actions  on  some  of  these  schemes  and  will  continue  to  be 
vigilant in eliminating such practices. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
In addressing this problem, the Government requested the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to provide 
technical and funding assistance in developing the microfinance sector in PNG. Subsequently, this led 
to  the  establishment  of  the  PNG-ADB  Microfinance  and  Employment  Project,  which  commenced  in 
2000. 
The Project’s overall objective is to contribute to economic growth through private sector development 
and employment creation and further development of the financial system. The specific objective of 
the Project is to provide sustainable microfinance services to viable formal and informal enterprises 
and savings services to the population at large. 
Regarding regulation of MFIs, there is currently no regulation in place to govern the activities of MFIs. 
However, the Bank is in the process of developing an appropriate regulatory and supervisory regime 
that would support the development of MFIs and legally protect and equip them to serve the urban and 
rural communities of PNG. As deposit-taking institutions, these MFIs are required by the Central Bank 
to be duly incorporated and operate legally within a prescribed set of rules to ensure sustainability in 
the future. 
Since  there  is  no regulatory  framework  in  place  to  license  MFIs, the  Central  Bank  gave  conditional 
license to the Wau Microbank (WMB) under the existing Banks and Financial Institutions Act 2000 to 
operate as a licensed financial institution and allow it to collect public deposits. The licensing of the 
WMB portrays a new approach considered by the Project and BPNG to be an effective means to meet 
the expectations of the local people. 
The establishment of the Lae branch of Wau Microbank should be seen as a sign of expansion of the 
Microfinance sector in PNG as more entrepreneurs from the formal and informal sectors will now be 
served by this microbank. The Morobe province has a vibrant economy and there are prospects for the 
expansion of the microbank to other areas of the province. The success of this branch will show the 
nation that a microbank can quickly become viable also in urban areas. 
This  province  is  fortunate  to  have  the  microfinance  policy  of  the  Government  being  tested  with  the 
establishment  of  the  pilot  microbank  in  Wau  as  a  ‘laboratory’  for  testing  microfinance  products  and 
methodologies. The province should embrace and support the microfinance initiatives as an alternate 
‘vehicle’ for delivery of financial services to a wider sector of the urban and rural communities. The 
MCC supported by the BPNG are working together to assist any institution, public or private, that wish 
to serve the Microfinance market. 
I commend the Project team from MCC and IBBM for extending the provision of microfinance services 
to Lae city through the establishment of the branch of Wau Microbank. 
The Bank also acknowledges the continued support of the donor organisations including the ADB and 
AusAID without which this Project would not have been established. I am sure your support will be 
extended to the other provinces as well. 
I  also  wish  to  thank  the  Morobe  Provincial  Government  and  Administration  for  taking  a  proactive 
stance in this expansion plan for the WMB. 
Thank you ladies and gentlemen. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
