Timothy F Geithner: Overview of the US financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Bond Market Association’s annual meeting, New York, 20 April 2005. 
 Thanks for giving me the opportunity to join you today. 
The U.S. and the world economy now confront the conjunction of several different transitions, which 
will have important implications for the U.S. financial system.  
Among the most important of these transitions are:  
- 
The  approaching  demographic  pressures  on  fiscal  resources,  which  will  hit  most  major 
economies at a time when underlying fiscal positions are still likely to be in substantial deficit. 
The  disposition  of  the  global  imbalances  reflected  most  conspicuously  in  the  U.S.  current 
account deficit.  
The  inevitable  evolution  in  the  exchange  rate  regimes  of  those  countries  that  have  been 
actively targeting their nominal exchange rate against the dollar to a system where there is 
more variability in their bilateral and real effective exchange rates. 
The transition from a long period of exceptionally low short-term nominal and real interest 
rates to levels more appropriate to the present circumstances. The slope and shape of this 
path toward equilibrium is necessarily subject to considerable uncertainty, and will depend 
on how the outlook unfolds.  
   These  are  all  types  of  disequilibria.  They  can  be  sustained  for  a  time,  but  not  indefinitely.  The 
imbalances  in  our  fiscal  and  external  positions  could  be  diffused  gradually  and  smoothly.  But  the 
transitions  to  a  more  sustainable  equilibrium  could  also  bring  greater  volatility  in  asset  prices,  less 
stability in macroeconomic outcomes, slower growth and more uncertainty.  
The strength of the financial system is an important factor in assessing the probabilities associated 
with, and the potential impact of, the greater volatility that might be associated with these transitions. 
Where financial systems are strong and resilient, they provide more of a cushion against shocks and 
help  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  those  circumstances.  Where  they  are  weaker, 
they  can  amplify  the  impact  of  shocks  on  macroeconomic  activity  and  reduce  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy in mitigating shocks. 
I  believe  the  changes  in  the  U.S.  financial  system  over  the  past  two  decades  have  produced  a 
stronger  and  more  stable  system.  The  large  financial  institutions  at  the  core  of  the  system  have 
substantial  capital  cushions  and  larger  and  more  diversified  earnings  capacity.  These  institutions 
maintain capital above both the regulatory minimums and their internal economic capital measures. 
The  technology  and  practice  of  risk  management  has  improved  dramatically.  All  types  of  risks  in 
financial intermediation are more broadly dispersed. The financial infrastructure is stronger.  
The  combined  effect  of  these  changes  seems  likely  to  have  made  the  U.S.  financial  system  more 
stable  across  a  broader  range  of  circumstances.  Although  a  substantial  degree  of  uncertainty 
surrounds any forward looking judgment about financial resilience, the U.S. financial system seems 
less  vulnerable  to  specific  shocks  and  better  able  to  absorb  larger  shocks  than  was  true  in  the 
relatively recent past.  
At the same time, however, changes in the structure of the financial system and an increase in product 
complexity could make a crisis more difficult to manage and perhaps more damaging.  
Consolidation has produced a system in which a smaller number of financial institutions, banks and 
non-banks,  account  for  a  substantially  larger  share  of  financial  intermediation.  Therefore,  while  the 
probability  of  a  major  crisis  induced  by  the  financial  failure  of  a  major  institution  may  be  lower,  the 
damage  associated  with  such  an  event  could  be  higher.  An  event  large  enough  to  threaten  the 
solvency or liquidity of one of these core institutions could have more severe impact on the stability of 
the system than was the case in a less concentrated market. 
The  substantial  increase  in  the  role  of  hedge  funds  in  our  financial  system  also  complicates  the 
challenge of risk management. Although hedge funds help improve the efficiency of our system and 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
may also contribute to greater stability over time by absorbing risks that other institutions would not 
absorb, they may also introduce some uncertainty into market dynamics in conditions of stress. 
The  rapid  growth  in  instruments  for  risk  transfer,  most  recently  in  the  credit  world,  has  produced  a 
large  universe  of  exposures  in  complex  products,  whose  future  value  is  uncertain  and  difficult  to 
model. The risk-reducing benefits of these innovations, for individual institutions and for the system as 
a whole, are substantial, but these benefits are to some extent qualified by the limits of our knowledge 
of how they will perform in conditions of stress.  
The  uncertainty  and  challenge  posed  by  these  developments  are  complicated  by  the  confidence 
engendered  by  the  stability  and  resilience  of  the  U.S.  economy  over  the  past  decade.  Until  very 
recently,  we  have  seen  an  unusual  dynamic  in  financial  markets,  in  which  low  realized  volatility  in 
macroeconomic  outcomes,  low  realized  credit  losses  and  low  uncertainty  about  future  inflation  and 
interest rates have worked together to bring risk premia down across many asset prices. There is a 
self-reinforcing character to this pattern, with past stability seemingly increasing confidence in future 
stability, and this dynamic itself can magnify the risk of a more damaging reversal. 
These are all good reasons to pay careful attention to the strength of the financial system today. We 
have a strong interest in ensuring that the largest institutions in our financial system, and the system 
as a whole, are able to function reasonably effectively, even in the face of a more turbulent economic 
and financial environment.  
Capital is critical to this objective, and our current Basel I regulatory framework for capital is not up to 
the challenge. We have a very important global effort underway to improve the regulatory regime for 
capital,  by  tying  it  more  closely  to  the  actual  risk  profile  of  financial  institutions.  Basel  II  provides  a 
much better way of determining the appropriate level of capital to hold against risk. It does a better job 
of  capturing  default  risk  and  the  true  extent  of  risk  transfer  in  securitization,  guarantees  and  credit 
derivatives. It provides explicit recognition of operational risk, which can be larger than exposure to 
market risk for some complex financial institutions, not just for processing or clearing banks. 
But  Basel  II  is  not  the  end  of  the  process  of  designing  a  better  regulatory  framework  for  capital  in 
financial  institutions.  As  we  move  to  refine  and  implement  the  Basel  II  framework  for  credit  and 
operational  risk,  we  need  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  market  risk  and  encourage  further 
improvements in how firms capture the possibility of extreme events. 
The  current  regulatory  treatment  of  market  risk  does  a  good  job  of  capturing  directional  risk  from 
movements  in  interest  rates,  exchange  rates  and  equity  and  commodity  prices.  It  is  less  effective, 
however,  in  capturing  the  full  range  of  risks  associated  with  some  newer  products  and  trading 
strategies,  where  values  can  react  sharply  and  discontinuously.  In  particular,  the  risks  of  trading 
strategies based on changes in the correlation between asset returns are not always captured under 
the current regulatory capital regime, nor are some of the risks associated with traded credit products. 
And given the relatively short history of some of these products, the current regulatory treatment of 
market risk may not capture the risks of these products going forward. While a clear consensus on the 
best way to capture these risks has yet to fully emerge, these are very active areas of risk modeling at 
banks,  and  this  is  clearly  a  frontier  area  in  both  the  regulatory  and  consensus  economic  capital 
regimes.  
In  this  regard,  an  important  question  to  ask  is  how  well  the  current  capital  frameworks  capture  the 
possibility  of  extreme  events,  those  far  in  the  “tail”  of  the  distribution.  Stress  testing  can  play  an 
important  role  in  addressing  these  concerns.  Stress  tests  should  allow  institutions  to  assess  likely 
losses  under  extreme  market  events,  those  that  happen  too  rarely  to  be  captured  under  traditional 
value-at-risk measures, but that could cause very significant losses to the institution should they occur. 
Institutions  have  long  engaged  in  this  kind  of  analysis  for  internal  management  purposes.  Now, 
however, those at the forefront of risk management are assessing the adequacy of their value-at-risk 
results  against  stress  losses  and  finding  ways  of  integrating  the  results  of  stress  testing  into  their 
capital  frameworks.  Indeed,  an  important  aspect  of  our  supervisory  process  includes  critically 
assessing stress-testing regimes. 
More rigorous and comprehensive stress testing of large shocks across multiple markets, geographic 
regions and business lines is vital, particularly for systemically important institutions. In this context, we 
need  to  see  more  attention  paid  to  risks  to  market  liquidity,  and  the  effects  on  market  liquidity  that 
could result from the exit of a major dealer. Stress regimes need to capture market risk and credit risk 
across the firm, incorporating exposures in priced credit products, such as credit default swaps and 
structured credit products, and the strong linkages between these priced credits and traditional credit 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
instruments such as bank loans. Stress regimes need to take into account the effects of a firm’s own 
actions  and  trading  strategies  on  market  prices  during  times  of  stress,  and  the  constraints  on  their 
room for maneuver imposed by size.  
Banks hold a special place in our financial system, and most of our focus on improving the regulatory 
framework  for  capital  will  always  be  on  banks.  Getting  to  a  greater  degree  of  comfort  about  the 
adequacy of the capital cushion for banks is a necessary but not sufficient condition for achieving a 
higher level of comfort about the resilience of our financial system. This point applies equally well to 
non-bank financial firms that play critical roles in our financial system. These institutions, too, need to 
have  internal  controls  and  risk  management  systems  and  capital  levels  commensurate  with  their 
critical role in the financial system.  
The SEC’s initiative to implement internal-models-based regulatory capital requirements for securities 
firms as part of the Consolidated Supervised Entity (CSE) framework will help bring more consistency 
and more sophistication across banks and securities firms in the capital treatment of traded positions. 
Among the major non-bank financial institutions, the most important part of the financial system today 
where  we  need  a  stronger  capital  regime  relates  to  the  GSEs.  Even  with  the  improvements  in  risk 
management at these institutions over the last few years, we are some distance from the point where 
their regulatory capital requirements appropriately reflect their risk. 
While critically important, capital alone does not define an institution’s strength. It is vitally important for 
firms to continue to invest in strong internal controls and to make sure that advances in the operational 
infrastructure keep pace with rapid growth, particularly in complex transactions.  
Strong operational controls can help ensure smooth market functioning in times of stress, and when 
they  are  weak  they  can  exacerbate  adverse  market  dynamics.  An  important  element  of  a  sound 
operational  control  environment  is  timely  and  accurate  information  for  senior  managers,  especially 
when  it  is  most  critical  for  them  to  have  a  clear  picture  of  the  firm’s  exposure.  As  such,  strong 
operational  controls  can  help  reduce  some  dimensions  of  uncertainty  and  therefore  help  markets 
function better in conditions of stress.  
The  challenge  of  ensuring  that  operational  controls  keep  up  with  front  office  advances  in  the 
complexity  and  volume  of  transactions  is  particularly  evident  today  in  the  area  of  credit derivatives. 
The rapid growth in the trading of credit default swaps and structured credit products has resulted in 
considerable  back-office  backlogs  (unsigned  confirmations  and  master  agreements,  delays  in  trade 
capture into risk management systems, delayed notification of assignments of positions) that create 
significant operational risk for market participants.  
These  types of  operational  problems  have  arisen  more broadly  in  the  OTC derivatives  market over 
time and they have gotten worse with the rapid growth in activity by hedge funds. Efforts underway to 
automate  matching  and  confirmation  of  credit  default  swap  transactions  should  help  address  these 
concerns.  But  we  need  to  see  a  stronger  collective  commitment  by  the  principal  dealers  in  these 
markets to reduce the outstanding backlog of confirms, shorten confirm times and move larger share 
of transactions in the more standardized instruments to automated platforms. And we’ll act to reinforce 
that commitment. 
These considerations are particularly important for the systemically significant financial institutions that 
stand  at  the  core  of  the  U.S.  financial  system.  These  institutions  need  to  have  exceptionally  high 
standards  in  terms  of  internal  controls,  capital  and  risk  management  and  governance.  The  greater 
complexity of their risk profile puts more exacting demands on the risk management architecture and 
requires a higher margin of capital than would be necessary for a business profile with less volatility 
and more predictability in returns. And the central role these firms occupy in our financial system and 
the consequences to other firms and to the stability of the financial system should one of them face 
significant financial or operational difficulties requires that they hold a higher margin of capital above 
economic capital than would be appropriate for smaller institutions with a similar risk profile.  
These arguments are compelling on their own, and they are made more compelling by the challenges 
ahead facing the U.S and the world economy. 
The increased stability in macroeconomic outcomes that has characterized the last two decades, the 
relative ease with which the U.S. financial system weathered the stress of the equity market shock and 
September  11,  the  increased  mobility  of  the  world’s  savings  and  the  optimism  produced  by  the 
acceleration in productivity growth, have all worked to lower expected future volatility and risk premia. 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 3
The reduction in credit losses and in realized volatility has created room for institutions to take greater 
risk without showing deteriorating risk-based capital measures.  
But the macroeconomic environment may not prove to be as benign in the future as it has in the recent 
past.  And  it  is  important  that  the  major  financial  institutions  in  particular  sustain  a  strong  capital 
cushion at levels that will enable them individually and the U.S. financial system as a whole to manage 
safely in a more uncertain and perhaps more volatile world.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2005
