Wu Xiaoling: Conditions and environment for improving corporate governance 
structure of China’s financial enterprises 
Speech  by  Ms  Wu  Xiaoling,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  2005  China 
International Finance Development Forum, Shanghai, 23 April 2005. 
 I.  
Financial enterprises are playing special and important roles in the performance of 
the national economy. Reform of commercial banks takes a significant niche in that of 
financial enterprises. 
A  financial  enterprise,  in  particular,  a  commercial  bank,  is  a  special  enterprise  that  shoulders 
formidable  social  responsibility.  A  commercial  bank  is  characterized  by  absorption  of  savings, 
extension of loans and funds settlement for the general public. The profitability of commercial banks 
and their ability to provide services will have impacts in many respects. First, they are vital to welfare 
of the public, safety of savings of depositors and capital safety and profitability of investors. Second, 
they affect efficiency of funds allocation and in turn indirectly influence that of resource allocation in the 
whole  economy.  Third,  they  entail  transaction  costs  and  efficiency  of  commodity  trades  and 
investment in the economy. It is the sole and specific role played by commercial banks that puts their 
reform in a particularly important niche in the whole reform of all financial enterprises. 
II.  
Perfecting governance structure of commercial banks is vital to success of the reform 
of commercial banks. 
(I) The government decides that reform be implemented in state-owned commercial banks in line with 
the mode of “one policy for one bank”. The move is aimed at the target that the big four commercial 
banks  enhance  the  returns  of  capital  management,  upgrade  efficiency  of  resource  allocation  in  the 
whole economy and safeguard safety of and preserve valuation of state-owned assets to the greatest 
extent, in a bid to mitigate risks in operation of commercial banks and to reduce negative impacts on 
the whole society. 
The share-holding reform of state-owned commercial banks only represents one means of attaining 
the  reform  target.  It  is  aimed  at  forming  effective  corporate  governance  structure,  strengthening 
restraints in the capital market and improving performance of banks. 
(II)  The  linchpin  of  improving  corporate  governance  structure  of  commercial  banks  lies  in  proper 
handling of the relationship between commercial banks on one side, and investors, top Management, 
employees  and  other  stake-holders  on  the  other,  enabling  all  the  parties  to  restrain  one  another 
according to laws, rules, regulations and contracts. 
Good  corporate  governance  structure  will  help  commercial  banks  set  targets  for  their  operation, 
determine  the  approaches  to  attaining  the  targets,  facilitate  implementation  of  decisions  and  put  in 
place effective oversight. It will earn trust of investors and the public, winning more room for better 
development.  Reversely,  poor  governance  structure  will  result  in  failure  of  operation  of  commercial 
banks as well as the reform itself. Tod Minton (2000) studied 399 companies in Korea, Malaysia, the 
Philippines  and  Thailand  and  found  out  that  during  the  Southeastern  Asian  Crisis  the  difference  in 
corporate  governance  from  company  to  company  produced  immense  impacts.  Mckinsey  Investor 
Opinion Survey (2000) also indicated that most investors were willing to invest large sum of funds in 
companies with good corporate governance. 
(III)  Improvement  of  corporate  governance  of  commercial  banks  calls  for  not  only  the  efforts  of  the 
banks themselves but also favorable environment. During economic transition, favorable environment 
has  bigger  significance.  To  some  extent, 
the 
establishment and betterment of corporate governance structure in every commercial bank. 
The People’s Bank of China (PBC), as the agency for implementation of the reform scheme of state-
owned commercial banks, pays particular attention to cultivation of favorable institutional environment 
for reform of commercial banks, and is committed to advocating for a favorable legal environment. 
favorable  environment  will  directly 
influence 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
III.  
Conditions and environment for improvement of corporate governance structure of 
commercial banks 
(I) The aspects of corporate governance structure of commercial banks 
The definition varies for corporate governance. To some, it means all the control system of guidance 
and  control  in  corporate  finance  and  other  aspects  (The  Cadbury  Committee,  Financial  Aspects  of 
Corporate  Governance).  To  some,  it  encompasses  an  array  of  relations  among  corporate 
management,  Board  of  Directors,  shareholders  and  other  stake-holders  (The  OECD  Principles  of 
Corporate Governance); Some view that corporate governance deals with the ways in which suppliers 
of  finance  to  corporations  assure  themselves  of  getting  a  return  on  their  investment  (Shleifer  & 
Vishny). The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision used the one of the OECD in its Enhancing 
Corporate Governance of Banking Organizations in September 1999 and pointed out that it is of vital 
importance for a bank to possess strong corporate governance. Central to good corporate governance 
structure of commercial banks are: clearly definition of relationships between the Board of Directors, 
top Management, the Supervisory Committee, shareholders and other interest parties, establishment 
of effective incentive and restraint mechanism and open and transparent disclosure mechanism, in a 
bid  to  safeguard  conformity  of  operation  and  top  Management  of  banks  with  the  interests  of 
shareholders and other interest parties. 
We believe that corporate governance encompasses internally the relationship between shareholders 
and the Board of Directors (Directors), between the Board and top Management, between the Board 
and top Management and the Supervisors and between Management and employees. Externally, it 
includes the relationship between banks and financial supervisory authorities (e.g. the People’s Bank 
of  China  (PBC),  the  State  Administration  of  Foreign  Exchange  (SAFE),  China  Banking  Regulatory 
Commission  (CBRC)  and  China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  (CSRC)),  between  banks  and 
administrative departments of the government and the Party (e.g. the Organization Department of the 
CPC Central Committee, the State Council, the Ministry of Finance, State Development and Reform 
Commission,  National  Audit  Office  and  local  governments  etc.),  between  banks  and  industrial 
associations  and  intermediary  agents  (e.g.  self-discipline  industrial  organizations,  accountants, 
auditors and legal counsels), between banks and clients and between banks and suppliers of finance 
(share-holders and creditors) etc. 
In  constructing  internal  and  external  relationships,  banks  will  deal  with  the  cadres  and  personnel 
system,  the  employment  system,  the  fiscal  and  tax  system,  the  financial  supervisory  system,  the 
ownership system, the arrangement for protection of consumers’ rights, the system of fair competition 
and anti-monopoly and the system of service standardization for intermediary organizations etc. The 
outside legal environment will greatly influence establishment and effectiveness of internal corporate 
governance structure of commercial banks. 
The core of corporate governance structure lies in the solution to the principal-agent problem. With 
expansion of a company, equity will become ever more diversified and decentralized. The power of the 
general meeting of shareholders passes into the hands of the Board and there is severe conflict of 
interest  between  big  shareholders  and  small  and  medium-sized  ones.  Operation  of  companies  has 
more  minute  division  of  responsibilities,  enhanced  specialization  raises  the  status  of  professional 
managers. Thus, the Board cannot bring its role of restraint into full play. The separation of ownership 
leads to the severe problem of insider control. The issue worthy of extensive attention remains how to 
choose  directors,  supervisors  and  top  Management  with  integrity,  loyalty  and  diligence  and  how  to 
institute  mutual  oversight  and  restraint  among  themselves  through  effective  incentive  and  restraint 
mechanism, in a bid to safeguard the interests of owners of the company. In handling the relationship 
between  the  principal  and  the  agent,  the  personnel  system  and  the  ownership  system  are  of  vital 
importance regarding the external institutional buildup. 
(II) We shall reform the personnel system in a bid to select excellent directors, to form a diligent and 
responsible board and to appoint outstanding top Management for banks. 
1. The key to establishment of adequate corporate governance structure rests with handling well the 
relationship between the principle of the Party’s supervision over cadres and respecting the rights of 
investors. 
The Party’s supervision over cadres is one of the basic principles of the Communist Party of China 
(CPC).  The  core  of  the  principle  is  to  safeguard  implementation  of  the  Party’s  general  and  specific 
policies through organizational construction. As the ruling party, CPC can recommend party members 
and non-party people with both ability and integrity for holding positions in leading groups at various 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
levels  by  directly  relying  on  leadership and  cohesion  of  the  Party  organization.  Our  party  has  been 
making  efforts  in  strengthening  inner-party  democratic  construction  and  we  shall  have  the  Party 
committees  play  bigger  role  in  choice  and  hiring  of  competent  personnel  in  a  bid  to  eradicate 
corruption in hiring of personnel due to minority decisions. In such public opinion organizations as the 
NPC and the CPPCC and their local subordinates, and in enterprises and social organizations, there is 
an issue of the relationship between the ruling party and interest parties in the above entities. In the 
new era, the organization and personnel system is confronted with a new issue of how the competent 
personnel  from  viewpoint  of  the  Party  organization  receive  public  acceptance  and  legally  hold  the 
proper positions. 
The relationship between shareholders and top Management is a principal-agent relationship. If we’d 
like to choose the Board of Directors and the Chairman thereof and to let the Board to have its say in 
establishing favorable incentive and restraint mechanism for Top Management, then we shall grant to 
investors the right of personnel choice and hiring. As such, the agent will serve the owner in a loyal 
manner, so as to eradicate intrusion through insider control into the interest of shareholders. 
China’s financial enterprises, in particular, the state-owned commercial banks, have continued to use 
the  administrative  system  for  the  Party  organizations  and  government  agencies  as  their  personnel 
system. There is a strong sense of officialdom and yet to form the ideology of restraint of ownership. 
When  commercial  banks  are  still  wholly  state-owned  or  state-controlled,  there  is  still  no  intense 
contradiction.  While  the  equity  is  diversified,  there  could  be  conflicts  between  the  power  by  the 
shareholders in choice of agents and the existing personnel system. Therefore, the key to improving 
corporate  governance  in  financial  enterprises  lies  in  dealing  well  with  the  relationship  between  the 
principle of the Party’s supervision over cadres and the power of shareholders. 
2.  “Recommendation  by  the  Party  organization  and  acceptance  by  the  public”  shall  be  concrete 
reflection of the principle of Party’s supervision over cadres. 
Today,  the  country  is  ruled  by  law.  Persons  in  charge  of  enterprises,  in  particular,  members  of  the 
Board and top Management of share-holding enterprises shall go through legal procedures and then 
hold  relevant  posts.  First  and  foremost,  the  principle  of  Party’s  supervision  over  cadres  shall  be 
reflected in proper choice by the Party of representatives of state-owned equity. We shall recommend 
to  the  Board  as  representatives  of  state-owned  equity  those  honest  and  clean  Party  members  that 
have  a  grasp  of  the  business  and  those  professionals  that  will  carry  out  in  a  loyal  way  the 
responsibility  of  representatives  of  state-owned  assets.  Through  their  work,  we  shall  implement  the 
Party’s general and specific policies. Second, within financial enterprises, the Party organization shall 
strengthen  cultivation  and  training  of  Party  members.  They  will  in  turn  become  persons  with  high 
ideals and moral integrity, proficient in professional work and conscientious in carrying out general and 
specific  policies  of  the  Party.  Through  the  Party-wide  education  to  maintain  the  progressiveness  of 
Party  members,  we  shall  render  Party  members  in  financial  enterprises  to  have  adequate 
competitiveness  in  professional  work  and  charismatic  character.  By  expanding  admission  of  party 
membership, we shall attract those outstanding talents into the Party that accept Party Constitution so 
that candidates recommended by the Party organization will be accepted by internal departments and 
staff  of  the  enterprises  in  election  of  members  of  the  Board  and  appointment  of  top  management. 
Third, we shall reinforce the Party’s work of united front within financial enterprises. We shall carry out 
well publicity to the masses of enterprises, in particular, outstanding personage of democratic parties 
or  without  party  affiliation,  and  educate  them  to  conscientiously  implement  the  policies  of  the 
government at their posts. We shall bring into full play the supervisory roles of non-Party democrats on 
the work of the Party organization as well as enterprises. 
“Recommendation by the Party organization and acceptance by the public” is a practice for which we 
have  strove as  a  target  for  the  personnel system since  its  reform.  In  other words,  it  is  a  system  of 
competing for posts. As such, we can recommend truly outstanding talents to hold relevant posts. And 
only by doing so can we get over the long-standing bad habits of courting promotion through personal 
relationships and eradicate corruption in the personnel system. 
3. We shall strengthen the reform of the system of hiring financial practitioners, in a bid to ensure that 
financial  enterprises  are  governed  by  qualified  Board  and  that  qualified  talents  provide  financial 
services to the public. 
An enterprise is a social entity that weaves various social relationships. It comes into being in order to 
reduce transaction costs and to increase social wealth. Financial enterprises connect with the public 
with even stronger social feature and bigger social responsibility. It is of vital importance for them to 
select qualified shareholder representatives and qualified managers. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 3
Of the outside conditions for perfecting corporate governance structure of financial enterprises, one is 
imperative  that  supervisory  authorities  and  self-discipline  industrial  associations  shall  propose 
qualifications  for  practitioners  of  the  financial  industry,  in  particular,  senior  officers  of  financial 
enterprises-Chairman  of  the  Board,  Directors  and  top  Management.  The  qualifications  are  not 
“license” requirements. They are, however, standards only attainable with adequate training. 
In view of China’s practices in mitigating financial risks, it is not the case that he who has funds shall 
become Chairman of financial enterprises. The Board will decide as to operational policies, strategies 
and the incentive and restraint mechanism. Members of the Board shall possess adequate expertise. 
Their  expertise  may  not  necessarily  be  confined  to  the  financial  industry,  it  shall  at  least  cover 
adequate business management. To increase efficiency of the Board, there has formed an association 
of  Directors.  The  association  proposed  the  qualifications  for  the  Board  and  compiled  guidance  for 
directors.  Many  international  organizations  also  proposed  the  advice  of  training  directors.  China’s 
supervisory authorities have also required of directors to participate in adequate training. All the above 
concludes that training of directors constitutes an important aspect of improving corporate governance 
structure. 
In  the  early  period  of  instituting  corporate  governance  structure  of  financial  enterprises,  the  biggest 
lesson  is,  taking  the  Board  as  a  rubber  stamp.  As  a  result,  some  directors  did  not  have  adequate 
expertise, without bringing into play the role of the Board in corporate governance. It is encouraging, 
however, the situation has been improving. In the recent reform of state-owned commercial banks, the 
government  has  appointed  such  young,  energetic  professionals  as  Mr.  Xiao  Gang,  Mr.  Jiang 
Chaoliang  and  Mr.  Guo  Shuqing  as  Chairmen  of  Bank  of  China  (BOC),  Bank  of  Communications 
(BoCom)  and  China  Construction  Bank  (CCB)  respectively.  The  move  indicated  that  we  have  paid 
much  attention  to  organizational  ability,  expertise  and  creativity  of  Directors.  The  Central  Huijin 
Investment  Corporation  sent  for  6  Directors  to  BOC  and  CCB.  They  are  also  selected  from  the 
People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC),  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission 
(CSRC),  the  State  Administration  of  Foreign  Exchange  (SAFE)  and  other  agencies.  They  are 
professional executives, enthusiastic with the financial industry, full of administrative experience and 
proficient in operation of financial enterprises. 
Strengthening and improving training arrangement and rules of procedure for members of the Board of 
Directors, shall be the focus of the next stage of reform and the gist of the principle of separation of the 
functions of enterprises from those of government. We shall grant the managerial power to investors 
and  their  representatives  in  the  real  sense.  Only  by  doing  so  can  we  have  the  micro  basis  for 
operation of the market economy. 
When China is running short of financial talents, we could as well hire talents abroad or from all walks 
of life, thus accelerating growth of China’s financial talents. 
(III) We shall improve the system of labor safety and set up the personnel system in which one can be 
transferred to other jobs or be given a higher or a lower position as required. 
Handling well the relationship between the Board and top Management and between the Board and 
employees, represents one very important component of corporate governance structure of financial 
enterprises.  The  above  calls  for  establishment  of  the  adequate  system  of  safeguarding  labor  rights 
and interests. Concretely speaking, it entails the employment system and social safety net. In terms of 
the  reform  of  China’s  state-owned  enterprises  and  banks,  the  success  is  hinged  on  instituting  the 
personnel system in which one can be transferred to other jobs or be given a higher or a lower position 
as required. 
The sense of security, ownership and enthusiasm of employees of financial enterprises come from the 
adequate  law  of  labor  safety  and  social  security  net.  Guanzi  once  said,  he  who  has  immovable 
property will have immovable perseverance. When enterprises have clearly established ownership and 
when employees have the sense of physical safety, the reform shall proceed smoothly. The Labor Law 
prescribes  that  establishment  of  employment  calls  for  employment  contracts.  The  contract  is  the 
fundamental  basis  for  safeguarding  legal  interests  of  employees  during  employment.  Employment 
contracts  shall  be  entered  into  in  conformity  with  the  principle  of  equality,  voluntary  participation, 
consultation and consensus, which represents complete contractual freedom enjoyed by employees. 
Employees  of  financial  enterprises  may  participate  in  the  management  of  the  enterprise  in  a 
democratic manner and discuss on equal footing with the employer about protection of legal interests 
of labor through the General Meeting of employees, trade unions or other means. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2005
Career  development  program,  training  program,  compensation  scheme  and  Employee  Stock 
Ownership Plan (ESOP) can create the sense of honor and ownership among employees, arouse their 
definite  expectation  about  the  future  and  thus  can  mobilize  their  working  enthusiasm.  The  survey 
conducted  by  Mercer  Human  Resource  Consulting  on  40  multi-national  companies  (MNCs)  in 
Shanghai  in  November  2003  indicated  employee  development  program  (78%),  reward  and 
acknowledgement (60%), compensation and welfare (56%) and training program (40%) were among 
the top 4 appealing factors. The economist, Mr. Liang Xiaomin, in his recent presentation about culture 
in the Shanxi Merchants, also pointed out that draft banks by Shanxi Merchants in the 19th century 
designed  the  arrangement  of  “career  stock”  according  to  each  employee’s  position,  tenure  and 
performance. The stock could share dividends. The arrangement played apparent incentive role in that 
period. 
Since 1920s, there were more and more mergers and acquisitions in a horizontal, vertical and mixed 
manner and even across borders, bringing about several times the super-banks. After China institutes 
its exit mechanism for financial institutions, acquisitions, restructuring and bankruptcy will surface as 
well. Under such circumstances, it is of high necessity to establish social safety net for employees and 
to make proper arrangements for employees’ medical and unemployment and pension insurance. 
We  shall  establish  effective  incentive  and  restraint  mechanism.  We  shall  gradually  establish  the 
market  of  professional  managers.  The  situation  shall  be  changed  where  some  operational 
performance  and  reputation  mechanism  are  the  important  determinants  for  compensation  of  top 
management in the market and within the enterprises. Government agencies are after all government 
agencies, and enterprises are after all enterprises. There shall no longer be an incentive mode based 
on “administrative hierarchy”. In no event shall executives of top Management with poor performance 
be transferred to posts at the same administrative levels or back to posts in administrative agencies. 
Professional managers shall cherish their own reputation and get over the complex of “administrative 
hierarchy”. 
For  top  Management  of  banks,  we  shall  have  incentive  compensation.  More  important,  we  shall 
cultivate expectation linked with future operational earnings, e.g. stock option, long-term incentives like 
big pension plan for long tenure, practice practical protection of property safety and personal dignity 
for top Management for their hard-working after retirement. 
Strong incentives shall be accompanied by strict restraint. We shall form the responsibility mechanism, 
by means of supervisor inquiry, proposal for recall, establishment of track records of top Management 
and investigation and affixation of responsibility. In the recent revision of the Corporate Law, lessons 
have been drawn from the practice of “lifting the veil of the corporations” and constructive proposal has 
been  put  forward  regarding  “supervisor  proceedings”  and  “shareholder  proceedings”.  For  damaging 
behavior  by  directors  and  top  Management,  shareholders  may  ask  the  supervisory  committee  or 
supervisors to lodge proceedings. In case of emergency, shareholders may lodge proceedings on their 
own behalf. 
(IV)  We  shall  set  up  limited  government,  safeguard  ownership  in  real  earnest,  create  level  playing 
ground and cultivate the sense of serving the public by financial enterprises. 
A real market economy shall be one based on ruling by law. The concept of limited government is the 
cream of the principle of ruling by law. Financial enterprises shall be regulated due to its special nature 
of public products, externality and information asymmetry. The regulation, however, shall be moderate. 
Regulation shall focus on compliance and internal risk controls. The financial industry is an industry 
that  manages  risks.  All 
in 
acknowledgement of risks, presentation of risks to clients, measures to mitigate and control risks to 
the extent capital and reserves of financial enterprises could sustain. Regulation shall be confined to 
the  extent  creativity  of  financial  enterprises  will  not  be  stifled  and  risks  shall  be  fully  disclosed  to 
clients. Reliance solely on regulation will be costly and ineffective. In terms of the financial safety net, 
the  first  priority  is  self-restraint  of  financial  institutions.  Industrial  self-discipline  and  public  oversight 
ensue with it, while financial regulation comes the fourth. 
We shall protect ownership of financial enterprises in real earnest. We shall emphasize prior claim of 
banks for their creditor’s rights with collateral, and shall establish gradually the basic credit database 
fully  covering  enterprises  and  individuals,  in  a  bid  to  improve  the  social  credit  environment  and  to 
create  favorable  environment  for  banks’  operation.  Financial  institutions  are  inflicted  with  costs  in 
providing services to the public and shall be paid off to be viable enterprises. Many clients, who used 
to enjoy free services for some financial products for a long period, are still not used to the practice. 
Financial enterprises shall make efforts for explanation and publicity when charging the relevant fees. 
financial  products  have 
inherent  risks.  The 
issue  herein 
lies 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 5
Meanwhile,  financial  enterprises  shall  in  turn  sharpen  their  sense  of  social  responsibility  and  shall 
cherish a sense of accountability to repay the public by providing prime and prompt financial services 
for residents in their community and other enterprises as well. As such, banks may charge fees for 
their  services  while  clients  feel  the  services  are  worthwhile  of  the  charges.  The  Board  and  top 
Management of financial enterprises shall take serving the public as the sole purpose of development 
of their enterprises, and earn their room for viability and growth in serving the public. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2005
