Philipp M Hildebrand: Do financial markets promote responsible behaviour? 
Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the 35th ICS-Symposium, University of St Gallen, 21 May 2005. 
 I am honoured to join this distinguished panel. In his opening remarks to this year’s ISC Symposium, 
Federal  Councillor  Moritz  Leuenberger  compared  the  symposium’s  theme  –  Liberty,  Trust  and 
Responsibility  –  to  the  Holy  Trinity.  Let  me  assure  you.  I  will  be  less  ambitious.  In  my  formal 
comments, I will take the liberty to reflect not only on financial market but on markets more broadly. 
The  great  economist  Adam  Smith  has  famously  written  that  “it  is  not  from  the  benevolence  of  the 
butcher,  the  brewer,  or  the  baker,  that  we  expect  our  dinner,  but  from  their  regard  to  their  own 
interest.” This often-cited reference from the Wealth of Nations can be interpreted as suggesting that 
markets  function  best  when  market  participants  are  not  concerned  about  any  particular  normative 
values of responsibility but simply pursue their self-interest. Led by the “invisible hand”, this collective 
pursuit  of  self-interest  produces  the  optimal  economic  outcome.  In  other  words,  market  participants 
need not be concerned about responsibility or, to use Adam Smith’s term, benevolence. The “invisible 
hand” of the market will take care of that.  
It seems to me such a reading of Adam Smith is too narrow. Two sentences prior to the quote about 
the butcher, the brewer and the baker, Smith states: “In civilised society [man] stands at all times in 
need of the co-operation and assistance of great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to 
gain  the  friendship  of  a  few  persons.”  Here,  then,  is  our  dilemma:  to  be  civilized  and  to  have 
functioning markets, we need vast cooperation. Yet, human nature is such that it is impossible to base 
cooperation with millions of unanimous fellow market participants on common values of responsibility 
or, in Adam Smith’s language, on benevolence. In other words, self-interest and the “invisible hand” of 
the market are not just the optimal but the only available path to cooperation.  
The story does not end here, however. Adam Smith clearly recognized the importance of the “laws of 
justice”.  By  the  laws  of  justice,  I  take  it  he  meant  what  we  would  refer  to  as  the  rule  of  law  with  a 
specific focus on property rights. He says explicitly: “Every man, as long as he does not violate the 
laws  of  justice,  is  left  perfectly  free  to  pursue  his  own  interest  his  own  way,  and  to  bring  both  his 
industry and capital into competition with those of any other man, or order of men.”  
The “invisible hand” therefore cannot function in the total absence of government. Indeed, apart from 
assuring  the  rule  of  law,  Smith  saw  two  other  functions  for  government:  “the  duty  of  protecting  the 
society from the violence and invasion of other independent societies” and the “the duty of erecting 
and  maintaining  certain  public  works  and  certain  public  institutions,  which  it  can  never  be  for  the 
interest of any individual, or small number of individuals, to erect and maintain”. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  these  brief  reflections  on  the  great  Adam  Smith,  let  me  turn  back  to  the 
specific  question  put  to  us.  I  have  no  doubt  that  together  with  a  functioning  rule  of  law  and  limited 
government  intervention,  free  markets  in  general  and  financial  markets  in  particular  are  the  optimal 
path  to  the  promotion  of  wealth.  I  am  equally  convinced  that  responsible  behaviour  has  the  best 
chances of flourishing in an environment of economic opportunities and rising standards of living. Trust 
clearly  enhances  the  rule  of  law  as  there  will  never  be  enough  courts  to  permanently  monitor  all 
market transactions. Modern means of communication and transparency, in turn, are trust-enhancing. 
Think of seller and purchaser ratings on many internet auction sites. 
Now,  let  me  conclude  my  remarks  with  a  final  and  in  my  view  crucial  note  of  caution.  As  Charles 
Kindleberger  demonstrated  convincingly  in  his  1978  book  Manias,  Panics  and  Crashes,  financial 
markets are prone to phases of irrationality and exaggeration. Such market disequilibria lend support 
to the need for the rule of law and the utility of limited government intervention in a number of areas. I 
want  to  emphasize  the  word  limited.  Notwithstanding  Adam  Smith’s  own  reference  to  government 
intervention, the role of government must remain a limited one. 
If temporary market imperfections or difficult market adjustment periods give rise to the justification for 
relentlessly  expanding  the  role  of  government,  there  will  be  a  point  when  markets  will  no  longer 
function  effectively  and  when  welfare  creation  will  seize  to  advance.  There  is  no  better  breeding 
ground  for  irresponsible  behaviour  than  an  environment  of  economic  stagnation  or  worse,  welfare 
decline.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
There are times in history when the world economy undergoes fundamental structural change. With 
the rapid integration into the global economy of China and India, we are experiencing such historic 
change.  Fundamental  structural  economic  change  invariably  produces  economic  victims.  The 
temptation for governments to interfere excessively with the free market is therefore particularly acute 
during periods when dramatic change occurs. Paradoxically, it is precisely then that the forces of the 
“invisible hand” are most needed to help bring about the welfare that can ultimately help absorb the 
negative externalities of change. If I am right that we are currently traversing such a period of historic 
change, it is more important than ever to ensure that government intervention in markets is limited and 
remains subject to continuous checks.  
Free  markets  under  the  rule  of  law,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  provide  the  optimal  path  to  welfare 
creation and ultimately responsible behaviour by market participants. As the history of the Industrial 
Revolution which began shortly after Adam Smith’s death demonstrates compellingly, there will always 
be  people  who  endure great  difficulties when  rapid  economic change  occurs.  Chairman Greenspan 
has recently noted that “a significant minority, trapped on the adverse cycle of the market’s process of 
creative  destruction,  are  suffering.  This  is  an  issue  that  needs  to  be  more  fully  addressed  if 
globalization is to sustain the public support it requires to make further progress.”  
Perhaps this will indeed be one of the major challenges we will face in the years to come. Dealing with 
it by way of relentless government interference with the forces of the free market will at best fail to 
produce desirable results. At worst, it will begin to reverse the dramatic welfare gains we have enjoyed 
since the time of Adam Smith.  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2005
