Ewart S Williams: Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman  
Remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the launch 
of the Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman, Port-of-Spain, 29 April 2005. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen. It is indeed a great pleasure to welcome you all this morning, 
on  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  to  the  launch  of  the  Office  of  the  Financial 
Services Ombudsman. A special welcome to Minister Conrad Enill, Minister in the Ministry of Finance 
for taking the time to be with us on this special occasion. 
I  would  like  to  recognize  the  President  of  ATTIC  and  the  Vice-  President  of  the  Bankers’ 
Association  as  the  major  contributors  to  the  fruition  of  this  event,  representatives  from  the 
participating insurance companies and commercial banks. 
I  am  also  pleased  to  welcome  four  members  of  the  public  who  had  their  complaints  resolved  as  a 
result of the intervention of the Market Conduct Unit of the Central Bank and who are here with us 
today to celebrate the launch of this very important Office. The majority of the complaints received by 
that Unit will now be considered by the Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman. 
In many ways this event is yet another manifestation of the ongoing integration of the financial sector, 
under  the  aegis  of  a  single  regulator. This  morning  we  say  goodbye  to  the Office of the Banking 
Services  Ombudsman  and  welcome  to  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  Judy  Chang  who 
graduates  from  being  the  Banking  Services  Ombudsman  to  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman.  It 
sounds routine but, in fact, all this represents progress. 
I would like to thank all those who have made this possible. The idea was first broached by the ATTIC 
Executive who thought that the establishment of an Ombudsman would be of tremendous assistance 
in  strengthening  confidence  and  credibility  in  the  insurance  industry.  (I  am  told  that  the  idea  of  an 
Ombudsman for the insurance industry has been floating around for the last ten years). 
The  non-ATTIC  members  who  have  signed  on  to  the  scheme  deserve  a  special  commendation  for 
accepting the challenge we put to them earlier this year to make the scheme as inclusive as possible. 
(We have 90 percent participation among active insurance companies – that is a good participation 
rate). 
I  would  like  to  express  sincere  thanks  to  the  banks,  through  the  Bankers  Association,  for  their 
collaboration and their commitment to making this integrated scheme a reality. 
And finally, I must thank Bernard Aquing who did a lot of the ground work and was an excellent and 
most  knowledgeable  Advisor,  and  the  Inspector  of  Financial  Institutions,  Catherine  Kumar  and  her 
staff, and the Committee, who did yeoman service in  bringing this scheme into operation in such a 
relatively short time. 
As you may know, the establishment of a Financial Services Ombudsman, encompassing all financial 
services is an important pillar of our vision for the financial sector, as outlined in the Government’s 
White Paper for Financial Sector Reform. This vision sees Trinidad and Tobago as the financial center 
of a larger PanCaribbean area with all the required architecture including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a range of strong diversified financial institutions; 
a robust regulatory framework that meets international best practices; 
a cadre of well-trained financial sector professionals; 
an efficient, impartial judicial system; and 
a  set  of  supporting  institutions  such  as  information  vendors  like  our  Automated  Credit 
Bureau,  the  Regional  Credit  Rating  Agency  and  now  our  Financial  Services  Ombudsman 
which we are launching today. 
Experience elsewhere shows that a well functioning Ombudsman scheme, by facilitating the orderly 
resolution  of  disputes,  goes  a  long  way  towards  strengthening  credibility  in  the  financial  sector. 
Ombudsman schemes are becoming more popular even in developing countries: 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
  Firstly, competition in the financial sector is giving rise to a range of new financial products, 
the full implications of which are not always obvious to the unsophisticated customer; and 
Secondly,  in  today’s  environment,  customers  are  becoming  increasingly  aware  of  their 
rights and are more demanding about good service and fair treatment. 
Both these factors underscore the need for mechanisms for lodging complaints and seeking redress. 
Our  very  short  experience  with  the  Banking  Services  Ombudsman  has  been  very  positive.  For 
example,  the  data  for  2004  shows  that  the  number  of  eligible  complaints  received  by  the 
Ombudsman’s  Office  fell  compared  with  the  previous  year.  One  possible  reason  is  that  the 
establishment of the Office prompted banks to strengthen their internal mechanisms and to resolve 
complaints  earlier  to  avoid  having  cases  referred  to  the  Ombudsman.  If  this  is  indeed  so,  we  have 
much to look forward to, with the expansion of the scheme to the insurance companies. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  are  fully  aware  that  expanding  the  Ombudsman  Scheme  to  cover  the 
insurance  industry  will  present  special  challenges.  If  we  can  judge  from  the  number  of  complaints 
received by the Market Conduct Unit (some 425 in about 10 months) the office is likely to get very 
busy. But we think that we are well prepared. 
In terms of the organizational arrangements for the Financial Services Ombudsman (FSO), the current 
staff from the Banking Services Ombudsman Office will be supplemented, at the beginning, with two 
transfers from FISD. 
In addition, technical assistance will be sourced from a panel of insurance experts with the required 
knowledge and experience. We intend to continue to provide extensive training to the staff both on 
banking and insurance matters. 
Mrs. Judy Chang will, in her presentation give you the detailed operating modalities of the Financial 
Services Ombudsman scheme. I would, however, like to underscore a few of its most salient aspects. 
Firstly,  the  main  purpose  of  the  scheme  is  to  seek  to  resolve  complaints  by  individuals  and  small 
businesses about the provision of banking and insurance services, using the criteria of law, industry, 
best practices and basic fairness. 
Secondly, once a bank or insurance company has voluntarily signed to participate in the scheme, the 
decision of the Ombudsman is binding. 
Thirdly,  the  proper  operation  of  the  scheme  requires  that  insurance  companies  set  up  their  own 
formal complaints mechanisms (as the banks have done). This is so, since the complaint must first 
have gone through internal processes before it is referred to the Ombudsman. 
Fourthly,  as  in  the  case  with  the  banks,  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  will  have  a  specific 
Terms of Reference for insurance complaints, and there will be some matters that will be outside the 
authority of the Ombudsman. There will also be a cut-off date so that the Ombudsman does not get 
lost in trying to resolve long-standing complaints. 
I would like to assure you that the office of the Financial Services Ombudsman, which comes under 
the Governor’s Office is committed to: 
• 
Your customers should know that: 
• 
• Providing responsive service based on fairness, integrity, equity and respect. 
We  are  committed  to  maintaining  our  independence  from  member  financial  services 
providers, and 
We  are  committed  to  upholding  the  highest  standards  of  excellence,  in  both  our 
decision-making process and in the timely response to their complaints. 
 Insurance  companies,  the  banks  could  vouch  for  our  integrity.  They  could  tell  you  that  the  FSO  is 
completely  independent,  including  from  the  regulator.  It  is  not  a  consumer  champion.  Its  role  is  to 
settle disputes without taking sides. Also, the FSO, is not a court : rather it is a free informal alternative 
to going to court. 
Over  the  next  several  months  the  Ombudsman’s  office  will  intensify  its  education  and  outreach 
programs through direct contact with the public and through its new website. I would like to invite the 
financial sector to join us in educating the public on financial matters. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
Let me once again thank you for joining us at this ground breaking event. I have full confidence that all 
parties  present  here  today  will  ensure  the  success  of  the  operations  of  the  office  of  the  Financial 
ServicesOmbudsman which will redound to the benefit of our society as a whole. 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 3
