Ishrat Husain: Comparison of Pakistani economy with Asean economies 
Keynote address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 12th General 
Council  and  General  Body  Meeting  of  the  Asia  Oceania  Tax  Consultants  Association,  Karachi, 
26 November 2004. 
 It is now widely accepted that the Asian economies have done extremely well in terms of economic 
growth and poverty reduction during the last three to four decades or so despite the crisis of 1997. 
Three decades ago, China was among the world’s poorest countries with 80 percent of the population 
having incomes less than US$ 1 per day and only a third of all adults able to read or write. By 2000 the 
proportion of the poor (income less than US$ 1 per day) had declined to around 16 percent. Korea and 
Pakistan had identical per capita incomes of $100 in 1960. Korea has now graduated as an OECD 
country and reached per capita income of approximately $10,000 while we haven’t even crossed the 
threshold of $1,000. Asia’s share in World GDP (at PPP) has risen from 24 percent in 1973 to almost 
40 percent in 2003. Foreign currency reserves of Asian central banks now account for 70 percent of 
the World currency reserves and financed more than half of the current account deficit of the United 
States in 2003. 
There  was  a  time  in  the  late  1960s  when  Pakistan’s  exports  exceeded  total  exports  of  Indonesia, 
Malaysia,  Thailand  and  the  Philippines.  But,  unfortunately,  all  these  countries  have  moved  ahead 
whereas Pakistan is still struggling to reach $14 billion target. Had Pakistan maintained its economic 
progress of the 1960s, its economy would have been akin to the East Asian ones and moved into the 
middle income group by now. Our per capita income is still around $650 and we are stuck in the low 
income category. 
Whereas it took the United Kingdom almost a century, United States of America 50 years to double 
their per capita incomes, most of the Asean+3 countries1 (Asean + Japan, China and Korea) achieved 
this  goal  in  less  than  half  a  century.  Japan  did  this  in  40  years,  Korea  in  25  years  and  China  in 
10 years. Pakistan should learn from the experience of these countries and there are many lessons 
which should be followed by us if economic progress has to be sustained. The evidence on economic 
development  Asean+3  countries  suggests  some  common  factors  which  have  been  critical  to  their 
success. 
Work  ethic;  discipline;  trust:  The  foremost  principle  for  economic  progress  was  strong 
(a) 
work ethic and discipline in the work force and creation of trust among each other. The labour force, in 
each of these countries, is highly disciplined, works extremely hard and carries out the orders of their 
supervisors ungrudgingly. The workers mind their own business without disrupting others’ work, focus 
on the task given and take pride in producing results. 
Trust and social capital have a positive impact on the quality of development by enhancing collective 
action,  mitigating  risks,  promoting  accountability  and  reducing  transaction  costs.  Korea  and  Japan 
produce more scientists and engineers than lawyers as these countries work on the basis of trust and 
avoid protracted litigation which wastes a lot of productive time and dissipated energy. 
Another characteristic of East Asian economies is the reliability of contract fulfillment. When a contract 
is given in China either for production of goods, delivery of services or construction of a project, you 
can be rest assured that it will be completed mostly ahead of time, within the stipulated specifications 
and without incurring any cost overruns. The attributes of reliability and low cost have made China the 
world’s largest manufacturing factory that has been able to attract almost all Fortune 500 Companies 
to locate their facilities in China. Unless every single worker and manager in this country begins to 
abide by his word in honouring contracts - whether oral or written - we would remain on the fringes of 
the global expansion. 
Savings: Pakistan would have to improve its domestic saving which was amongst the lowest 
(b) 
in the Asia region at round 16 to 18 percent as against 30 to 40 percent in other countries. China’s 
domestic  savings  rate  has  consistently  exceeded  40  percent  providing  ample  resources  for 
                                                      
1  Most  of  the  discussion  in  this  paper  is  focused  on  Japan,  Korea,  China,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  Singapore,  Indonesia  and 
Philippines. Other Asean countries such as Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam are not covered. 
investment. So is Malaysia’s rate of savings 43 percent and Thailand’s 33 percent. It is only when a 
country does not have adequate domestic savings it has to indulge in foreign borrowing in order to 
attain a modest investment. Correspondingly, East Asian countries retired, in net terms - $28 billion of 
debt during the last four years. External debt-GDP ratio in China is only 13 percent, one of the lowest 
among the developing countries because it relies mainly on its own savings to finance investment. In 
contrast, Pakistan’s low savings rate compelled it to borrow abroad. This excessive foreign borrowing 
resulted in a financial crisis for Pakistan in the late 1990s as the country was not able to service its 
loans.  The  reduced  debt  burden  that  has  been  recently  achieved  can  be  sustained  if  the  national 
savings rate rises consistently over time. 
Investment  in  human  development:  Investment  in  human  resource  development  has 
(c) 
made a significant contribution to growth, reduction in the incidence of poverty and improvement in 
social indicators in the East Asian countries. The average years of schooling in Korea are 9.6 years; 
6.3 years in Malaysia and 6.0 years in Singapore compared to 3.2 years in Pakistan. The emphasis on 
female education led to reduced fertility, thus mitigating the adverse effects of population pressure and 
increased supply of educated labour. In Pakistan, female education rates remained dismally low with 
the  attendant  problems  of  high  fertility  rates,  high  population  growth  rates  and  a  low  labour 
participation rate. There is an urgent need to bring women in the mainstream and give priority to their 
education, health care, nutrition. This will not only control the rate of population growth but expand the 
base of educated and skilled labour force in the country. Almost half of the population in Pakistan is 
illiterate  and  it  is  imposing  a  heavy  drag  on  achievement  of  Pakistan’s  economic  potential.  On  the 
other hand, most Asean+3 countries have almost 100 percent literacy rates with high life expectancy, 
low  infant  and  maternal  maternity  and  universal  primary  education.  The  productivity  effects  of  such 
elevated social indicators on the economies of these countries are quite obvious and productivity is the 
key variable determining how fast the economy can grow. 
Labour force quality: Related to this phenomenon is the training and skill upgradation of 
(d) 
the labour force. Asian countries do not only hire educated and literate workers but provide continuous 
training  to  these  workers  in  acquiring  new  knowledge,  techniques  of  production  or  improvement  in 
processing.  In  1991,  a  U.S.  manufacturing  worker  was  40  times  more  productive  than  his  Chinese 
counterpart.  By  2000  that  gap  had  narrowed  to  only  10  times.  Chinese  labour  productivity  has 
increased  four  fold  in  the  past  decade  thus  lowering  the  unit  labour  cost  in  manufacturing.  China’s 
wage  rate  is  61  cents  per  hour  compared  to  the  US  rate  of  $16.  Taking  into  account  the  labour 
productivity differences between the two countries, the unit labour cost in China is still only $6.10 per 
hour. The firms in Pakistan consider training expenses as additional costs and not investment. This 
short  sighted  view  has  kept  the  unit  cost  of  labour  i.e.  taking  into  account  labour  productivity 
differentials quite high relative to China and Asean countries. 
Openness of the economy: Another fundamental which has served the Asean+3 countries 
(e) 
well is openness of their economies to trade and foreign investment. Tariffs rate are uniformly low - in 
single  digits  -  and  non  tariff  barriers  are  hardly  existent.  Market  access  to  these  countries  has 
stimulated both import and exports of goods and services to the extent that in Malaysia the trade-GDP 
ratio exceeds 100 percent. China and India both had almost identical level of exports of $10 billion in 
the late 1970s. A relatively more open trade policy pursued by China has enabled it to increase its 
exports to more than $400 billion last year while India was able to each about $60 billion. Similarly, 
FDI flows are welcomed by all the Asian countries as they benefit the domestic economies in form of 
new  technology,  better  managerial  skills,  networking  with  the  global  supply  chain  and  infusion  of 
foreign capital. FDI flows to East Asia during the last four years amounted to $208 billion. China alone 
receives  $50  billion  annually  and  most  foreign  enterprises  produce  goods  not  only  for  the  Chinese 
markets  but  also  for  exports.  65  percent  of  China’s  increase  in  exports  in  the  last  ten  years  was 
generated by foreign firms and their joint ventures. 
This policy of openness makes a lot of sense. Our entire economy is $100 billion and even if we are 
able to double it within ten years, it will only grow to $200 billion whereas, as world exports today are 
$7 trillion  and  if  we  aim  at  capturing  2  percent  of  world  trade,  our  exports  alone  will  increase  to 
$140 billion - ten times the 2004 level. So you can see what a tremendous difference it will make in 
boosting Pakistan’s economy if we aggressively integrate ourselves into the world economy. This is 
the way the Asean+3 countries have done it. Those who favour inward like strategies relying simply on 
domestic economy and argue against exploiting the opportunities offered by globalization are, in fact, 
condemning us to a perpetual state of backwardness, poverty and misery. 
Tax culture: One interesting feature of the development story of Asean+3 countries is the 
(f) 
high tax compliance by the population and low incidence of tax evasion. In the 1970s when Japan had 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
not yet joined the ranks of developed countries, tax recovery was almost 96 percent of the total tax 
assessments. The high degree of revenue collection helps a nation to build infrastructure like roads 
and highways, bridges, ports, etc. and to spend on education and health. In the absence of adequate 
tax  revenue  mobilization,  the  government  is  unable  to  carry  out  these  basic  responsibilities  of 
development well. In Pakistan there is a widespread tendency to evade taxes by concealing incomes. 
Presently, there were only 1.1 million tax payers in a population of 150 million people. This number 
should be increased to at least three million. Once the tax base is broadened the tax rate can come 
down  from  35  to  25  or  even  20  percent  and  the  heavy  burden  borne  by  a  small  segment  of  the 
population can be eased by sharing with a larger segment. As tax consultants, you bear an enormous 
responsibility for the sake of the nation’s cause to help plug the holes of tax evasion and maximize the 
number of tax payers in the country. 
Role  of  the  government:  The  role  of  the  government  in  Asean+3  countries  has  been  to 
(g) 
facilitate,  guide  and  help  the  private  sector  in  fostering  economic  growth  and  development.  By 
maintaining macro economic stability, by charting out a long term vision and strategic direction and by 
pursuing consistent and predictable policies, the governments in these countries gave confidence to 
local as well as foreign investors. The long term path chosen by China in the late 1970s under the 
leadership of Deng Xao Ping is still being followed with suitable adaptation and modification despite 
changes in the leadership of the Communist Party during the last two decades. The same was done 
by  Japan  where  a  separate  ministry  called  Ministry  of  International  Trade  and  Industry  (MITI)  was 
created  to  develop  industrial  strategy  and  vision  and  to  assist  the  private  sector  in  these  industrial 
pursuits and export expansion. Unfortunately, we have been changing our policies, programmes and 
priorities  every  two  to  three  years  in  the  1990s  with  every  single  change  in  the  government  giving 
confusing signals to the investors, nurturing uncertainty and leading to disruption in the momentum of 
economic activities. The continuity and consistency of policies since 1999 and the level playing field 
created  for  the  investors  has  started  paying  dividends  as  investment  rate  has  begun  to  show  an 
upward trend. 
Science and technology: As a nation, we have to give greater importance to science and 
(h) 
technology as a tool to capture the commanding heights of the global economy and to achieve the 
required  level  of  growth  of  7  to  8 percent.  Korea  and  Taiwan  (a  non  Asean  country)  sent  teams  to 
recruit their nationals working in the United States and offered them lucrative and attractive packages 
to hire them back to their countries of origin. These scientists and engineers taught at the universities 
and  colleges,  set  up  research  institutes,  worked  in  the  laboratories  and  on  product  development  of 
industrial conglomerates and trained hundreds of thousands of young men and women in the modern 
tools of science and technology. The enormous progress that these countries have achieved during 
the  last  thirty  years  would  not  have  been  possible  without  this  huge  investment  in  research  and 
development. 
In Pakistan, we started extremely well and our educational institutions were turning out scientists and 
engineers of high caliber in the 1960s but then we neglected these fields to the serious detriment to 
our  economic  progress.  It  is  only  during  the  last  five  years  that  higher  education,  science  and 
technology  have  come  back  on  the  radar  screen  of  the  Government  but  it  will  take  us  some  time 
before we can make up for the lost time. 
Private sector:  In  Asean+3  economies  the  private  sector  was  allowed  a  free  hand  in  the 
(i) 
production,  distribution  and  trade  of  goods  and  services.  Japan  did  it  through  big  industrial 
conglomerates Keiretsus/Zaibatsus and so did Korea through Chaebols. Taiwan adopted a different 
strategy  and  that  was  to  promote  industrialization  through  small  and  medium  enterprises.  China, 
Thailand,  Indonesia,  Philippines  and  Malaysia  encouraged  foreign  direct  investment  and  joint 
ventures. The success of these strategies can be gauged from migration of product cycle. In the 1970s 
U.S. firms such as RCA and Westinghouse dominated domestic appliances markets in the world, in 
the  1980s  Sony,  Sanyo  and  National  of  Japan  took  over  this  market,  in  the  1990s  the  production 
shifted to Korea with Samsung, LG, etc. and in this decade it is the Chinese companies such as Haier 
who  are  beginning  to  assert  themselves.  Private  sector  firms  were  responsive  to  changing  market 
conditions  and  took  full  advantage  of  lower  costs  of  production  in  adapting  to  these  changed 
conditions. Pakistani scene after the 1970s has been riddled with inefficient and highly bureaucratic 
public enterprises who were subtracting rather than adding value and causing enormous losses. It is 
only more recently that the speed of privatization has picked up and private sector has been assigned 
its due role. 
Leadership  and  institutions:  In  almost  all  these  countries,  a  common  feature  has  been 
(j) 
strong leadership and strong institutions that could provide the helping hand and clear direction to the 
entrepreneurs,  firms,  farming  community,  exporters,  businesses  and  delivering  essential  public 
services to the population at large. In Korea, General Park, in Singapore Lee Kuan Yew, in Indonesia 
General Suharto, in Malaysia, Dr. Mahatir Mohammad, in the Philippines General Ramos after Marcos 
were the shining lights in their respective countries. Whatever their faults they took upon themselves 
the responsibility to steer the course of economic development and produced tangible results for their 
nations. In the absence of strong leadership or strong institutions, the difficulties are compounded and 
the time taken to reach the goal post is elongated. 
Regional integration: Finally, the Asian economies have been recording very high growth 
(k) 
rates in times of turbulence in the world economy, slow down in the US and European economies and 
overall  stagnation.  They  have  been  able  to  do  so  because  regional  trade  integration  has  insulated 
them from these external shocks to a very large extent. The rising share of intra-regional trade has in 
fact created a barrier against the tidal waves of adversity in world economy. This can be seen from the 
differential growth in intra-regional trade in East Asia and the growth in world trade. The intra-regional 
trade has grown at an annual rate of 16.4 percent between 1975-2001 while world exports have grown 
at 8.2 percent per annum. 
China has become a pivot around which the countries in the region revolve around. This linkage may 
prove to be a liability at some future point of time if something goes wrong to the Chinese economy but 
even then the trade among these countries other than China has also picked up. 30 products account 
for half of the intra-regional trade. Of these, 20 are inputs for further production. The basis for intra-
regional  trade  is  that  they  buy  raw  materials  and  commodities  from  each  other  to  make  labour 
intensive products for the US and European Markets. South Asia, on the other hand, is the only region 
in the world where the tentacles of regional integration are least spread out and intra-regional trade 
linkages hardly exist. The potential for rapid economic growth through improved trading relations in the 
region is quite high but political differences have not yet allowed this potential to be harnessed. Given 
the  fact  that  this  is  a  region  which  has  the  highest  number  of  the  poor  in  the  world,  the  sense  of 
urgency is quite obvious but lack of political will has so far retarded the progress. 
The  above  comparison  clearly  brings  out  that  some  of  the  important  factors  responsible  for  the 
economic turnaround of Asean+3 countries were not practised consistently in Pakistan and that is why 
we are left behind. 
But, let me conclude on an optimistic note. Whatever progress has been achieved during the last five 
years by following a set of continuous and consistent policies and reforms if it is allowed to move on 
the chosen course, I am confident that Pakistan will also be able to emulate the example of the Asian 
Countries. We will be able to leave a prosperous and progressive Pakistan for our children to live and 
enjoy. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2005
