Loi M Bakani: Financial planning for tomorrow 
Speech by Mr Loi M Bakani, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 2005 Money 
Show, Port Moresby. 
Topic of discussion: Creating a conducive financial system infrastructure for financial planning. 
 The Minister for Finance & Treasury, Honourable Bart Philemon, other Government ministers, Central 
Bank Governor Mr. Wilson Kamit, members and directors of the Port Moresby Stock Exchange, invited 
speakers, ladies and gentlemen. 
The  Bank  of  PNG  has  participated  in  the  Money  Show  since  its  inception,  and  as  with  the  other 
sponsors, we see our involvement as an important contribution towards the education of our people in 
financial planning and investment. The Money Show has truly become an annual venue and source of 
education and awareness on financial matters. 
Our participation is not only because of the unique position we hold in the financial structure of the 
country,  but  because  the  governing  Act,  the  Central  Banking  Act  (CBA)  2000,  also  requires  us  to 
promote  educational  awareness,  provide  financial  advice  and  ensure  the  safety  of  the  financial 
system. In this regard, I, on behalf of the Bank of PNG commend other sponsors for their continued 
support and participation in the Money Show. 
The theme for this year’s Money Show is - “Financial Planning for Tomorrow”. Speakers before me 
have and those after me will talk specifically on financial planning. What is it, why is it important, and 
how  individuals  and  business  enterprises  can  manage  their  financial  resources  and  make  use  of 
various income-earning opportunities available. I will talk specifically on the area that is much closer to 
the  activities  of  the  Central  Bank,  that  of  ‘Creating  a  conducive  financial  system  infrastructure  to 
facilitate financial planning’. 
The activities of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, as most of you are aware, are governed by several 
legislations. These legislation include the Central Banking Act (CBA) 2000, the Banks and Financial 
Institution Act (BFIA) 2000, the Savings and Loan Societies Act, and recently, the Life Insurance and 
Superannuation Acts. 
We  can  look  at  the  financial  system  infrastructure  from  a  legislative,  operational  and  policy 
perspective: 
Legislative 
Let me first talk about the legislative aspect of the financial system infrastructure.  
I  have  mentioned  the  legislation  that  governs  the  activities  of  the  Central  Bank.  These  legislations 
were part of the Government’s reform in the financial sector undertaken since 2000, which have given 
the Central Bank greater independence to perform its roles and objectives. Under the CBA 2000 and 
BFIA 2000, the Bank is given the tasks of managing monetary policy, supervising the financial system 
and ensuring an efficient payment system that would contribute towards achieving economic growth. 
The  Life  and  Superannuation  Acts  were  introduced  to  remove  political  interferences  in  these 
industries, and to ensure that these institutions are managed in a prudent manner to safeguard the 
interests of stakeholders, contributors and policyholders. All these activities are targeted at providing a 
stable, strong and vibrant financial system infrastructure, one that would amongst other things, assist 
in  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  financial  planning.  Such  an  environment  would,  in  the  long 
run, contribute to the achievement of economic growth and create employment.  
Increased  independence given  to  the  Central  Bank  means  increased  responsibilities.  It  also  means 
that we have to be transparent and accountable on our decisions and actions. We have used these 
legislations  to  deal  with problem  financial  institutions,  those  that are being  mismanaged,  as  well  as 
ensuring that only ‘fit and proper’ persons were managing them. 
Our  supervision  of  the  financial  system  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  covering  the  banks,  other  licensed 
financial institutions, saving and loans societies, superannuation funds, and life insurance companies 
are  to  ensure  that  these  institutions  comply  with  the  legislative  requirements,  use  world’s  best 
practices and have operational work ethics.  
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
Operational 
I will now talk about the operational aspects of the financial system infrastructure. 
The Central Bank is entrusted with the role of maintaining a sound and efficient financial system. To 
strengthen our supervisory functions, we have introduced new prudential standards for the licensed 
financial  institutions,  based  on  international  best  practices  and consistent  with  the  Basle  standards. 
The people tasked with managing these licensed financial institutions have a demanding, challenging 
and  responsible  role  to  perform.  Therefore,  the  corporate  governance  structure  is  one  of  the 
requirements  that  the  Central  Bank  has  continuously  emphasized  to  ensure  only  “fit  and  proper” 
persons are appointed to the boards and management of these institutions. Corporate governance is 
the key to strengthening efficient internal controls, risk management and reporting systems. 
As a result of these reforms and standards, the financial system is generally stable and functioning 
reasonably well for a thin system with only a few large institutions. Overall, there is adequate level of 
capital maintained by the banking sector; asset quality has been improving which is consistent with the 
improvements in the economy; liquidity remains high; and posted earnings continue to be favourable, 
especially for the major banks. This has provided a strong foundation for the growth and management 
of our financial institutions, as indicated by recent media reports of significant profit earnings by Bank 
South Pacific, POSF and NASFUND. 
The Central Bank is committed to seeing the development of the capital market in Papua New Guinea. 
We are one of the founding members of the Port Moresby Stock Exchange (POMSOX) and see our 
role as one of nurturing its development and growth. The development of the local bourse provides an 
alternative source for capital raising and allows for the deepening of the financial system. 
We  continue  to  advise  the  general  public  against  investing  in  fast  money  schemes.  They  come  in 
various guise and manner. There are no quick and fast ways to gaining financial wealth, as the other 
speakers  would  have  mentioned.  While  the  Central  Bank  has  taken  out  various  public  notices  and 
educational campaigns against depositing funds in these illegal entities, it is the role of all of us here 
and through such conferences as the Money Show to educate the public that financial wealth, like all 
other things, grows over time through good financial planning, hard work, honesty and sacrifice. 
Ensuring wider participation in the financial system is an on-going area of work for the Central Bank. 
Apart  from  revitalising  the  savings  and  loan  societies  movement,  we  have  commenced  on  the 
development  of  the  micro-finance  business.  To  date,  we  have  two  licensed  microfinance  service 
providers;  the  Wau  Microbank  based  in  Wau,  which  has  expanded  to  Lae  this  year  and  the  PNG 
Microfinance Limited based at Koki, Port Moresby. A few other established financial institutions are 
also venturing into and linking up with microfinance businesses. Over a short span of their existence, 
these institutions have experienced significant expansion in their customer base and outreach. This 
clearly  reflects  a  high  demand  for  financial  services  by  the  small  people  and  the  change  in  their 
attitudes  to  plan  and  save  for  their  future  needs.  To  ensure  that  the  growth  of  this  industry  is 
sustained, the Bank of PNG is in a process of establishing a legal framework and broad guidelines on 
their licensing requirements. 
To  support  other  Government  policies  in  realising  and  spreading  the  benefits  of  macroeconomic 
stability,  the  Central  Bank  removed  one  of  the  administrative  impediments  to  investing  in  PNG  and 
abroad,  by  liberalising  some  aspects  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Controls  on  01st  June  2005.  Prior 
attempts  and  intentions  to  liberalise  exchange  controls  did  not  eventuate  because  the  timing  was 
inappropriate  and  the  Central  Bank  did  not  have  the  required  foreign  exchange  reserves  and 
independence  then  to  rein  in  any  monetary  expansion  that  may  result  from  an  expansionary  fiscal 
policy and resulting pressure on the kina. This bold move now allows for a smooth and free movement 
of capital into and out of the country, and encourages better financial planning by investors. 
The remaining controls are those for approvals on private capital account contracts between residents 
and  non-residents,  approvals  to  open  and  operate  foreign  currency  accounts  outside  PNG,  and 
licensing of authorised foreign exchange dealers and gold exporters. 
Policy 
Let me turn now to the policy aspect of the financial system infrastructure.  
Early this morning, the Bank of PNG released its July 2005 Monetary Policy Statement, outlining its 
monetary policy stance for the remainder of 2005 and the medium term. The Central Bank’s monetary 
policy objective is to achieve and maintain price stability. 
We have to an extent achieved this, given the low inflation and interest rate levels, as well as a stable 
exchange  rate.  Not  only  was  these  positive  outcomes  due  to  favourable  international  commodity 
prices  but  most  importantly  to  sound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  This  has  resulted  in  renewed 
confidence in the economic management of the country as well as expansion in business activities by 
the private sector. 
For  2005  and  the  medium  term,  we  forecast  inflation  to  remain  low  as  the  stability  in  the  kina 
exchange rate will be sustained over the medium term. Combined with prudent fiscal management by 
the  Government  and  confidence  in  the  market,  the  Central  Bank  will  maintain  a  neutral  monetary 
policy stance, as announced this morning. 
Achieving and maintaining price stability is not only our monetary policy objective, but is also important 
for  financial  planning  by  all  of  us.  It  provides  some  certainty  in  price  levels  for  budgeting  and 
investment purposes, particularly on interest rates, exchange rate and inflation. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  the  Bank  of  PNG  is  committed  to  implementing  and  fulfilling  its  mandated  role  of 
ensuring  a sound and stable  financial system  for  the  people  of Papua New Guinea  and  those  who 
conduct business here. We now have in place the necessary legislations and strong independence to 
safeguard the institutions that we licensed under the various legislations. 
However, we still have more work to do to in ensuring that the financial system infrastructure continues 
to be sound and reliable. The economy is in a better shape than it has been for a number of years. But 
we  cannot  afford  to  be  complacent  and  must  continue  to  work  towards  ensuring  these  gains  are 
sustained. Working together with the private sector, Government and the general public, we can all 
ensure that these gains are passed on to tangible benefits for the rest of the country and its people. 
The  Government  has  been  able  to  undertake  significant  reforms  in  the  financial  sector.  Whilst  the 
foundation  for  a  sound  financial  system  has  been  laid,  we  will  continue  to  strengthen  the  financial 
system infrastructure that will support and sustain financial planning for tomorrow. It is a challenge for 
everyone  –  the  business  community,  the  commodity  producers,  the  Government  and  the  general 
public,  to  take  advantage  of  the  current  favourable  macroeconomic  and  financial  situation  and  the 
income earning opportunities it provides to improve on our financial being and for the whole country. It 
is now an opportune time not only to talk, but also to actually do financial planning for tomorrow. 
Thank you. 
