Y V Reddy: Micro-finance - Reserve Bank’s approach 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Micro-Finance Conference 
organised by the Indian School of Business, Hyderabad, 6 August 2005. 
 Friends, 
I am thankful to the organisers for giving me this opportunity to be amidst this distinguished gathering. 
Since  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan,  a  Member  of  Parliament  and  my  distinguished  predecessor,  is  chairing  the 
session, let me start with his role in the subject of my special address today.  The earliest reference to 
micro-credit in a formal statement of monetary and credit policy of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was in 
Dr. Bimal Jalan’s Monetary and Credit Policy Statement of April 1999. The policy attached importance 
to  the  work  of  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD)  and  public  sector 
banks in the area of micro-credit. It announced total deregulation of interest rates on loans by banks to 
micro-credit organisations and by these organisations to their members and beneficiaries except in the 
case  of  government  sponsored  programmes.    Dr.  Jalan,  as  Governor,  continued  to  focus  on  this 
subject virtually in every one of his Annual and Mid-term Review of policy statements.  In all these 
statements, the basic objective has been of mainstreaming micro-credit and accelerating the flow of 
bank  credit  to  micro-finance  institutions  without  jeopardising  their  decentralised,  voluntary  and  non-
bureaucratic  character.    Accordingly,    the  banks  were  urged  to  make  all  out  efforts  for  provision  of 
micro-credit, especially forging linkages with Self-Help Groups (SHGs), either at their own initiative or 
by  enlisting  support  of  Non-Governmental  Organisations  (NGOs).  The  micro-credit  extended  by  the 
banks is reckoned as part of their priority sector lending, and they are free to devise appropriate loan 
and savings products in this regard.  
I  am  delighted  to  continue  the  excellent  tradition  set  by  my  predecessor  in  regard  to  micro-credit. 
Accordingly,  RBI  announced  a  policy  framework  in  the  Mid-Term  Review  of  Monetary  and  Credit 
Policy of November 2003 based on interactive sessions with various stakeholders in the sector and 
reports of four Informal Groups.  The framework urged the banks to provide adequate incentives to 
their  branches  for  financing  the  SHGs,  establish  linkages  with  them,  simplify  the  procedures  while 
providing for total flexibility in such procedures to suit the local conditions.  It was also made clear that 
the group dynamics of working of the SHGs may be left to themselves and need neither be regulated 
nor formal structures be imposed or insisted upon. NABARD was advised to reinforce its commitment 
to  enhancing  the  flow  of  micro-credit  while  simplifying  the  process  and  to  devise  mechanisms  to 
ensure  sharing  of  experiences  amongst  the  bank  branches  that  were  closely  involved  in  extending 
micro-finance.  In  view  of  the  interim  report  of  the  Task  Force  on  Revival  of  Cooperative  Credit 
Institutions  (Vyas  Committee),  RBI  clarified  that  micro  finance  institutions  (MFIs)  would  not  be 
permitted  to  accept  public  deposits  unless  they  comply  with  the  extant  regulatory  framework  of  the 
Reserve Bank. 
The Annual Policy Statement of April 2005 noted the progress and targets of SHGs programme and 
indicated  two  measures  to  give  further  fillip  to  microfinance  movement.  First,  access  to  External 
Commercial Borrowings was indicated for non governmental organisations engaged in micro finance 
activities. Second, the policy also announced that the modalities were being worked out for allowing 
banks to adopt the agency model by using the infrastructure of civil society organisations, rural kiosks 
and village knowledge centres for providing credit support to rural and farm sectors and appointment 
of micro-finance institutions (MFIs) as banking correspondents. 
Review of developments 
It  must  be  recognised  that  considerable  work  had  been  done  by  the  RBI  in  this  sector  since  1991 
before making the formal policy announcements in 1999. In 1991-92, a pilot project for linking about 
500 SHGs with banks was launched by NABARD in consultation with the RBI which advised the banks 
to actively participate in it. In 1994, the RBI constituted a Working Group on NGOs and SHGs. On the 
recommendations of the Group, the Reserve Bank advised that the banks’ financing of SHGs would 
be reckoned as part of their lending to weaker sections and such lending should be reviewed by banks 
and also at the State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) level, at regular intervals. As a follow up of the 
recommendations of the NABARD Working Group, the RBI took a series of measures in April 1996 to 
give a thrust to micro-finance based lending, and these are worth recalling.  
Banks were advised to consider lending to the SHGs as part of their mainstream credit operations, to 
identify branches having potential for linkage with SHGs and provide necessary support services to 
such  branches  while  including  the  SHG-lending  within  their  Service  Area  Plan.    The  Service  Area 
branches, in turn, were to fix their own programme for lending to the SHGs with a view to enabling 
them to get the benefit of catalytic services of NGOs. The Service Area branch managers were asked 
to  have  an  ongoing  dialogue  and  rapport  with  the  NGOs  and  the  SHGs  of  the  area  for  effecting 
linkage. Banks were also advised that SHGs, registered or unregistered, which engaged in promoting 
the saving habits among their members, would be eligible to open savings bank accounts with banks 
irrespective of their availment of credit facilities from banks. It was also decided that flexibility allowed 
to banks in respect of margins, security norms, etc., as part of the pilot project for savings-linked loans 
to SHGs would continue. Further it was decided that NABARD would continue to provide refinance to 
banks under the linkage project at the rates stipulated by NABARD. It was also decided that banks 
may charge interest on the finance provided to the Groups / NGOs for on-lending to SHGs at the rates 
indicated  by  the  NABARD  from  time  to  time.  Further,  the  SHGs  were  to  be  free  to  decide  on  the 
interest rate to be charged to their members, provided the rate of interest was not excessive.  
While close coordination between the NABARD and the RBI characterised the growth of the micro-
credit movement till 1999, the Government of India took an active interest in the subject as evidenced 
by the successive announcements in the Budget Speeches of Finance Ministers since 1999. However, 
the  announcements  related  essentially  to  SHG  programme,  except  in  the  budget  speech  of  2005 
where there was a separate and distinct reference to MFIs, with a mention of a suitable legislation, 
though the thrust remains to be the linkage with the banks for providing financial intermediation. The 
budget speech states:  
“At present, micro finance institutions (MFIs) obtain finance from banks according 
to guidelines issued by the RBI. MFIs seek to provide small scale credit and other 
financial  services  to  low  income  households  and  small  informal  businesses. 
Government intends to promote MFIs in a big way. The way forward, I believe, is to 
identify MFIs, classify and rate such institutions and empower them to intermediate 
between the lending banks and the beneficiaries. Commercial banks may appoint 
MFIs as “banking correspondents” to provide transaction services on their behalf. 
Since MFIs require infusion of new capital, I propose to re-designate the existing 
Rs.100  crore  Micro  Finance  Development  Fund  as 
the  “Micro  Finance 
Development and Equity Fund”, and increase the corpus to Rs.200 crore. The fund 
will be managed by a Board consisting of representatives of NABARD, commercial 
banks  and  professionals  with  domain  knowledge.  The  Board  will  be  asked  to 
suggest suitable legislation, and I expect to introduce a draft Bill in the next fiscal 
year”. 
It must be recognised that the policy of expanding the thrust beyond micro-credit to the MFIs is not a 
reflection  on  the  lack  of  progress  in  provision  of  micro-credit  but  a  reiteration  of  its  success  and  a 
possible  approach  to  widening,  deepening  and  strengthening  micro-finance  movement  as  a  whole. 
The evolution of SHG Bank-Linkage Programme could be viewed in terms of three distinct phases, 
viz., (i) pilot testing during 1992 to 1995, (ii) mainstreaming during 1996 to 1998 and (iii) expansion 
from 1998 onwards. The cumulative number of SHGs ‘credit-linked’ to the banks showed a significant 
expansion from 255 as at end-March 1993 to 16.18 lakh as at end-March 2005. Commensurate with 
an  increase  in  the  cumulative  refinance  support  from  NABARD  from  about  Rs.0.3  crore  as  at  end-
March  1993  to  over  Rs.3,092  crore  as  at  end-March  2005,  the  cumulative  bank  loans  disbursed 
witnessed a sharp increase from about Rs.0.3 crore to around Rs.6,898 core during the period. This 
translates to an estimated 2.42 core poor families being brought within the fold of banking services. 
The  loans  per  SHG  increased  to  Rs.42,620  during  2004-05  from  an  average  of  Rs.  36,179  in  the 
previous year, reflecting the process of deepening of the credit access amongst the SHGs. 
New Paradigm 
It  is  clear  that  the  dominant  theme  so  far  has  been  of  extending  micro-credit  through  Bank-SHG 
linkages, with NABARD playing a leadership role and micro-finance institutions, mainly NGOs, playing 
a catalytic as well as enabling role at the gross root level.  However, there is clearly an emerging new 
paradigm in the approach to micro-finance.  It would be appropriate to recall that while the term micro-
credit has not been strictly defined at present, it usually refers to the credits of “very small amounts”. 
However, for the purpose of exempting the micro-finance companies registered under Section 25 of 
the  Companies  Act  from  the  core  regulatory  provisions  attracted  by  NBFCs,  such  companies  are 
required by RBI to be engaged solely in extending micro-finance upto Rs.50,000 for small businesses 
and upto Rs.1.25 lakh for housing in rural areas. The term “micro-finance” has been given a working 
definition by the Task Force on Supportive Policy and Regulatory Framework for Micro-Finance set up 
by NABARD in November 1998 as: “provision of thrift, credit and other financial services and products 
of very small amounts to the poor in rural, semi-urban and urban areas for enabling them to raise their 
income levels and improve living standards”. It is, however, understood that the MFIs provide other 
non-credit services as well such as capacity building, training, marketing of the products of the SHGs, 
micro-insurance, etc. In this background, the following considerations are relevant: 
First,  micro-finance  would  be  seen  to  be  a  broader  concept  than  micro-credit  and  the  focus  of 
discussion has now expanded beyond micro-credit to cover micro-finance.  
Second, there is a recognition in the Annual Policy Statement of the RBI for 2005-06 of the need for 
enhancing financial inclusion and the banks were urged to review their existing practices to align them 
with the objective of financial inclusion in regard to banking services. This underlines the importance of 
the micro-finance movement in addressing the issue of financial exclusion.  
Third,  the  increasing size and  growth  of  MFIs  seem  to  warrant  a  clearer  policy  framework to  cover 
operations in financial services in addition to credit,  in respect of  both bank- and  NABARD-led micro-
finance through SHGs and micro-finance institutions.  
Fourth,  the  delivery  of  non-credit  financial  services,  such  as  insurance  and  mutual  funds  by  micro 
finance institutions seems to be possible but as a pre-condition, there is a need for a clear framework 
for the approach of different regulators to these non-bank financial services by MFIs.  
Fifth, the organisational forms of micro-finance institutions appear varied, though the activities may in 
some cases include non-financial services.  This makes them subject to differing legal frameworks as 
per the organisational form.  
Sixth, different State Governments take varying approaches to the microfinance institutions – including 
subsidising interest rates. The nature and spread of micro-finance movement also differ significantly 
across States. 
Seventh, as per information available, a significant part of the current microfinance activity is related to 
credit, which is perhaps attributable to both the felt credit needs and the absence of a conscious policy 
thrust in regard to non-credit related financial services.  
Eighth, developments in technology seem to provide a window of opportunity to reduce the transaction 
costs and thus enable microfinance to be commercially viable and profitable activity.  
Finally, the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for 2005-06 made a reference to the possibility of a 
suitable legislation in this regard.  
Let me outline a preliminary response to these developments which, as will be described later, is being 
revisited by us. Broadly, the approach of RBI has been to emphasise the informality of micro-finance 
and focus on the developmental aspects.  The regulatory dispensation put in place by the RBI seeks 
to  enable  enhanced  credit  flow  from  banks  through  MFIs  and  could  be  further  refined  by  RBI,  as 
necessary.  On  the  suggestion  for  bringing  the  micro-finance  entities  under  a  system  of  regulation 
through a separate legislation, the RBI felt that microfinance movement across the country involving 
common people has benefited immensely by its informality and flexibility. Hence, their organisation, 
structure and methods of working should be simple and any regulation will be inconsistent with the 
core-spirit  of  the  movement.  It  was  also  felt  that  ideally,  the  NABARD  or  the  banks  should  devise 
appropriate  safeguards  locally  in  their  relationship  with  the  MFIs,  taking  into  account  different 
organisational forms of such entities. In any case, if any statute for regulation of MFIs is contemplated, 
it may be at the State-level with no involvement of the RBI as a banking regulator or for extending 
deposit-insurance.  
Issues and next steps 
In view of the new paradigm that was noticed in regard to microfinance, the RBI decided to revisit the 
issue in a comprehensive manner. Accordingly, several initiatives were taken in the recent months. 
First,  consultations  were  arranged  with  several  representatives  of  microfinance  institutions  in  select 
centres  to  obtain  their  views.  Second,  based  on  such  consultations,  a  Technical  Paper  on  Policy 
relating to Development, Regulation and Supervision of Microfinance Services was prepared and was 
discussed with the representatives of this sector on July 18, 2005. The recommendations of the Paper 
are being considered in consultation with the Government. Third, and in parallel, an internal group of 
RBI  on  Rural  Credit  and  Micro-Finance  (Khan  Committee)  had  been  set  up  to  examine  the  issues 
relating to this sector and the draft report of the Group was placed in the public domain on June 1, 
2005 for comments. The report captures experience of other countries and our requirements both in 
terms  of  development  of  micro-finance  and  of  financial  inclusion.  The  final  version  of  the  Khan 
Committee report dated July 19, 2005 has since been placed on the website of the RBI. The report 
considers  (a)  policy  options  and  strategies  for  deepening  and  widening  of  financial  services;  (b) 
promotion,  development  and  rating  of  microfinance  institutions  and  other  outreach  entities;  and  (c) 
regulatory  issues  and  concerns.    The  Report  will  form  a  basis  for  evolving  a  policy  framework  in 
consultation with the Government, NABARD and other stake-holders.  
It is, however, necessary to recognise that there are several issues which have to be clarified as one 
proceeds with a response, to what may be termed as, the new paradigm in micro-finance, described 
above.  Importantly, the new paradigm seems to imply a process of formalising what has essentially 
been  an  informal  mechanism  of  credit-disbursal,  occasionally  coupled  with  other  activities,  and 
expanding its scope. It is worth recounting some of the major issues in this regard.  
First, how do we distinguish micro-finance institution from micro-credit institution and both these from 
other financial institutions? Is it by the ceilings imposed on the size of deposits, lendings and / or by 
defining activities? What part or percentage of the activity could be non-financial while the institution 
continues  to  be  an  MFI?  Is  there  merit  in  differentiating  between  not-for-profit  MFIs  and  the  profit-
seeking ones ? 
Second,  how  do  we  identify,  for  regulatory  purposes  micro-credit  institutions  as  distinct  from  micro-
finance institutions since the latter may need more varied skills and in any case, warrant a policy view 
by more than one financial sector regulator?  
Third, should the SHGs, which have no formal organisational structure, be brought within the ambit of 
the proposed formal framework for the MFIs?  
Fourth, currently there are five organisational forms of the MFIs, viz., Trusts; Societies; Cooperative 
Societies; Not-for-Profit Companies and Non-Banking Finance Companies. There are also instances 
of large corporates undertaking micro-credit activity as a part of their operations. What are the merits 
and demerits of recognising one or more or all the organisational forms under a formalised regulatory 
framework for the MFIs?  
Fifth, there is also a need to recognise the large regional differences in the spread of SHGs and the 
MFIs  across  the  country.  While  the  issue  needs  deeper  analysis  to  identify  the  reasons  for  such 
variation  and  to  promote  balanced  growth  of  the  MFIs,  it,  prima  facie,  appears  that  the  MFIs  have 
flourished more in the States with well developed banking infrastructure and outreach. Thus, the MFIs 
in  our  country  would  seem  to  be  a  supplement  rather  than  a  substitute  for  a  developed  banking 
infrastructure.  
Sixth, what should be the role of the foreign capital and venture capital in regard to the MFIs? It may 
be necessary to recognise here the orientation of the micro-finance activity given the limitation of size 
and skills in the MFIs and then consistency with the risk-reward bias of such sources of commercial 
capital. As regards the external commercial borrowings, the imperatives of exchange rate risk and the 
capacity of the MFIs to effectively assess and manage this risk would also need to be duly reckoned.  
Seventh, what could be the scope and effectiveness of a self regulatory organisation for the MFIs and 
how it dove-tails with the possible formalised regulatory framework under contemplation?  
Eight, the credit rating is usually assigned for specific instruments issued or for a defined purpose and 
often, on a continuing basis.  There is merit in devising rating system for the MFIs, recognising that 
such exercises are seldom for localised views amongst decentralised entities. It will be instructive to 
review our experience so far in regard to utility and quality of rating exercises of MFIs. How to ensure 
that the rating exercise adds value to the localised operations of the MFIs? 
Ninth, what are the prospects for expanding the permission accorded by the RBI to the non-banking 
financial companies for offering credit and other financial services to not-for-profit companies? What 
are the prospects for creating a separate category of NBFC-MFIs to be regulated by RBI? 
Finally,  should  all  the  MFIs  or  only  a  select  category  out  of  them  be  permitted  to  accept  public 
deposits?  While  there  is  a  view  that  only  banks  should  be  permitted  to  accept  public  deposits, 
currently non-banking financial companies are also permitted to accept public deposits but subject to 
the regulatory prescriptions of the RBI. Needless to say, it is the issue of accepting public deposits that 
poses major challenges, both legislative and more importantly, of moral hazard.  
As  the  experience  with  cooperative  banking  shows,  a  soft  regulatory  regime  relative  to  scheduled 
commercial banks, be it in terms of governance or prudential aspects, trends to attract less than truly 
‘fit and proper’ persons to capture such institutions. Indeed it is possible to argue that our experience 
with bringing cooperative banks under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in 1966 coupled with their 
coverage  under  Deposit  Insurance,  compared  with  the  health  and  reach  of  the  cooperative  sector 
before such regulation came into effect, would provide some lessons in this regard. In fact, RBI in its 
comments  on  the  draft  report  of  the  Task  Force  on  Revival  of  Cooperative  Credit  Institutions 
(Vaidyanathan Committee, February 2005) argued in favour of substituting RBI’s regulatory jurisdiction 
with  a  separate  independent  national  or  State  level  regulatory,  body  broadly  in  line  with  what  was 
advocated by Dr. Bimal Jalan in his policy statement in 2001 in regard to Urban Cooperative Banks. 
Currently, it is proposed to examine the issue in detail in the light of recommendations of the Khan 
Committee and keeping in view the Microfinance Consensus Guidelines issued in July 2003 by the 
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) incorporating the Guiding Principles on Regulation and 
Supervision  of  the  MFIs.  These  Guiding  Principles  bring  out  globally  recommended  principles  on 
regulation  and  supervision  of  micro-finance  and  they  need  to  be  considered  in  the  context  of 
conditions in our country. 
There  are  several  operational  issues  which  could  be  addressed  through  coordinated  efforts  of  the 
central government, State governments, regulators, banks and the NABARD. RBI has an interest in 
pursuing  the  subject  as  part  of  its  thrust  towards  financial  inclusion.  As  the  micro-credit  approach 
yields  place  to  a  more  encompassing  micro-finance  approach,  coordinating  mechanisms  amongst 
financial sector regulators and institutional regulators have to be considered. A view needs to be taken 
on permitting scheduled commercial banks to participate in the equity of the MFIs. There may also be 
a  need  for  establishing  processes  for  transition  from  one  form  of  organisation  to  another,  while 
remaining engaged in the micro finance activity. There are several tax measures, both at Central and 
State levels, from which MFIs have been seeking special dispensation but a view is yet to be taken on 
many  of  them.  Training  and  capacity  building  is  an  area  of  high  priority  which,  coupled  with 
widespread use of technology, could reduce transaction costs and improve overall effectiveness while 
imparting robustness to the movement. Some States like Andhra Pradesh intend providing financial 
support for these purposes. There is considerable scope for increasing the tried and successful model 
of  Bank-SHG  linkages,  especially  to  large  tracts  in  the  country  which  have  not  been  adequately 
covered.  RBI is currently engaged in exploring a forum where these issues could be addressed on a 
continuing basis, through a participative and consultative process amongst all the stakeholders. 
In  conclusion,  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  that  we,  in  India,  have  to  focus  on  extending  financial 
services  in  both  rural  and  urban  areas  for  ensuring  financial  inclusion  of  all  segments  of  the 
population.  At  the  same  time,  one  should  avoid  the  temptation  of  creating  one  set  of  banking  and 
financial institutions to cater to the poor or the unorganised, and another for the rest. The medium to 
long-term objective should be to ensure inclusion of all segments in the main-stream institutions while 
taking  advantage  of  the  flexibility  of  multiplicity  of  models  of  delivering  a  wide  range  of  financial 
services. In this light, a comprehensive framework to revive the cooperative credit system, revitalise 
the Regional Rural Banks and reorient commercial banking system needs to get a high priority while 
simultaneously encouraging and enabling the growth of micro-finance movement in India, which has 
been  very  successful.  We  need  to  build  on  its  strengths  and  extend  it  to  vast  areas  which  are 
inadequately covered by both banking and micro-credit entities. Micro-finance, broadly defined, needs 
to be explored in the light of the new paradigm described. RBI and NABARD recognise the growing 
importance of micro-finance and are committed to enable its healthy growth. However, several issues, 
both in regard to regulation as well as development of the MFIs need to be considered and must be 
comprehensively addressed. While the report of the Khan Committee would provide a good starting 
point  for  taking  a  view  on  developmental  aspects,  in  particular,  the  CGAP’s  Guiding  Principles  on 
Regulation and  Supervision  on  Micro-finance  provide  a  valuable and globally relevant  framework  in 
regard to the regulatory issues. The proposed forum for a consultative process on the MFIs would also 
be useful in evolving an appropriate framework for development of the MFI sector. No doubt, a very 
well-crafted balance between the regulation and growth objectives would be warranted in formulating 
our approach to a regulatory regime, keeping in view the big challenge of financial inclusion of a large 
segment of the Indian population. Thank you. 
