Ardian Fullani: Experiences of the Bulgarian National Bank in its road 
towards the ESCB 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  and  Chairman  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the 
workshop  Experiences  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank  in  its  road  towards  the  ESCB,  organised  in 
cooperation with the Bulgarian National Bank and the GTZ Office, Tirana, 5 September 2005. 
 Dear participants, 
First of all, I would like to say good morning to all of you. 
Today’s meeting with our Bulgarian friends takes place in the context of several activities that we have 
recently organised with a clear focus on the future challenges related to the integration process. I am 
pleased that the fall season of this year starts with this activity and first of all, I avail myself of this 
opportunity to extend my gratitude to the representatives of the Bulgarian National Bank, the GTZ and 
to my friend, Professor Bolle. 
Since  the  very  first  days  of  my  appointment  to  this  position,  I  have  publicly  declared  that  Bank  of 
Albania’s  institutional  preparation  in  its  road  towards  the  ESCB  remains  our  main  challenge. 
Meanwhile, in all the meetings that I have had with the representatives of the regional central banks, 
as well as with high officials from Brussels and the ECB, I have underlined the idea that the future of 
the EU will be both more prosperous and unproblematic if the countries on its periphery look not only 
towards Brussels, but also if they start looking to each other. We – the central banks of the region – 
should represent an example in this direction. 
As pioneer institutions of progress, the central banks of the region should cooperate with each other in 
order to expand the road for a further political, social and economic integration. 
I believe that the chances for a rapid and secure process of European integration could be accelerated 
if we will have – among others – a healthy and safe financial and banking system, which should be 
able to advance the economic development of the country. Nevertheless, in order to materialise the 
objective for the approximation of their model with that of the EU member states, we hold the opinion 
that  the  central  banks  of  the  transition  countries  have  more  difficult  “homeworks”  than  the  classical 
responsibilities carried out by a central bank. Speaking in more concrete terms, this has to do mainly 
with the challenges related to the development of markets, with the unification of different norms and 
standards and with enhancing credibility in the country, thus aiming at the creation of an atmosphere 
that inspires confidence to foreign investors. 
Even though they have passed into the consolidation stage, our banking systems still remain fragile, 
and  as  such,  they  require  greater  commitment  and  care.  Regardless  statistical  developments,  the 
scale of financial intermediation is relatively low, whereas time after time the shadow of shocks on the 
economic equilibra shows up itself in different countries. Future changes will not be simple at all, but 
all  of  us  together,  by  exchanging  experiences  and  necessities  for  change,  will  build  a  safer 
environment, which I hope will make future challenges somewhat easier. 
Granting  independence  to  central  banks  represents  one  of  the  most  relevant  steps  in  the  financial 
system  reform  in  the  countries  of  our  region,  as  an  important  precondition  for  maintaining  inflation 
under control and becoming an ESCB member. However, our endeavours for the consolidation of the 
institutional  and  real  independence  should  be  coordinated  carefully  by  taking  into  consideration  the 
specific features of our economies in transition, and not as a mere implementation of what may seem 
to be a successful model for the ESCB countries. 
In this framework, I consider today’s meeting as very important, since the Bulgarian economy and the 
Bulgarian National Bank have been going through substantial reforms in the context of EU accession. 
I believe that the challenges that we have faced and those that we will face in the future are more or 
less the same with those experienced by the Bulgarian authorities, including the Bulgarian National 
Bank. 
As a consequence, I think that the bilateral cooperation between our banks carries a high potential, 
and in the name of my institution, I avail myself of this opportunity to offer maximal guarantees with 
regard to the fruitful development of these relations. 
   1/2 
Passing  into  a  multilateral  framework,  I  will  return  once  more  to  the  idea  that  focuses  on  the 
institutionalisation of the inter-regional cooperation between central banks. If we look to the meetings 
organised  with  some  of  the  regional  banking  authorities,  the  initiative  on  regional  cooperation  has 
been welcomed, but I also believe that time has come to carry out concrete measures towards this 
cooperation. Judging from my personal experience, not as governor but as a banker, I hold the opinion 
that it would be appropriate to establish a club of regional central banks. The regular meetings of this 
club  would  certainly  enable  the  exchange  of  experiences  and  the  further  strengthening  of  our 
cooperation. 
 
   2/2 
