Alan Greenspan: Regulatory reform of the government-sponsored enterprises 
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 6 April 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman, Senator Sarbanes, and Members of the Committee, thank you for again inviting me to 
discuss the role of housing-related government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) in our economy. As I 
described at length last year, the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan 
Mortgage Corporation (hereafter Fannie and Freddie) have contributed importantly to the development 
of  the  secondary  home  mortgage  market  and  thereby  to  the  diversification  of  funding  sources  for 
depository  institutions  and  other  mortgage  originators.  In  particular,  Fannie  and  Freddie  played  a 
critical  role  in  promoting  mortgage  securitization  -  the  key  to  the  success  of  secondary  mortgage 
markets in the United States.1
The stated intent of the Congress is to use the housing-related GSEs to provide a well-established 
channel  between  housing  credit  and  the  capital  markets  and,  through  this  channel,  to  promote 
homeownership, particularly among lower-income families. Although prospectuses for GSE debt are 
required  by  law  to say  that  such  instruments  are  not  backed  by  the  full  faith  and credit  of  the  U.S. 
government, investors have concluded that the government will not allow GSEs to default, and as a 
consequence  offer  to  purchase  GSE  debt  at  substantially  lower  interest  rates  than  required  of 
comparably  situated  financial  institutions  without  such  direct  ties  to  government.2  Given  this 
advantage, which private competitors are not able to fully overcome, the housing-related GSEs have 
grown rapidly in recent years. 
The strong belief of investors in the implicit government backing of the GSEs does not by itself create 
safety and soundness problems for the GSEs, but it does create systemic risks for the U.S. financial 
system  as  the  GSEs  become  very  large.  Systemic  risks  are  difficult  to  address  through  the  normal 
course of financial institution regulation alone and, as I will stipulate shortly, can be effectively handled 
in the case of the GSEs by limiting their investment portfolios funded by implicitly subsidized debt. 
The  government  guarantee  for  GSE  debt  inferred  by  investors  enables  Fannie  and  Freddie  to 
profitably  expand  their  portfolios  of  assets  essentially  without  limit.3  Private  investors  have  granted 
them a market subsidy in the form of lower borrowing rates. Unlike subsidies explicitly mandated by 
the Congress, the implicit subsides to the GSEs are incurred wholly at the discretion of the GSEs. 
Because  Fannie  and  Freddie  can  borrow  at  a  subsidized  rate,  they  have  been  able  to  pay  banks, 
thrifts, mortgage companies, and other home mortgage originators slightly higher prices for mortgages 
than  their  potential  competitors  have  paid.  This  edge  has  enabled  Fannie  and  Freddie  to  gain 
gradually but inexorably an ever-larger share of the home mortgage market. Investors have provided 
Fannie  and  Freddie  with  a  powerful  vehicle  for  pursuing  profits  through  the  rapid  growth  of  their 
balance sheets, and the resultant scale has given them an advantage that their potential private-sector 
competitors cannot meet. 
But the higher prices that these two GSEs pay for mortgages are only a small part of their subsidy, as 
evidenced by their persistent and well-above-market returns on equity capital. Their annual return on 
equity, often exceeding 25 percent, is far in excess of the average approximately 15 percent annual 
                                                      
1   Under securitization, mortgages are bundled into pools and then turned into securities that can be easily bought and sold 
along side other debt securities. Mortgage securitization continues to perform this important function, and such securitization 
techniques now have been applied extensively by the private sector to many other types of financial instruments. 
2   For example, the government provides the GSEs with a line of credit from the Department of the Treasury, fiscal agency 
services  through  the  Federal  Reserve,  exemptions  from  securities  registration  requirements,  exemptions  from  bank 
regulations on security holdings, and tax exemptions. 
3   The Boards of Directors of Fannie and Freddie are allowed to invest in almost anything as long as there is some link, direct 
or indirect, to their mission of supporting conforming mortgage markets. As demonstrated by recent innovations in the home 
equity lending and asset-backed securities markets, much of the $9 trillion in household credit can potentially be secured by 
real estate and thus may be available to the GSEs as investments. Moreover, the GSEs have been allowed to invest in 
many forms of non-mortgage debt, such as corporate bonds and commercial paper, to the degree the GSEs' can argue 
such investments support the GSEs' liquidity goals and thus indirectly support mortgage markets. 
returns  achievable  by  other  large  financial  competitors  holding  substantially  similar  assets.  Virtually 
none  of  the  GSE  excess  return  reflects  higher  yields  on  assets;  it  is  almost  wholly  attributable  to 
subsidized borrowing costs. 
The ability of the GSEs to borrow essentially without limit has been exploited only in recent years. At 
the end of 1990, for example, Fannie's and Freddie's combined portfolios amounted to $132 billion, or 
5.6  percent  of  the  single-family  home-mortgage  market.  By  2003,  the  GSEs'  portfolios  had  grown 
tenfold,  to  $1.38  trillion  or  23  percent  of  the  home-mortgage  market.  The  almost  unlimited 
low credit risk  profit  potential  from  exploiting  subsidized  debt  has  been  available  to  the  GSEs  for 
decades.  The  management  of  Fannie  and  Freddie,  however,  chose  to  abstain  from  making 
profit-centers  out  of  their  portfolios  in  earlier  years,  and  only  during  the  mid-1990s  did  they  begin 
rapidly enlarging their portfolios. 
Typically  in  a  market  system,  lenders  and  investors  monitor  and  discipline  the  activities,  including 
leverage, of their counterparties to assure themselves of the financial strength of those to whom they 
lend. However, market discipline with respect to the GSEs has been weak to nonexistent. Because the 
many  counterparties  in  GSE  transactions  assess  risk  based  almost  wholly  on  the  GSE's  perceived 
special  relationship  to  the  government  rather  than  on  the  underlying  soundness  of  the  institutions, 
regulators cannot rely on market discipline to contain systemic risk. 
When these institutions were small, the potential for such risk, if any, was small. Regrettably, that is no 
longer  the  case.  From  now  on,  limiting  the  potential  for  systemic  risk  will  require  the  significant 
strengthening of GSE regulation and the GSE regulator. Determining the suitable amount of capital for 
Fannie and Freddie is a difficult and technical process, and in the Federal Reserve's judgment, a GSE 
regulator must have as free a hand as a bank regulator in determining the minimum and risk-based 
capital standards for these institutions. 
Beyond  strengthening  GSE  regulation,  the  Congress  will  need  to  clarify  the  circumstances  under 
which a GSE can become insolvent and, in particular, the resultant position - both during and after 
insolvency  -  of  the  investors  that  hold  GSE  debt,  as  well  as  other  creditors  and  shareholders.  This 
process must be unambiguous before it is needed. Current law, which contemplates conservatorship 
and  not  receivership  for  a  troubled  GSE,  requires  the  federal  government  to  maintain  GSEs  as 
ongoing enterprises, but other than the symbolic line of credit at the U.S. Treasury, provides no means 
of  financing  to  do  so.  Left  unresolved,  such  uncertainties  could  threaten  the  stability  of  financial 
markets. 
 World class regulation, by itself, may not be sufficient and, indeed, might even worsen the potential for 
systemic risk if market participants inferred from such regulation that the government would be more 
likely to back GSE debt in the event of financial stress. This is the heart of a dilemma in designing 
regulation for GSEs. 
On the one hand, stiffening their regulation might strengthen the market's view of GSEs as extensions 
of government and their debt as government debt. The result, short of a very substantial increase in 
equity  capital,  would  be  to  expand  the  size  of  the  implicit  subsidy  and  allow  the  GSEs  to  play  an 
even-larger unconstrained and potentially destabilizing role in the financial markets. 
On the other hand, if we fail to strengthen GSE regulation, we increase the possibility of insolvency 
and crisis. We at the Federal Reserve believe this dilemma would be resolved by placing limits on the 
GSEs' portfolios of assets, perhaps as a share of single-family home mortgages outstanding or some 
other variation of such a ratio. Almost all the concerns associated with systemic risks flow from the 
size  of  the  balance  sheets  of  the  GSEs,  not  from  their  purchase  of  loans  from  home-mortgage 
originators and the subsequent securitization of these mortgages. 
We have been unable to find any purpose for the huge balance sheets of the GSEs, other than profit 
creation  through  the  exploitation  of  the  market-granted  subsidy.  Some  maintain  that  these  large 
portfolios  create  a  buffer  against  crises  in  the  mortgage  market.  But  that  notion  suggests  that  the 
spreads of home-mortgage interest rates against U.S. Treasuries, a measure of risk, would narrow as 
GSE  portfolios  increased.  Despite  the  huge  increase  in  the  GSE  portfolios,  however,  mortgage 
spreads  have  actually  doubled  since  1997,  when  comparable  data  for  interest  rate  spreads  on 
mortgage-backed securities first became available.4
A recent study by Federal Reserve Board staff found no link between the size of the GSE portfolios 
and mortgages rates.5 The past year provides yet more evidence, with GSE portfolios not growing and 
mortgage spreads, as well as the spread between yields on GSE debentures and Treasury securities, 
declining further. Indeed, while GSE stock prices have fallen substantially and turmoil has continued at 
the GSEs, mortgage markets have functioned well. 
Others have asserted that fixed-rate mortgages would be more difficult, or perhaps even impossible, to 
obtain without the GSEs' portfolios. But, again, we see little empirical support for this argument. We 
have found no evidence that fixed-rate mortgages, for example, were difficult to obtain during the early 
1990s  when  GSE  portfolios  were  small.  Indeed,  the  share  of  adjustable-rate  mortgage  originations 
averaged slightly more than 20 percent in 1992, when GSE portfolios were small, and averaged 34 
percent  in  2004,  when  GSE  portfolios  were  large;  these  data  suggest  that  the  size  of  the  GSEs' 
portfolios is unrelated to the availability or popularity of fixed-rate mortgages. As far as we can tell, 
GSE  mortgage  securitization,  in  contrast  to  the  GSE's  portfolio  holdings,  is  the  key  ingredient  to 
maintaining  and  enhancing  the  benefits  of  the  GSEs  to  homebuyers  and  secondary  mortgage 
markets. And mortgage securitization, unlike the GSE portfolio holdings, does not create substantial 
systemic risks. 
 We  at  the  Federal  Reserve  remain  concerned  about  the  growth  and  magnitude  of  the  mortgage 
portfolios  of  the  GSEs,  which  concentrate  interest  rate  risk  and  prepayment  risk  at  these  two 
institutions and makes our financial system dependent on their ability to manage these risks. Although 
Fannie and Freddie have chosen not to expand their portfolios significantly this past year (presumably 
at  least  partly  in  light  of  their  recent  difficulties),  the  potential  for  rapid  growth  in  the  future  is  not 
constrained by the existing legislative and regulatory regime. It is a reasonable presumption that rapid 
growth  is  likely  to  resume  once  Fannie  and  Freddie  believe  they  have  resolved  their  current 
difficulties.6 Without changes in legislation, Fannie and Freddie will, at some point, again feel free to 
multiply  profitability  through  the  issuance  of  subsidized  debt.  To  fend  off  possible  future  systemic 
difficulties, which we assess as likely if GSE expansion continues unabated, preventive actions are 
required sooner rather than later. 
Limiting  the  debt  of  Fannie  and  Freddie,  while  comparably  expanding  their  role  in  mortgage 
securitization, would be consistent with the original congressional intent that these institutions provide 
stability to the secondary market for home mortgages and liquidity for mortgage investors. Indeed, in 
1989, before the rapid expansion of its portfolio, Freddie testified before the Congress that the need 
for safe and sound operation and provision of affordable mortgages to homebuyers was inconsistent 
with holding a substantial portfolio. As argued by Freddie's CEO at that time, by financing mortgages 
with mortgage-backed securities sold to investors, Freddie avoided interest rate risks and thus could 
keep  mortgages  flowing  when  depository  institutions  were  suffering  an  interest  rate  squeeze.7 
Freddie's message changed after 1989 when it became owned by private shareholders and it began 
to exploit the risk-adjusted profit-making potential of a larger portfolio. 
*** 
The creation of mortgage-backed securities for public markets is the appropriate and effective domain 
of the GSEs. Deep and liquid markets for mortgages are made using mortgage-backed securities that 
are held solely by investors rather than the GSEs. Fannie's and Freddie's purchases of their own or 
each other's mortgage-backed securities with their market-subsidized debt do not contribute usefully 
                                                      
4   Spreads averaged 148 basis points in 1997 and 280 basis points in 2003. 
5   See  Andreas  Lehnert,  Wayne  Passmore,  and  Shane  Sherlund  (2005),  "GSEs,  Mortgage  Rates,  and  Secondary  Market 
Activities," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2005-7, January. 
6   Press reports indicate that during a recent open conference call, Freddie Mac said it is poised to start growing its portfolio 
again. For example, see "Freddie Earnings Fell Sharply in 2004; But GSE Sees Growth Potential and Rising Market Share 
in 2005," Inside MBS & ABS, April 1, 2005, page 4. 
7   Leland C. Brendsel, Government-Sponsored Enterprises, Hearing before the Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee 
on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, the 101st Congress, September 28, 1989. 
to  mortgage-market  liquidity,  to  the  enhancement  of  capital  markets  in  the  United  States,  or  to  the 
lowering of mortgages rates for homeowners. 
The  bulk  of  the  GSEs'  portfolio  growth  over  the  past  decade  has  occurred  mainly  through  the 
acquisition of their own mortgage-backed securities - which reflect the AAA-rating of pools of home 
mortgages.  As  I  indicated  earlier,  holding  their  own  securities  in  portfolio  often  yielded  Fannie  and 
Freddie subsidized annual returns on equity of more than 25 percent, far in excess of the returns to 
purely private financial institutions from holding such securities. 
 Limiting  the  systemic  risks  associated  with  GSEs  would  require  that  their  portfolio  holdings  be 
significantly smaller. At the same time, reducing portfolios would have only a modest effect on financial 
markets. Currently, these portfolios are financed largely by the issuance of GSE debt, which, in turn, is 
held by investors. 
If mortgage-backed securities were sold into the market or allowed to self-amortize - and accordingly 
GSE  debt  was  redeemed  -  the  transaction  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  supply  and  demand  for 
high-quality credit is essentially a wash. In the simplest outcome, the holders of GSE debt would be 
seen as exchanging their debt instruments for the mortgage-backed securities previously held on GSE 
balance sheets.8 As for homebuyers, whether GSE mortgage purchases are held in GSE portfolios or 
securitized and sold to investors appears to have no noticeable effect on mortgage rates. 
Limitations  on  portfolio  holdings  could  be  imposed  gradually  over  several  years  and  then  adjusted 
upward or downward depending on the growth of the single-family mortgage market. Very short-term 
Treasury  holdings  needed  for  liquidity  and  other  assets  employed  for  business operations  could be 
exempt  from  these  limitations.  Such  a  restriction  would  provide  the  GSEs  with  ample  liquidity  and 
would focus the GSEs almost exclusively on the purchase and securitization of mortgages, including 
mortgages for affordable housing. In other words, this restriction frees the GSEs of the difficulties of 
hedging large-scale interest rate risk. I should note that, even with such portfolio limits, Fannie and 
Freddie would likely remain among the most formidable of financial institutions in our country. 
 As I concluded last year, the GSEs need a regulator with authority on a par with banking regulators, 
with a free hand to set appropriate capital standards, and with a clear and credible process sanctioned 
by  the  Congress  for  placing  a  GSE  in  receivership,  where  the conditions  under  which  debt  holders 
take losses are made clear. However, if legislation takes only these actions and does not limit GSE 
portfolios,  we  run  the  risk  of  solidifying  investors'  perceptions  that  the  GSEs  are  instruments  of  the 
government and that their debt is equivalent to government debt. The GSEs will have increased facility 
to continue to grow faster than the overall home-mortgage market; indeed since their portfolios are not 
constrained,  by  law,  to  exclusively  home  mortgages,  GSEs  can  grow  virtually  without  limit.  Without 
restrictions on the size of GSE balance sheets, we put at risk our ability to preserve safe and sound 
financial markets in the United States, a key ingredient of support for homeownership. 
                                                      
8  
If GSE debt holders do not want to hold mortgage-backed securities directly because of interest rate and prepayment risks, 
other forms of collateralized mortgage obligations are available to meet their needs. 
