Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic and financial integration in EMU and 
implications for monetary and economic policies 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of 
the 
SUERF/UNICREDIT  conference  entitled  “Governance  and  structure  of  European  finance  after  EU 
enlargement”, Frankfurt, 9 March 2005. 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to give this keynote speech here today and to welcome you all to Frankfurt 
–  the  home  of  the  ECB  since  1998  and  the  euro  since  1999.  While  serving  the  SUERF’s  aim  of 
promoting  contacts  and  discussions  on  monetary  and  financial  issues,  the  topic  of  this  conference 
covers  the  most  crucial,  and  most  rapidly  changing,  elements  of  present  developments  in  the  EU, 
namely  i)  the  evolving  composition  of  the  EU  and  ultimately  the  euro  area,  ii)  the  prospects  for 
European  finance  and  finally,  iii)  issues  of  governance  –  and  I  am  looking  forward  to  hearing  the 
results of today’s discussions.  
In 2003, I had the honour of speaking on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the SUERF in Paris. I 
discussed the interplay between the degree of optimality of a currency area and the implementation of 
economic  policies.  Having  made  the  move  from  Paris  to  Frankfurt  shortly  after,  and  having  had 
enough time to appreciate the complex and fascinating mechanisms of EMU through another angle, I 
would like to return to the topic of economic and financial integration in Europe and its implications for 
economic and monetary policies.  
Economic and monetary integration in the euro area  
Political and economic rationale have taken turns in driving the European integration process with the 
aim  of  achieving  peace,  political  reconciliation  and  economic  prosperity.  This  has  led  to  a  very 
advanced stage of economic and financial integration in the EU, with the Single Market and the single 
currency  as  its  most  visible  characteristics.  This  integration  process  is  historically  unique  as  it 
combines both supranational and intergovernmental elements between sovereign states in a way that 
challenges previous concepts and definitions. While integration in Europe could be seen partly as a 
regional  process  of  the  much  wider  global  phenomenon  of  trade  integration,  visionary  political 
leadership  also  played  its  role  in  accelerating  the  integration  of  the  product,  labour  and  capital 
markets. In the field of economics, theory and practical experience gained in the 1970s and 1980s led 
to a convergence of ideas and greater belief in the virtues of stability-oriented macroeconomic policies. 
As a result, we see less volatility in market variables such as interest rates and exchange rates.  
The single currency and the Single Market in Europe are often discussed using the optimum currency 
area literature as a theoretical framework. The essential foundations of this literature were elaborated 
in studies by Mundell (1961), McKinnon (1963) and Kenen (1969) in the 1960s. The theory discusses 
the similarity of shocks affecting countries or regions in a monetary union and stresses the need for a 
high degree of trade and financial integration as well as similarity of economic structures. The greater 
the degree of similarity and integration in production and consumption structures, the lower the risks of 
asymmetric shocks or diverging developments that would necessitate a different monetary policy or 
changes in the exchange rate in order to avoid prolonged periods of unemployment. Of course, other 
adjustment  mechanisms,  such  as  a  sufficient  degree  of  price  and  wage  flexibility  as  well  as  factor 
mobility, would need to compensate the loss of the exchange rate and an individual monetary policy in 
the event of diverging developments, and are thus stressed as necessary conditions for an optimum 
currency area.  
While  such  considerations  are  true  for  any  currency  area,  there  have  been  specific  concerns  for 
Europe, as regards cross-border labour mobility (although this also applies within individual countries), 
labour and product market flexibility and a cross-border fiscal transfer mechanism. Let me say that I do 
not share the sometimes negative tone of this debate, mainly for two reasons; first, I believe the theory 
must be applied in a dynamic framework. Indeed, applying the theory at a specific point in time, there 
are few currency areas that fully live up to all the criteria of “optimality”. My second reason, which is 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
linked to my first, is that I believe the achievements, in terms of convergence and integration, have 
been  significant  in  Europe  and  developments  are  going  in  the  right  direction.  While  accepting  that 
more could, and should, be done to improve adjustment mechanisms, given that a significant number 
of  countries  still  exhibit  major  product  and  labour  market  rigidities,  it  is  my  belief  that  the  euro  is 
helping individual countries to undertake reforms that are leading to an increasingly efficient currency 
area.  Such  reforms  would  also  have  been  necessary  in  the  light  of  the  increasingly  integrated  and 
competitive world economy. 
Let me highlight some of the most important achievements to date. 
First, the process of nominal convergence in Europe has been truly impressive, especially seen from a 
historical  perspective.  In  a  sense,  the  EU  has  returned  to  the  same  macroeconomic  stability  that 
characterised the 1950s and the 1960s. Inflation in the euro area is well anchored to price stability 
according to our definition – below, and close to 2% - and price stability has become a common good 
for  all  European citizens, not  just  a subset of  them.  The  dispersion  of  inflation  rates has also  been 
reduced. In 1992, the difference between the highest and the lowest inflation rate across the euro area 
countries was around 13.5 percentage points. Since 1999, it has been around 3.3 percentage points, 
which is admittedly higher than that observed within individual euro area countries, but of the same 
order of magnitude as that observed in, for example, the United States (where the average difference 
stood  at  3.2  percentage  points  between  1999-2004  according  to  the  survey  of  the  14  Metropolitan 
Statistical Areas).  
In parallel, the consolidation of public finances that took place in the 1990s was as impressive as it 
was necessary, ending the continuous increase in public debt that had taken place since the 1970s. In 
this  regard,  the  convergence  criteria  for  joining  EMU  played  a  crucial  role  in  supporting  the 
consolidation efforts. However, since the start of EMU, compliance with the 3% and 60% budgetary 
reference values has diminished. Further fiscal discipline is called for, in the light of the challenges of 
an ageing population and in order to facilitate the efficient functioning of automatic stabilisers.  
Reflecting  the  achievements  in  terms  of  inflation  and  public  finances,  long-term  interest  rates  have 
also tended to converge downwards and are now more stable. This, combined with the total removal 
of  any  exchange  rate  volatility  in  the  single  currency  area,  has  markedly  reduced  their  potentially 
disturbing impact on individual countries. This is very different from the situation in the early 1990s, 
when financial market turbulence heavily affected our continent. Without the single currency, recent 
major shocks, such as the stock market correction in 2000 and the terrorist attacks on 11 September 
2001,  would  have  triggered  major  instability  in  European  economies  and  financial  markets.  A 
remarkable sign of the success of EMU, in my mind, is that long-term inflation expectations have been 
well anchored to price stability since the first days of the euro and of the ECB, and that the cost of 
long-term capital, including mortgage credit, has converged towards the best performers in terms of 
credibility  and  low  interest  rates,  therefore  offering  an  environment  highly  favourable  to  economic 
growth. These are indeed results that could never have been achieved without the euro.  
The positive results for nominal convergence and stability have also been shared by other EU Member 
States,  and,  supported  by  the  convergence  criteria,  are  indeed  serving  as  strong  incentives  for 
Member States aiming to join the euro area.  
As  outlined  in  the  theory,  real  convergence  is  equally  essential  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  a 
currency area. Real convergence usually refers to the degree of trade and financial integration, the 
similarity of economic structures and business cycles, the flexibility of prices and wages, and labour 
and  capital  mobility.  Trade  integration  is  well-advanced  and  trade  flows  within  the  euro  area  have 
increased  sizeably  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  suggesting  that  the  elimination  of  transaction 
costs  and  uncertainties  related  to  exchange  rates  have  indeed  enhanced  cross-border  price 
transparency  and  trade  opportunities  as  expected.  While  trade  within  the  euro  area  has  increased 
markedly, it is interesting to note that trade with countries outside the euro area has also increased, 
raising  the  export  share  to  almost  20%  of  GDP  in  2003,  from  around  17%  in  1997  (a  similar 
development is recorded for imports), compared with around 10% in the United States and Japan. An 
important  factor  is  the  rising  trade  with  the  new  EU  Member  States,  which  has  increased  trade 
integration within the enlarged EU. The share of total euro area exports to the new Member States 
was less than 9% on average during the second half of the 1990s, but it has now risen to more than 
11%.  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
Similarly, the integration of financial markets is well advanced in the euro area, facilitating the efficient 
allocation of savings to the most profitable investment opportunities and allowing market participants 
to partly diversify away the risk of asymmetric shocks.1 The euro has visibly accelerated integration, 
particularly  in  the  money  market.  In  addition,  the  measures  adopted  under  the  Financial  Services 
Action Plan (FSAP) have significantly enhanced the integration of the government bond market, and to 
a  lesser  extent  the  corporate  bond  market.  However,  in  the  retail  area,  especially  in  the  banking 
sector, market segmentation remains rather strong. Cross-border loans from euro area banks to the 
private non-financial sector remain below 5% of total loans, and there is persistent dispersion in the 
levels of financial institutions’ interest rates across countries, at least in some instrument categories; in 
this regard, the ECB strongly supports the efforts aimed at creating a Single European Payment Area.  
In  terms  of  economic  structures,  euro  area  countries  show  a  high  degree  of  similarity,  with  well 
diversified  production  and  consumption  structures  that  should  reduce  the  risks  of  asymmetrical 
disturbances.  Financial  structures  are  also  very  homogeneous  across  countries,  implying  that  the 
transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy  can  work  in  a  comparable  and 
predictable way across countries.2 
A  series  of  studies  have  revealed  the  similarity  of  monetary  policy  transmission  channels,  with  the 
interest  rate  channel  playing  the  prominent  role  in  all  countries  and  the  bank  credit  channel  a  less 
predominant  role.3  National  financial  structures,  however,  still  continue  to  exhibit  significant 
differences. For instance, the role of debt securities and shares in financing the private sector and the 
types of vehicles (pension, insurance and mutual funds) used to manage the long-term savings and 
pensions of households are markedly different across countries.  
As a result of the high degree of trade, particularly intra-industry, and financial integration, as well as 
the high degree of convergence of macroeconomic policies in the euro area, the business cycles tend 
to be significantly synchronised. Cross-correlations of business cycles (in particular industrial output) 
have been quite high between the larger euro area countries4 over the past decade, although business 
cycles have also tended to be more synchronised across the world. Moreover, the dispersion of real 
GDP growth rates in the euro area has remained very close to its historical average, suggesting the 
absence  of  any  major  asymmetric  shocks.  As  differences  in  GDP  growth  rates  partly  reflect 
differences in potential growth rates, and consequently differences in the successful implementation of 
structural  reforms,  the  dispersion  also  indicates  the  scope  for  countries  with  low  growth  to  achieve 
higher growth rates. It is important to note that even if there have been no major asymmetric shocks, 
diverging  developments  may  have  arisen  from  the  transmission  of  common  shocks,  implying  that 
adjustment mechanisms, working via external competitiveness or automatic fiscal stabilisers, are still 
necessary.  
For the new Member States, business cycles are less correlated within the group and with the euro 
area, showing also higher output variability. While this partly reflects the profound structural changes 
and reforms that have taken place, it may also reflect the fact that these countries are rather small and 
specialised.  As  trade  integration  and  foreign  direct  investment  flows  into  these  countries  continue, 
there is reason to believe that the level of synchronisation will increase. As a matter of fact, there has 
been a marked increase in investment flows towards the 10 new Member States in recent years.  
Certainly,  the  euro  area  also  lacks  some  properties  that  would  make  countries  and  regions  more 
resistant  to  economic  disturbances  and  improve  performance  in  terms  of  GDP  growth  and 
employment, in particular a high degree of wage and price flexibility and labour market mobility. Some 
have  also  argued  that  the  sustainability  of  EMU  hinges  on  the  existence  of  a  cross-country  fiscal 
transfer mechanism to absorb regional shocks. Most of these issues are not unique to the euro area 
                                                      
1   See A. Atkeson and T. Bayoumi (1993), Do Private Markets Insure Against Regional Shocks in a Common Currency Area? 
Evidence  from  the  US,  Open  Economies  Review  4,  303-324  or  P.  Asdrubali,  B.  E.  Sörensen,  and  O.  Yosha  (1996), 
Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963-1990, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1081-1110. 
2   As illustrated for example in the “Report on financial structures” published by the European Central Bank in 2002 or in the 
“Financial Integration Monitor” published by the European Commission in 2004. 
3   See  I.  Angeloni,  A.  K.  Kashyap  and  B.  Mojon  (2003),  Monetary  policy  transmission  in  the  euro  area,  a  study  by  the 
Eurosystem Monetary Transmission Network. 
4   Correlation  coefficient  of  around  0.9  (based  on  de-trended  GDP  series)  between  Germany,  France  and  Italy  during  the 
period 1993-2003. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 3
but are relevant in a majority of EU countries and I would like to return to them a bit later when the 
discussion turns to challenges for structural policies. 
Specialisation and agglomeration within the euro area 
Having  discussed  the  current  situation  of  the  euro  area  as  an  optimum  currency  area,  it  is  also 
important to discuss where EMU might be heading. The dynamics that have been set in motion are 
indeed likely to lead to further changes and challenges. As we have seen, the Single Market and the 
single  currency  have  mainly  affected  trade  and  financial  integration  through  changes  in  the 
competitive  conditions  of  the  markets.  Easier  market  entry,  reduced  cross-border  transaction  costs 
and  increased  price  transparency  should  increase  the  competitive  pressures,  to  the  benefit  of 
consumers  in  terms  of  greater  product  diversification  and  lower  prices.  In  response  to  this,  the 
strategic  behaviour  of  firms  may  change  and  lead  to  structural  changes  in  terms  of  economies  of 
scale, industry concentration and location. An interesting issue is how European integration will affect 
specialisation and the division of labour between Member States, especially since a higher degree of 
specialisation might imply greater vulnerability to asymmetric shocks.  
In  economic  theory,  two  strands  of  thinking  have  emerged.  The  first,  supported  by  Paul  Krugman 
(1991) and the new economic geography models, suggests that as trade barriers (e.g. transport and 
transaction costs) are reduced, opportunities for economies of scale and specialisation in production 
where countries have a comparative advantage would increase. Consequently, countries’ production 
structures would become less diversified and thus increasingly vulnerable to asymmetric shocks while 
business cycles could become less synchronised. An opposing view, developed by Frankel and Rose 
(1997), states that European integration would instead lead to greater intra-industry trade integration 
and  more  similar  economic  structures  and  business  cycles  through  the  convergence  of  factor 
endowments  and  technology  and  reduced  exchange  rate  variability,  which  tends  to  weaken 
intra-industry  trade.  This  view  even  implies  that  countries  could  satisfy  the  optimum  currency  area 
properties ex post rather than ex ante (the “endogeneity of OCA” argument).  
Although the timespan since the start of the EMU is too short for any strong empirical conclusions, 
evidence  based  on  long-term  trends  of  European  integration  gives  some  support  to  both  views, 
leaving  it  fairly  open  as  to  where  we  might  be  heading.  According  to  an  overview  published  by  the 
European  Commission5,  there  have  so  far  only  been  modest  changes  in  the  pattern  of  industrial 
concentration and geographical specialisation within the euro area.  
While production specialisation has gradually increased since the 1970s, export specialisation appears 
to  have  decreased,  which  could  be  partly  explained  by  the  increased  importance  of  intra-industry 
trade.  Similarly,  a  study  of  sectoral  specialisation  carried  out  by  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks6  in  2004  found  the  production  structure  of  euro  area  countries  to  be  relatively  similar,  more 
homogeneous than in the United States, and relatively stable over time. An overall view of the effects 
of EMU on specialisation is consequently still difficult to obtain.  
A  few  other  developments  could  shed  further  light on  the  issue.  A  host  of  studies  have  highlighted 
agglomeration  or  clustering  effects,  suggesting  that  in  high-value  industries,  an  environment 
generating  positive  externalities,  such  as  dense  networks  of  sub-contractors,  the  presence  of 
competitors  and  informal  links  with  complementary  businesses,  the  supply  of  qualified  labour  and 
investment  capital,  the  proximity  of  research  capacity  and  other  services,  is  increasingly  important. 
Such  agglomeration  of  production  factors  could  indeed  increase  specialisation  and  reduce 
cross-border trade within industries. At the same time, the growing economic role of services, which 
are less prone to specialisation and trade, needs to be taken into account.  
As regards economic efficiency, increased specialisation offers sizeable gains in terms of innovation, 
productivity and higher potential growth rates. These trends are apparent worldwide, as shown by the 
fast  accumulation  of  capital  and  know-how  in  the  new  Member  States  and  similar  developments  in 
Asia. In the EU, the promotion of a knowledge-based economy and the clustering of more diversified 
but  complementary  competencies  could  further  advance  innovation,  agglomeration  effects  and 
economic dynamism.  
                                                      
5   European Commission (2004), “EMU after 5 years: an assessment”. 
6   ECB (2004), “Sectoral specialisation in the EU – a macroeconomic perspective”, Occasional Paper No. 19. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2005
If  Europe  were  to  evolve  gradually  into  more  specialised  regions,  one  could  argue  that  economic 
cycles  and  developments  could  become  more  divergent  across  the  area,  creating  challenges  for 
economic  policies.  However,  increased  specialisation  is  likely  to  operate  at  regional  rather  than 
national level. Consequently, it may pose a challenge for regional policy at national or EU level, rather 
than weighing on the “optimality” of the currency area. Such problems of diversity across regions are 
well  known  in  most  currency  areas.  The  best  model  for  a  dynamic  Europe  may  be  one  of  regional 
diversity,  with  comparative  advantages  determining 
than 
centralisation of capital and labour in only a few areas which would put greater demands on labour 
mobility  and  possibly  lead  to  greater  polarisation  across  regions.  Let  me  now  discuss  some  policy 
implications.  
the  regional  specialisation,  rather 
Implications for monetary and economic policies  
In  Europe,  the  question  as  to  how economic  policies should be conducted  in  a diversified  currency 
area has been at the centre of the policy debate since the launch of the single currency. By entering 
the monetary union, individual countries renounce the possibilities of an independent monetary policy 
and  variations  in  the  nominal  exchange  rates  within  the  area.  This  affects  the  ability  of  individual 
members  to  respond  to  economic  shocks  that  are  specific  to  individual  countries  or  regions  or  that 
result in diverging developments. What can then the single monetary policy and economic policies do 
to avoid the risks of shocks that give rise to diverging developments?  
Monetary policy  
The  ECB/Eurosystem  has  a  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Our 
monetary policy focuses on this overriding objective, thus providing a nominal anchor to the euro area 
economy.  All  our  internal  work,  our  analysis  and  assessment  of  economic  information,  our  policy 
discussions and policy decisions are clearly directed at this aim. I am deeply convinced that this is the 
best contribution that monetary policy can give to the welfare of the euro area. Attributing additional 
roles  to  monetary  policy,  such  as  that  of  directly  aiming  to  reduce  divergences  across  sectors  or 
regions in the euro area, would overburden monetary policy with objectives that it cannot deliver and 
to the detriment of its primary role.  
Having said that, does this mean that we ignore sectoral, regional or country-specific information? Not 
necessarily.  First,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  devote  a  large  effort  in  gathering  and  analysing 
disaggregated evidence, and we intend to do this even more in the future. But, I should stress that our 
efforts in this regard are made with the clear idea that such disaggregated analysis helps us to have a 
better understanding of the aggregate area-wide picture, taking into account all the complex linkages 
between the euro area regions and countries. To the extent that price formation processes might be 
different  across  economies,  it  is  useful  for  monetary  policy  to  consider  the  size,  persistence  and 
determinants of inflation differentials when assessing the area-wide inflation dynamics. Furthermore, in 
our communication with the public, the explanations of the monetary policy decisions are framed in 
terms of the area-wide assessment. We see this practice not only to be in line with our mandate but 
also instrumental in fostering public awareness of the euro area as a new entity.  
Second, as part of the evaluation of our monetary policy strategy in May 2003, the ECB also took into 
consideration the implications of persistent inflation differentials across countries when reviewing the 
area-wide inflation objective. From the analysis of the available evidence in this regard, we concluded 
that  our  aim  of  maintaining  the  euro  area  inflation  rate  below,  and  close  to  2%  also  provides  a 
sufficient  safety  margin  for  avoiding  that  individual  countries  might  have  to  structurally  operate  at 
negative  inflation  rates.  Finally,  the  ECB  pursues  its  objective  with  a  medium-term  orientation.  This 
means  that  we  can  tailor  our  monetary  policy  response  by  taking  into  account  the  nature  and  the 
persistence of economic shocks, and ensures flexibility for individual economies or sectors to adjust 
gradually also in the face of asymmetric shocks.  
Fiscal policies  
In EMU, fiscal policy is potentially useful in responding to economic fluctuations, as it is an instrument 
in the hands of the national governments and thus can be tailored to macroeconomic developments 
that  are  specific  to  the  country.  However,  given  the  considerable  time  lags,  discretionary  fiscal 
measures are not well suited to fine-tuning in the short run. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 5
The free operation of automatic stabilisers can help to cushion economic upswings and downturns. In 
this  way,  government  spending  and  revenues  can  absorb  part  of  the  deviation  from  the  structural 
economic growth path. Creating the conditions for an appropriate play of automatic stabilisers was one 
of the considerations in drawing up the Stability and Growth Pact. If governments, on average, have a 
budgetary  position  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  over  the  business  cycle,  this  normally  should 
authorise to let automatic stabilisers operate without the deficit exceeding the 3% of GDP reference 
value.  Consequently,  concerns  about  fiscal  stabilisation  are  combined  with  the  need  for  fiscal 
sustainability.  
On the other hand, if the fiscal starting position is not particularly solid when an economic downturn 
sets in, there may come a point where budget deficits become excessive. In such cases, automatic 
stabilisers  can  no  longer  operate  without  creating  problems  of  sustainability,  and  undermining 
confidence in the longer-term soundness of public finances with an immediate negative effect on the 
behaviour of all economic agents.  
This  is why  the  ECB  and its  Governing  Council  have  the same analysis since  the beginning  of  the 
discussions on the Stability and Growth Pact. Namely, strongly recommending to preserve the integrity 
of the corrective arm of the Pact, with the nominal anchor of 3% and the excessive deficit procedure, 
and to improve and make more effective the preventive arm of the Pact. 
Structural policies  
Turning  now  to  structural  policies,  in  my  opinion,  they  contain  the  most  powerful  policy  tools  for 
addressing  and  preventing  problems  that  may  arise  in  a  currency  area,  as  well  as  in  individual 
countries  and  regions.  Why?  Because  they  can  influence  the  speed  with  which  market  forces  can 
operate and provide lasting adjustment after an economic shock. In this regard, two mechanisms are 
particularly relevant to the euro area economy; the mobility of factors of production and the flexibility of 
price  and  wage  setting.  Either  of  these  mechanisms  would  need  to  react  in  order  to  achieve  a 
sustainable adjustment to economic disturbances.  
I have already discussed the striking feature of financial integration in the euro area, where there is a 
continuous increase in cross-border financial and capital flows. This creates an increasingly effective 
risk-sharing mechanism against regional divergences in the euro area over time. The labour factor, on 
the  other  hand,  shows  little  mobility  across  border  and  regions,  either  because  of  institutional  and 
administrative  factors  or  because  of  flawed  price  signals,  or  both,  thereby  negatively  affecting  an 
efficient allocation of productive resources.  
In  the  labour  markets,  governments  and  social  partners  face  major  challenges  in  finding  the  right 
balance  between  social  considerations  and  individual  incentives  that  maximise  economic  welfare. 
Areas of particular interest are, for example, the social transfer systems, employment protection laws 
and  the  wage  setting  mechanisms,  including  wage  indexation.  Equally  important  are  policies 
supporting the creation of new businesses and housing policies that do not hinder labour mobility, e.g. 
through rent subsidies or high transaction costs. In most countries, there has been some progress with 
labour market reform over the past decade, leading to a small reduction in structural unemployment. 
Nevertheless,  labour  market  flexibility  needs  to  be  enhanced  further,  especially  in  view  of  the  large 
number of people who are wastefully underemployed or unemployed in Europe, resulting in individual 
difficulties and welfare losses to society.  
In the goods and services markets, further steps in reforming and liberalising markets would improve 
the  efficiency  of  price  signals,  resulting  in  reduced  inflation  persistence  and  a  speedier  adjustment 
mechanism to shocks. Services markets in the euro area hold a particularly great potential to benefit 
from greater cross-border competition, especially as this sector is likely to have a sizeable impact on 
employment given its high labour content.  
That is why the Eurosystem strongly supports the Lisbon process and shares the views expressed by 
the former Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok in his recent mid-term assessment of the Lisbon agenda.  
Concluding remarks  
Let me now briefly say a few words in conclusion, 
• 
In terms of macroeconomic stability, the euro area and the new enlarged EU are committed 
to a stability-oriented framework that provides the best conditions for sustainable economic 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2005
   growth  and  employment.  The  results  of  the  euro  area  in  terms  of  nominal  and  real 
convergence are impressive and compares well to the criteria for an optimum currency area. 
The euro has played an important role in these achievements and will continue to do so.  
In terms of what may lie ahead, a process of change has been set in motion. The internal 
market and the single currency, combined with structural changes in the world economy, are 
changing economic conditions at a rapid pace. Ultimately, this may lead to a higher degree 
of  economic  diversity  and  regional  specialisation,  which,  provided  that  it  is  led  by  market 
forces, should enhance the economic welfare of the area as a whole. Issues related to the 
redistribution  between  more  advanced  and  lagging  regions  may  pose  a  challenge  for 
regional policies at national and EU level.  
Automatic fiscal stabilisers can contribute to economic stability via their smoothing impact on 
aggregate demand. Given the lack of a cross-border central fiscal transfer mechanism, it is 
vital that these stabilisers are able to operate freely. This calls for renewed efforts to return to 
sound fiscal positions, as those we saw in the run-up to Monetary Union.  
In  terms  of  structural  policies,  measures  have  been  taken  in  the  euro  area  countries  to 
increase  the  flexibility  of  labour  and  product  markets,  with  positive  results  and  further 
benefits  to  come.  While  sometimes  implying  short-term  costs  from  uncertainty,  especially 
when the measures are not implemented in a resolute fashion, in a longer perspective, the 
positive  impact  of  well-designed  structural  reforms  on  growth  and  on  job  creation  is  very 
significant.  A  resolute  pursuit  of  the  implementation  of  these  reforms  is  desirable  and  the 
mid-term  review  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  offers  an  important  opportunity  for  stepping  up  the 
pace of reform. While boosting the growth potential and employment, which is badly needed 
in  many  countries,  more  flexible  economies  would  also  accelerate  the  adjustment 
mechanisms  to  shocks,  thereby  increasing  the  resilience  to  economic  shocks  of  the  euro 
area  as  a  whole.  In  the  present  global  economic  environment,  marked  by  a  significant 
acceleration of the pace of structural changes, this resilience is more important than ever. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 7
