Y V Reddy: The roadmap for fixed income and derivatives markets 
Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Fixed Income and 
Money Market & Derivatives Association of Indian and Primary Dealers Association of India, Mumbai, 
11 March 2005. 
 Friends,  
I am thankful to the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and 
Primary  Dealers  Association  of  India  (PDAI),  the  organisers,  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  keynote 
address today.   I have had the pleasure of being closely associated with FIMMDA and PDAI since 
their  inception.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  taking  active  interest  in  the  development  of  fixed 
income  markets  and  the  role  of  FIMMDA  is  becoming  increasingly  important  in  this  regard.  It  has 
played a  pivotal  role  in  the  design  of  documentation  of  repos, Commercial  Paper  and Certificate  of 
Deposits,  finalising  the  daily/annual  valuation  methodology  for  fixed  income  securities.  RBI 
consistently  seeks  its  views  on  various  G-Sec  market  related  issues.    It  is  also  involved  in 
standardisation of market practices for fixed income securities/money market instruments/fixed income 
derivatives.  It  has  been  emphasising  the  importance  of  best  practices  in  the  OTC  interest  rate 
derivatives  market  and  has  circulated  a  Guidance  Note  for  Best  Practices  to  its  members  in  this 
regard. We, in the RBI, understand the need for continued collaborative relationship with FIMMDA and 
PDAI. It is in this spirit that I look forward to the deliberations today in the sixth Annual Conference 
being organised jointly by FIMMDA and PDAI.    
I am somewhat reluctant to elaborate on the subject of the day, namely, the road map of fixed income 
and  derivatives  market,  in  my  keynote  address  for  several  reasons.  My  views  in  this  regard  were 
articulated  in  a  seminar  and  then  published  in  a  BIS  paper  titled  “Issues  and  challenges  in  the 
development  of  the  debt  market  in  India”.    The  subject  was  subsequently  updated,  elaborated  and 
improved  upon  comprehensively  by  my  friend  and  former  colleague  Dr.Rakesh  Mohan,  when  he 
addressed  this  gathering  last  year  in  Dubai.    Dr.  Mohan  has  already  indicated  the  “Road  Ahead”, 
which I fully endorse.  Moreover, one should wait for free and frank discussion on the subject in this 
conference, in which distinguished persons with several perspectives are participating.   Let me assure 
you that we in RBI do look forward to the deliberations of this conference and  the suggestions made 
will be, to the  extent  possible, examined by the various Technical Groups in the RBI that have been 
set up recently.  It is our intention to place the reports of the Groups on Money Market, Government 
Securities Market and Forex Market in the public domain soon.  Hence, the subject of the Sixth Annual 
Conference is both well-timed and significant for us. 
To justify my presence here, let me take this opportunity to mention some of the recent developments 
which should be kept in view in the deliberations of the conference.  
First,  under  the  provisions  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Act,  2003,  the 
Reserve  Bank  will  not  be  participating,  in  the  normal  circumstances,  in  the  primary  market  for  the 
government securities from the start of 2006-07.   The Technical Group that I referred to is currently 
working  on  the  operational,  technological  and  institutional  aspects  of  this.    Hence,  the  market 
perspectives on the implications of this development can best be articulated in the conference today.    
Second, the Twelfth Finance Commission has made certain recommendations which would mean that 
the State Governments would approach the market instead of obtaining loans from the Government of 
India.      Several  operational  and  other  issues  will  have  to  be  addressed  in  the  management  of  the 
borrowing programme of the State Governments, in future.  We are convening a Conference of the 
State Finance Secretaries on 8th April 2005, which will be addressed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, Chairman, 
Economic  Advisory  Council  to  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  former  Chairman,  Twelfth  Finance 
Commission, to discuss these issues. The road map that this Conference would indicate in this regard 
will be helpful for our discussions and further policy formulation in regard to debt-papers of the State 
Governments.  
Third,  the  Central  Government  budget  has  proposed  a  Special  Purpose  Vehicle  (SPV)  for  raising 
resources for investment in infrastructure.  The issuance of debt-paper with relatively longer maturity, 
outside  the  Government  of  India’s  normal  borrowing  programme,  is  yet  another  recent  dimension 
added to the debt-market developments in the country.       
BIS Review 17/2005 
 1
Finally, several legislative changes on the anvil provide new opportunities for further development of 
fixed income markets. For example, the long awaited Government Securities Bill is at an advanced 
stage  of  processing.  The  Finance  Minister,  in  his  budget  speech,  announced  the  intention  of  the 
Government  to  bring  about  amendments  to  the  RBI  Act  and  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  and  the 
amendments relating to statutory pre-emptions could have implications for fixed income markets. 
In this context, it is useful to recognise that the stake of the RBI in the fixed income and derivatives 
market arises on account of several reasons. First, RBI as a monetary authority is most concerned 
with the transmission of monetary policy. Second, it must be recognised that in the Indian conditions, 
we are neither a closed economy nor an open economy. In reality, we are an opening economy and a 
careful management of the process of opening is critical for growth and stability. Third, for the Reserve 
Bank of India, as the central bank, financial stability is one of the increasingly important considerations 
and an important subset of the financial stability is determined by the stability in the external sector. 
Fourth, government securities market, which is currently the dominant segment of the fixed income 
markets, is also a legitimate concern for the Central Bank, since it provides the benchmark interest 
rates. The government securities market, in our setting, has policy signalling although the rates are 
largely market determined. Fifth, the Reserve Bank of India is a regulator of the banks and also of the 
primary  dealers,  which  together  constitute  large  holders  of  Government  papers.  Hence,  there  is  a 
significant linkage between RBI’s prudential regulations and the fixed income markets. Finally, in an 
economy like ours which is attempting structural transformation, RBI has to have a developmental role 
also,  apart  from  being  a  regulator  of  money  markets,  Government  securities  markets  and  forex 
markets.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  goes  into  close  interactive  mode  with 
organisations like FIMMDA and PDAI. 
RBI’s  developmental  role  in  the  context  of  Self  Regulatory  Organisations  (SROs),  is  perhaps  worth 
exploring at some length. A good beginning may be the Report of the Advisory Group on Securities 
Market Regulation,  2001 (Chairman:  Shri Deepak  Parekh) which  made  certain  observations  on  self 
regulation by the SROs and the RBI. The relevant extract from Section 2.4 reads as follows:  
“Further, the slow evolution of the Association of Mutual Funds of India (AMFI) as a SRO has meant 
continuation of substantial regulatory burden on SEBI. In this regard, the Group suggests that SEBI 
assist  the  AMFI  to  develop  into  a  full-fledged  SRO.  Similarly,  in  money  and  government  securities 
markets,  Fixed  Income  Money  Market  and  Derivatives  Association  of  India  (FIMMDA)  and  Primary 
Dealers  Association  of  India  (PDAI)  are  operating  as  industry  level  associations,  who  are  gradually 
taking on the role of SROs. There is as yet no regulatory oversight of the RBI over these emerging 
SROs. However, to facilitate these associations to emerge as full-fledged SROs, the RBI is engaging 
them in a consultative process, which needs to be further intensified. On their part, to promote integrity 
of  the  markets,  FIMMDA  and  PDAI  need  to  establish  a  comprehensive  code  of  conduct  and  best 
practices in securities transactions and also have a mechanism to enforce such codes. The RBI can 
play a supportive role here”.  
There has been a recent review (December 2004) of the recommendations of the Advisory Groups 
constituted by the Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes published in 
January 2005 RBI Bulletin. An extract from this “Report on the Progress and Agenda Ahead” is useful, 
though,  as  the  disclaimer  says,  it  is  an  assessment  by  the  professional  staff  of  the  RBI  and  not 
necessarily the view of the Reserve Bank:  
“The proposal to accord legal status as an SRO to FIMMDA has been examined in detail by RBI and 
was  not  found  feasible  at  present.  However,  FIMMDA  has  established  a  code  of  conduct  and 
undertaken related responsibilities appropriate to an industrial body. According self-regulatory status 
to PDAI is a non-issue since all PDAI members are also members of FIMMDA”.  
There are several concepts which are addressed in the Reports cited, in particular, `industry body’; 
`Self  Regulatory  Organisation’  and  `legal  status  as  SRO’.  There  is  considerable  merit  in  debating 
these  concepts  and  their  relevance  to  FIMMDA,  keeping  in  view  the  way  forward  that  is  being 
contemplated in the conference today.  
Self-regulation has a long history of working effectively. Some of the earliest signs of self-regulation 
were evident in the utterance of the Hippocratic oath by the medical professionals at the time of their 
graduation. Almost a thousand years ago, Maghribi traders had probably one of the first self-regulatory 
schemes based on market incentives for regulating their trade. The Maghribi were Jewish traders who 
lived in the Abbasasid caliphate (centered in Baghdad) until the first half of the tenth century, when 
they emigrated to North Africa. They operated through business associates to handle some of their 
business dealings abroad. Merchants could never be sure that agents actually handed over the entire 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2005
proceeds  of  business  done  abroad  on  their  behalf.  Courts  were  generally  unable  to  verify  agents’ 
claims and actions or track down an agent who absconded with the merchant’s money. The Maghribi 
traders solved the problem by organizing themselves into a coalition that served as a grapevine for 
information on honest and dishonest agents. Any agents who treated a member unfairly could never 
hope to do business again with other members. In Europe, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, as 
more and more rural folk moved to towns and cities, a new class of merchants emerged to meet the 
demands  of  the  growing  urban  population.  It  was  during  this  period  that  the  basic  concepts  and 
institutions of modern Western mercantile law (lex mercatoria) were formed.  
The self-regulation has evolved significantly since then and linkages with regulatory authorities, often 
on  a  sound  legal  basis,  were  established  mainly  in  the  financial  sector.  Self-regulation  generally 
imposes lower cost than official regulation whenever a shift is feasible. SROs possess the flexibility to 
adapt to regulatory requirements of rapidly changing business environment. They provide an intimate 
knowledge  of  the  markets  and  products.  Self-regulation,  typically  involving  a  unique  combination  of 
private interests with government or regulatory oversight over them, is an effective and efficient form of 
regulation  for  the  complex,  dynamic  and  ever-changing  financial  services  industry.  The  role  of  self-
regulation and, indeed, its very existence, differs from country to country, across market sectors and 
across the developed and emerging markets. In its most complete form, self-regulation encompasses 
the  authority  to  create,  amend,  implement  and  enforce  rules  of  conduct  with  respect  to  the  entities 
subject to the SRO’s jurisdiction, and to resolve disputes through arbitration or other means.  
The  advantages  of  self-regulation  are  very  clear,  especially  in  terms  of  minimising  the  cost  of 
regulation as well as cost of compliance of regulation in the financial sector, while improving the quality 
of regulation. However, there are a number of issues particularly in the financial sector which are often 
cited.  For  instance,  there  is  a  well-known  observation  about  the  “regulatory  capture”,  that  is,  the 
regulated entities, in the organised form, have a tendency to capture the regulator to protect their own 
interests. It is also argued that the SROs protect the interests of the members if they are in conflict 
with interests of the system. In this regard, I find that the model for effective regulation, brought out in 
the  Report  of  the  SRO  Consultative  Committee  of  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions in May 2000, is useful. Perhaps these issues will also be addressed in this Conference 
as part of the way forward. 
Let me again thank the organisers for giving me this opportunity and wish the Conference all success.  
BIS Review 17/2005 
 3
