Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening the banking sector for further competition  
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the dialogue 
session with banking institutions, Kuala Lumpur, 17 February 2005. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirahim  
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Economic  transformation,  a  more  competitive  environment,  advances  in  technology,  strengthening 
international  linkages,  and  more  discerning  customers  will  be  the  important  forces  that  will  drive 
changes  in  the  domestic  financial  landscape  in  the  years  ahead.  Economic  transformation  can  be 
expected to be more pronounced as efforts intensify to shift resources to new areas of growth. A more 
competitive environment will emerge from increased deregulation and further liberalisation. Advances 
in  technology  will  continue  to  increase  the  potential  for  creating  new  instruments,  new  business 
processes and enhance the ability to measure and manage risks. Strengthening international linkages 
will  come  as  foreign  presence  and  participation  in  the  domestic  financial  system  increases  and  as 
initiatives are taken by domestic groups to operate beyond domestic borders. Against this background, 
more demanding customers with higher expectations will see greater consumer activism exerting their 
influence on the financial landscape. These developments will indeed present a dynamic environment 
with new challenges for the banking industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the dialogue session between Bank Negara Malaysia and banking 
industry.  This  dialogue  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  the  industry  to  discuss  with  the  Central  Bank 
these  developments  and  their  implications,  important  issues  that  have  emerged  and  the  Central 
Bank's  policy  initiatives.  As  the  year  2005  unfolds,  it  is  important  for  us  to  reflect  on  our  progress 
achieved,  the  new  challenges  that  have  emerged  and  the  actions  that  need  to  be  taken  to  drive 
performance  in  the  period  ahead.  The  banking  system  in  Malaysia  today  is  vibrant,  strong  and 
profitable. In fact, the banking system is at its strongest position since the financial crisis. The high 
level of capital, improving asset quality and strong profitability have also been reinforced by substantial 
enhancements  in  the  areas  of  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  standards.  Large 
investment  has  also  been  made  to  strengthen  internal  systems  and  processes,  to  improve  delivery 
channels  and  to  acquire  talent.  Cumulatively,  these  enhancements  have  enabled  the  banking 
institutions,  particularly  the  domestic  banking  institutions,  to  remain  competitive  and  to  offer 
differentiated products and value-added services. Undoubtedly, the competitive environment has also 
driven domestic banking institutions to strive for greater efficiency as well as to venture into new areas 
of  businesses,  tapping  new  sources  of  income  and  entering  into  alliances  with  regional  banking 
institutions.  
Most of all, these advancements have enabled the banking institutions to assume an important role in 
facilitating the increased role of the private sector in the economic growth process.  
The foundations for strong performance have now been well established for the domestic banks. As 
we  advance  into  the  second  phase  of  our  Financial  Sector  Masterplan,  the  policy  of  gradually 
deregulating and liberalising the banking system will be complemented with the objectives of bringing 
increased  benefits  to  the  overall  economy.  While  foreign  banks  will  benefit  from  this  process,  it 
becomes equally important that there is reciprocity in the relationship. It is acknowledged that foreign 
banks  have  contributed  to  the  development  and  vibrancy  of  our  financial  sector.  They  have  made 
large capital investments and facilitated transfer of skills and technology to Malaysia. But the foreign 
banks  have  in  turn  benefited  and  flourished  in  the  stable  economic  environment  and  significant 
economic  growth  Malaysia  has  achieved.  Therefore,  while  greater  operational  flexibility  will  be 
accorded  to  the  existing  foreign  banks  so  that  they  can  better  serve  the  needs  of  the  growing 
economy, foreign banks will also need to become more integrated into the domestic economy. This 
includes ensuring affordable access to banking products and services by all segments of the society 
and not to focus only on specific locations. Therefore, the potential to establish additional branches will 
be balanced with the requirement to distribute the branch network to include non-urban areas. While 
the  focus  of  foreign  banks  have  been  for  the  most  part  in  urban  areas,  it  should  be  noted  that  the 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
record has shown that domestic banking institutions with large presence in the non-urban areas have 
been among those institutions that have sustained strong performance.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The economic prospects for 2005 will continue to be favourable. Despite some signs of slower global 
growth,  this  has  not  become  a  cause  for  concern  as  the  underlying  conditions  in  the  global 
environment continue to remain supportive of growth. Positive developments are that income growth 
and job creation in the world's largest economy, the United States, has improved while growth in the 
Asian region also continues to be strong and mutually reinforcing. Despite higher commodity prices, 
inflationary pressures in the major economies remain moderate. While some countries have begun to 
raise interest rates, the environment has allowed the upward adjustments to be gradual and supportive 
of  growth.  Therefore,  although  the  pace  of  world  growth  may  moderate,  global  growth  in  2005  will 
remain strong.  
The current global environment is however, affected by uncertainty arising from the global imbalances. 
The United States continues to record large deficits in the current and fiscal accounts. There has been 
extensive discussion by the global community on the nature of the adjustment that should take place. 
Currently, the discussion on the measures to address the existing imbalances appears to be skewed 
toward pressures for a realignment of exchange rates. Ultimately, these structural imbalances would 
have to be addressed by the countries where these imbalances exist. Exchange rates may be part of 
the  solution  but  even  so,  they  are  only  a  small  part  of  the  solution.  The  issue  of  competitiveness 
however,  requires  more  than  just  adjustments  in  exchange  rates.  It  requires  fundamental  structural 
changes in the countries concerned. The appreciation of regional currencies is not likely to eliminate 
these imbalances. In fact, excessive focus on the exchange rates as corrective mechanisms for these 
imbalances  has  led  to  speculative  capital  inflows  into  Asian  economies.  This  has  required  policy 
makers to intervene to avoid a sharp appreciation of their currencies, thus accumulating large reserve 
holdings. Clearly, at best, exchange rates offer only a partial solution and excessive focus on this area 
could in fact be counter productive. It risks sharp movements in exchange rates which at the extreme 
would be highly destabilising to the global currency, capital and commodity markets.  
The long-term solution would be for the US to increase its savings and moderate its import demand 
and for the rest of the world to increase its demand and imports. Such a transformation will eventually 
occur but it is unlikely to occur overnight. In the transition there could be some economic dislocation. 
However,  with  its  young  workforce  and  with  the  growing  productivity,  competitive  and  dynamic 
economies,  there  is  great  potential  for  the  Asian  economies  to  become  the  growth  dynamo  for  the 
region and the world. With rising income levels in regional economies, particularly among the growing 
middle  income  group  in  China,  India  and  the  ASEAN  economies,  there  is  potential  for  an  intrinsic 
source  of  demand  within  the  region.  This  rebalancing  of  demand  across  the  world  will  eventually 
reduce the prevailing imbalances.  
In 2004, the Malaysian economy experienced strong growth. Going forward, the economy will continue 
to  be  well  supported  by  both  domestic  and  external  demand.  The  strength  of  domestic  demand,  in 
particular,  private  expenditure,  together  with  sustained  exports,  is  expected  to  continue  to  support 
growth in 2005. This will be reinforced by sound domestic economic fundamentals as well as strong 
corporate  and  financial  sectors.  Private  investment  is  likely  to  remain  on  an  upward  trend  as 
companies  upgrade  facilities  and  install  new  capacity  in  response  to  strong  domestic  and  external 
demand.  The  strength  of  the  economy,  the  highly  diversified  economic  structure  and  the  strong 
fundamentals  increase  Malaysia's  potential  to  absorb  and  respond  to  the  challenging  external 
environment.  
Bank Negara's monetary policy has played a supportive role to the economy throughout 2004. Going 
forward, this stance will be maintained. Inflation has risen from the earlier low levels but it is expected 
to remain relatively low in 2005 despite the US dollar depreciation and the higher international price of 
oil. Temporary increases in the inflation rate caused by one-off supply shocks or price adjustments do 
not warrant a monetary policy response. The focus of monetary policy is to continue to support further 
expansion in business investment activity to enhance the long-term growth potential of the Malaysian 
economy. During 2004, Bank Negara Malaysia also implemented a number of measures to enhance 
the operational efficiency and transparency of its monetary policy. In particular, almost one year after 
its  introduction,  the  new  interest  rate  framework  is  operating  well,  with  the  Overnight  Policy  Rate 
providing  the  signal  to  the  market  on  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Combined  with  the  quarterly 
Monetary Policy Statement issued by the Central Bank, the market is provided with regular information 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
on current and expected monetary conditions. The deregulation of pricing under the new interest rate 
framework has also acted as a catalyst for more efficient pricing in the financial system.  
Against  volatile  world  currency  markets,  the  pegged  exchange  rate  regime  continues  to  accord 
significant  benefits  to  the  Malaysian  economy  by  providing  greater  predictability  and  stability  for 
international  trade  and  investment.  From  time  to  time,  isolated  developments  or  rumours  have 
prompted market speculation on the need to review the pegged exchange rate. Bank Negara Malaysia 
has consistently maintained that the exchange rate regime would not be reviewed unless the Ringgit is 
expected  to  be  fundamentally  misaligned  or  if  the  regime  is  no  longer  consistent  with  economic 
fundamentals  arising  from  major  structural  changes  within  the  international  and  regional  financial 
systems.  It  should  be  noted  that  while  the  Ringgit  has  declined  with  the  US  dollar,  its  depreciation 
against Malaysia's trading partners' currencies as a group has been relatively small. Given the small 
degree of undervaluation, the inflation pass-through arising from the weakness in the US dollar is also 
likely  to  be  small,  and  consequently,  the  potential  for  misalignment  is  correspondingly  small. 
Therefore, the peg exchange rate regime remains fundamentally sound and we expect that it would 
continue to serve the economy well. Any change in the exchange rate regime would be on the basis of 
longer-term structural considerations and not on account of short-term movements in capital flows and 
transient shifts in exchange rate expectations.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In  spearheading  the  development  of  the  financial  sector,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  objective  is  to 
develop a dynamic, competitive and resilient financial sector. In the year 2005, focus will be accorded 
to strengthen the effectiveness of the banking sector in meeting the new requirements of the economy, 
enhance  competition  and  hence  efficiency  and  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  for  consumer 
protection. These initiatives would be taken in the context of preserving the soundness and stability of 
the financial system.  
An  important  component  of  a  strong  financial  sector  is  the  institution  of  a  robust  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework.  Two  main  principles  will  be  taken  into  consideration  in  the  formulation  and 
implementation  of  prudential  policies.  First,  is  the  creation  of  a  regulatory  environment  that  fosters 
innovation and competition, while promoting best practices to preserve financial stability. Policies will 
therefore  balance  the  need  to  attain  efficiency  whilst  preserving  stability.  Second,  regulations  will 
increasingly  be  "principle-based".  Regulations  will  focus  on  identifying  parameters  within  which 
banking institutions must operate, whilst retaining sufficient flexibility to allow institutions to determine 
their  own  individual  strategies  and  approaches  within  these  parameters.  This  is  in  the  light  of  the 
improved corporate governance and risk management practices within banking institutions. The Board 
and management will be accountable for strengthening individual institutions.  
The  success  of  the  principle-based  approach  to  regulation  will  depend  on  the  ability  of  banking 
institutions,  individually  and  collectively  as  an  industry,  to  make  use  of  the  flexibilities  given  without 
giving rise to excessive risk taking, overpricing, credit rationing and other actions that could threaten 
stability in the financial system and overall economic well-being of the nation. The key is for banking 
institutions  to  act  responsibly,  as  the  actions  of  banking  institutions  would  have  implications  on  all 
segments of the economy. Due attention must be given to ensure that all segments of the society have 
access to banking services at reasonable cost and no groups should be marginalised in this process. 
In this respect, while we advocate a principle-based regulatory framework, Bank Negara Malaysia will 
closely monitor the performance and actions of banking institutions, and would intervene and prescribe 
specific regulations in the event that actions by banking institutions could jeopardise financial stability 
and public confidence in the financial system.  
As  a  custodian  of  public  funds,  and  as  a  service-oriented  industry,  the  banking  sector  must 
continuously strive to maintain public confidence in the system and deliver high standards of services. 
Maintaining public confidence entails efforts beyond maintaining strong financial results and having a 
wide range of products and services for customers. As customers become more financially savvy and 
better  informed  of  their  rights,  the  conduct  and  practices  of  banking  institutions  will  increasingly  be 
scrutinised by the public. Fraud, unethical practices, and monopolistic and unfair practices would, if left 
unchecked, adversely affect public opinion and confidence in the banking system, with consequences 
on the financial performance of individual institutions. Indeed, in order to preserve corporate reputation 
and sustain public confidence, banking institutions must be sensitive to the impact of their policies and 
practices on their customers and other stakeholders. It is, therefore, in the interest of the industry to 
collectively ensure that public confidence in the system is maintained at all times.  
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  recent  issue  on  the  fees  and  charges  imposed  by  the  banking  institutions  received  significant 
attention by the public. Bank Negara Malaysia's policy has been to gradually deregulate the rules on 
fees  and  charges,  as  a  way  to  drive  improvement  in  the  performance  of  banking  institutions  and 
promote innovation. Nevertheless, the flexibility given needs to be judiciously enforced so as not to 
result in any erosion of public confidence in the banking sector. To protect consumer interest, Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  will  balance  the  competing  expectations  of  banking  institutions  and  consumers. 
While  it  is  recognised  that  enhancements  to  products  and  delivery  channels  involve  substantial 
investments, any realignment to the pricing structures on products and services need to be supported 
by the adequate costing and justification that also takes into account cost savings. More importantly, it 
must be accompanied by improvements in service quality.  
While Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to strengthen the consumer protection framework through 
enhanced  disclosure  standards,  effective  dispute  resolution  mechanisms,  and  promotion  of  fair 
practices,  banking  institutions  must  also  play  their  role.  An  important  aspect  is  to  ensure  that 
consumers  are  adequately  equipped  with  the  relevant  information  to  minimise  the  risks  of  poor 
financial decisions and their consequences. Market practices and disclosure standards must be fair 
and  comprehensive  so  as  to  ensure  that  consumers  are  treated  equitably  and  have  access  to 
adequate and timely information to facilitate effective decision-making.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In  this  recent  year,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  put  in  place  two  important  infrastructures  within  the 
banking  sector,  the  first  being  the  framework  for  the  establishment  of  Islamic  subsidiaries,  and 
secondly, the merger of commercial banks and finance companies within the same banking groups. 
These frameworks have paved the way for banking institutions to further rationalise their operations 
and  improve  efficiency.  Both  allow  for  the  operations  to  be  now  undertaken  within  a  new  structure 
where the operations will be able to leverage on the group infrastructure, including the branch network 
and  the  support  functions,  to  maximise  cost  efficiency  and  reap  the  benefits  of  group  synergies.  A 
number  of  banking  institutions  have  already  capitalised  on  the  opportunities  provided  by  these 
frameworks.  
Going forward in 2005, Bank Negara Malaysia will finalise a number of key regulations for the banking 
system.  These  regulations  will  focus  on  enhancing  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  overall  oversight  on 
banking institutions, whilst according greater flexibility for the Boards and management of the banking 
institutions to chart business strategies within the parameters set by the regulations.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In  an  environment  where  group  structures  are  becoming  more  complex,  prudential  regulation  and 
surveillance over diversified financial conglomerates will be further strengthened. In this regard, Bank 
Negara Malaysia will finalise the Framework for Consolidated Supervision of Financial Conglomerates 
in 2005. The first Concept Paper that was issued in December 2003 has received positive feedback 
from  the  industry.  On  the  group  structure,  there  has  been  wide  acceptance  of  the  proposal  for  all 
financial  groups  to  be  headed  by  financial  holding  companies.  The  essence  of  having  the  financial 
holding  company  is  to  allow  banking  institutions  within  the  financial  group  to  rely  on  the  holding 
company as a source of financial strength. Flexibility will, however, be given for commercial banks to 
remain at the apex of the financial groups. Nevertheless, safeguards will be introduced to ensure that 
the commercial banks exhibit higher standards of risk management practices and oversight to manage 
the higher risks arising from such structures.  
A  further  issue  is  the  scope  and  nature  of  activities  that  would  be  permissible  within  the  financial 
holding company structure. The principle for defining financial activities or activities that are incidental 
to financial activities will be clearly outlined to facilitate any likely restructuring that will be required as a 
result  of  the  new  policy.  Work  is  also  ongoing  to  define  the  appropriate  corporate  governance  and 
prudential  standards  to  be  applied  at  the  financial  holding  company  level.  With  regard  to  capital 
requirements, whether there should be a standard capital rule for all financial holding companies is 
currently being reviewed. The more important consideration is to minimise excessive leveraging and 
ensure that the financial holding company has the necessary infrastructure to have an overall view of 
the risk taking activities within the group.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
4 
 BIS Review 10/2005
It is envisaged that in a more liberalised financial system, market discipline will play a greater role in 
driving  performance  in  banking  institutions.  In  this  regard,  shareholders  are  expected  to  be  more 
involved in overseeing the performance of banking institutions and the effectiveness of the board of 
directors and management. The policy on shareholding will therefore be enhanced to promote greater 
shareholder activism within banking institutions. Shareholders need to be concerned with the practices 
of banking institutions, particularly those which can have adverse implications on depositors' interests 
and on financial stability.  
Similarly, given the increasingly competitive environment, advancement in risk management practices 
and the strengthened corporate governance framework, a more flexible policy framework on lending to 
connected parties will be put in place. However, to prevent abuses of such flexibilities, there will be 
safeguards and conditions that need to be observed by banking institutions.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  adoption  of  a  principle-based  regulatory  approach  will  provide  banking  institutions  with  greater 
flexibility in deciding on strategic options in a more competitive environment. As the banking industry 
grows at an accelerating pace, there are common areas where collective efforts by the industry will not 
only bring benefits to the financial sector but also to the overall economy. In this regard, there is an 
increasing  trend  among  developed  countries  such  as  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada,  and  Australia, 
where  the  bankers  associations  have  an  important  role  in  spearheading  initiatives  to  promote  high 
standards  of  ethical  code  of  market  conduct  to  meet  consumers'  rising  expectations  and  demands. 
The bankers associations have increasingly assumed the role as a focal point for consultation with not 
only  the  regulatory  authorities,  but  also  by  the  other  stakeholders  on  policies  affecting  the  financial 
sector.  In  this  respect,  such  associations  have  played  an  important  complementary  role  to  the 
regulatory authorities' efforts in promoting a more progressive, dynamic and resilient banking system. 
In addition, banking associations in these countries have also acted as the voice for the industry in 
articulating the position of their members to promote the interests of the industry. In Malaysia, there 
are  several  areas  of  common  interest  to  the  industry  which  the  associations  can  spearhead.  It  is, 
therefore, to the benefit of the industry to reassess the role of the associations with respect to taking 
forward common initiatives and interests of the industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Moving forward, consumer and SME financing will continue to be two important areas of growth. The 
overall  macroeconomic  and  interest  rate  environment  would  continue  to  be  supportive  of  growth  in 
these  two  sectors.  The  challenge  for  banking  institutions  is  to  ensure  that  consumers  and  the 
businesses  have  access  to  a  wide  range  of  products,  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring  that  the 
necessary infrastructure is in place to manage risks arising from these businesses. This is to ensure 
that  lending  to  these  sectors  would  be  sustainable  and  avoid  the  risks  that  have  recently  been 
experienced in a number of other countries in this region.  
While  focusing  on  consumer  and  SME  financing,  banking  institutions  should  also  recognise  the 
emergence  of  a  number  of  new  growth  sectors  in  the  economy,  including  activities  in  the  services 
sector, and the agriculture and agro-based industries. These areas represent opportunities that can be 
capitalised  upon  by  the  banking  institutions.  While  these  may  be  viewed  as  non-traditional  areas, 
banking  institutions  that  introduce  new  lending  models  and  products  to  cater  to  the  financial 
requirements of these areas would have the early advantage in capitalising the potential of these new 
markets.  
In this regard, the main theme of this year's dialogue, is "Tapping Opportunities in the New Growth 
Areas  -  Fostering  Best  Lending  Practices",  for  discussion  by  the  banking  community.  We  are  very 
pleased  to  have  four  distinguished  speakers  to  share  with  us  their  expertise  and  experiences  in 
building  successful  and  sustainable  portfolios  in  consumer  lending,  SME  financing,  microcredit  and 
agriculture financing. Following their presentations, there will be break-up sessions in these four areas 
where bankers are encouraged to actively discuss the issues relating to these respective areas. Each 
group will be invited to present the results of their deliberations tomorrow morning. It is hoped that this 
will be a constructive process that will contribute towards elevating the level of performance and value 
added in these areas.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
BIS Review 10/2005 
 5
On this note, I wish you productive discussions this afternoon. I look forward to hear the outcome of 
your deliberations tomorrow morning.  
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS Review 10/2005
