Rafael Buenaventura: Implementation of BSP rules on the transport of 
currencies  
Keynote address by Mr Rafael Buenaventura, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank 
of  the  Philippines),  at  the  BSP  Strategic  Planning  Conference,  Manila,  at  the  signing  of  the 
Memorandum of Agreement for the Effective Implementation of BSP rules on Physical Cross-border 
Transport of Currencies, Manila, 17 January 2005. 
 Good afternoon, friends, ladies and gentlemen.  
I would like to thank the agencies represented here for their full cooperation in the preparation of the 
Memorandum  of  Agreement  (MOA)  for  the  effective  implementation  of  BSP  rules  on  the  physical 
cross-border transport of currencies, which will be signed today. We know that, each agency has more 
than  enough  work  in  its  hands,  and  therefore,  it  is  not  easy  to  define  and  accept  additional 
responsibilities, as would be the case in this MOA. I also want to thank the following signatories to this 
MOA who have taken time off from their busy schedules for this signing ceremony: 
1. Bureau of Customs 
Commissioner George M. Jereos,  
2. Manila International Airport Authority 
General Manager Alfonso G. Cusi,  
3. Philippine National Police Director 
General Edgar B. Aglipay,  
4. Bureau of Immigration 
Commissioner Alipio F. Fernandez  
5. Air Transportation Office 
Executive Director Helen N. Camua, and  
6. Philippine Ports Authority 
General Manager Oscar M. Sevilla.  
Of course, I am also a signatory under two hats, as BSP Governor and as Chairman of the Anti-Money 
Laundering Council. 
This  MOA  seeks  to  ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  BSP  rules  on  the  physical  cross-border 
transport of foreign currencies and the Philippine peso (PhP).  
BSP Circular No. 308 dated 15 November 2001, as amended, requires any person who brings in or 
out of the Philippines in excess of US$10,000 or its equivalent to declare the same in writing using the 
prescribed foreign currency declaration form. Other countries such as the United States, South Korea, 
and  Malaysia  broadly  require  similar  customs  procedures  in  the  transport  of  foreign  currency.  The 
Circular was issued as part of a package of measures to help curb money laundering activities. As 
early  as  June  2000,  the  BSP  has  adopted  anti-money  laundering  measures  to  be  at  par  with 
international practices.  
The  monitoring  of  the  cross-border  transport  of  currencies  is  covered  under  the  9th  Special 
Recommendation of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the body that evaluates the anti-money 
laundering regimes of individual countries.  
Meanwhile, Section 4 of Circular No. 1389 dated 13 April 1993, as amended, requires any person who 
brings in or out of the Philippines an amount exceeding PhP 10,000 to obtain prior BSP authorization 
therefore. The rule was promulgated to help prevent speculation against the peso and maintain the 
convertibility of the currency.  
Vigilance in the implementation of the BSP rules, particularly in the transport of foreign currencies, is 
important  in  addressing  incidents  such  as  recent  events  involving  the  discovery  by  U.S.  customs 
authorities of large amounts of undeclared foreign currency found in the possession of Filipino citizens 
arriving in the U.S. We are glad that we will be assisted by other government agencies in this regard.  
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
The MOA defines the functions and responsibilities of the various government agencies involved and 
aims  to  promote  harmony  and  maximum  cooperation  in  the  implementation  of  BSP  rules  on  the 
transport of currencies.  
The  MOA  demonstrates  the  strong  commitment  of  the  government,  thru  the  heads  of  the  various 
agencies who are signatories to the agreement, in instituting measures versus money laundering in 
the Philippines.  
Again, thank you for your support and we look forward to the smooth implementation of the MOA.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
