Joseph Yam: ABF Pan Asia Bond Index Fund 
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
listing ceremony of the ABF Pan Asia Bond Index Fund, Hong Kong, 7 July 2005. 
 Deputy  Governors  and  representatives  of  the  EMEAP  Central  Banks,  Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies 
and Gentlemen, 
1. It gives me great pleasure to be present at the inauguration of trading of the ABF Pan Asia Bond 
Index Fund (PAIF) on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong. It was barely two weeks ago that I attended 
the  listing  ceremony  of  another  ABF  fund.  Up  to  now,  two  components  of  the  Asian  Bond  Fund 
Initiative, the PAIF and the ABF Hong Kong Bond Index Fund, have been listed in Hong Kong. In the 
next few months, the other seven components of ABF2 will also be launched in other Asian markets. 
2. All of this activity marks the culmination of one of the largest co-operative enterprises among central 
banks in the Asian-Pacific region in recent years. I am delighted to see that, after nearly two years of 
hard work by central banks and monetary authorities in the region, the PAIF has now been turned from 
a conceptual construct into a real product. The PAIF is an excellent demonstration of how the public 
and private sectors can work together to strengthen the regional bond market as an effective channel 
for turning savings into investments in Asia. 
3. The ABF Hong Kong Bond Index Fund made history by being the first bond exchange-traded fund 
launched in Asia. The PAIF has also set two records. It is the first listed Asian bond fund to invest in as 
many as eight bond markets in the region. As a listed fund, it allows easy access by both institutional 
and  retail  investors  who  wish  to  have  exposure  to  the  Asian  bond  markets  in  a  cost-effective  and 
convenient manner. Secondly, the PAIF is the first foreign institutional investor that has access to the 
interbank bond market of Mainland China. This is an important step in the opening up of China’s bond 
market  to  foreign  participants.  I  am  glad  to  see  that  the  PAIF  has  played  a  catalytic  role  in 
development not only in China but also in all the markets in which the fund invests. 
4. I take this opportunity to thank State Street Global Advisors (SSgA), the fund manager of the PAIF, 
for their commitment and dedication to the development of this innovative product and to the idea of 
an Asian bond market. We have seen a favourable response to the ABF Hong Kong Fund, and I hope 
that the PAIF, with its broader investor base, will also be well received by markets. I wish you every 
success in promoting the PAIF. Thank you. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
