Toshiro Muto: The outlook for Japan’s economy 
Summary of a speech given by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Oita, 23 June 2005. 
 I. Japan's economy: current situation and immediate prospects  
Japan's economy has been at a temporary pause since summer 2004 due partly to adjustments in 
production  and  inventories  of  IT-related  goods.  Inventory  adjustments  in  IT-related  sectors  are  still 
continuing, but steady progress has been made and production is increasing moderately. Corporate 
profits have been at high levels, and this has not only led to an increase in business fixed investment 
but also had positive effects on the household sector through a rise in household income. The result is 
that  private  consumption  has  been  steady,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  various  sales  indicators 
increased  in  the  January-March  quarter  and  have  continued  to  be  relatively  strong.  Therefore,  the 
underlying  mechanism  of  economic  recovery  remains  firm,  although  recently  growth  in  exports  has 
been  sluggish,  especially  in  those  to  China.  In  the  not  so  distant  future,  the  economy  is  likely  to 
gradually emerge from the current plateau and move onto a sustainable growth path.  
The Bank of Japan's economic outlook is explained in detail in the Outlook for Economic Activity and 
Prices (the Outlook Report) released at the end of April 2005. In short, the economy is expected to 
experience a relatively long period of growth, albeit at a moderate pace. In terms of real GDP growth, 
the growth rate is expected to be around 1.5 percent for both fiscal 2005 and 2006, slightly above the 
potential growth rate.  
On the price front, the consumer price index (CPI) has been declining slightly on a year-on-year basis 
partly due to the decline in rice prices and the reduction in electricity and telephone charges caused by 
the intense competition accompanying deregulation. The effects of the rise in domestic and overseas 
commodity prices, including the surge in crude oil prices, has been largely contained due to a decline 
in unit labor costs (labor costs per unit of output): in other words, wage growth has been restrained 
compared to the rise in productivity. Even though labor's share of the total value added generated by 
the  corporate  sector  has  declined  to  the  level  recorded  in  the  early  1990s,  many  firms  are  still 
cautiously continuing to restrain labor costs. In addition, the effects of the decline in rice prices and the 
reduction  in  electricity  and  telephone  charges  are  expected  to  continue  for  a  while.  Although 
underlying  economic  strength  continues  to  exert  gradual  upward  pressures,  a  marked  increase  in 
prices is unlikely in the immediate future. In the April Outlook Report, consumer prices are projected to 
remain around zero percent on a year-on-year basis in fiscal 2005, and to become slightly positive in 
fiscal 2006.  
The Bank's outlook for economic activity and prices is based on the perception that firms' business 
stance will remain cautious. The recent recovery phase is characterized by its moderate pace and the 
scarcity  of  signs  of  acceleration.  Furthermore,  the  spread  of  the  recovery  to  regional  economies 
remains weak. As evidenced by the continued increase in business fixed investment observed at the 
macroeconomic level, some firms are taking a more positive stance. Such cases are, however, still 
limited, and a large number of firms with increased profits are still placing priority on reducing interest-
bearing  liabilities  and  taking  a  "wait-and-see"  attitude  toward  investment.  Most  firms  have  kept  any 
increases in business fixed investment within the limits of their cash flow.  
Given that Japanese firms maintain this cautious stance, the pace of economic recovery is likely to 
remain  moderate.  At  the  same  time,  the  fact  that  the  pace  of  recovery  is  moderate  increases  the 
chances of a relatively long period of growth. Looking at past economic fluctuations, corporate activity 
is seen to have amplified cyclical fluctuations in some instances. As economic activity picks up, the 
emergence of over-optimistic expectations about future growth tends to trigger an excessive level of 
business fixed investment and inventory investment. Such a situation may heighten the peak of the 
business  cycle,  but  it  also  deepens  the  trough  thereafter  as  additional  adjustment  is  needed  to 
compensate  for  the  overshooting.  However,  these  kinds  of  large  swings  in  the  business  cycle  are 
unlikely to occur in the current economic recovery, owing to the cautious behavior of firms.  
In  the  long  term,  the  cautious  business  stance  of  firms  will  hinder  the  economy  from  realizing  and 
building  on  its  potential  strength.  Amid  increasing  competition  and  a  rapidly  changing  technological 
environment, the maintenance of high profitability in the medium term requires that firms continue to 
   1/6 
invest in highly profitable areas while ensuring that management resources are promptly reallocated in 
response  to  constantly  changing  circumstances.  If  firms  remain  cautious  and  postpone  new 
investment,  realizing  the  economy's  potential,  let  alone  enhancing  that  potential,  becomes  more 
difficult.  With  this  in  mind,  I  would  now  like  to  reexamine  the  nature  of  the  structural  adjustment 
pressures faced by the economy in the 1990s. These, I believe, will help shed some light on why there 
has not been more widespread positive activity in the corporate sector and what measures should be 
taken to encourage its spread.  
II. Two types of structural adjustment pressure faced by the Japanese economy  
The first type of structural adjustment pressure faced by the Japanese economy in the 1990s was the 
pressure  to  change  the  industrial  structure  exerted  by  the  expansion  of  supply  capacity  in  Asian 
countries. Other Asian countries have more abundant supplies of labor than Japan, while Japan has a 
comparative advantage in terms of capital stock and technology. Economic theory suggests that the 
Japanese  manufacturing  sector  will  focus  less  on  labor-intensive  manufacturing  industries  whose 
products can be substituted with imports from other Asian countries and tend to specialize in capital- 
or technology-intensive industries. Theory also suggests that, if growth in the nonmanufacturing sector 
can be realized, this will enable the surplus labor emerging as the share of labor-intensive industries 
declines to be successfully absorbed. The expansion of production capacity in Asian economies was 
therefore expected, through the adjustment process detailed above, to shift the Japanese economy's 
orientation from external demand to domestic demand.  
In  the  event,  the  manufacturing  sector  witnessed  both  increased  specialization  in  capital-  or 
technology-intensive  industries  and  a  decline  in  the  share  of  labor-intensive  industries.  However, 
Japanese  firms'  efforts  to  reallocate  their  business  resources,  concentrating  on  highly  profitable 
markets and withdrawing from other areas, ended up being only moderately successful. They could 
not keep up with changes in business conditions that were remarkable for their extent and the speed 
with which they occurred. The profitability of individual firms thus dropped significantly. In addition, the 
poor  performance  of  the  manufacturing  sector  hindered  growth  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector: 
household  income  declined,  and  generation  of corporate  demand  such  as advertising  activities  and 
computer  software  development  was  weak.  As  Japanese  consumers  became  more  sensitive  about 
prices, especially the balance between price and quality, there was an unprecedented level of import 
penetration from other Asian economies, and this was part of the reason why the nonmanufacturing 
sector, particularly the wholesale and retail industry, also ended up suffering from a significant drop in 
profits.  
In  addition  to  adjustment  pressure  affecting  the  Japanese  industrial  structure,  another  type  of 
adjustment pressure is associated with the fall in land prices after the bursting of the economic bubble. 
This had a powerful negative impact, on the nonmanufacturing sector in particular. It is a well-known 
fact that the significant fall in land prices gave rise to a huge amount of nonperforming assets in the 
real estate, and wholesale and retail industries. This has impacted negatively on the entire economy 
by  generating  nonperforming-loan  problems  at  financial  institutions  and  reducing  their  risk-taking 
capacity, as well as by damaging the balance-sheet soundness of firms holding nonperforming assets.  
In  the  1990s,  the  Japanese  economy  was  therefore  unfortunate  enough  to  be  simultaneously 
confronted with two types of structural adjustment pressure different in nature: the pressure to change 
the industrial structure and the pressure related to the decline in land prices which caused balance-
sheet problems. As a result, the surplus labor in the manufacturing sector generated as production of 
labor-intensive  goods  contracted  was  not  absorbed  by  growth  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector. 
Instead, the phenomenon of surplus labor was observed in almost all categories of both manufacturing 
and nonmanufacturing industry. This was markedly different from that witnessed in the U.S. economy 
in  the  early  1990s,  when  the  decline  in  the  number  of  employees  in  the  manufacturing  sector  was 
perfectly offset by increased employment in the nonmanufacturing sector, especially in the health-care 
and information services industries. The 1990s has thus become known to Japanese economic history 
as the "lost decade."  
III. Progress in dealing with these structural adjustment pressures  
Since  the  mid-1990s,  most  Japanese  firms  have  devoted  considerable  efforts  to  downsizing  and 
restructuring  their  businesses.  The  actual  implementation  of  business  restructuring  has  differed 
significantly  across  individual  firms,  depending  on  specific  conditions  at  firms  and  within  their  given 
   2/6 
industries.  It  has  ranged  from  drastic  cost-cutting  efforts,  gradual  withdrawal  from  business  areas 
offering  only  low  profitability  while  expanding  operations  in  strategically  important  areas,  and  the 
thorough disposal of nonperforming assets, to forging alliances with rival companies when individual 
restructuring efforts proved unsuccessful. In the event, these efforts seem to be bearing fruit, and clear 
progress in dealing with the two types of structural adjustment pressure can recently be observed in 
the indicators even at the macroeconomic level. Worth specific mention are the progress in dealing 
with  the  three  excesses,  namely  excess  capacity,  labor,  and  debt;  and  the  bottoming  out  of  land 
prices.  
In the Bank's March Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), for example, the 
relevant  production  capacity  indicator  showed  a  significant  contraction  in  the  extent  of  excess 
capacity. Moreover, the most recent diffusion index measuring tightness in the labor market registered 
a labor shortage for the first time since November 1992, although its extent was marginal. There is 
also an increasing number of firms intending to hire regular employees. The debt-to-sales ratio peaked 
in 1993, declining thereafter and currently down to a level last seen in the mid-1980s. Japanese firms 
have continued efforts to repay their debt, and as a result, about one-third of listed firms currently run 
their business with almost no debt. As for land prices, these have bottomed out and begun to rise, 
especially at the top end of the market. Looking at price movements for individual locations, the prices 
of locations near the top end of the market, which are considered to have high utility value, are seen to 
have either stopped declining or to have started to increase. According to the latest Urban Land Price 
Index, which surveyed land prices as of end-March 2005, although prices for all districts continue to 
decline, the pace of decline in the six major metropolitan areas has clearly slowed down. Within these 
six areas, prices of land in commercial districts have started to increase for the first time in 14 and a 
half years.  
Firms' efforts to improve their capability of generating high-value-added products and services have 
combined with the above developments to contribute to drastic profitability gains at Japanese firms. 
For example, the ratio of current profits to sales has almost reached its bubble period level. Presuming 
that  progress  in  dealing  with  their  problems  is  ultimately  reflected  in  firms'  profitability,  the  current 
situation may be considered evidence of light at the end of a long tunnel for Japanese firms.  
IV. Remaining issues and proposed solution strategies  
In spite of this progress in addressing their problems, positive forward-looking business activity has 
not been widespread among firms. Various factors lie behind this, but the main one is the substantial 
fall in people's expectations of economic growth which has been generated by the prolonged period of 
sluggish economic growth. In fact, the Annual Survey of Corporate Behavior released by the Cabinet 
Office showed that firms' expectations with regard to Japan's economic growth tend to be based on 
movements  in  actual  growth  over  the  preceding  few  years.  Applying  this  to  future  economic 
developments,  the  effects  of  the  prolonged  period  of  sluggish  economic  growth  may  be  expected 
gradually  to  fade  and  firms'  expectations  of  growth  to  increase  once  the  economy  returns  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path.  However,  even  when  memories  of  past  experience  gradually  fade  away, 
firms' expectations of growth will not increase if they do not respond proactively to recent changes in 
the  economic  environment.  Among  these  changes,  those  considered  most  crucial  by  corporate 
management are the issues of the ageing population  and the declining birthrate. I will elaborate on 
these in what follows.  
As far as the economic effects of these demographic trends are concerned, the workforce has been 
declining  since  1999,  and  this  will  eventually  depress  economic  growth,  unless  labor  is  substituted 
with capital assets or there is an increase in the rate of technological innovation. The personal saving 
rate of the elderly is relatively low, so that a rise in the proportion of the elderly in the population will 
result in a fall in the overall saving rate. Should such a decline in saving reduce capital accumulation, 
this might also act to depress economic growth. In fact, the speed at which the population is ageing 
and the birthrate declining has recently been accelerating rapidly. This trend has not only exacerbated 
concerns about a possible contraction of the domestic market, but also added to the numbers worried 
that the pension, medical care insurance, and various other social security systems might be forced 
toward  bankruptcy.  Thus,  most  of  the  problems  confronting  the  Japanese  economy  can  be  linked 
either more or less directly to the issues of population ageing and the declining birthrate.  
In light of this, we must give top priority to finding a way to stop the trend, especially the decline in the 
birthrate. Entangled with this issue, however, are people's individual values and notions of how the 
social  structure  ought  to  be,  so that  identifying  some  quick-acting  remedy  is difficult.  The  proposed 
   3/6 
policy  must  therefore  be  efficacious,  but  it  must  also  be  steady  and  long  term  in  scope.  We  must 
overhaul the labor market so as to encourage greater labor force participation, while simultaneously 
realizing  a  social  environment  in  which  people  feel  the  desire  to  start  families  and  raise  children 
without needing to worry unduly. The government has an important role to play in this regard, and in 
fact, with the establishment of a new committee in the autumn of 2004 to consider social remedies for 
the declining birthrate, there has been a concerted effort by all government ministries and agencies to 
determine appropriate measures for areas of top priority such as enhancement of child care services. 
Turning to the ageing population, however, the position is somewhat different. It should be noted that 
this phenomenon is a result of Japan's economy and society having successfully developed, meaning 
that  people  can  live  longer  and  healthier  lives  than  in  previous  generations.  The  ageing  of  the 
population should therefore be seen as a positive development even for firms.  
Looking at firms' actual behavior, although concern about major changes in the economic environment 
is  deep-seated,  many  firms  are  actively  engaging  with  the  ageing  population,  treating  it  as  a  new 
business opportunity. For example, there are many cases where firms have targeted their marketing 
strategies  at the  elderly,  and  have  succeeded  in  stimulating  consumers'  drive  to  spend,  particularly 
among those with high levels of disposable financial assets. This success is seen in consumption of 
various  goods  and  services,  such  as  expensive  digital  appliances,  particularly  flat-panel  TVs; 
expensive  package  tours  both  within  Japan  and  overseas;  educational  services  promoting  lifelong 
education and self-improvement; and services related to well-being and sports.  
Given  that  the  ageing  of  the  population  may  thus  be  seen  to  provide  a  wide  range  of  business 
opportunities for firms, there still appear to be plenty of growth opportunities for nonmanufacturers and 
in sectors catering to domestic demand, even with a falling population. Business opportunities are not 
restricted  to  the  domestic  arena,  and  Japanese  firms  will  of  course  always  retain  the  option  of 
extending  their  operations  overseas.  Recently,  Japanese  firms,  not  only  manufacturers  but  also 
nonmanufacturers such as retailers, distributors, trading houses, and financial institutions, have been 
actively  engaged  in  business  in  Asia.  This  business  includes  not  only  relocating  labor-intensive 
production  but  also  increasing  project  variety  by  promoting  technology  transfer,  opening  up  new 
markets, and enhancing local sales, all of which further the expansion of Japanese firms' overseas 
business.  Those  of  you  who  live  in  Oita  and  other  parts  of  Kyushu  can  experience  the  impact  of 
globalization more directly due to your geographical proximity to other Asian countries.  
Dealing with changes in the economic environment requires a head-on and proactive approach from 
Japanese firms rather than a "wait-and-see" attitude. The most effective prescription for survival is for 
firms to sharpen both their ability to respond incisively to changes and the creativity with which they 
provide attractive new products and services. From the viewpoint of the overall Japanese economy, 
unless Japanese firms succeed in developing business aggressively in global markets and expanding 
domestic income, then it becomes rather hard to envisage growth in domestic demand. The need for 
firms  to  respond  proactively  to  changes  in  the  environment  does  not  apply  only  to  demographic 
changes such as societal ageing and the declining birthrate, but is of more fundamental relevance. 
During past phases of high economic growth, economic recovery spread throughout the country via 
increases  in  public  investment.  However,  this  conventional  mechanism  of  economic  recovery  is 
changing, and firms are seeking ways to revitalize regional economies by taking advantage of their 
regional uniqueness to provide high-value-added products and services. The more proactively firms 
tackle  changes  in  the  environment  and  take  advantage  of  the  resulting  business  opportunities,  the 
more solid the footing of the economic recovery. As such activity spreads and the recovery becomes 
clearer, expectations of growth will gradually rise. It is even possible to envisage the emergence of a 
virtuous cyclical mechanism in which rising expectations of growth fuel further progressive activity by 
firms.  
V. Structural adjustments and macroeconomic policies  
For  firms  to  become  more  proactive  in  tackling  changes  in  their  environment,  implementation  of 
structural reforms aimed at raising the productivity of the overall economy is a prerequisite. The Bank 
has  repeatedly  emphasized  this  point.  Specifically,  there  should  be  a  thorough  review  of  fiscal 
expenditure  which  should  be  better  geared  toward  stimulating  private  demand  and  raising  the 
productivity  of  the  overall  economy.  At  the  same  time,  easing  the  regulatory  burden  on  firms  and 
making it easier for them to undertake new business is also vital. Moreover, alleviating public concern 
about  pension  and  medical  care  insurance  and  other  social  security  systems  is  a  sine  qua  non  for 
households  to  be  able  to  spend  money  freely.  Once  the  implementation  of  these structural  policies 
   4/6 
leads  people  to  expect  the  productivity  of  the  overall  economy  to  increase,  there  will  be  a  positive 
impact on firms' investment activity and household spending behavior.  
Within the context of structural adjustments as a whole, what then is the role of the Bank's monetary 
policy? In this regard, the Bank is often criticized for maintaining monetary easing, on the grounds that 
this may hinder necessary adjustments by allowing unprofitable firms to stay in business. As described 
earlier, the two types of structural adjustment pressure, the pressure acting to change the industrial 
structure and the pressure associated with the fall in land prices, are subsiding. In this situation, the 
prospect  of a  sustainable economic recovery  has gradually  become  more realistic.  Firms, however, 
have  not  yet  become  sufficiently  vigorous  in  pursuing  new  business  opportunities,  leaving  room  for 
concern  about  their  response  to  remaining  issues.  With  this  in  mind,  the  role  expected  of 
macroeconomic  policy,  including  the  Bank's  monetary  policy,  is  to  ensure  a  favorable  economic 
environment that enables necessary adjustments to be carried out smoothly, while being careful not to 
distort resource allocation too much.  
VI. The Bank's conduct of monetary policy  
Based on this thinking, the Bank has continued to implement the quantitative easing policy with the 
outstanding balance of current accounts held at the Bank as the main operating target. The framework 
is based on the following two key elements.  
First, the Bank continues to provide ample liquidity to the money market. To be more specific, it has 
been providing such ample liquidity that the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank has 
substantially exceeded the amount of required reserves, which is about 6 trillion yen at present. This 
has continued to generate confidence among market participants about raising funds and has resulted 
in short-term interest rates of almost zero percent. Making financial institutions feel secure about the 
availability of funds helps to maintain an accommodative corporate financing environment and also to 
firmly support private-sector economic activity from the financial side. Even when there were strong 
concerns  about  financial  system  stability,  financial  markets  were  stable,  the  financial  environment 
remained  accommodative,  and  a  possible  credit  crunch  was  avoided.  This  combination  of  market 
stability  and  the  accommodative  financial  environment  also  played  a  major  part  in  preventing  the 
economy from falling into a deflationary spiral of price declines, deterioration in corporate profits, and 
contraction in economic activity. Portfolio rebalancing by financial institutions holding current accounts 
at the Bank, which involves shifting large amounts of surplus funds from non-interest-bearing current 
accounts at the Bank into other interest-bearing assets, has been pointed out as a possible effect of 
raising the target for current account balances under the quantitative easing policy, although there has 
been little evidence of it to date.  
The second element of the policy framework is the Bank's commitment, unprecedented in the history 
of  central  banks,  to  continue  this  policy  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (excluding 
fresh  food,  on  a  nationwide  basis)  registers  zero  percent  or  higher  on  a  sustainable  basis.  This 
commitment leads market participants to expect short-term interest rates to remain at zero for longer. 
The result is to keep longer-term interest rates steady at low levels, underpinning corporate profits, 
and improving the return on investment. Within a financing environment where they can raise funds at 
low rates even while the economy continues to recover, firms will pursue new business opportunities 
more  vigorously  and  adopt  a  more  proactive  business  stance,  thereby  raising  expectations  of 
economic growth.  
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) on May 19 and 20, 2005, the Bank decided to maintain the 
current guideline for money market operations, which specifies a target for the outstanding balance of 
current accounts at the Bank of around 30 to 35 trillion yen, and the Bank also decided to add the 
following  sentence  to  the  proviso  in  the  guideline:  "When  it  is  judged  that  liquidity  demand  is 
exceptionally weak considering such factors as responses of financial institutions to the Bank's funds-
supplying  operations,  there  may  be  cases  where  the  balance  of  current  accounts  falls  short  of  the 
target." At the MPM on June 14 and 15, 2005, the Bank maintained the guideline in this form.  
The  Bank  decided  to  amend  the  proviso  in  the  guideline  because  financial  institutions'  demand  for 
liquidity has been declining, reflecting abatement of concern over financial system stability, and there 
has  been  a  stronger  feeling  that  liquidity  in  financial  markets  is  in  abundance.  As  a  result, 
undersubscription,  where  financial  institutions'  bids  fall  short  of  the  Bank's  offers,  has  occurred 
frequently in funds-supplying operations. If the Bank tries to keep the outstanding balance of current 
accounts at the Bank within the target range even when liquidity demand has declined substantially, 
   5/6 
this could, depending on the means employed, have negative effects on the functioning of financial 
markets, for example, by distorting interest rates. Given this situation, the Bank decided to maintain 
the  current  target  range  of  "around  30  to  35  trillion  yen"  but  also  to  allow  the  balance  of  current 
accounts  to  fall  short  of  the  target  in  cases  when  liquidity  demand  was  judged  to  be  exceptionally 
weak.  
Although this decision was made merely as a response to the decline in financial institutions' demand 
for liquidity which has accompanied increasing confidence in financial system stability, some market 
participants have instead interpreted it as a step toward termination of the quantitative easing policy. I 
would like to stress that there has been no change in the Bank's underlying policy of maintaining the 
target range of "around 30 to 35 trillion yen," and that the decision at the MPM to add a sentence to 
the proviso in the guideline was definitely not an indication of a shift in the quantitative easing policy. 
Instead, it was simply intended to facilitate the smooth implementation of the quantitative easing policy 
by  enabling  the  Bank  to  give  due  consideration  to  the  functioning  of  the  market  mechanism  in  its 
liquidity provision.  
As for the future conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will firmly keep in place the current quantitative 
easing policy framework detailed earlier with the commitment based on the CPI. Although the timing of 
a change to the quantitative easing framework is not certain at present, if current projections regarding 
economic  activity  and  prices  in  fact  materialize,  the  possibility  of  a  change  in  the  policy  is  likely  to 
gradually increase over the course of fiscal 2006. As long as upward pressures on prices continue to 
be to a large extent contained and the economy follows a sustainable and balanced growth path, this 
will likely give the Bank latitude with regard to changes in the policy framework and the subsequent 
conduct of monetary policy. Based on this thinking, the Bank will continue to conduct monetary policy 
in  an  appropriate  manner  giving  due  consideration  to  changes  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  as 
there is uncertainty with regard to their future developments.  
   6/6 
