Ardian Fullani: Recent financial and economic developments in Albania   
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  while  presenting  the  2004  Annual 
Report to the Albanian Parliament Audience, Tirana, 9 April 2005. 
 Honored deputies, 
I am here with you presenting my first address as Governor of the Bank of Albania, to share with you 
the  Bank  of  Albania  estimations  on  the  economic  developments  of  year  2004,  to  present  our 
viewpoints on the Albanian economy perspective for the years to come, and to present some other 
important aspects of the Bank of Albania activity during this period. Bank of Albania is an institution 
that plays a crucial role in the decision-making of economic and financial policies and for establishing 
and  maintaining  the  financial  stability  of  the  country.  For  this  purpose,  on  behalf  of  the  institution  I 
govern, I would welcome any opinion, comment or suggestion relating to the past, the present and the 
future of the institutional development, of monetary policy and banking supervision. 
Albanian economy during 2004 
According to the Bank of Albania estimates, the development of the Albanian economy over 2004 was 
in line with the objectives of the strategy on the economic development of the country. Based on the 
latest  estimates,  it  results  that  Albanian  economy  grew  by  6.0  percent  in  real  terms,  keeping  the 
average  development  rate  of  the  last  five  years.  The  economic  growth  rate  of  Albania  has  been 
throughout this period higher than the one of other Southeastern European countries or even the one 
of the countries being recently members of the European Union.  
The activity conducted by the Albanian economy, as a relatively open economy, was fuelled by the 
invigoration on a world-wide scale of the economic activity throughout 2004. A slow but a safe growth 
of  the  European  economy  experienced  over  2004  has  been  a  positive  factor  for  the  Albanian 
economy, fostering the demand for our exports and sustaining the rise of remittances inflow in foreign 
currency from emigrants. The average inflation rate of the euro area has been around 2.4 percent over 
this  year,  without  exerting  any  influence  on  the  rise  of  the  imported  inflation  rate  in  Albania. 
Simultaneously, the impact of shocks on the world economy during 2004 resulted to be smoother in 
the  Albanian  economy.  Oil  price  rise  in  the  international  market  was  amortised  partially  due  to  Lek 
appreciation and partially due to the rising competitiveness and the emerging of a certain flexibility of 
demand  for  this  product.  The  impact  of  oil  price  rise  on  the  inflation  rate  in  the  country  has  been 
restricted. Also, its impact on the Albanian economy, though hard to be measured, is believed to have 
been  rather  a  smooth  one  according  to  the  estimations  on  the  performance  of  the  most  exposed 
sectors to oil price, the transport and industry.   
Exchange rates have been fluctuating over 2004. The American dollar was appreciated in the first part 
of the year, as a consequence of expectations for a tightening of the United States monetary policy. 
But,  during  the  second  part  of  the  year,  the  attention  of  financial  markets  mainly  focused  on  the 
structural problems of the American economy, that of the budget deficit and current account deficit. 
These concerns brought about a quick decrease in the American dollar value, reaching the minimum 
levels against the common European currency. 
In face of these developments, both monetary policy and fiscal policy of larger economies maintained 
expansionist  features.  Notwithstanding  the  rise  of  US  dollar  interest  rates,  they  remained  at  low 
historical  levels  while  Euro  interest  rates  remained  unchanged.  The  fiscal  policy  has  impacted  the 
growth  of  domestic  demand,  either  in  the  euro  area  or  in  the  United  States.  The  progressive 
integration of the Albanian economy in the international markets of products and capitals makes that 
this  economy  benefits  from  these  incentive  policies,  in  the  form  of  lower  interest  rates  for  foreign 
currency and in the form of higher demand for its exports.  
Placed in this positive background, the Albanian economy growth continues to be generated from the 
dynamic  development  of  the  private  sector,  while  maintenance  of  the  macroeconomic  stability  and 
economic  growth  support  through  investments  in  the  priority  development  fields:  infrastructure, 
education and health, have been a priority to the public sector.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
During 2004, investments in the economy marked the same level as during 2003, representing nearly 
25.4  percent  of  GDP.  These  investments  are  mainly  represented  by  the  private  investments,  which 
count  for  about  80  percent  of  total  investments.  The  financial  sector  has  given  an  ever-stronger 
support  to  this  development,  through  the  increase  of  lending  activity  and  the  range  of  services 
provided.  Thus,  credit  to  the  economy  increased  by  an  average  of  34  percent  during  the  last  two 
years, being at the same time accompanied by a prolongation of maturity term. 
The sectoral development of the Albanian economy has been a dynamic development over the last 
years. Sectors that have provided a major contribution to the annual growth rate are considered to be: 
“Trade,  hotels,  restaurants”,  “Construction”,  “Transport”  and  “Other  services”.  These  sectors  have 
contributed about 75 percent of the economic growth over 2004. This development is accompanied by 
a redistribution of the relative contribution of economy sectors to GDP, and also by a redistribution of 
the production factors, the labour forces and capital support.  
The  large  demand  for  the  infrastructure  development,  for  increasing  and  expanding  the  productive 
capacities as well as for housing made that construction sector be characterized by high development 
rates.  It  contributed  by  an  average  of  17  percent  to  the  economic  growth  of  the  last  three  years, 
although  the  added  value  in  this  sector  represented  only  10  percent  of  GDP  in  2004.  Sales  of  the 
“Trade,  hotels,  restaurants” sector  increased  by 6.2  percent  over  the  nine-month  period of  2004,  in 
comparison with the same period of the previous year. This sector performed nearly 44 percent of total 
sales for this period. A positive development of year 2004 was also the agricultural production, which 
increased  by  4.9  percent.  The  industry  sector  performance  has  been  characterized  by  a  mixed 
performance. Sub-branches of the processing industry like foodstuff industry, manufacturing of mineral 
products and metallurgy, performed higher sales during the nine-month period of 2004, while sales of 
the  textile  industry  and  processing  leather  industry  marked  rather  low  levels.  The  energetic  sector 
experienced a  positive  performance  during  2004.  The  electric  energy  production  marked an  annual 
growth of 12 percent, being expressed in the rise of exports by 20 percent and the decline of energy 
imports by 30 percent. Sales of the transport sector increased by 5 percent over the nine-month period 
of the year. 
An important aspect of the Albanian economy over the last years is the fact that the economic 
growth did not generate macroeconomic imbalances. On the contrary, it is accompanied by the 
ongoing  consolidation  of  this  stability,  being  expressed  in  the  low  and  stable  inflation  rates,  in  the 
reduction of budget deficit and public debt, in the improvement of the balance of payments position 
and in the overall stability of monetary indicators.  
Some indicators of the economy over the years 
2000 
 
1999 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
488611 
Real growth of GDP (in %)1  8.9 
PBB (with current prices,  
in millions of Lek2) 
PBB (with current prices,  
in millions of USD) 
PBB (in USD per capita)3 
Number of the employed  
(in thousands) 
Unemployment rate (in %) 
3548.4 
1052.0 
1081.0 
18.0 
7.7 
6.5 
4.7 
6.0 
6.0 
530900 
588700 
630000 
695100 
780100 
3694.5 
4102.4 
4496.8 
5702.2 
7,581 
1086.3 
1329.0 
1460.0 
1833.5 
2,434 
1068.0 
1065.0 
921.0 
928.0 
917.0 
16.9 
14.6 
15.8 
15.0 
14.6 
                                                      
1   Data on GDP and its real growth for the period 1999-2000 are originated from INSTAT. For the rest data are estimates from 
Ministry of Finance, IMF and also data from Bank of Albania.  
2  The table is being constructed based on the reviewed nominal GDP.  
3   Nominal GDP converted at the average rate of the period.  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2005
a 
a 
(as 
(as 
3.3 
3.5 
2.2 
2.1 
4.2 
-1.0 
-8.2 
-4.9 
-4.9 
-7.9 
-6.6 
debt 
debt 
60.7 
66.8 
69.7 
55.3 
65.1 
71.3 
25.8 
29.4 
23.4 
-32.3 
-12.1 
in  % 
rate  – 
Inflation 
(year/year) 
Budget  deficit  (with  grants, 
as a percentage of GDP) 
Public 
percentage of GDP) 
External 
percentage of GDP)4 
Current  account 
(without 
government  transfers,  as  a 
percentage of GDP)  
Average  exchange 
Lek/USD  
Average  exchange 
Lek/EUR 
Source: INSTAT, Ministry of Finance, Bank of Albania and the IMF estimates. 
 
The  2004  data  suggest  a  gradual  easing  of  unemployment  rate.  Although  the  demographic 
changes  over  the  last  years  make  difficult  the  statistical  disclosure  of  labour  forces  displacement, 
according to official data the unemployment rate is estimated to have decreased from 15 percent to 
14.6 percent throughout 2004.  
137.7 
147.0 
143.5 
140.1 
121.9 
128.5 
132.4 
137.5 
143.7 
132.6 
102.8 
127.7 
-10.2 
rate, 
rate, 
20.7 
17.8 
-7.0 
-8.2 
-6.1 
-6.2 
-8.5 
Fiscal indicators 
Based on the developments of fiscal indicators, it results that the fiscal policy followed during 2004 has 
been  a  prudential  policy,  which  relied  upon  the  Medium-term  Budget  Program  for  the  period 
2004-2006. Expressed in terms of GDP, the budget indicators are presented at approximate levels as 
those of year 2003, where one can distinguish the unchanged figure of budget deficit, of 4.9 percent. 
State budget income grew by 10.4 percent over 2004, reaching 23.7 percent of GDP. Also, budget 
expenses  recorded  an  annual  growth  rate  of  10.7  percent,  reaching  28.6  percent  of  GDP.  These 
indicators remained, however, below the projected levels in the 2004 budget, imposing the necessity 
for a more cautious follow-up of the budget in its two principal phases: the design and implementation. 
Also, performance of capital expenses still remains a problem, which deserves more attention in the 
future,  given  the  particular  importance  it  has  for  the  development  of  infrastructure  capacities  of  the 
country.  
External sector of the economy 
The favourable economic situation in the country was also reflected in the field of foreign transactions. 
The current deficit marked a significant decline over 2004, reaching 5.3 percent of GDP and marking a 
significant decrease compared to the last two years. This development resulted to be a consequence 
of trade deficit improvement, which lowered to 21 percent of GDP in 2004, from 23.4 percent of GDP it 
was in 2003. Exports of goods marked a higher growth rate than imports, while the positive balance of 
current transfers increased in parallel with trade deficit, thus impeding the deepening of current deficit. 
The coverage of imports by exports of goods reached 27.5 percent, marking rather an improvement 
relative  to  year  2003  when  this  ratio  was  25  percent.  During  2004,  Albania’s  balance  of  payments 
recorded a flow of financial assets and capitals of about 1.5 times higher than the previous year. The 
rise  of  inflows  in  the  financial  account  and  the  non-deepening  of  current  deficit  brought  about  the 
increase  of  foreign  reserves  by  about  USD  290  million  over  2004.  Albania’s  foreign  reserve  is 
sufficient to cover about 5.2 months of imports of goods and services. 
                                                      
4   Government debt including other sectors debt guaranteed by Government.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 3
Notwithstanding  the  positive  developments  of  the  recent  years,  the  economic  growth  and  the 
macroeconomic  stability  of  the  country  are  two  parameters,  which,  according  to  our  consideration, 
cannot and should be considered as issues already accomplished. The high trade deficit requires the 
ability to find stable long-term coverage resources, especially to promote foreign direct investments, 
which will raise the productive capacities of the Albanian economy. A major interest should be given 
particularly to the sectors such as agriculture and tourism.  
Fiscal  policy  must  continue  to  conserve  its  positive  contribution  in  the  consolidation  of  the 
macroeconomic  stability,  a  contribution  being  expressed  in  the  reduction  of  budget  deficit,  in  the 
increase  of  income  and  in  the  establishment  of  priorities  according  to  the  National  Strategy  for  the 
Socio-economic Development, in the performance of budget expenses. We deem that financial sector 
development should be balanced in all its segments, and this requires the successful completion of the 
privatisation  process  and  the  harmonization  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  legislation,  in 
accordance with the best practices of the developed countries.        
These issues require a continuous attention and cooperative contribution. On this opportunity, I deem 
appropriate  to  highlight  that  Bank  of  Albania  shall  be  a  prompt  and  open  partner,  assuming  the 
responsibilities  belonging  to  it,  and  collaborating  with  all  the  actors  interested  in  the  economic  and 
financial development of the country. 
Inflation and monetary policy developments 
The  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  provided  in  the  Law  “On  the  Bank  of  Albania”  is 
maintaining the price stability. This objective is expressed in the achieving of a low and stable inflation 
rate, measured as an annual change of Consumer Price Index. For year 2004 inflation rate, according 
to the Monetary Policy Document, was fixed to be within the two-to-four percent targeted range.  
According  to  the  actual  developments,  Bank  of  Albania  has  achieved  its  objective  on  the  inflation 
control within the two-to-four percent targeted range. The annual inflation rate resulted 2.2 percent by 
the end of 2004, while the average annual inflation rate was 2.9 percent. Inflation rate remained about 
3 percent during the first half of the year and, later on, marked a downward trend during the second 
half, approximating to the lower limit of the targeted band.  
The main role in creating the inflation rate during 2004 has been played by the “Rent, water, fuels, 
energy” group, unlike the past years when this role was played by the “Foodstuffs and non-alcoholics” 
group. The price index of the “Rent, water, fuels and energy” group marked high annual growth rates 
over 2004. Despite the increase of the energy price by 31.2 percent in February of this year, this group 
recorded a rise even in the price of rent and imputed rent. The annual inflation rate of the “Foodstuffs 
and  non-alcoholics”  group  has  been  a  negative  one  during  May-November,  due  to  the  growth  of 
domestic agricultural production, including the production of greenhouses.  
The positive inflation performance during the last two years was facilitated by the absence of shocks, 
the  positive  developments  of  productive  capacities  and  the  consolidation  of  macroeconomic  and 
macrofinancial  indicators.  The  concern  that  oil  price  rise  in  the  international  markets  would  have 
caused a consumer price rise even in Albania, has not become a reality. The appreciation of exchange 
rate  in  Lek  against  US  dollar  during  2004  has  eased  the  effect  of  oil  price  rise  in  the  international 
markets. Also, the inflation value of the two main partner countries, Italy and Greece, has been low, 
compared  to  inflation  rates  in  Albania.  As  a  consequence,  imported  inflationary  pressures  did  not 
accompany Albania’s trade activity. 
The favourable macroeconomic developments during 2004 have provided an appropriate environment 
for  the  inflation  control.  Two  basic  macroeconomic  policies,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy,  have 
contributed  toward  the  economic  activity  stabilization,  without  exerting  increasing  pressures  on  the 
inflation  rate.  The  budget  expenses  during  2004  have  been  relatively  uniform  throughout  the  year, 
without jeopardizing the rise of inflationary pressures in the economy in given periods. The domestic 
borrowing of Government has been 2.0 percent of GDP over 2004, compared to 2.9 percent in 2003. 
Monetary policy 
The  monetary  policy  followed  during  2004  maintained  the  easing  trend  of  the  policy  being  followed 
during 2003. Bank of Albania has cut 5 times the core interest rate over 2004, with a total effect of 
1.25 percentage points. The core interest rate reached new minimum historical levels through every 
cut occurred during 2004, remaining by the end of the year 5.25 percent. The easing monetary policy 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2005
has been in compliance with the inflation developments during 2004 and the positive expectations on 
this indicator in the future. These developments seem to have been perceived by the public, who is 
increasingly anchoring the inflationary expectations to the inflation target announced by the Bank of 
Albania. This is reflected in the increase of public interest in depositing their savings in Lek, generating 
also appreciation pressures on the exchange rate in Lek. The appreciation of exchange rate in Lek, 
accompanied  by  stable  inflation  values  in  the  largest  trade  partners  of  Albania,  has  impacted  the 
decrease of inflation value imported during 2004. 
The  easing  of  monetary  conditions  in  the  economy  aimed  at  fostering  the  economic  activity  and 
creating more spaces to crediting to the economy, without infringing the long-term perspective of the 
inflation target. This monetary policy resulted to be a right one. Bank of Albania has been successful in 
achieving its objective on inflation, easing simultaneously the appreciation pressures on the domestic 
currency.  Notwithstanding  the  easing  monetary  policy,  Bank  of  Albania  has  kept  under  control  the 
growth rate of monetary aggregates.     
The weak inflationary pressures from the fiscal policy, the good-management of money supply, as well 
as Lek appreciation, have provided appropriate conditions for a moderate rise of consumer price over 
2004. In general terms, Bank of Albania believes that this favourable situation will continue to prevail 
even  during  the  current  year.  It  will  be  supported  by  the  favourable  monetary  conditions  of  the 
economy and by the controlled development of domestic demand. Based on the available information 
and in absence of shocks, the consumer price rise for year 2005 is expected to be within the two-to-
four percent targeted range of the Bank of Albania.  
Monetary indicators performance 
To achieve its primary objective, that is maintenance of price stability, Bank of Albania relies on the 
monetary  aggregates  control  as  an  intermediate  instrument.  Expectations  on  monetary  indicators 
performance are provided in detail in the annual monetary program, which serves to orient the Bank of 
Albania monetary policy. Based on this strategy, the objective of increasing money supply for 2004 
was fixed to be 12.4 percent. This increase is believed to have been adequate to supply the demand 
of the economy for money under the conditions of an economic growth of 6 percent and of an inflation 
rate within the two-to-four percent targeted range. 
Money  supply  and  the  closest  money  aggregate  (M1)  have  known  faster  growth  rates  during  2004 
compared  to  year  2003.  This  is  a  consequence  of  a  rising  demand  of  the  economy  for  monetary 
assets, reflected even in the invigoration process of lending to the economy throughout the year. Also, 
the controlled inflation level has rendered possible the maintenance of a real interest rate in positive 
terms,  despite  the  ongoing  reduction  of  nominal  interest  rates.  The  real  positive  interest  rate  has 
maintained the tendency of households to deposit their savings in the banking system, bringing about 
further reductions of the relative level of currency outside banks that circulates in the economy. 
The  rising  demand  for  monetary  assets  has  been  shaped  mainly  as  the  demand  for  monetary 
balances in Lek. The demand for Lek has been particularly evident in the summer time, being partially 
supplied even by means of liquidity injection through the Bank of Albania intermediations in the foreign 
exchange market. 
The annual growth rate of deposits in Lek was 12.9 percent, being a satisfactory growth compared to 
the average historical rate. It was adequate to cover Government demand for the financing of deficit 
and  the  economy  demand  for  credits  in  Lek.  Meanwhile,  deposits  in  foreign currency  grew  by  17.1 
percent during 2004. The main source of the high growth rate of deposits in foreign currency continues 
to be the large inflows of remittances in foreign currency from emigrants.  
Under  these  conditions,  credit  to  the  economy  increased  by  Lek  19.4  billion  during  2004,  from  Lek 
16.5 billion being projected in the monetary program. This implies an increase of credit to the economy 
by an average of Lek 1.6 billion monthly compared to year 2003. Credit to the economy constituted 8.4 
percent  of  GDP,  marking  an  increase  of  1.6  percentage  points  compared  to  year  2003.  Also, 
credit/deposit ratio reached 19 percent at the end of 2004, from 15.7 percent being in 2003.  
Banking  system  financing  was  done  through  purchasing  Treasury  bills  and  two-year  bonds  and 
constituted  the  largest  weight  of  domestic  financing  during  the  year.  Commercial  banks  and 
households increased the Treasury bills portfolios in comparison to the previous year, respectively by 
Lek  6.5  and  6.2  billion.  Meanwhile,  revenues  from  the  Savings  Bank’s  privatization  constituted  a 
significant financing source, particularly during the second half of the year.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 5
Exchange rate 
2004 was associated with appreciating pressures for the Lek, impacted by country’s macroeconomic 
stability, rise of confidence in domestic currency and largest influence of seasonal effects. Compared 
to the previous year, the Lek was appreciated on average by 7.2 percent versus the euro and by 15.7 
percent versus the dollar. The Lek appreciation is not a tendency observed only in 2004. According to 
assessments made by the Bank of Albania, there exist some long-term factors whose operation has 
influenced on appreciating the Lek’s value:  
• 
• 
• 
Constant consolidation of the country’s economic stability. 
Interest rate spread between the Lek and the foreign currencies. 
Consolidation of public finances and budget deficit, dictating a low government demand for 
monetary assets.  
Stable remittances by Albanian emigrants working abroad. 
• 
In the meantime, during 2004 the exchange rate performance was also impacted by specific factors of 
the  year.  Specific  factors  relate  to  starting  of  tourism  earlier  than  in  the  previous  years,  rise  of 
agricultural  produce  and  decline  of  demand  for  agricultural  merchandise  imports,  impacting  on  the 
supply and demand for foreign currency in terms of the Lek appreciation. Also, the international foreign 
exchange market developments are reflected in our foreign exchange market. The euro appreciation 
versus the dollar over more than a year is reflected in the reduction of the dollar’s value even in our 
country, though no strengthening of the euro is observed. During 2004, the dollar was depreciated by 
7.5 percent against the euro in the international market.  
During 2004, the Bank of Albania intervened in the foreign exchange market in terms of purchasing 
foreign currency, in an effort to prevent large exchange rate fluctuations reflected mainly during the 
summer and end-year period.  
Financial markets 
Growth of deposits in Lek, in the presence of a low government demand for monetary assets, created 
premises  for  increasing  banks’  liquidity  and  extending  interbank  market  activity.  Low  inflation  rates 
made real interest rates rest close to historical levels, regardless of nominal interest rate cut. This has 
impacted  on  maintaining  high  annual  growth  rates  for  time  deposits  in  Lek.  The  main  features  of 
money market over 2004 were the market activity intensification and interest rate cut. 2004 recorded 
rise of weekly and monthly interbank transactions.  
Under the impact of easing monetary policy, the interest rates in all markets continued the downward 
trend of the previous year, reaching the minimum historical levels at end of 2004. Besides the easing 
monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  these  trends  have  also  reflected  the  enhancement  of 
competition  in  the  banking  system,  due  to  the  Savings  Bank’s  privatization.  The  banks’  supply  to 
invest  in  government  Treasury  bills  has  been  larger than  the  amount  issued  in  the  primary  market, 
being  reflected  in  pressures  for  constant  yield  cut.  Therefore,  the  Treasury  bills  yield  gradually 
dropped  during  2004,  reaching  the  lowest  historical  levels  at  end  of  the  year.  2004  testified  a 
strengthening  of  banking  system  interest  in  investing  in  longer-term  securities,  such  as  two-year 
bonds.  The  weight  of  two-year  bonds  in  the  securities  portfolio  of  the  banking  system  rose  to  6.1 
percent over 2004, from 2.4 percent at end of 2003; whereas that of quarterly Treasury bills dropped 
from 9.2 to 2.8 percent. Albanian authorities aim at capitalizing this positive development of financial 
market in terms of further increasing the maturity term and structure of domestic public debt.  
Interest  rates  of  foreign  currency  deposits  demonstrated  adverse  tendency  to  that  of  Lek  deposits 
during  2004.  This  market  was  impacted  by  rise  of  LIBOR  and  EURIBOR  interests  in  international 
markets.  
The Bank of Albania has successfully managed the banking system liquidity, using its framework of 
monetary policy instruments. Aiming at improving its operational framework and easing the functioning 
of  Albania  Interbank  Payment  System  (AIPS),  the  Bank  of  Albania  approved  the  Regulation  “On 
intraday credit” on March 2004. The use of this credit, which started in May, has assisted in meeting 
the needs for effecting commercial banks’ intraday payments.  
6 
 BIS Review 38/2005
Banking system performance 
Financial  position  of  the  banking  system  at  end  of  2004  is  presented  as  good.  Main  profitability 
indicators have generally had a steady performance, reflecting the prudential overall banking system 
growth  and  the  activity  extension  of  most  banks  through  more  products  and  larger  presence  in  the 
market.   
The banking system evidenced positive net income over 2004, about Lek 5.11 billion or about 0.66 
billion more than in the previous year. This figure constitutes 0.66 percent of GDP accrued for 2004. 
Good  position  of  the  banking  system  is  reflected  even  in  the  main  profitability  indicators,  RoA  and 
RoE. These indicators have rested in high levels; furthermore, they have undergone a slight growth in 
comparison to the previous years. This indicates that the net result growth was not only due to banking 
system assets growth but also due to productivity growth of assets and capital.   
During 2004 the banking system assets were raised by Lek 52.8 billion (or 14.1 percent), about Lek 
18.5 billion more than the growth of assets evidenced over 2003. Year 2004 underwent a significant 
rise in lending activity, with a growth rate of 38 percent (or Lek 19.3 billion) at end of 2004, compared 
to 30.5 percent at end of 2003. Therefore, lending rose to 16.4 percent of total assets of the system at 
end of 2004, from 13.5 percent in the same period of 2003.  
Lending quality indicator (problem loans to credit balance ratio) is estimated at 4.2 percent, from 4.6 
percent at end of 2003. The lowest level of this indicator highlights improvement in lending quality and 
limited banking system exposure to credit risk. 
Downward  trend  of  capital  adequacy  ratio  during  2004  was  due  to  a  better  exploitation  of  banks’ 
capacities in terms of extending in riskier investments. During 2004 the supervision process, trying to 
be proactive and continuous, had on its focus the risk assessment of banks’ activity. Following up the 
requirements of Supervision Development Plan, the document on “Operative Supervision Policy” was 
drafted and approved, prescribing banks’ supervision principles. In view of this policy, the supervision 
cycle for banks that present less concern to supervision is lengthened from 12 months to 18 months, 
whereas for problematic banks it is reduced to 6 months. 
Licensing and regulatory framework 
During  2004  the  banking  system  in  Albania  was  characterized  by  dynamic  developments,  either  in 
terms of increasing the number of banks operating in the market or in terms of extending the banking 
network in various areas of the country. At end of 2004 the number of banks in Albania was 16, from 
which 2 banks are totally with domestic capital and 14 other banks have foreign capital. On April 2004 
the  banking  system  was  further  consolidated  with  the  approval  on  the  ownership  transfer  of  100 
percent  of  the  Savings  Banks’  stock  to  Raiffeisen  Zentralbank,  as  a  crowning  of  the  privatization 
process of this bank. Also, the Popular Bank Jnt. Stk., the second bank with totally Albanian capital 
entered into Albanian market. An application for establishing a new bank with wholly Albanian capital 
was  also  submitted.  This  application  has  recently  received  the  preliminary  approval  for  licence, 
pursuant to requirements of the Law “On Banking System in the Republic of Albania”.  
Parallel  to  development  and  extension  of  the  banking  system  and  the  products  it  offers,  further 
improvements  and  amendments  have  taken  place  in  the  regulatory  packet  of  banking  supervision. 
During  2004,  the  Guideline  “On  bank  regulatory  capital,  the  Regulation  “On  capital  adequacy”,  the 
Regulation  “On  credit  risk  management”  were  revised,  and  the  Regulation  “On  money  laundering 
prevention” was adopted. Also, during 2004 work was done for making improvements in the existing 
Law  “On  Banking  System  in  the  Republic  of  Albania”,  with  the  goal  to  realize  its  adoption  by  the 
Albanian Parliament within 2005.  
These improvements were dictated by the need to adjust to and implement the European directives in 
this are, and the Basel principles for an effective supervision. 
Other activities of the Bank of Albania 
During 2004 the legal status of the Bank of Albania remained unchanged. Meanwhile, the revising of 
the Law “On Banking System in the Republic of Albania” started with the purpose to further perfect the 
legal  framework  of  commercial  banks’  activity  in  accordance  with  the  aspirations  of  our  country  for 
membership in the European Union.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 7
Also,  during  the  last  autumn  the  Bank  of  Albania  regenerated  most  of  its  Supervisory  Council  (7 
members)  and  new  administrators  of  the  institution  were  elected.  This  process  did  not  impact  on 
normal flowing of the Bank’s activity, indicating the consolidation of this institution.  
During 2004 the inter-institutional cooperation was another feature characterizing the Bank of Albania 
performance.  In  this  aspect,  we  have  been  open  and  ready  to  design  and  implement  the  country’s 
development programs, to advise the Albanian executive on various economic issues and we have 
participated actively in all tables of negotiations with the international factor.  
In  view  of  meeting  the  objectives  and  obligations  deriving  from  the  agreements  between  Albanian 
authorities and international institutions, during 2004 the Bank of Albania closely cooperated with the 
latter ones.  
In  the  framework  of  consultations  on  assessing  the  fulfilment  of  obligations  deriving  from  the 
agreement  between  Albanian  authorities  and  the  IMF,  Albania  was  visited  by  three  monitoring 
missions of the IMF. In general, the accomplishments of the Bank of Albania were assessed in the 
framework  of  the  Memorandum  of  Economic  and  Financial  Policies  signed  between  the  Bank  of 
Albania, Ministry of Finance and this institution. Particularly, they evaluated the maintaining of inflation 
within the Bank of Albania targeted band (2-4 percent), the maintaining of a relatively stable exchange 
rate and the efforts for modernizing the banking system. At the same time, the missions expressed 
their support and  encouraged  the  mid-term  plan on cash reduction  in  economy.  Rising  the  lending, 
developing the real sector and amending the regulatory framework of banking supervision were other 
topics discussed in these meetings and in the contacts of the members of the mission with the Bank of 
Albania experts. 
The Bank of Albania was visited by the Mission of Technical Assistance of the IMF, which was focused 
on  banking  supervision  area,  implementation  of  international  accounting  and  payment  standards, 
application of monetary statistics standards and integration of the Bank of Albania into the European 
Monetary  System.  The  Bank  of  Albania  required  assistance  in  inflation  targeting  area.  The  so-far 
assistance  by  the  IMF  to  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  regarded  as  a  stable  and  fruitful  one,  impacting 
significantly on the accomplishment of up date central banking standards.          
Also,  in  the  framework  of  cooperation  with  the  World  Bank  and  its  financial  support,  the  Bank  of 
Albania  has  initiated  the  Automated  Electronic  Clearing  House  Project,  which  will  serve  the  further 
modernization  of  payment  system  and  its  approximation  to  international  standards.  The  work  for 
implementation  of  this  project  was  inaugurated  on  November  2004,  with  the  participation  of  senior 
managers of the World Bank.        
During  2004,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  together  with  the  banking  system  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance 
designed a number of operations, which were intended to reduce cash in economy. In view of meeting 
these  commitments  during  2004,  a  number  of  concrete  steps  were  taken,  among  which  I  would 
highlight the following: completion on January 2004 of the interbank payment system, initiation of the 
big project for building the Automated Electronic Clearing House and the transfer of wages of public 
administration personnel through a bank account.  
Both above projects are regarded as an essential infrastructure, connecting almost the whole banking 
system. The implementation of the systems is done in accordance with best international standards 
and principles, based on modern and up date technology.  
On the other hand, I would emphasize that we have also organized meetings with various groups and 
representatives  of  economic  interest,  who  not  only  have  helped  us  to  better  understand  our  weak 
points, but have also served for clarifying mutual benefits to the participants.  
We  are  determined  to  continue  our  efforts  in  this  direction  even  during  2005.  Therefore,  we  are 
working to complete the project on small-size payments in time, to start cooperation with the World 
Bank  for  creating  a  credit  information  register.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  constantly  holding  the 
banking system under pressure not only for its further geographical extension, but also for raising its 
quality  and  inventory  of  payment  instruments.  The  establishment  of  an  ever  update  payment 
infrastructure,  side  skipping  investments  in  technology  or  out-dated  solutions,  will  be  a  clear 
orientation of the Bank of Albania.  
In this sense, there is room for further increasing the use of electronic credit cards, on which I have 
observed that certain banks have been very active. In the quality of the central bank, we welcome any 
rationalism in terms of simplifying and unifying the use of various cards issued by the banking system.  
 8 
 BIS Review 38/2005
Further to my speech, allow me to make a summary of the financial activity of the Bank of Albania over 
2004: 
Meeting the objective of price stability and financial sustainability of the country has dictated the need 
for  a  more  active  policy  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  Also,  the  developments  of  two  main  foreign 
currencies, Euro and US dollar, have had significant effects on the financial indicators and the Bank of 
Albania balance sheet.  
During 2004, the total assets of the Bank of Albania were increased by 4.8 percent, reflecting growth 
of foreign assets by 14.7 percent. The growth of the latter ones was due to two factors: the Bank of 
Albania intervention in foreign exchange market by purchases, and the converting of foreign currency 
government  income.  In  absolute  value,  the  total  foreign  assets  were  raised  by  Lek  17.2  billion. 
Contribution to foreign assets growth was also given by foreign reserve investment in foreign markets.  
However, the appreciation of domestic currency versus two main currencies, Euro and US dollar, has 
negatively  impacted  on  existing  foreign  assets  value  by  about  Lek  8.5  billion,  expressed  in  the 
reduction  of  Revaluation  Reserve,  on  which  the  Ministry  of  Finance  has  projected  the  issuing  of 
securities, in compliance with the Law “On the  Bank of Albania” and the Law “On State Budget for 
2005”.  
Also, the Bank of Albania, in implementation of its monetary policy, has used the instrument of outright 
Treasury bills sales. This has brought about the reduction of portfolio of domestic assets of the Bank of 
Albania by 10.5 percent or Lek 8.0 billion. On the other hand, the easing policy has impacted on the 
decrease of Treasury bills yield through interest rate cut.  
The  combination  of  both  factors  has  impacted  on  the  level  of  income  from  investment  in  securities 
portfolio of Albanian Government for Lek 2.3 billion or 30 percent less in comparison to the plan. This 
reduction  constitutes  100  percent  of  the  dropping  of  total  income  from  operations.  Under  the 
conditions  of  almost  the same  level  of operative  expenses,  compared  to  the previous  year,  the  net 
profit of the Bank of Albania over 2004 resulted to Lek 5.5 billion or Lek 2.4 billion less than in 2003.  
 Honored deputies! 
Allow  me  to  emphasize  once  more  the  willingness  of  the  institution  I  govern  for  meeting  all  the 
obligations deriving from the Constitution of the Republic of Albania and from the Law “On the Bank of 
Albania”.  This  will  be  achieved  through  further  perfecting  the  framework  of  monetary  policy  and 
monetary  operations  and  simultaneously  through  deepening  our  knowledge  in  terms  of  functioning 
and causative inter-dependence characterizing the Albanian economy. I believe that year 2005 will be 
a successful year in terms of research, particularly in increasing the forecasting power on inflationary 
developments and in improving the Bank of Albania governance. I would like to cite that adaptation of 
inflation targeting regime remains our political aspiration, a fact that makes us be seriously committed 
to prudentially follow the relevant pre-conditions.  
For this purpose, we will continue the relevant theses we need for finding understanding and proper 
support of the Assembly and other state institutions.  
I  would  like  to  ensure  the  Assembly  of  Albania  that  our  recent  steps  and  expected  ones  take  into 
account even our national aspiration for a faster integration into the European Union.  
We have already understood that no genuine integration can exist without financial integration. The 
country needs more income, more political stability, more social and cultural integration, but as much 
important is the financial integration as well. From this viewpoint, I think that the role of the institution I 
govern,  the  role  of  the  banking  system  and  of  the  financial  sector  is  primary  and  we  have  many 
challenges ahead of us.   
Strengthening of the country’s financial stability, enhancement of effectiveness of monetary policy and 
other economic policies, financial market flexibility, increase of geographical coverage of the country 
with  banking  business  and  financial  intermediation  rise  are  indispensable  conditions  for  a  real 
integration of the country with the developed part of the European Continent.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 9
