Antonio Fazio: Update on the change in the control structure of some 
Italian banking groups 
Report by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, to the Interministerial Committee 
for Credit and Savings, Rome, 26 August 2005. 
 1. 
Introduction. Supervisory procedures and action in the case of transactions 
involving the capital of banks 
The  controls  on  the  ownership  structures  of  banks  contribute,  together  with  the  other 
instruments of prudential supervision, to the pursuit of the objectives of sound and prudent 
management  of  intermediaries  and  the  stability,  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  the 
banking  and  financial  system  (Article  5  of  the  Consolidated  Law  on  Banking).  Effective 
performance of the controls has accompanied the international opening of the ownership of 
Italian  banks,  which  is  also  significant  in  comparison  with  other  European  countries.  The 
proportion of foreign-owned capital in the four major banking groups averages 16 per cent in 
Italy,  7  per  cent  in  Germany,  3  per  cent  in  France  and  2.6  per  cent  in  Spain.  In  Italy 
competition has increased; the range of services offered to customers has broadened; unit 
operating costs have been reduced. This process is still under way. Under Community and 
Italian law, the acquisition of shareholdings in banks above given thresholds, which start at 5 
per cent, must be authorized by the Bank of Italy; moreover, holdings that allow the exercise 
of control must always be authorized (Article 19 of the Consolidated Law on Banking). 
All shareholders’ agreements leading to the coordinated exercise of voting rights at a bank 
must  be  notified  to  the  Bank  of  Italy  within  five  days.  Voting  rights  that  are  the  subject  of 
unreported  agreements  may  not  be  exercised.  The  evaluations  conducted  by  the  Bank  of 
Italy are intended to prevent major shareholders from exercising their rights to the detriment 
of the sound and prudent management of the bank. To this end the Bank of Italy takes into 
account: (a) the characteristics of the parties intending to acquire the holdings; (b) the upper 
limit of 15 per cent on industrial and commercial companies’ holdings of a bank’s capital and 
(c) in the event of the acquisition of a controlling interest, the business plan pursued.  
If the acquirer is a bank, the evaluation also looks at the operation’s impact on the bank’s 
overall situation and organization and that of the entity created by the combination (Article 53 
of the Consolidated Law on Banking). If the acquirer is an EU bank, Community law requires 
prior consultation with the supervisory authority of its country of origin, which is responsible 
for  verifying  its  sound  and  prudent  management.  The  sustainability  of  acquisitions  is 
evaluated with reference to prudential regulations, which are based on common international 
principles;  in  this  regard,  capital  adequacy  with  respect  to  the  various  forms  of  risk  is  of 
fundamental importance. 
In  particular,  the  regulations  state  that  banks’  capital,  in  the  composition  employed  for 
supervisory purposes, must be equal to at least 8 per cent of their riskweighted assets.1
Banking groups are required to report their capital ratios to the Bank of Italy twice a year, 
with  reference  to  the  situation  on  30  June  and  31  December  of  each  year;  these  official 
reports must be sent, respectively, by 25 October and 25 April following the reference date. 
                                                 
1 
In the case of banks belonging to banking groups, the minimum capital requirement is lowered to 7 percent (at 
the “individual” level), while the requirement for the group as a whole remains 8 per cent (at the “consolidated” 
level). Furthermore, the Bank of Italy also requires the main banking groups to aim for higher capital ratios 
than the regulatory limits: the so-called target ratios. 
   1/14 
Compliance with the regulations is verified on the basis not only of statistical reports, but also 
of  information  and  documents  acquired  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  as  part  of  its  administrative 
activity and in the course of interviews with corporate officers. Supervisory inspections can 
be conducted to obtain further information regarding the management of the bank and the 
quality of the data transmitted. 
Community law and supervisory instructions do not exclude the possibility of deviations from 
regulatory requirements, but require that suitable measures be adopted promptly to restore 
compliance with the capital ratio.  
In  the  case  of  business  combinations,  the  Bank  of  Italy  examines  the  amount  of  capital 
available  as  well  as  the  plans  for  raising  any  additional  funds  that  might  be  needed.  The 
evaluations are made on the basis of the latest balance sheet of the acquirer, audited, in the 
case  of  listed  banks,  by  a  leading  firm  of  independent  auditors;  these  evaluations  are 
supplemented  with  information  acquired  in  the  course  of  ordinary  supervisory  activity  and 
with  additional  information,  data  and  simulations  obtained  during  meetings  with  corporate 
officers or from other sources. 
In general it is not economically advantageous, in the early stages of planning, for the bank 
making the acquisition to obtain more funds than are necessary for ordinary operations, not 
least  in  view  of  the  substantial  progress  the  capital  market  has  made  in  recent  years; 
acquiring capital in advance would primarily affect the shareholders, by reducing the return 
on their capital. The authorizations contain mandatory provisions to coordinate the making of 
investments in shareholdings with the raising of capital. 
In  order  to  provide  safety  margins  with  respect  to  the  minimum  ratios  prescribed  by  the 
regulations, the Bank of Italy often requires contingency plans for raising further capital to be 
drawn up, ready for implementation in case of need. The Bank of Italy performs a different 
evaluation  of  mergers  and  acquisitions,  entirely  separate  from  the  examination  of  the 
prudential  aspects,  by  virtue  of  the  powers  as  antitrust  authority  for  the  banking  sector 
entrusted to it under Law 287/1990. I will not go into this aspect in detail because it has no 
bearing on the facts that are the focus of attention today; in the case of the Banca Nazionale 
del Lavoro, the opinion of the Antitrust Authority is pending.2
The procedures followed by the Bank of Italy in the conduct of its supervisory activity comply 
with 
the  provisions  of  Law  241/1990,  as  amended,  which  regulate  administrative 
proceedings, making a distinction between the examination stage and the decision-making 
stage. 
In  the  case  of  business  combinations,  the  Bank  of  Italy  examines  the  amount  of  capital 
available  as  well  as  the  plans  for  raising  any  additional  funds  that  might  be  needed.  The 
evaluations are made on the basis of the latest balance sheet of the acquirer, audited, in the 
case  of  listed  banks,  by  a  leading  firm  of  independent  auditors;  these  evaluations  are 
supplemented  with  information  acquired  in  the  course  of  ordinary  supervisory  activity  and 
with  additional  information,  data  and  simulations  obtained  during  meetings  with  corporate 
officers or from other sources. 
In general it is not economically advantageous, in the early stages of planning, for the bank 
making the acquisition to obtain more funds than are necessary for ordinary operations, not 
least  in  view  of  the  substantial  progress  the  capital  market  has  made  in  recent  years; 
acquiring capital in advance would primarily affect the shareholders, by reducing the return 
on their capital. The authorizations contain mandatory provisions to coordinate the making of 
                                                 
2  The  Antitrust  Authority  recently  asked  the  parties  concerned  to  provide  information  about  an  existing 
consultation  agreement  relating  to  FINSOE,  the  company  controlling  UNIPOL,  entered  into  by  Monte  dei 
Paschi di Siena, a shareholder in FINSOE, and Holmo Spa, which controls it. 
   2/14 
for  raising 
further  capital 
to  be  drawn  up,  ready 
investments in shareholdings with the raising of capital. In order to provide safety margins 
with  respect  to  the  minimum  ratios  prescribed  by  the  regulations,  the  Bank  of  Italy  often 
requires  contingency  plans 
for 
implementation in case of need. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  performs  a  different  evaluation  of  mergers  and  acquisitions,  entirely 
separate from the examination of the prudential aspects, by virtue of the powers as antitrust 
authority  for  the  banking  sector  entrusted  to  it  under  Law  287/1990.  I  will  not  go  into  this 
aspect in detail because it has no bearing on the facts that are the focus of attention today; in 
the case of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the opinion of the Antitrust Authority is pending. 
The procedures followed by the Bank of Italy in the conduct of its supervisory activity comply 
with 
the  provisions  of  Law  241/1990,  as  amended,  which  regulate  administrative 
proceedings, making a distinction between the examination stage and the decision-making 
stage. 
In  the  interests  of  a  desirable  plurality  of  technical  evaluations,  these  stages  have  always 
been  characterized  by  a  dialectical  approach  correlated  with  functional  roles,  professional 
capacities and related responsibilities. 
The  internal  regulations  prescribe  how  these  dialectical  positions  are  synthesized  and 
regulate the powers and duties of the people authorized to make decisions. 
2. 
Transactions involving the capital of Banca Antoniana Popolare Veneta 
(Antonveneta) 
Governance structure of Banca Antonveneta 
2.1 
During  2004  relations  between  the  members  of  the  shareholders’  agreement  governing 
Banca  Antonveneta  (ABN  Amro,  Lloyd  Adriatico  and  some  entrepreneurs)  became 
increasingly strained, mainly because of the large number of participants and the diversity of 
their  objectives;  in  December  some  of  them  announced  their  intention  not  to  renew  the 
agreements upon expiry. Given this situation, ABN Amro, which in June 2004 had expressed 
an interest in increasing its holding in Antonveneta, signified its willingness to find a solution 
for the bank’s governance that would safeguard its 
investment; on the other hand, Banca Popolare di Lodi (BPL) informed the Bank of Italy that 
it intended to put itself forward as reference shareholder in the search for new governance 
arrangements for Antonveneta. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  evolution  of 
Banca Antonveneta’s ownership structure threatened to destabilize its management policies, 
thereby  undermining 
internal  reorganization  and 
enhancement of the bank’s balance-sheet assets; this process had been initiated recently by 
the management in order to solve the considerable operating and organizational problems 
from which Antonveneta had been suffering for some time;the consolidated profit and loss 
account  for  2003  closed  with  a  loss  of  €842  million,  partly  as  a  result  of  substantial  value 
adjustments to loans. In 2004 it showed a profit of €282 million. 
Against this background of uncertainty, ABN Amro and BPL were repeatedly urged to reach 
an agreement that would ensure the sound and prudent management of Banca Antonveneta. 
Contacts between the two parties in the early months of 2005 nonetheless failed to produce 
mutually  acceptable  solutions  regarding  either  the  governance  of  the  bank  or  commercial 
agreements; on the contrary they led to an acceleration of plans by both parties to undertake 
transactions involving the capital of Banca Antonveneta. 
the  effectiveness  of 
the  ongoing 
   3/14 
2.2 
BPL’s application to increase its shareholding to 14.9 per cent of Banca 
Antonveneta’s capital 
On 4 February BPL gave the Bank of Italy prior notification of a plan to acquire 14.9 per cent 
of  Antonveneta’s  capital.  A  formal  application  was  sent  on  11  February;  the  Bank  of  Italy 
granted authorization on 14 February, ten days after the notification. 
The  capital  needed  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  transaction  was  to  come  from  an 
existing surplus of own funds and the forthcoming issue of a €300 million subordinated loan 
for which authorization had already been obtained. The plan drawn up by BPL to strengthen 
its capital base by issuing additional instruments was designed to maintain a high solvency 
ratio even after the investment. 
Since the issue of the capital instruments announced by BPL would take a few weeks, in the 
authorization  measure  the  bank  was  invited  to  proceed  gradually  in  acquiring  the 
shareholdings;  the  document  contained  a  further  request  that  additional  measures  to 
strengthen  capital  be  scheduled  for  the  end  of  2005  to  take  account  of  the  effects  of  the 
application of the new International Accounting Standards. 
In the weeks after 14 February technical meetings were held to discuss the proposed issue 
of  capital  instruments  with  innovative  features;  the  Bank  of  Italy  requested  additional 
documentation  and  after  careful  examination  demanded  changes  to  the  transaction; 
consequently the preparation of the issue took longer than initially planned. 
ABN Amro’s applications for authorization 
2.3 
On 15 March 2005 ABN Amro informed the Bank of Italy, in its prior notification, that it was 
interested in acquiring control of Banca Antonveneta through a complete-acquisition tender 
offer. 
ABN  Amro  sent  the  official  request  for  authorization,  accompanied  by  the  prescribed 
documentation,  to  the  Bank  of  Italy  on  30  March.  In  compliance  with  the  requirements  of 
European legislation and the supervisory Instructions, the Bank of Italy, after subjecting the 
documents  to  a  preliminary  examination,  on  12  April  applied  to  the  Dutch  supervisory 
authority for information regarding ABN Amro. 
On 12 April ABN Amro requested authorization to hold shares in excess of the thresholds of 
15 and  20 per cent of capital, on the grounds that it wished to ensure the success of its bid. 
One complex point that arose in the course of the examination was the fact that ABN Amro 
was in possession of bonds convertible into Antonveneta shares; conversion of these bonds 
would have had major effects on the ownership structure and governance of Antonveneta. 
On 19 April, seven days after the formal application was made, the Bank of Italy authorized 
ABN Amro to increase its shareholding in Banca Antonveneta to 20 percent. 
At the time it was not possible to give permission to go beyond that threshold: authorization 
to do so would have placed the Dutch bank in a position to increase its holding to the next 
threshold prescribed by the regulations, 33 per cent; attainment of that threshold would have 
made a tender offer mandatory, whereas the application to gain control of Antonveneta by 
means of a voluntary tender offer was still being evaluated. 
On  20  April  ABN  Amro  formally  undertook  not  to  exceed  30  per  cent  of  Antonveneta’s 
capital, thereby making the potential bond conversion into the bank’s shares irrelevant for the 
purpose  of  calculating  ABN  Amro’s  total  shareholding.  On  27  April  the  Bank  of  Italy 
authorized ABN Amro to acquire up to  30 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. 
On 6 May, once the necessary analyses and verifications and the consultation with the Dutch 
authorities  had  been  completed,  ABN  Amro  was  authorized  to  take  control  of  Banca 
Antonveneta. The examination, which began with ABN Amro’s prior notification on 15 March, 
lasted 52 days; starting from the date of the formal application for authorization, which was 
   4/14 
submitted  on  30  March,  the  inquiry  lasted  37  days;  17  days  were  taken  up  by  the 
consultation with the Dutch authorities. 
The tender offer terminated on 22 July 2005, with the shares tendered amounting to just over 
2 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. ABN Amro publicly announced its intention to return the 
shares acquired during the tender offer and that it was not interested in remaining a minority 
shareholder in Banca Antonveneta. 
BPL’s additional investment 
the  shareholding  appeared  compatible  with 
2.4 
On  31  March  BPL  announced  its  intention  to  increase  its  shareholding  in  Antonveneta  to 
29.9 per cent and submitted a formal application for authorization on 4 April. 
During the technical meetings held to assess whether BPL had sufficient capital, the Bank of 
Italy asked the bank’s officers to explain how the capital requirements would be met. They 
replied that steps would be taken to match the disbursement with actions to strengthen the 
capital base; proposals included the use of securities lending and the pledges of shares in 
order to acquire voting rights of the order of 10 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital; the sale to 
foreign banks of minority shareholdings in companies controlled by the group for an overall 
value of around €1 billion; and additions to the subordinated loans already planned. Finally, 
in  a  longer  term  perspective,  a  substantial  capital  increase  was  envisaged  to  support  the 
bank’s growth plans. 
The  estimates  submitted  by  BPL  showed  the  investment  to  be  sustainable.  The  cost  of 
acquiring  the  entire  29.9  per  cent  share  in  Banca  Antonveneta’s  capital  was  estimated  at 
around  €2  billion,  while  the  new  capital  resources  that  were  the  subject  of  the  two 
applications  for  authorization  amounted  to  €2,275  million,  later  raised  to  €2,380  million.  At 
the end of the transaction the bank’s capital ratio would stand at 10.3 per cent. 
On  7  April  authorization  was  granted,  seven  days  after  the  start  of  the  examination  of  the 
application.  Even  assuming  unfavourable  developments  regarding  certain  variables, 
acquisition  of 
the  sound  and  prudent 
management of the BPL group. 
After obtaining authorization for the shareholding, BPL asked the Bank of Italy to approve the 
issue  of  the  instruments  to  strengthen  its  capital  base  described  in  the  application  and  to 
include them in the computation of supervisory capital. The Bank of Italy called for changes 
in  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  issues,  so  that  they  would  have  standard  technical 
features; the authorizations were granted in measures adopted after examinations lasting up 
to one month. 
In  the  meantime  the  Bank  of  Italy  held  several  technical  meetings  to  keep  abreast  of 
developments  in  the  capital  strengthening  plan  and,  in  particular,  the  sale  of  minority 
holdings of companies belonging to the group. 
On 29 April BPL’s shareholding reached 29.5 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. On 30 April 
the  shareholders’  meeting  of  Banca  Antonveneta  renewed  the  governing  bodies  and 
appointed  members  put  forward  by  BPL.  Subsequently,  according  to  the  documents 
produced  by  BPL  at  the  beginning  of  May,  it  was  found  that  the  acquisitions  had  been 
effected  with  less  recourse  to  securities  lending  and  pledges  of  shares  than  originally 
proposed; moreover, it appeared that the timetable for the sale of minority shareholdings had 
not been respected. As a consequence, from April of this year the capital ratios were briefly 
out of line, although the shortfall was subsequently removed. 
These circumstances have no bearing on the effects of the authorization already granted by 
the Bank of Italy, as confirmed by the recent decision of the Lazio Administrative Court dated 
13-19  July  and  filed  on  9  August,  but  they  are  relevant  for  sanctions.  The  relative 
investigations, which began immediately, concluded with a formal notice issued on 29 July to 
the members of BPL’s board of directors and board of auditors. 
   5/14 
BPL’s takeover bids for Antonveneta 
2.5 
On  22  April  Banca  Popolare  di  Lodi  gave  the  Bank  of  Italy  prior  notification  of  a  plan  to 
acquire  control  of  Banca  Antonveneta  by  means  of  an  exchange  tender  offer.  The  formal 
application was filed on 5 May. Preliminary estimates showed that BPL’s capital ratios after 
the acquisition would have been above the regulatory minimum regardless of the amount of 
shares tendered. Moreover, the planned capital increase of €1.5 billion would have further 
increased the capital surpluses. 
In April Consob, with which the Bank of Italy had begun cooperating in February with regard 
to the transactions involving Antonveneta’s capital, intensified its checks. 
Among other matters, Consob informed the Bank of Italy of the acquisition of Antonveneta 
shares by BPL on behalf of a number parties. Consob investigated this activity on the basis 
first  of  information  requested  from  BPL  and  then  of  inspections  and  the  Central  Credit 
Register data it requested on two occasions from the Bank of Italy. The requests for Central 
Credit Register data were transmitted on 20 April and 4 May and satisfied by the Bank of 
Italy in six and two working days respectively. 
With  a  resolution  dated  10  May  Consob,  proceeding  on  its  own  authority,  found  that  an 
undeclared  shareholders’  agreement  existed  between  BPL  and  other  Antonveneta 
shareholders  for  the  concerted  acquisition  of  Antonveneta  shares  and  the  exercise, 
individually  or  jointly,  of  a  dominant  influence  over  Antonveneta;  the  resolution  also  drew 
attention to the manner in which loans had been granted for the purchase of Antonveneta 
shares. 
The Bank of Italy promptly notified the suspension of voting rights to the persons indicated in 
the  Consob  resolution and  initiated  the  administrative  sanction  procedure  against them  for 
violations  of  the  provisions  concerning  the  notification  of  shareholders’  agreements  to  the 
Bank of Italy and the authorization to acquire major shareholdings. Furthermore, judging that 
there had been instances of non-compliance with the rules on credit management, the Bank 
of Italy initiated an additional sanction procedure against BPL. 
The Consob resolution, which was transmitted to the Bank of Italy in a letter dated 11 May, 
substantially modified the information available to the Bank; the obligation to make a tender 
offer, with a further outlay of cash, altered the overall context of the supervisory evaluations. 
On 17 May BPL, conforming with the obligations resulting from Consob’s finding, applied to 
the Bank of Italy to authorize the mandatory cash tender offer as well and transformed the 
exchange tender offer for which it had applied for authorization on 5 May into a  cash and 
exchange tender offer basically similar in content to the exchange tender offer. 
At the same time BPL executed a shareholders’ agreement among the persons indicated in 
the Consob resolution, which was notified pursuant to Article 20 of the Consolidated Law on 
Banking. 
On  2  June  the  shareholders’  meeting  of  Banca  Popolare  di  Lodi  approved  a  €1.5  billion 
capital  increase;  on  the  same  occasion  the  name  of  the  bank  was  changed  to  Banca 
Popolare Italiana (BPI). The offering terminated on 15 July with an acceptance rate of 99 per 
cent, which took the capital ratios well above the regulatory minimums. 
In view of the uncertainties regarding the transactions for the capital cover of the mandatory 
tender  offer,  on  8  June  the  Bank  of  Italy  asked  BPI  to  submit  documents  on  the  actions 
intended to ensure that the 8 per cent requirement would continue to be satisfied after the 
acquisition.  In  addition,  the  Bank  formalized  some  especially  stringent  guidelines  that  BPI 
was  to  follow  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  bank’s  capital  base  could  sustain  the  mandatory 
tender offer. 
BPI  responded  to  the  requests  by  providing  updates  and  documents  on  the  capital 
strengthening needed to sustain the acquisition of control of Banca Antonveneta. 
   6/14 
Lastly, on 20 June the Bank of Italy initiated an inspection of a general nature at BPI, inter 
alia with the aim of checking, in connection with the acquisitions, the bank’s capital ratios, its 
credit disbursement and management procedures and its statistical reports. The first checks 
concerned the amount of BPI’s own funds. 
The latter initiative came after the start on 9 June of an inspection at Antonveneta to check 
whether  the  functioning  of  the  bank’s  ordinary  operations  had  been  impaired  by  the 
temporary  uncertainty  stemming  from  the  precautionary  suspension  of  the  shareholders’ 
resolution of 30 April renewing Banca Antonveneta’s governing bodies, ordered by the Court 
of Padua on 21 May. The inspection ended on 24 June without significant findings. 
The examination of BPI’s proposed tender offers. 
2.6 
The  examination,  conducted  according  to  the  criteria  and  methods  referred  to  above, 
focused  principally  on  three  aspects  material  to  the  granting  of  authorization  to  acquire 
control  of  Antonveneta:  a)  the  BPI  group’s  capital  adequacy;  b)  BPI’s  “quality”  as  a 
shareholder, taking account of the above-mentioned Consob resolution and the consequent 
steps taken by the Bank of Italy; and c) the checks carried out by the Bank of Italy regarding 
the conduct in connection with the temporary shortfall of BPI’s capital ratio. 
On the last two points the Bank of Italy continued to avail itself of the advice of authoritative 
jurists  who had  collaborated  with  it from  the  start  of  the  Antonveneta  case.  Recourse  was 
made to outside experts in view of the complexity of the factors to be evaluated, the novelty 
of  the  case  and  the  extremely  specialized  nature  of  the  matter,  including  its  practical 
application. Professors Agostino Gambino, Massimo Luciani, Fabio Merusi and Paolo Ferro-
Luzzi collaborated; Professors Gambino and Luciani were part of the Bank of Italy’s defence 
team in the trial before the Lazio Administrative Court. 
The examination began by estimating the overall capital ratio at 30 June on the basis of the 
documentation and statements produced at the time by BPI. The ratio was found to be equal 
to  
9.2 per cent on the more restrictive assumption that the shareholding already held would be 
consolidated  using  the  equity  method;  if  it  were  not  consolidated,  taking  into  account  the 
intervening  suspension  of  the  voting  rights  attaching  to  it  and  the  absence  of  BPI 
representatives  on  Antonveneta’s  board  of  directors,  BPI’s  capital  ratio  would  have  been 
higher than 11 per cent. 
Considering  the  capital  strengthening  measures  envisaged  by  BPI,  and  particularly  the 
capital increase of €1.5 billion then under way, it was found that the bank’s capital base could 
sustain  the  transaction  in  the  event  of  the  tender  offers  succeeding.  However,  the 
examination also revealed uncertainties as regards the situation that would emerge with the 
year-end application of the International Accounting Standards, due to put options issued by 
BPI  to  third  parties  on  shares  of  group  companies  and  the  commitment  to  purchase 
Antonveneta shares owned by the other parties to the shareholders’ agreement. As regards 
the conduct deemed material for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements 
for the quality of the shareholders and sound and prudent management, an initial phase of 
the  examination  found  questionable  conduct  in  business  dealings  by  shareholders  of 
Antonveneta, in relation to the facts brought to light by the Consob resolution of 10 May and 
the checks carried out by the Bank of Italy.  
For a fuller evaluation of the facts, the analysis of these aspects was usefully supplemented 
by the observations already made by the legal advisors; the results of a further consultation 
contributed  significant  elements  for  an  appreciation  of  the  case  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
granting of authorization. 
The convergent opinions of the legal advisors, authoritative and expert in the matter, were 
considered  to  overcome  the  various  doubts  that  had  arisen  in  the  first  phase  of  the 
   7/14 
examination and to provide a correct interpretation of the letter and the spirit of Italian and 
Community legislation. 
On 11 July 2005 the Bank of Italy authorized BPI to acquire control of Antonveneta, giving an 
ample account of the grounds for its decision in the authorization measure. 
The  integration  of  the  two  banks  as  envisaged  in  the  business  plan  presented  positive 
aspects from the supervisory point of view, considering the significant synergies that would 
arise, partly as a consequence of the new group’s strong territorial roots. 
On  the  basis  of  the  advisors’  opinion,  the  authorization  measure  recalled  the  necessary 
autonomy  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  evaluation  of  matters  able  to  impair  sound  and  prudent 
management with respect to the above-mentioned Consob resolution. 
It was observed that the law provides for the mandatory tender offer as an ex post remedy in 
favour of minority shareholders; accordingly, a comparison of the different interests led to the 
conclusion  that  the  consequences  of  denial  of  authorization  were  so  serious  that  such  a 
course was possible only if the applicant bank was found to be manifestly unsuitable, to an 
extent that rendered the threat to the target bank’s stability obvious. 
In addition, separate evaluations were made of the conduct of the bank’s corporate officers 
and  the  “reliability”  of  the  bank.  According  to  the  approach  adopted,  the  conduct  was 
punishable with administrative sanctions. The imposition of an administrative sanction does 
not affect the reliability of the bank, which is the effective applicant for authorization and its 
ability to ensure sound and prudent management is not in question. As regards the conduct 
in question, the sanction procedure had already been initiated by the Bank of Italy. 
Similar  considerations  hold  for  the  temporary  shortfall  of  the  capital  ratio,  since,  as  noted 
earlier,  this  had  been  made  good  in  full  and  the  Bank  of  Italy  had  already  initiated  the 
administrative sanction procedure for violation of the rules on capital requirements. 
With  regard  to  BPI’s  prospective  capital  adequacy,  account  was  taken  of  its  formal 
commitments  to  meet  any  need  for  a  further  strengthening  of  its  own  funds  and  of  the 
feasibility of the steps it envisaged. At all events the Bank of Italy expressly required BPI to: 
– 
launch  the  cash/cash  and  exchange  tender  offer  once  the  conditions  for  the 
successful outcome of the capital increase then under way had been verified; 
reformulate the shareholders’ agreement between BPI and the other shareholders of 
Antonveneta, so as to avert a negative impact on capital adequacy with the entry 
into force of the International Accounting Standards for supervisory purposes; 
modify  the  agreements  concluded  with  Société  Genérale,  Deutsche  Bank  and 
Dresdner  Bank  for  the  transfer  to  them  of  up  to  30  per  cent  of  the  Antonveneta 
shares acquired in the cash tender offer for subsequent resale on the market and 
reduce the market risk borne by BPI; 
take every step that might be necessary in the future to ensure compliance with the 
prudential rules. 
   The examination began on 22 April with the prior notification transmitted by BPI and lasted 
80 days. From the date the first formal application was submitted (5 May), it lasted 67 days, 
including the period in which the time limit was suspended. 
Meanwhile,  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Consob  continued  to  exchange  information  and 
documentation  in  the  context  of  their  ordinary  cooperation.  The  Bank  of  Italy  described  in 
detail  the  fact-finding  activities  it  had  begun  and  the  checks  and  inspections  under  way, 
notifying  Consob  of  each  decision  it  made  concerning  BPI’s  acquisition  of  control  of 
Antonveneta. 
   8/14 
2. 
Actions under administrative law and the ruling of the Lazio Administrative 
Court 
Between April and June ABN Amro decided to apply for legal remedies, requesting, among 
other things, the annulment or revocation of the authorizations issued by the Bank of Italy to 
BPL (now BPI) whereby the latter had been progressively authorized to raise its holding in 
Banca Antonveneta to 29.9 per cent. 
These  applications  were  examined  by  the  Lazio  Administrative  Court,  which  on  28  April 
dismissed  the  applicant’s  request  for  suspension  of  the  authorizations  and  then  issued  its 
ruling on the merits of the case, dated 13-19 July and filed on 9 August. 
The Administrative Court recognized the full legitimacy of the acts of the Bank of Italy. 
The  judges  preliminarily  excluded  that  BPL  had  been  granted  favoured  treatment  with  the 
issue  of  its  authorizations  in  less  time  than  had  been  taken  for  ABN  Amro,  since  the  two 
applications involved different situations (BPL’s directed towards the acquisition of minority 
albeit  qualifying  holdings,  ABN  Ambro’s  towards  the  acquisition  of  control),  that  merited 
distinct evaluations. 
In this regard, I recall that the examination for the granting of authorization to acquire control 
of Antonveneta lasted 52 days for ABN Ambro and 80 days for BPI. 
In stating the grounds for its ruling, the Administrative Court underscored that the go-ahead 
for the transaction was “formulated in such as way as to reconcile the preeminent needs of 
banking supervision with the characteristic dynamism of market transactions”, and affirmed 
that the authorization for BPI to increase its interest in Antonveneta up to 29.9 per cent came 
at the end of “an examination that appears to have been complete and appropriate” and that 
the Bank of Italy had evaluated the sustainability of the transaction from the “standpoint of 
sound and prudent management”. 
Furthermore, the Court confirmed the correctness of the conduct of the Bank of Italy, on the 
grounds that “the Bank of Italy is required to verify not so much the current amount of the 
applicant’s  own  funds  in  relation  to  the  entire  planned  acquisition,  as  the  adequacy  and 
practical feasibility of the proposed plan for capital strengthening, thereby making a forecast, 
with  a  high  degree  of  technical  discretion,  in  which  its  institutional  functions  are  ultimately 
manifested”. 
The Administrative Court also explicitly ruled that supervisory indications imparted at the time 
of granting an authorization are not conditions for the effectiveness of the authorization; they 
constitute accessory elements by way of guidance. 
Consequently, supervening developments do not impinge on the effects of the authorization 
measure or its legitimacy, but are relevant, on a different plane, for the Bank of Italy’s powers 
of  control  and  sanction  with  regard  to  compliance  with  its  prescriptive  supervisory 
instructions. 
The Bank of Italy based its activity on these principles again in authorizing BPL to acquire 
control of Banca Antonveneta. 
Events following the granting of authorization for BPI to acquire control 
2.8 
Following  the  authorization  measure  of  11  July,  Consob  ascertained  the  existence  of  an 
undeclared agreement between BPI and Magiste International for the concerted purchase of 
Banca  Antonveneta  shares  and  the  exercise,  possibly  on  a  joint  basis,  of  a  dominant 
influence over that bank, as well as the interposition of two foreign funds in some purchases 
of Antonveneta shares made prior to 30 April 2005. 
In  this  case  too  the  Bank  of  Italy  notified  suspension  of  the  voting  rights  and  initiated  the 
administrative sanction procedure under the Consolidated Law on Banking in connection with 
   9/14 
the relevant matters indicated in the Consob resolutions, which included the management of 
BPI’s finance area. 
On 26 July the decree issued by the Milan public prosecutor’s office for the sequestration of 
the  Antonveneta  shares  owned  by  the  parties  to  the  shareholders’  agreements,  including 
BPI,  was  notified  to  the  Bank  of  Italy.  According  to  the  investigators,  some  financial 
transactions  carried  out  in  order  to  comply  with  the  capital  ratios,  particularly  the  sales  of 
minority shareholdings, had been merely artificial. 
On 27 July Consob ordered the precautionary suspension of both the cash tender offer and 
the  cash  and  exchange  tender  offer  made  by  Banca  Popolare  Italiana.Moreover,  the 
supervisory inspections begun at BPI on 20 June revealed credit derivative agreements with 
a maturity of one year entered into with the London branch of Deutsche Bank; according to 
the  interim  reports  of  29  July  and  8  August  by  the  head  of  the  inspection  team,  the 
transaction may have been executed without following normal internal procedures. In view of 
the links between the credit derivatives and the minority shareholdings sold, the effect of the 
disposals carried out to strengthen BPI’s capital base may be substantially annulled. At the 
Bank of Italy’ request the company’s governing bodies are making the necessary checks.  
On  30  July  the  Bank  of  Italy  had  already  ordered  the  suspension  for  up  to  ninety  days  of 
BPI’s  authorization  to  acquire  control  of  Antonveneta,  considering  it  necessary  to  make  a 
further examination of the effects of subsequent developments on the evaluations included in 
the authorization measure of 11 July 2005. 
The situation of BPI’s capital ratios 
2.9 
The  current  situation  of  the  BPI  group,  taking  account  of  the  recently  executed  capital 
increase of €1.5 billion, shows a substantial surplus of capital with respect to the minimum 
requirements. 
The surplus is estimated at €2.3 billion, with an overall capital ratio of 15.8 per cent. If on the 
basis  of  the  further  examinations  now  under  way  it  should  be  necessary  to  sterilize  the 
benefits to the capital ratios of the above-mentioned disposals of minority shareholdings, the 
surplus is estimated to be €1 billion and the overall capital ratio to be 11.3 per cent in the 
absence of corrective measures. 
If BPI were to sell the Antonveneta shares in its possession, this would lead to a substantial 
increase in the capital surplus, to €4.4 billion, and in the overall ratio, to 22.5 per cent; in the 
event  that  the  effects  of  the  above-mentioned  disposals  of  shareholdings  were  sterilized, 
these figures would be €3 billion and 18 per cent respectively. 
A  revival  of  the  cash  tender  offer  cannot  be  independent  of  the  prompt  execution  of  the 
further  measures  of  capital  strengthening  already  approved  by  the  company’s  governing 
bodies and authorized by the Bank of Italy (a capital increase of €300 million, a €400 million 
issue  of  preference  shares  and  conversion  of  the  €1,200  million  convertible  subordinated 
loan). 
The need for full compliance with the Bank of Italy’s guidance for dealing with the prospective 
impact of the application of the International Accounting Standards remains unaffected. 
The Bank of Italy is following the development of the situation and will adopt the measures 
falling within its sphere of competence, taking account of the decisions that will be made by 
the company’s governing bodies.  
   10/14 
3. 
Transactions involving the capital of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro  
Governance structure of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro. 
3.1 
In  April  2004  some  BNL  shareholders  -  Banco  Bilbao  Vizcaya  Argentaria  (BBVA), 
Assicurazioni  Generali  and  Dorint-Della  Valle  -  concluded  a  shareholders’  agreement 
concerning the management of the bank covering a total of 28.39 per cent of BNL’s share 
capital (the “pact”). 
In  July  2004  other  non-bank,  non-financial  shareholders  of  BNL  entered  into  a  rival 
shareholders’ agreement (the “counterpact”), which among other things regulated the way in 
which  the  voting  rights  attaching  to  their  ordinary  shares  would  be  exercised;  the  share 
capital covered  by  the  counterpact  increased progressively  from  an  initial  13.5 per  cent  to 
27.7 per cent. 
Individually,  the  parties  to  the  counterpact  owned  shareholdings  that  did  not  exceed  5  per 
cent.  Consequently,  their  share  purchases  were  not  subject  to  prior  authorization  by  the 
Bank of Italy and were in compliance with the ceiling designed to ensure separation between 
banking and commerce. This ceiling does not apply to shareholders’ pacts as such. 
The  existence  of  two  opposing  pacts  gave  rise  to  a  state  of  conflict  within  the  body  of 
shareholders and the board of directors of BNL, engendering uncertainty in the management 
and operation of the bank and impeding initiatives for its revival and growth. 
3.2 
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria’s application for authorization to acquire 
control of BNL 
On 18 March 2005 BBVA gave the Bank of Italy prior notification of its intention to acquire a 
controlling  interest  in  BNL  by  means  of  a  voluntary  exchange  tender  offer  for  all  of  BNL’s 
ordinary shares. 
On 13 May, after completing the required consultation procedure with the Bank of Spain and 
receiving  clarifications  from  BBVA  concerning the  procedure  for  the  exchange  tender  offer 
and its business plan for BNL, the Bank of Italy authorized BBVA to acquire, by means of an 
exchange  tender  offer,  a  holding  of  more  than  50  per  cent  of  BNL’s  share  capital.  The 
application process lasted a total of 56 days, from the prior notification on 18 March to the 
authorization on 13 May. Counting from 29 March, the date on which the formal application 
for authorization was submitted, the process took 45 days, including a suspension of 19 days 
for consultation with the Spanish supervisory authority and for the acquisition of additional 
information from BBVA. 
In a note dated 30 May BBVA asked the Bank of Italy to modify the authorization issued on 
13 May by eliminating the requirement to exceed the 50 per cent threshold. 
In a note dated 10 June the Bank of Italy responded that if as a result of the exchange tender 
offer BBVA were to acquire a holding of less than 50 per cent of BNL’s share capital, the 
Bank of Italy would evaluate the suitability of the new ownership structure to carry out the 
necessary reorganization. 
The  major  strategic  and  operational  investments  necessary  to  relaunch  BNL  require  an 
ownership  structure  that  can  ensure  stable  management  and  effective  policymaking, 
ultimately to safeguard the savings entrusted to the bank by its depositors. 
Similar considerations had in the meantime been set forth on 7 June in a note to the Minister 
for Community Policies in response to a specific request from the European Commission for 
clarifications concerning the 13 May authorization. 
Appreciation for the information provided by the Bank of Italy was expressed in a letter from 
the Competition Directorate-General on 13 July. 
   11/14 
On  14  July  the  Bank  of  Italy  granted  the  application  that  BBVA  had  made  on  16  June  to 
acquire  up  to  30  per  cent  of  BNL’s  share  capital  through  its  exchange  tender  offer, 
independently of acquisition of a majority holding. In response to BBVA’s further request for 
recognition of its de facto control of BNL if its holding exceeded the 30 per cent threshold, the 
Bank of Italy reaffirmed the need to await the outcome of the exchange tender offer in order 
to verify the Spanish bank’s actual exercise of control. 
The tender offer expired on 22 July. Acceptances amounted to around 1 per cent of BNL’s 
share capital. BBVA announced that it would not acquire the shares if they were not enough 
to attain the majority of BNL’s share capital, thus implicitly acknowledging the failure of the 
exchange tender offer. 
UNIPOL’s initiative 
3.3 
On  11  May  and  30  June  UNIPOL  Assicurazioni  and  its  parent  company  Holmo  S.p.A. 
requested  authorization  to  increase  their  holding  of  BNL  shares  first  to  9.99  per  cent  and 
then to 14.99 per cent. The stated purpose of these purchases was to acquire a large, stable 
holding in order, among other things, to safeguard the investment in BNL Vita, an insurance 
joint venture controlled by UNIPOL and BNL. In relation to each application, the Bank of Italy 
asked  ISVAP,  the  supervisory  authority  for  the  insurance  industry,  for  information  on  the 
strength  of  the  insurance  group.  On  25  May  and  again  on  13  July  ISVAP  pronounced  a 
judgement  of  “suitability”,  attesting  the  sustainability  of  UNIPOL’s  planned  investment  in 
financial and capital terms. 
Authorizations to increase the holding were issued on 27 May and 15 July. A copy of each 
decision was also transmitted to Consob. 
On 17 July 2005 the boards of directors of UNIPOL and its parent company Holmo resolved 
to acquire control of BNL. The explanation adduced for this initiative was the impossibility of 
reaching a satisfactory agreement with BBVA on the operation of BNL Vita and establishing 
forms of cooperation with the parties to the counterpact. 
In the course of the contacts following the prior notification of this intention the Bank of Italy 
had  emphasized  the  desirability  of  extending  the  project  to  include  banking  or  financial 
partners of high standing in a position to contribute to the growth of the volume of business. 
The acquisition of control is to be achieved by means of a mandatory tender offer for 59 per 
cent of BNL’s ordinary share capital following the conclusion on 18 July of a shareholders’ 
agreement,  notified  to  the  market  on  the  same  day,  between  UNIPOL  and  other  BNL 
shareholders (some cooperatives, Banca Carige, Nomura and Hopa). The agreement, which 
covers 30.86 per cent of BNL’s share capital, makes a tender offer mandatory under Article 
109 of the Consolidated Law on Finance. The offer is to be made exclusively by UNIPOL, 
with the other parties to the shareholders’ agreement jointly and severally liable. 
Other shareholders’ and bilateral agreements, also entered into on 18 July 2005, govern the 
acquisition and sale of BNL shares by the parties thereto. The agreement with Crédit Suisse 
First Boston International also outlines joint business and financial plans. 
On 4 August the UNIPOL insurance group submitted its formal request to the Bank of Italy 
for authorization to acquire control of BNL. As UNIPOL specified, the aim of the transaction is 
to create a highly integrated banking and insurance conglomerate of uniquely large size in 
the Italian financial market. 
The Bank of Italy requested the opinion of ISVAP concerning the civil law implications of the 
transaction and the operating and financial adequacy of the insurance group and its ability to 
create an organizational and operational framework meeting the needs of the reorganization 
and relaunching of BNL. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  informed  UNIPOL  that  the  time  limit  for  responding  to  the  request  for 
authorization was suspended pending receipt of ISVAP’s opinion. The Bank’s relations with 
   12/14 
ISVAP  are  conducted  under  the  principle  of  cooperation  laid  down  in  Article  7  of  the 
Consolidated Law on Banking. If the takeover succeeds, the provisions of Community law on 
the  supplementary  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates,  recently  transposed  into  Italian 
law (Legislative Decree 142 of 30 May 2005), will apply.  
On  16  August  UNIPOL  submitted  its  draft  offer  document  to  Consob  for  the  latter’s 
evaluation  prior  to  clearance  for  publication  and  issued  a  press  release  summarizing  the 
characteristics of the tender offer. 
On 19 August the Bank of Italy asked UNIPOL for supplementary information on its business 
plan, with reference among other things to the strategic and operating and financial aspects, 
the distribution networks, and the information procedures and systems. 
The merger of Unicredit with the German bank HVB  
4. 
On  12  June  2005  the  Boards  of  Directors  of  Unicredit  and  Bayerische  Hypo-  und 
Vereinsbank  AG  (HVB),  with  a  preliminary  notification  to  the  Bank  of  Italy,  approved  the 
integration of the two groups. The plan envisages an exchange tender offer by Unicredit for 
all of HVB’s share capital. The Italian and German supervisory authorities, after a top-level 
meeting  in  Rome  on  28  June,  coordinated  their  respective  procedures  for  authorization, 
which  was  granted  on  21  July  after  a  thorough  technical  investigation  that  in  some  parts 
included joint work by the two institutions. 
The exchange tender offer is expected to start at the end of August and close at the end of 
October. 
The HVB group consists of the German parent company (the country’s second largest bank 
in terms of assets) and a number of subsidiary banks, mostly located in Central and Eastern 
Europe;  the  most  important  are  Bank  Austria  (the  largest  bank  in  Austria)  and  BPH  (the 
fourth-largest bank in Poland). 
The combination would create one of the largest banking groups in the euro area. It would 
have total assets of €730 billion and yearly operating profits of around €8 billion. The new 
group would be highly diversified both geographically and by customer segment. Forty per 
cent of its credit risk would stem from exposures in Germany, 30 per cent in Italy, 15 per cent 
in Austria and 10 per cent in the Central and Eastern European countries. 
Since  Unicredit  already  boasts  a  major  presence  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  the  new 
group would have especially large market shares in Croatia (34 per cent), Bulgaria (24 per 
cent), Bosnia (22 per cent) and Poland (17 per cent). Thanks to the future synergies laid out 
in the operating and financial plan, it is expected that in 2007 the new group will have a gross 
operating  profit  of  €11.8  billion  and  net  profits  of  €6  billion.  ROE  would  be  18  per  cent.  A 
specific  agreement  between  the  parties  settles  the  principal  questions  regarding  the 
management  of  the  new  group:  the  registered  office  and  most  of  the  administrative 
headquarters of the parent company will be in Italy; the chairman of the board of the parent 
company,  with  non-executive  functions,  will  be  the  present  chairman  of  the  management 
board of HVB; the CEO will be the present CEO of Unicredito Italiano; and the chairman and 
the majority of the members of the HVB Supervisory Board will be designated by Unicredit. 
Under European law, the Bank of Italy will exercise consolidated supervision over the new 
group,  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  issued  recently  by  the  Committee  of  European 
Banking Supervisors for cooperation between authorities in the supervision of international 
banking groups.3
                                                 
3  CEBS CP 09, Guidelines for co-operation between consolidating supervisors and host supervisors, July 2005. 
   13/14 
 The  description  of  the  bids  for  control  of  Banca  Antonveneta  and  Banca  Nazionale  del 
Lavoro  presented  to  this  Committee,  which  is  the  institutionally  competent  forum,  has 
highlighted in particular the timing of the exercise of powers of authorization and control. 
The correctness of the decisions and conduct has to be gauged by their conformity with the 
law. No other parameters exist. Anything beyond this does not pertain to the set of factors to 
be taken into consideration, especially in an institutional forum such as this. The Bank of Italy 
has complied scrupulously with Community and Italian law and with the relevant regulatory 
and supervisory provisions. The ruling of the Lazio Administrative Court, with its description 
of the criteria that constantly guided the Bank’s action, fully recognizes this. 
Without  in  any  way  infringing  on  the  powers  or  organs  of  the  State,  first  and  foremost 
Parliament,  to  which  we  pay  the  most  respectful  attention,  we  believe  that  detailed 
knowledge  of  the  steps  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  will  help  to  foster  agreement  on  the 
consistency of the course that the Bank has followed. The Bank of Italy performs its activity 
of  monitoring  and  oversight,  always  ready,  when  the  conditions  require,  to  activate  its 
specific powers. 
 
   14/14 
