T T Mboweni: Signing of a syndicated loan and comments on the South African 
economy 
Comments by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, on the occasion of the 
signing of the USD1,5 Billion Dual Tranche Syndicated Term Loan facility, London, 18 July 2005.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to address you once again on an occasion such as this and even more delighted to be 
back in this great city. With the weather you are having here, we could quite easily be experiencing an 
African winter … I mean summer. It is a pleasure to welcome you here and to be amongst friends such 
as yourselves who have shown great confidence in South Africa.  
As many of you live in this city, and almost certainly all of you have operations in London, I think it is 
right  and  proper,  as  we  gather  here  only  10  days  after  the  attacks  on  London,  that  I  express  our 
sympathy and condolences, on behalf of the South African Reserve Bank, to those who have been 
affected. 
The number of many familiar faces present here today reflects both your commitment to South Africa, 
as well as the South African Reserve Bank's commitment to building strong relationships with a range 
of financial institutions. 
The foreign credit facilities we seek to establish with international institutions such as yourselves are 
utilised from time to time, or fully drawn down over the period of the loan to supplement our foreign 
reserves. In this case the US$1,5 billion facility is being used to prepay the US$1 billion Dual Currency 
Term Loan Facility concluded in June 2003 and tranche B of the Dual Currency Term Loan Facility 
concluded in July 2002.  
In the run-up to this syndicated loan, we were very encouraged to discover during our discussions that 
the  market was more  than  willing  to  support  a dual-tranche  transaction, namely  a  three-year  and a 
five-year  tranche,  at  reasonable  pricing.  In  negotiating  the  2005  facility  we  took  into  account  the 
maturity  profile  of  the  country's  foreign  debt,  our  financing  strategy,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of 
re-establishing  the  five-year  benchmark.  Whereas  not  too  long  ago,  a  five-year  maturity  would  still 
have been the subject of debate, today it seems very natural for us to borrow for five years, and thus 
pave the way for other South African borrowers. 
It is therefore with great pleasure that we celebrate the successful conclusion of this syndicated loan. 
The  loan  was  oversubscribed  and  brought  to  the  table  some  top  names  spread  over  a  wide 
geographic area. As usual, we are delighted by the quality of the participating banks and we will, as is 
our  practice  at  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  make  every  effort  to  share  our  business  with  our 
valued counterparties.  
Priced at 22.5 basis points per annum and 30 basis points per annum over Libor for the three-year 
and  the  five-year  tranche  respectively,  this  amounts  to  a  considerable  improvement  over  the  last 
couple  of  years.  (As  you  know,  our  2004  syndicated  loan,  which  matures  in  2007,  was  priced  at  a 
margin of 47.5 basis points per annum over Libor. And, going even further back in time, we last raised 
five-year  money  in  2002  at  a  90-basis-point  margin  above  Libor.)  The  improvement  in  the  pricing 
structure  bears  testimony  to  South  Africa's  prudent  macro-economic  policies  and  to  the  social  and 
political  stability  characterising  our  democracy,  which  gave  rise  to  and  enhanced  South  Africa's 
laudable credit story. The successful conclusion of this syndicated loan also bears testimony to the 
strength of our relationships. Naturally, we grudgingly admit, the pricing also reflects the very liquid 
conditions prevailing in the syndicated-loan market.  
The  ratings  upgrade  afforded  us  by  Moody's  in  January  this  year  reflects  South  Africa's  improved 
credit worthiness. As you know, Moody's upgraded South Africa's credit rating from Baa2 to Baa1 with 
a  stable  outlook based on  the  "substantial  strengthening"  in  the  country's  foreign reserves  position. 
South Africa's gross gold and foreign exchange position stood at US$18,7 billion as at the end of June 
2005. We are gratified and hopeful that a ratings grid in the loan documentation will result in lower 
pricing should South Africa's credit rating improve further.  
Now that the Net Open Foreign Currency Position or international liquidity position, as we now term it, 
has turned positive, we are relieved of a structural impediment to our economy and a source of much 
   1/2 
international criticism. We have and continue to concentrate on building our reserves gradually and 
sensibly to a level that could be regarded as appropriate for a small open economy such as South 
Africa.  Of  course,  we  also  have  to  bear  in  mind  the  costs  of  accumulating  reserves.  The 
appropriateness of reserve levels will also change over time.  
Allow  me  to  touch  on  a  few  other  salient  points  of  South  Africa's  economy.  As  you  well  know,  we 
conduct  monetary  policy  within  an  inflation-targeting  framework.  This  forms  the  basis  for  all  our 
monetary-policy decisions. Inflation has remained within the target range of 3 to 6 percent for some 21 
months  now.  The  latest  CPIX  figures  for  May  showed  a  year-on-year  growth  of  3.9  percent.  The 
inflation-targeting  framework  has  served  us  well  and  has  enabled  us  to  firmly  anchor  inflation 
expectations.  The  overriding  and  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  remains  maintaining  inflation 
within the target band, so as to provide a stable platform for sustainable economic growth. Since the 
signing ceremony last year, the Monetary Policy Committee has reduced interest rates by 100 basis 
points. Of course, there are a couple of risk factors going forward, the oil price being one, which could 
exacerbate inflationary pressures. Nonetheless, the outlook remains favourable, aided to some extent 
by muted increases in food prices and continued low international inflation. 
The path of the rand, although volatile during some periods, has remained relatively stable over the 
past  couple  of  months.  As  a  central  bank  we  would  prefer  a  stable  exchange  rate  to  reduce  the 
uncertainty  of  resource-allocation  decisions.  Since  the  signing  ceremony  last  year,  the  rand  has 
depreciated from a level of around R6.10 to the dollar to a level of around R6.65 to the dollar, in part 
due to foreign currency fluctuations, in particular, the value of the US dollar.  
Growth remains robust, with the economy registering its 26th consecutive quarter of positive growth in 
output. Car sales have reached new peaks, and confidence in the economy is strong as reflected by 
healthy  consumer  demand  underpinning  the  growth  in  money  supply  and  credit  extension.  The 
economy grew by an annual real rate of 3,5 percent in the first quarter of 2005 after an increase of 4,0 
percent in the fourth quarter of last year. There are now signs that the economy may have entered a 
new higher and sustainable growth trajectory. 
Before I conclude, may I once more express my appreciation to each and every institution that has 
committed  to  this  loan.  The  confidence  each  financial  institution  has  displayed  in  South  Africa,  by 
committing  to  this  loan,  contributes  to  enhancing  South  Africa's  international  profile.  We  gratefully 
acknowledge the faith you have placed in us. 
Finally,  I  must  extend  our  thanks  to  the  Bank  of  Tokyo-Mitsubishi  for  their  efforts  in  finalising  the 
documentation and driving this process under tight deadlines. We also appreciate Mizuho Corporate 
Bank's efforts in arranging today's signing ceremony and we look forward to working with Bayerische 
Landesbank as facility agent going forward. 
Thank you. 
   2/2 
