Ardian Fullani: Important issues for the future of the Albanian banking system   
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Inter Balkan Forum of Banking 
Associations, Durrës, 20 May 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to participate in this prestigious event of the banking system of Balkan region. My 
pleasure  is  great  due  also  to  another  reason,  because  I  had  for  years  and  years  governed  the 
Albanian Association of Banks and in addition I had given my personal contribution in initiating and 
organising  this  meeting  in  Albania.  I  would  like  to  thank  you  again  for  having  accepted  today  my 
invitation already proposed last year for organising this meeting in Albania. Of course, my delight is 
great but also my responsibility today to present myself as Governor of the Bank of Albania; therefore 
please consider me as being yours. 
In this spirit, I would like sincerely to begin my speech with the wishes: successful and fruitful 
proceedings of the meeting.  
Allow me first to  tackle an important issue, which within the context of  this meeting, I believe, is of 
paramount  importance.  I  mean  by  that  the  regional  co-operation,  an  initiative  that  has  been 
completely supported by the European Central Bank. We have already taken the first steps in this 
regard  through  establishing  bilateral  relationships  in  banking  supervision  with  National  Bank  of 
Macedonia, Central Bank of Montenegro and Banking and Payment Authority of Kosovo. Meanwhile, 
we are in the process of negotiating with National Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, National Bank of 
Serbia, etc. I estimate that regional co-operation is an important forerunner of the integration 
process of the region with the rest of Europe; therefore I will not stop working to encourage a 
regional co-operation of high standards among the financial systems of Balkan countries.  
I hope that you share the same opinion with me, because only in this way, our region will be more 
credible  and  efficient  to  have  its  European  dream.  On  the  other  hand,  a  developed  and  financially 
integrated  region  will  be  more  attractive  for  foreign  strategic  investors,  opening  up  the  path  toward 
regional  development  projects,  particularly  infrastructure  ones  where  region’s  banks  might  be  the 
financing and co-financing ones.  
Further on I would like to give you an overview on some different issues of importance for the future of 
the Albanian banking system. In diverse meetings organised by the Bank of Albania with the banking 
community  and  other  actors  on  relevant  opportunities,  a  range  of  problems  were  highlighted  and 
evidenced of which I think there is still room for a joint commitment, of both the Bank of Albania and, of 
course, the banking system. 
In  my  capacity  of  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  I  would  like  to  ensure  the  banking 
community that the institution I govern is open for an institutionalised co-operation with the 
banking system by channeling it through the Albanian Association of Banks. We have a great 
consideration  on  this  Association  and  we  hope  that  its  role  will  further  be  enhanced  in  the  future, 
particularly on the principled topics that will characterize the development of the banking system and 
that of the financial system in general in the years to come.  
Honored bankers, 
I  hope  you  share  the  same  opinion  with  me  that  we  become  recently  witnesses  of  a  qualitative 
development  of  the  Albanian  banking  system.  I  use  the  opportunity  to  express  that  positive 
assessments on the banking system have been given also in the report prepared by the World Bank 
and  International  Monetary  Fund  after  the  completion  of  their  assessment  made  on  the  Albanian 
financial system (FSAP-Financial System Assessment Program). Of course, this is good news.  
Conclusions  of  FSAP,  of  this  important  international  passport,  are  an  indication  of  our  earliest 
conclusions that the Albanian financial system is characterized by a supervised and effective banking 
system  and  by  other  segments  that  are  still  in  the  first  development  stages  where  regulation  and 
supervision remain a priority. Regardless of what I mentioned above, sincerely feeling myself as a 
part of the banking system I would envisage that it needs better and faster motivation to reach 
higher contemporary standards in all the aspects of the banking activity.  
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
The  banking  system  has  experienced  remarkable  developments  recently.  After  the  licensing  of 
Popular Bank, with Albanian capital, the number of banks increased from 15 to 16, and a preliminary 
license is granted to Union Bank (Albanian capital), which is expected to raise the number of banks to 
17 over 2005. The system assets have further increased by 14 percent while there was an increase of 
banking  products  and  an  expansion  of  their  network.  During  this  year  there  will  be  sold  the  public 
shares of both the Italian Albanian Bank and United Bank of Albania, which will lead to an increase of 
effectiveness  and  banking  competition,  paving  the  way  to  the  processes  of  selling,  merging  and 
acquisitions towards a new consolidation of the banking system. 
The  lending  activity  increased  by  38  percent  where  one  can  distinguish,  inter  alia,  the  significant 
growth of medium-term and long-term loans compared to short-term loans.  
The  map  of  coverage  of  the  country  with  the  banking  system  has  further  expanded,  including  new 
areas  ever  covered  before.  At  the  end  of  2004,  the  total  number  of  branches  reached  88,  or 
11 branches more that the end of the previous year, while the number of agencies recorded for the 
first  time  a  full  three-digit  number,  100  and  the  number  of  the  employed  people  increased  by 
26 percent.  
The high increase of the number of branches relative to that of agencies shows that banks are not 
interested only in providing the service of collecting deposits but also in providing other products like 
crediting to the economy. These developments, besides their positive contribution in enhancing 
the financial intermediation, speak for a better perception of investing potential from banks in 
Albania. 
An  outstanding  development  is  mainly  related  to  the  client  service,  which  is  accompanied  through 
electronic  terminals  by  the  increasing  number  of  electronic  cards  in  circulation.  Banks  offer  already 
debit and credit cards in co-operation with international companies such as Visa and MasterCard. Six 
banks provide the ATM service and the number of ATMs reached 108 by the end of February 
2005.  
The banking system results to have a profit level, which has been increasing to Lek 5.1 billion. Return 
on equity (ROE) was estimated at 21 percent while credit quality is only 4.2 percent from 4.6 percent 
in the previous year. In any case, we must say that credits are still new and do not have adequate 
history to show their performance. 
However, problems and challenges, which the system is facing, are still enormous and in this context 
the role of the association of banks, I think, will be important to overcome them. 
Credit to the economy and credit register 
Credit to the economy has recently known a great development. High growth rates impose us to be 
prudent in the other direction, that is portfolio quality. Enhancing competitiveness and consequently, 
enhancing the credit level is bringing about a rising trend of weighted risk assets and some banks are 
already close to the minimum level of 12 percent. 
The  client’s  identification  on  receiving  and  using  the  credit  and  other  obligations  he/she  has  to  the 
banking  market  is  vague,  incomplete  without  giving  the  opportunity  the  banking  system  to  have  a 
history on the client’s activity. That’s why I believe that a centralized register, which unlike the previous 
years became now a necessity, is needed.  
I would like to highlight that Bank of Albania has included the project of establishing the credit 
register in its short-term plans and we are deeply committed to execute it within the next year. I 
use the opportunity to emphasize that this register will be under the administration of Bank of Albania 
and the participation of banks member of the system will be compulsory. Only in this way, evasion in 
the  statistical  information will  be  avoided,  its  integrity will  be  ensured  and  at  the  same  time 
available for each bank member of the system.  
On the other hand, we are aware of the fact that issues dealing with credit are more complex. They 
have  to  do  with  many  other  obstacles  that  arise  from  lack  of  collateral  register,  inaccuracy  of 
mortgage, lack of knowledge and the non-functioning on a correct basis of the judiciary system and 
law,  particularly  with  regard  to  technical  problems  that  relate  to  the  knowledge  and  execution  of 
collateral.  
For  this  purpose,  we  shall  take  the  initiative  to  set  up  an  ongoing  communication  with  the 
judiciary system, with the intent to organise an open conference in autumn of the current year. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
The main objective remains enforcing legal initiatives that would bring about the modification 
of legal and sub-legal basis.  
Modification of regulatory basis of Bank of Albania 
I have stated even previously that Bank of Albania aims at reviewing its regulatory basis with 
the sole intent to simplify it and to ease its implementation.  
For this purpose I have insisted on a continuous basis that the first contacts among mutual technical 
staffs  to  raise  the  banking  system  concerns  on  the  regulatory  framework  enforcement  should  be 
established.  
After several discussions we come to the conclusion that the group of the following regulations should 
be subject of necessary modifications, and I would ensure you that work at the Bank of Albania has 
already started for this purpose. 
Methodical guideline on “foreign exchange risks” 
Observations:  inclusion  in  the  calculation  of  the  open  position  of  off-balance  guarantees  which 
include  as  unused  credit  limit,  the  financing  commitments  made  and  received,  and  registering  of 
collateral  estimated  in  foreign  currency  and  received  for  guaranteeing  the  credit  (all  banks  in  the 
matrix). These are commitments that remain in force and for which, according to the current regulatory 
framework interpreting, the bank is required to create a real position (within the balance).    
It is proposed: to reformulate the methodical guideline, excluding the guarantees.  
Guideline “on bank regulatory capital” 
Observations: To make clearer systemization for the items being deducted from the additional capital, 
explaining that on which size deductions are to be calculated. To make clearer in the regulation even 
the inclusion of yearend profit in the regulatory capital only after confirmation from the certified public 
accountant and by approval from the Audit Committee.  
It is proposed: to take into consideration both observations and submit a draft-decision for changing 
the regulation.  
Regulation “on capital adequacy” 
Observations: Classification of countries where reference is made to OECD member countries is a bit 
confused and another time, a list of 29 members is presented, while collateral in cash is not taken into 
consideration as a deductive element in the calculation of weighted risk assets. Concept of mortgaged 
credits that are weighted by 50 percent is very restrained and subject of confusion.   
It is proposed: to take into consideration the observations and submit a draft-decision for changing 
the regulation.  
Regulation “on market risk” 
It is proposed: to review it in the framework of new recommendations of Basel II.  
Focusing again on the problem of banking supervision I would like to underline that we, Bank 
of Albania as a supervisory institution, are determined to have at a possible maximum level a 
simple and easy supervision for being implemented, associated with a significant improvement 
of the on-site inspection. We shall intend that expectation and prevention power of our supervision 
gains  new  dimension.  To  this  end  we  are  in  a  process  of  finalising  the  negotiations  with  European 
partner  institutions  for  launching  a  twinning  project  for  the  further  consolidation  of  supervisory 
capacities of the Bank of Albania.  
Anti cash campaign 
Recent  developments  have  impacted  cash  reduction  in  the  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have 
carried out an intensive public activity, of clarifying and promoting nature where meetings of another 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
nature  were  held  too,  in  which  we,  all  of  us  as  a  banking  system,  have  been  concretely  engaged. 
Allow me to remind you the meetings we have organized with business and utility services business 
and also that on the primary market of Treasury bills. 
Using  this  opportunity  I  would  like  to  bring  again  to  your  kind  attention  the  problems  raised  even 
beforehand. I hope that now, on the eve of finalising the Automated Electronic Clearing House project, 
each bank separately and the Association itself are seriously thinking to raise the profit level from this 
facility that Bank of Albania offers in this moment. I would appreciate if from the Association will 
have  some  comments  or  potential  reactions  on  the  system  preparations  and  the  possible 
assistance and co-operation of Bank of Albania in this direction.  
After  the  completion  of  this  project,  I  deem  that  we  must  think  more  seriously  about  the 
numerical and qualitative addition of electronic payments. For this purpose I would envisage to 
start thinking from now about future projects in the payment infrastructure. I personally will insist that 
even  in  this  direction  all  of  us  as  a  banking  system  look  forward  to  the  European  Union 
directives,  in  order  that  each  future  step  is  oriented  toward  the  country  integration  in  the 
European Union. 
Few  times  ago,  I  have  been  informed  about  a  new  EU  initiative,  which  requires  to  set  up,  within  a 
certain  period  of  time,  among  others  a  unified  payment  system  within  the  euro  area,  including 
payments with cards. Presently, small and medium businesses in the euro area have not the same 
payment  opportunities  as  they  have  in  their  respective  countries  on  a  national  scale.  Such  a  case 
includes credit cards, which cannot be employed equally across the borders. For this purpose I would 
suggest  that  respective  experts  from  the  Association  and  Bank  of  Albania  be  as  soon  as  possible 
informed  about  this  project,  making  the  relevant  suggestions  in  this  direction.  I  personally  remain 
consistent in my position that in Albania we have to adopt the most advanced solutions in all 
the  infrastructure  projects  that  we  are  going  to  implement.  I  believe  that  we  do  not  need  to 
examine  old-fashioned  models,  which,  in  addition  to  the  initial  cost,  will  continuously  require  other 
funds for maintenance and modification.  
Besides the developments in the field of payments I would welcome from you a broader commitment 
even in other directions. I think that the system must further expand its geographical coverage, 
aiming  at  including  also  areas,  which,  though  having  at  first  sight  the  appearance  of  being 
inactive, have large financial potentials in the form of threasurised savings outside the system.  
Also, the service level should be further improved. Now the public administration has become a 
client of the system and I think that there are real opportunities to resolve the utility services 
payments through the banking system.  
Also, I hope that the system will be aggressive and will keep promises to the public to put its 
windows at the service of selling Treasury bills directly to the interested public. We, as Bank of 
Albania, have kept our promises and very soon we will introduce as a first step a commission that 
is presumed to cover the transaction cost while we will accompany this move by the ban of 
cash flows receipt at the windows of Bank of Albania. We shall request the individuals that their 
participation  in  the  auctions,  through  windows  of  Bank  of  Albania,  will  become  possible  only  upon 
presentation of a banking document, which certifies that the client has deposited a certain amount as 
a guarantee in one of the banks pertaining to the system.  
Another  direction  on  which  banks  must  further  focus  relates  to  an  aggressivity  of  broader 
propaganda  and  clarification.  I  think  that  still  the  majority  of  common  people  show  a  certain 
hesitation to refer to banks. I believe that they have a feeling of non-confidence that the bank shall not 
resolve their problems. Many individuals, though in an absurd way, are still in search of a “friend” to 
negotiate with the bank.  
As  mentioned  above,  I  understand  that  above  all  the  reason  behind  might  be  our  poor  tradition  in 
addition to the high degree of informality and a lot of other objective and subjective reasons. However, 
I  think  that  the  cause  might  be  even  the  lack  of  detailed  clarifications,  and  lack  of  informative 
publications, and lack of the propaganda in the public environment as well as in media.  
I think that in the propaganda spaces in the media more space should be given to the clarifications of 
special  products,  while  launching  of  new  products  should  be  accompanied  by  standard  advertising 
campaigns.  
Dear participants, 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
Allow  me  that  before  closing  my  speech  to  express  again  my  high  appreciation  on  the  Albanian 
Association of Banks, ensuring that Governor of Bank of Albania will always be its decent partner in 
the long path of institutional co-operation.  
I sincerely hope that this meeting of banking associations is an important step towards establishing a 
fruitful regional co-operation.   
I am personally committed, in future contacts with my colleagues of the region’s countries, to dedicate 
a  special  room  to  this  co-operation,  hoping  that  I  will  find  on  them  a  well-understanding  and  full 
support.  
I again wish you successful and fruitful proceedings of this meeting.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 5
