T T Mboweni: South Africa - a land of hope and opportunity 
Remarks  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  an  ANC  breakfast 
meeting, Johannesburg, 22 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Distinguished guests 
Thank you for inviting me here this morning to say a word or two about the South African economy. 
When I received this invitation to be here this morning, a number of questions arose in my mind. The 
primary one being whether a governor of a central bank should speak at occasions such as this which 
are  organised  by  political  organisations.  It  was  a  vexing  question  which  required  of  me  a  serious 
answer. 
Central  bank  governors  have  to  demonstrate  at  all  times  their  commitment  to  the  independence  of 
central  banks  from  political  influence.  In  fact  central  bank  independence  also  means  rebutting  any 
attempt  by  anyone  including  market  participants  to  influence  their  decisions  or  interfere  in  their 
operational  work.  At  the  same  time,  central  bank  governors  have  to  engage  in  extensive 
communications  with  the  markets,  the  general  population,  governments  and  parliaments.  So  any 
opportunity to communicate should be seriously considered and if time permits, should be entertained 
whether from a political party, market participants or any other organisation which is reputable. So any 
political organisations wishing to invite me to their functions are welcome to do so. We just have to 
negotiate time. 
It is against this background that I accepted your invitation to be here this morning. 
South Africa is still very much a country in transition. It is a country of many hopes and opportunities. 
Firstly, the political system is maturing. Most certainly, the political system is entrenching democratic 
values and systems. People stand for elections within their parties - sometimes squabbling very badly 
privately and in the media in their endeavours to be elected, they avail themselves as candidates for 
local  council  chambers,  provincial  legislatures  and  the  national  parliament.  Debate  is  generally 
developing in its robustness. More often than not acrimoniously so. Not a place for the weak! 
Secondly  the  media  -  the  fourth  estate  -  is  lively  and  maturing  too.  Public  officials  and  private 
executives  are  closely  scrutinised  to  check  on  their  performances  and  good  corporate  governance 
standing in order to move the country forward. The media questions and exposes. Sometimes their 
approach  is  certainly  questionable  but  on  the  whole  they  are  making  a  good  contribution  to  our 
society. There is room for improvement particularly in financial journalism - a matter being attended to 
by  some  journalism  schools.  But  an  open  and  democratic  society  by  definition  requires  a  vigorous, 
investigative and independent media. 
Thirdly, the judiciary, despite its many weaknesses given where we come from, is independent and is 
making its contribution towards the respect for the law by all of us. Issues are being attended to as far 
as the transformation of the judiciary both in terms of form and content is concerned. Progress in this 
regard is promising as the government and the judiciary are hard at work to achieve this historically 
fundamental objective. The respect for the judiciary really demands that the authorities must not keep 
their eyes off the transformation ball. But whatever the outcomes of this process, the end result must 
be to protect and enhance the independence and respect for the judiciary. 
Fourthly,  we  have  in  South  Africa  policies  and  laws  that  respect,  protect  and  understand  the 
fundamental role of private property rights in the economic development of our society. Those who a 
couple of years ago doubted the positive role of private property in society and its role in the economy 
are  slowly  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  people’s  rights  in  private  property  are  prerequisites  for 
promoting  investment  and  certainty  that  one’s  investment  today  can  be  protected  by  law,  with  the 
courts available to enforce it and thus confident to grow businesses whether industrial or agricultural. 
There  are  still  many  countries  on  our  continent  which  should  still  need  to  improve  private  property 
rights in order to give surety and confidence to investors. 
Fifthly, there is in this land of hope and opportunity a vibrant culture and entertainment industry which 
is vital in any society. Music, dance, theatre, museums and other places to visit and enjoy. We are 
even  beginning  to  see  the  entry  by  black  dancers  into  the  ballet  schools  and  companies.  Even  I, 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 1
coming all the way from rural Limpopo, now appreciate La Traviata! So it is not just about soccer and 
rugby. 
Sixthly,  this  is  a  normalising  society  where  challenging  issues  are  looked  straight  in  the  eye,  in 
particular race, gender and the development of a black business class. 
Finally,  the  population  expects  and  demands  to  be  heard  at  every  turn.  Expectations  are  justifiably 
high  for  housing,  clean  water,  good  public  schools,  good  health  services,  good  roads  and  streets, 
including  traffic  lights  that  work,  safety  and  security,  employment  opportunities,  the  fairness  of  the 
justice  system  and  the  rest.  There  is  demand  for  delivery  everywhere.  The  public  authorities  and 
private companies are kept in check all the time. Our society is moving ahead indeed. Of course with 
demands  for  socio-economic  needs  also  come  responsibility  to  care  and  look  after  that  which  has 
been “delivered”. 
How are we doing then as far as the economy is concerned? How has globalisation affected the South 
African economy and society? 
As  we  know,  the  South  African  economy  was  primarily  dependent  on  gold  and  diamond  mining 
together with agriculture for many years. Many African people were driven from the land where they 
lived as peasants and pastoralists to the mines, emerging factories, agriculture and domestic service 
through the combination of political repression, land dispossession and yes, taxation. In the 1960s, the 
South  African  economy  increasingly  became  industrialised  and  services  oriented.  Of  course  the 
scourge of the colour bar in our society and the workplace was used as a major instrument to racialise 
everything.  Agriculture  and  mining  together  contributed  about  20.4%  to  Gross  Domestic  Product 
(GDP).  In  the  1990s  this  declined  to  11.3%.  Today  mining  contributes  about  7.8%  and  agriculture 
3.6%. This is a major change in the structural make up of the economy. 
The  secondary  sector  contributed  about  27.8%  to  GDP  in  the  1960s.  Although  this  has  declined 
somewhat  to  24%  currently,  this  is  nevertheless  testimony  that  our  economy  remains  highly 
industrialised. Another major change in our economy occurred in the services sector. In the 1960s, this 
sector contributed about 51.8% to GDP and today it accounts for 64%. Again this is a major structural 
change  in  our  economy.  Clearly,  mining  and  agriculture  have  been  the  major  “losers”  in  these 
developments. But let us not make the mistake of abandoning these sectors for we still have two-thirds 
of our gold in the ground and there are still many viable mineral deposits in this country and we still 
have to feed ourselves from agricultural activities. Oh by the way: food does not come from Pick ‘n 
Pay but from agriculture! Sometimes people forget this. 
The structural change from mining, agriculture and some extent manufacturing to an economy heavily 
dominated by the services sector has major implications for the jobs market. It means that the skills 
required  for  the  services  sector  are  much  higher  than  was  the  case  previously.  Many  people  have 
made the observation that the consequences of the Bantu education system are being more severely 
felt now than at any time in the past. There is no doubt that one of the most critical areas of focus in 
South Africa at the moment and for the foreseeable future is education and broadly human resources 
development. This has to be strategic in nature. We have to focus and provide resources for training 
people  in  those  areas  of  extreme  need  side  by  side  with  general  education.  We  need  engineers, 
accountants,  pilots,  of  course  lawyers,  actuaries,  doctors,  nurses,  scientists  and  other  specialised 
technical skills for a an increasingly services sector driven economy. And how can I forget economists! 
Mathematics education is fundamental to this. 
Alongside these structural changes in our economy has been the process of global integration of the 
South African economy. Whilst in the 1960s we were mainly an extractive economy, by the 1990s the 
South African economy was fairly integrating broadly into the world economy. With sanctions out of the 
way, imports and exports of goods and services amounted to about 44% of the economy. Currently 
this has increased to 55.6%. The manufacturing sector, despite its challenges from time to time saw its 
exports rise to 29.6% in the 1990s to about 37.9% in the period 2000-2004. 
One of the most notable features about the globalisation of the South African economy is to be found 
in the banking sector. South African banks as a percentage of GDP averaged 77% during the period 
1965-1994.  In  2004,  this  share  of  GDP  by  South  African  banks  was  109%.  The  equity  market 
averaged R2  billion  in  the  period  1970  to  1985.,  R21  billion  per year  for  the period  1986-1993,  the 
annual turnover in the equity market was R62 billion in 1994 and in 2004, the annual turnover was 
about a R1 trillion. Market capitalisation on the JSE increased from an annual average of R40 billion 
for the period 1970-1980 to R2 trillion in 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2005
Further  more  compelling  evidence  of  globalisation  is  to  be  found  in  the  performance  of  the  bond 
market.  Between  1970  and  1985,  turnover  in  this  market  was  about  R8  billion,  in  1995  this  had 
increased to R2.3 trillion and in the year 2004 turnover was R8.4 trillion. 
Finally the foreign exchange market which interests so many people has also seen some remarkable 
evidence of globalisation. To cut a long story short, in 1987 the average daily turnover in this market 
was 1.1 billion US dollars and during the course of 2005 the average daily turnover in this market in 
some 12 billion US dollars. So there is a lot of activity going on there. 
The only conclusion I can come to is that we are coping well with globalisation. We have seen some 
benefits  but  yes  there  has  also  been  some  costs  such  as  the  impact  of  globalisation  on  the  gold 
mining sector. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  there  has  been  a  remarkable  achievement  in  the  two  areas  that  I 
closely focus on as part of my job. This is inflation and budget management in South Africa. Inflation 
has  so  far  been  contained  within  the  inflation  target.  The  government’s  budget  management  is  an 
example  to  many  countries  throughout  the  world  recording  budget  deficits  before  borrowing  of  less 
than three percent of GDP consistently. Progress has indeed been made. 
The hope and opportunities that characterise South Africa make me happy to be a South African at 
this historic juncture in the development of humankind. 
President  Mandela  remarked  somewhere  that  ‘the  sun  will  never  set  on  such  a  glorious  human 
achievement’ I agree with that. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 3
