Ardian Fullani: Monitoring of the economy to be conducted not only in the 
metropolis but in the regions as well 
Article  from  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  published  in  the  Ekonomia 
newspaper, 21 January 2005. 
 Our  economy  has  long  ago  been  integrated  in  a  continuous  process  of  quality  and  quantity 
development, including an increasingly wider geographical expansion. Both Communities, bank and 
business,  need  to  cooperate  more  closely  with  each  other.  In  order  that  this  cooperation  becomes 
more efficient, we deem, as Bank of Albania, to play our active role not only through establishing a 
safe  macroeconomic  environment,  but  also  by  providing  a  range  of  other  operations  that  will 
encourage lending activity of the banking system from one side and impact a more correct tendency of 
business toward more reliable projects and investments, on the other side. To this end, we estimate in 
our  short-term  and  medium-term  programs  to  give  our  regional  branches  spread  throughout  the 
country a different role from the one they played till now. We deem appropriate it’s time now for our 
branches  not  to  be  simply  cash  storerooms  and  distributors.  Also,  we  shall  try  to  renounce  some 
operations of non-central banking nature, which gradually shall be absorbed by commercial banks.  
Our  goal  is  these  branches  be  changed  into  an  advanced  model  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  presence 
throughout various regions of the country. They will become genuine stations of information gathering 
about  the  economic  and  financial  activity  of  the  region,  being  preceded  by  further  analyses  and 
studies. This research work will serve not only to a more explicit monetary programming but also to the 
modernization of transmission elements of this policy from the higher authority to the lower authority 
and vice versa.  
I  estimate  that  this  initiative  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  monitor  the  economic  activity  not  only  in  the 
metropolis but also in other regions of the country would be of particular interest for all the interested 
groups.  
Further, I would like to add some other comments on the latest developments of the banking system, 
which I deem have created good premises for a real expansion of this business, an expansion that will 
positively impact on the performance of business activities.  
After completion of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system, the Bank of Albania inaugurated 
some times ago the initiation of a very important project on the Automated Electronic Clearing House 
(AECH).  The  operation  of  this  new  system  will  considerably  increase  the  payment  speed  for  the 
customers, knowing that the lack of this element has maintained businesses far from banks. I take this 
opportunity  to  make  businesses  aware  of  the  advantages  of  the  operation  of  this  system,  as  both 
systems  together  will  help  reach  the  international  standards  of  ATM  and  AIPS  (automatic  and 
electronic  payment  equipments),  per  population  number.  The  challenge  to  the  banking  system  and 
businesses, but also to the Bank of Albania, still remains the public encouragement to use them.  
So, to put this into practice, I shall stimulate the banking system to become more active, that is banks 
should  provide  to  the  households  and  businesses  clear  and  ready  products,  quick  and  efficient 
services.  
Given the latest developments in the banking system and the increasing number of the branches as 
well as the increasing banking services, I advocate the banking system will be more attractive in 2005.  
I consider the optimistic signals of the previous year will be followed by more vigorous operations of 
the banking system related to the business of electronic card payments. In this spirit I would say that 
banking system solutions properly consist in issuing a unified card.  
Evidently, steps to be taken in this direction will be more complex, and naturally some of them imply 
inter-institutional cooperation. Bank of Albania is already paving the way toward wider use of cards in 
Albania. 
Credit  cards  service  shall  not  only  contribute  to  cash  reduction  in  the  economy,  but  also  provide  a 
positive impact on the reduction of informal economy. However, I deem as important encouraging and 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 1
stimulating the banking system in order the service level be uniformly present all over the Albanian 
territory where banks conduct their activity. Only in this manner electronic payment advantages and all 
other  facilities  will  be  equal  to  you  and  to  all  the  public  in  general  throughout  the  territory  of  the 
Republic of Albania. I believe, in the spirit of this reasoning, we shall establish real opportunities for a 
harmonised  geographical  progress,  providing  a  concrete  contribution  to  the  growth  of  country’s 
welfare. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2005
