Timothy F Geithner: A view from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Business  Council  of  Fairfield  County’s  Economic  Luncheon,  New  York, 
19 January 2005. 
 Thanks for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today. 
I want to talk about the American economic agenda. And I want to start by looking back at the last 
decade or so, and the exceptional economic performance of the second half the 1990s in particular. 
What  were  the  fundamental  underpinnings  of  those  achievements,  and  what  are  the  principal 
challenges we face to sustaining those achievements? 
Let me begin by reviewing quickly what distinguished that period of U.S. prosperity, relative to the past 
in  the  United  States  and  relative  to  the  other  major  economies.  There  are  four  things  in  particular 
worth highlighting: 
• 
First, over this period of the past decade the U.S. sustained very solid growth in the range of 
3.5  percent.  This  was  not  particularly  exceptional  relative  to  the  preceding  decade,  but 
impressive relative to the other major economies, most of which saw a sustained slowdown 
in  growth.  Japan,  for  example,  saw  GDP  growth  slow  from  above  3.5  to  just  over  one 
percent. Europe slowed from just under 3.0 percent to about two percent. 
Second, we achieved very moderate inflation. U.S. inflation by most measures fell in half to 
an average for the CPI of about 2.5 percent. This positive inflation performance was more 
generalized  across  the  major  economies,  with  Europe  and  most  all  major  economies 
experiencing  a  similar  slowdown,  and  Japan,  more  famously,  slipping  into  sustained 
deflation. 
Third,  U.S.  economic  performance  during  this  period  was  characterized  by  lower  overall 
volatility in growth and inflation. This moderation, economists call it the “great moderation,” 
was reflected in a reduction in quarter to quarter volatility in output by about half. This more 
even  pattern  of  growth  was  evident  across  most  components  of  GDP.  Some  of  the  other 
major economies also saw some moderation in the variability of macroeconomic outcomes, 
but the trend is not as pronounced or well established. 
Fourth,  productivity  growth  in  the  United  States  accelerated  significantly  with  productivity 
growth in the non-farm business sector doubling from about 1.5 percent per year in the two 
decades  up  to  the  mid-nineties,  to  more  than  three  percent  on  average  over  the  decade 
since. This acceleration in productivity was not completely unique to the United States, but it 
has not yet been matched by the other major economies, though that may be in prospect. 
   What  accounted  for  these  achievements?  This  is  important  to  try  to  understand,  because  it  is 
important to assessing whether these trends are enduring or temporary, and what types of policies are 
likely to sustain them. 
There  is  no  definitive  consensus  on  this  question,  and  economists  have  an  interesting  debate 
underway about how much of this was luck and how much was skill. Most observers seem to attribute 
the record to the following mix of factors. 
The  first,  of  course,  is  technology.  We  experienced  during  this  period  the  benefits  of  a  powerful 
technology shock that made possible a revolution in the productivity of investment, in transportation 
and communication costs, in business methods, in computing power, etc. Given the speed with which 
technological advances are diffused, one might expect the benefits to have been more broadly spread 
among  other  economies,  but  that  has  not  yet  happened  on  a  scale  that  is  sufficient  to  narrow  the 
growth gap. 
The  extent  of  technological  progress  and  its  impact  on  economic  growth  were  magnified  by  the 
openness and flexibility of the U.S. economy. The United States became significantly more open over 
the  past  decade,  with  imports  and  exports  as  a  share  of  GDP  rising  by  about  50  percent.  This 
happened in part because of the impact of trade agreements like NAFTA and the Uruguay Round that 
lowered U.S. trade barriers, and in part because we stayed out of the way of the impact of technology 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 1
and globalization and did not, on the whole, try to insulate the U.S. economy from the pressures of 
competition. 
We are by choice significantly more flexible than the other major economies. The major deregulations 
(telecom, transportation, finance, etc.) of the last two decades made us more so. We have relatively 
limited regulation of business activity, low barriers to entry by new firms, lower hiring and firing costs, 
and more worker mobility and turnover. 
A third key factor involves the U.S. financial system. Our system has proven to be exceptionally good 
at  matching  capital  to  ideas,  at  rewarding  innovation  and  penalizing  failure,  and  relatively  more 
resilient to shocks. 
In comparison to the other major economies, banks are a smaller share of our financial system and 
the  capital  markets  play  a  greater  role.  Securitization  and  other avenues  for  risk  transfer  advanced 
much  more  rapidly  here.  The  venture  capital,  private  equity  and  hedge  fund  parts  of  our  financial 
system are much larger as a share of GDP than in the other major economies. These features of the 
U.S. financial system seem to have made us better at allocating U.S. savings, a more attractive place 
for  the  savings  of  other  countries,  and  probably  less  vulnerable  to  shocks.  They  have  also  made 
macroeconomic policy more effective in responding to shocks. 
And  a  final  factor,  by  most  accounts,  involved  good  policy  choices.  This  has been  an  exceptionally 
good  period  for  U.S.  monetary  policy,  with  the  formidable  combination  of  Volcker  and  Greenspan 
achieving  a  dramatic  and  sustained  moderation  in  inflation.  Better  monetary  policy  and  inflation 
outcomes played a central role in laying the foundation for the increased investment that made the 
productivity surge possible and in bringing about the reduction in the depth and length of recessions 
that are a feature of the more even U.S. economic performance. 
Better  fiscal  policy  in  the  1990s  helped  too,  by  reducing  long-term  interest  rates  and  improving 
confidence in future U.S. economic performance. More of the savings the United States borrowed from 
the world went to finance private investment rather than government consumption. 
This list of factors - technology, openness and flexibility, the more innovative U.S. financial system, 
and  good  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  -  is  not  a  comprehensive  list.  It’s  hard  to  know  how  important 
each  element  was  to  the  overall  record  and  whether  we  would  have  seen  as  much  improvement 
without all four of these elements. 
We were fortunate in the sense that the size of the shocks we experienced were smaller than in the 
past. The strategic environment of the 1990s seemed at the time more peaceful and secure, and so 
our security needs claimed a smaller share of resources than is true now and may be true for some 
time. 
But it wasn’t just luck. Much of what was exceptional in the U.S. was the result of conscious choices 
by policy makers. This is encouraging in the sense that it suggests that with good policy choices we 
have the capacity to sustain quite strong rates of income growth in the future. 
We face a number of major challenges to sustaining this record. I want to focus on just a few of these - 
those where the risks are highest and the return to sensible policies is likely to be highest. 
The  first  of  these  challenges  is  the  combination  of  our  fiscal  and  external  imbalances.  Both  are 
unsustainable. Each magnifies the risk in the other. Fiscal deficits of the magnitude projected are large 
enough  to  damage  future  growth  prospects  of  the  U.S.  economy,  which  in  turn  magnifies  our 
vulnerability to a decline in the willingness of other countries to lend us their savings, which could lead 
to higher risk premia on U.S. financial assets, also damaging long-term growth prospects. 
It is important that the United States work to build more confidence that it will act on the fiscal front to 
achieve  a  better  balance  between  our  commitments  and  our  resources,  both  with  respect  to  the 
medium term and the longer term. Building a stronger fiscal cushion and strengthening confidence in 
our fiscal sustainability is critical to reducing the risk in the size of our external imbalance. 
A  second  important  challenge  involves  sustaining  a  commitment  to  openness  and  market-oriented 
economic  policies.  The  pressures  that  have  accompanied  the  process  of  technological  change  and 
more  rapid  global  economic  integration  have  eroded  the  strength  of  the  center  of  the  U.S.  political 
spectrum that has been the source of our commitment to an open trade policy. The cost of this political 
shift is more evident so far in new trade expanding opportunities forgone, more than in a broad and 
major increase in the level of protection or barriers against imports of foreign goods and services. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2005
This is a difficult political challenge. Success depends in part on how creative we are in equipping our 
citizens with the skills that offer higher returns in the future. It depends in part on what you might call 
our commitment to the quality of equality of opportunity in America, for people are likely to be more 
accepting  of  change  if  they  are  confident  of  the  opportunity  for  mobility  and  advancement.  And  it 
depends in part on confidence people have in the transitional safety net that is available to bridge the 
transition to future employment. 
The last challenge I want to emphasize involves education. The education imperative has always been 
compelling. It is more so today for several reasons. 
First, we are seeing a significant erosion in the traditional premium accorded higher education in the 
United  States  and  in  some  dimensions  of  the  relative  level  of  educational  achievement  in  America. 
This cannot be good for the cause of improving the odds of sustaining this productivity surge. 
Second, U.S. citizens now face the prospect of bearing a much larger share of the risk of paying for 
health care and preparing for retirement. Making good decisions in the face of these changes requires 
a higher level of financial and economic literacy than our schools typically equip people with. 
Third, in a world where the returns to quality education have gone up substantially (and the penalty for 
inadequate skills also) we have not done as well as we could in ensuring that Americans have the 
opportunity to take advantage of the best education this country offers, opportunity that is based on 
talent, not on the economic fortune of one’s parents. 
And finally, the prospect for building a political base for confronting our fiscal challenges requires that 
Americans expect more from their politicians, and raising the overall quality of education is probably 
an important part of getting better policy results in a democracy. 
Let me end by noting that by many measures the immediate economic landscape looks reasonably 
favorable. 
The U.S. expansion has proven quite resilient. We enter the new year with what appears to be a pretty 
solid  underlying  pace  of  growth.  Core  inflation  is  moderate,  and  various  measures  of  inflation 
expectations suggest confidence in the outlook for price stability. Estimates of structural productivity 
growth remains high, although there has been some moderation recently. 
The  pace  of  global  growth  has  moderated  a  bit,  but  most  forecasts  anticipate  a  quite  strong  and 
broad-based expansion. The IMF’s projection is just over four percent for real global GDP growth. 
In the financial markets, this broadly positive outlook has been accompanied by a dramatic reduction 
in risk premia, leaving the price of insurance unusually low against a less favorable or more volatile 
environment. 
Whether this confidence is justified and whether the U.S. economy does as well in the future as it did 
over  the  past  decade  or  so,  will  depend  critically  on  how  successful  we  are  in  meeting  these 
challenges in the areas of fiscal sustainability, and over the longer terms in trade policy and education. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 3
