Ishrat Husain: Sustainable growth in the financial sector of Pakistan 
Address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  as  chief  guest  at  the 
Symposium Organized by the Public Relations Management Group, Karachi, 29 April 2005. 
 It is pertinent to ask whether the reforms brought about in the financial sector of Pakistan will persist 
generating sustainable growth in the sector or quickly dissipate. 
In  my  view  there  are  at  least  eight  factors  that  attest  to  the  sustainability  of  growth  in  the  financial 
sector.  Of  course,  the  sector  cannot  be  divorced  from  the  overall  external,  domestic  and 
macroeconomic conditions. If there is a breakdown in political stability or macroeconomic situation is 
under  stress,  then  these  factors  will  not  be  operative.  This  analysis  assumes  stability,  continuity  of 
good policies and good governance. What are these factors? 
First, capital base of the banks has been strengthened by raising the minimum capital requirements 
from Rs. 500 million to Rs. 2 billion. This will be raised further in the coming years. In addition, the 
capital adequacy ratio which reflects the amount of capital to finance the risk weighted assets is now 
at  about  11  percent  for  the  banking  industry  as  an  average  against  the  minimum  requirement  of 
8 percent. As the banks mainly use the depositors’ money to take risks they should also have their 
shareholders’  money  at  stake  too.  This  high  capital  adequacy  ensures  that  the  bank  management 
exercise caution and prudence in granting of loans. 
Second, the quality of assets of the banking system has improved during the last few years. Gross 
Non performing loans to Gross advances for the commercial banks have come down from 25 percent 
to  less  than  10  percent  while  the  provisions  held  by  the  banks  against  these  NPLs  cover  about 
70 percent of gross NPLs. Consequently, the net NPL to net advances ratio has shown a remarkable 
decline to 3 percent while is comparable to international standards. The flow of NPLs has dwindled to 
less than 5 percent that means that 95 percent of the loans in banks’ portfolio are being fully serviced 
on time. 
Third,  the  earnings  of  the  commercial  banks  have  risen  not  because  they  have  invested  in  stock 
market  or  real  estate  but  because  healthy  competition  and  restructuring  have  resulted  in  efficiency 
gains.  The  spreads  between  the  deposit  and  lending  rates  now  range  between  3.5  to  4.5  percent 
compared to 7.5 to 8 percent five years ago. The spreads have declined because the drag of NPLs 
has  disappeared,  the  corporate  tax  rates  on  the  profits  of  the  banks  have  been  lowered  from 
58 percent to 41 percent and 35 percent in the next two years and excess labor has been eased out 
through golden handshake schemes in the three major banks – NPB, HBL and UBL. Cost – Income 
ratios  have  therefore  fallen  from  74  percent  to  less than  60  percent  and  administrative  costs  range 
between 2.1 to 3.2 percent. The stable earning stream from core banking business allows the banks to 
build up reserves for facing unforeseen contingencies and strengthens their balance sheets. 
Fourth,  the  accesses  to  banking  services  have  been  broadened  to  a  much  wider  customer  base 
particularly  the  middle  and  lower  middle  income  groups.  No country  can  aspire  for  sustainable  and 
equitable  growth  in  absence of  a  strong  and  healthy  middle  class.  In  Pakistan,  the banking  system 
was  intermediating  the  savings  of  millions  of  depositors  primarily  to  fund  the  fiscal  deficit  and  the 
losses of the public sector, to meet the working capital of 200 top named companies and to engage in 
letters of credit for business and international trade. The number of active borrowers was limited to 
less than half a million at best. By allowing the banking system to offer new products and services 
such as agriculture credit, SME financing, mortgage loans, automobile leasing, personal loans etc. a 
new vista has opened up. Commercial banks that were always hesitant to channel credit to agriculture 
sector are now the single most source of agriculture financing. This year almost 1 million households 
will  receive  about  Rs.  100  billion  of  loans  for  agriculture.  Similarly,  the  Khushhali  Bank,  PPAF  and 
other  microfinance  institutions  will  reach  out  to  half  a  million  households  providing  them  small 
unsecured  loans  ranging  between  Rs.  5,000  to  Rs.  25,000.  The  beneficiaries  of  these  loans  are 
mainly  the  landless,  the  women  and  other  poor  classes  who  never  had  access  to  bank  financing. 
Salaried  classes  have  also  begun  to  leverage  their  incomes  by  receiving  personal  loans  the 
installments  of  which  are  deducted  from  their  monthly  pay  checks.  At  least  another  half  a  million 
families have availed of these loans. This broadening of access not only eases the credit constraint 
faced by a dynamic segment of the population and transfers purchasing power in their hands but also 
diversifies the risk for the banks and allows them to earn a decent return on their loan products. This 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
enhanced purchasing power in the hands of a large number of families stimulates aggregate demand 
in the economy, helps in the expansion of production of manufactured goods and in the higher growth 
of the economy. 
Fifth, with the privatization of nationalized commercial banks the role of the regulatory and supervisory 
authorities has also changed. A strong regulator is needed to act as a vigilant watchdog on the banks 
and banking industry as a whole. Prudential regulations and norms and their effective enforcement is 
one  of  the  potent  instruments  to  perform  this  function.  But  ensuring  good  corporate  governance  is 
another way to do so. The SBP has laid down fit and proper criteria for the appointment of the Boards 
of Directors, Chief Executives and Senior management of the banks. Those who meet this test can 
hold the office for the prescribed tenure but in case there is deviation and the appointees do not meet 
the test the SBP advises the banks to replace the individuals concerned by more appropriate persons. 
In my reckoning 50 percent of the job of the regulator is completed if the right persons are appointed 
and the corporate governance guidelines are observed in letter and spirit. 
Sixth, there have been certain apprehensions expressed about the risks to which the banks have been 
exposed or will be exposed in the future in light of the rising interest rates. There are two strands of 
criticism on this count. There are those who believe that there will be more defaults on consumer loans 
as interest rates go up. It is always true that the default rate will be higher under a rising interest rate 
scenario  compared  to  low  interest  rates.  But  for  the  last  five  years  the  banks  have  been  asked  to 
earmark  reserves  of  1.5  percent  against  their  secured  consumer  loans  and  3  percent  against 
unsecured loans in their portfolios. This pool of money will enable the banks to deal with in the event 
they are stuck with higher defaults. At the same time the repossession laws have been strengthened 
and repossession of automobiles or houses has become much easier for the banks and liquidate their 
collaterals against which the loans have been given. 
A second criticism is that the banks are fuelling the speculative activities such as stock market share 
trading  and  real  estate  purchases.  The  banks  have  been  restricted  by  the  SBP  and  their  total 
exposure to shares can not exceed 20 percent of their equity. If we assume, for the sake of argument, 
that  all  the  banks  have  collectively  used  up  this  maximum  limit  of  exposure  their  investment  of  the 
banking sector in shares would be small – about Rs. 32 billion. This accounts only 1.6 percent of the 
total assets of the banking system and it can be seen that it does not pose any serious risk to the 
bank. 
As far as real estate is concerned, the banks cannot finance purchase of plots of land and only against 
housing.  The  direct  lending  for  mortgage  is  miniscule  but  indirectly  the  banks  can  be  put  to  risk 
because  of  inflated  values  of  property  held  as  collateral.  The  SBP  insists  that  only  the  forced  sale 
value and not the market value should be taken into consideration for valuing the collaterals. This will 
save the banks from downward movement in the market prices of the real estate. 
Another risk mitigating measure taken by the SBP is to extend the coverage of all loans – corporate 
and consumer - in the Credit Information Bureau. This real time on-line information service which is 
currently limited to the corporate borrowers will enable the banks to appraise the credit worthiness of 
prospective  consumer  loanees,  determine  their  aggregate  repayment  capacity  and  verify  the  credit 
history before approving the loans. Thus, a card holder who already has four to five credit cards and 
reached his borrowing limit will find it difficult to get a card from another bank. 
Seventh, the human resource base of the banking system is being upgraded. Emulating the example 
set by the SBP in recruitment of new employees through merit based competition, other banks have 
also started following the same system. I am, therefore, sanguine that the new breed of bankers will 
be infused with professional skills. We have formed a task force consisting of the HR Managers of all 
the  banks  and  mandated  them  to  come  up  with  industry  wide  standards  for  training,  promotion, 
compensation  and  benefits,  severance  and  continuing  professional  education.  The  banks  have  to 
move away from the old paradigm of seniority as the sole criterion for career advancement. In future 
the  promotions  should  be  based  on  upgradation  of  skills  and  demonstration  of  performance.  In  a 
knowledge-based economy and a service-oriented sector, it is absolutely imperative that investment in 
human skills is given utmost priority. 
Eighth, five years ago the technological base of the banking industry was not even at a rudimentary 
stage. The SBP embarked upon a Technology upgradation project which will be completed this year 
after five years’ serious efforts. The banks have also followed the lead and from almost a scratch we 
have more than 800 ATMs and almost half of the branches nation-wide are connected on-line. By the 
end of 2005 it is expected that most branches will have on-line and internet banking facilities. The Real 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) will allow inter-bank transfer of funds from any place in the 
country thus increasing the efficiency and providing convenience to the customers. 
The  cost  of  transactions  will  be  reduced  significantly  once  the  ATM  network  and  on-line  banking 
become firmly entrenched. It is estimated that the average cost of processing a cheque is around Rs. 
50 while that of ATM withdrawal is Rs. 15. Thus, the cost savings will result in further efficiency of the 
banking system and increased volume of business. 
Conclusion 
The  above  analysis  shows  that  the  fundamental  reforms  carried  out  in  the  financial  sector  have 
brought  about  significant  changes  in  the  structure,  processes,  regulation,  technology  and  human 
resource base of Pakistan’s banking sector. The reforms have initiated a virtuous cycle of economic 
growth  which  is  pro-poor.  These  changes  and  their  future  continuation  provide  the  foundation  for 
sustainable growth in the financial sector and the virtuous cycle in economy. 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 3
