Philipp Hildebrand: Switzerland and global competition - an all-purpose 
strategy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the University of St Gallen, St Gallen, 29 August 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch) 
 Openness  was  one  of  the  major  factors  that  made  Switzerland  one  of  the  richest  countries  in  the 
world. A significant portion of our industry, and one upon which our current prosperity is based, is the 
direct or indirect outcome of foreign expertise and the efforts of foreign entrepreneurs. These people 
were attracted to Switzerland – particularly in the 19th century – by its openness and its stable, liberal 
environment. Openness promotes competition, innovation and progress, thereby securing sustained 
prosperity.  
But Switzerland strayed from the straight and narrow when it began erecting barriers to competition – 
barriers  that  provided  ever  greater  protection  to  its  domestic  market.  The  ensuing  insulation  of  the 
domestic market is probably one of the main reasons for Switzerland's growth slump today. External 
trade policies are always domestic market policies as well. Consequently, external trade policies have 
instruments that can be effective in opening up the domestic market from outside. This openness to 
external  trade  is  of  utmost  importance,  therefore,  not  only  for  exporters,  but  also  for  the  domestic 
market.  
Being  open  towards  Europe  and  towards  other  trading  blocks  is  not  mutually  exclusive.  Ultimately, 
being open means pitting oneself against the very best, irrespective of the region they belong to, since 
only if we compete against the best, will we be one of the best in the future. Consequently, it would be 
wrong  for  Switzerland  to  limit  its  openness  to  a  given  geographic  region.  Openness  must  be  the 
fundamental principle governing all of its economic policies. Even in the changing global environment 
of  intensive  competition,  Switzerland  can  increase  its  prosperity  if  it  rethinks  its  economic  policy 
direction  and  embraces  former  tried  and  tested  virtues  such  as  openness,  freedom  and  personal 
responsibility. 
