Jarle Bergo: The basis for inflation targeting 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Foreign 
Exchange Seminar of the Association of Norwegian Economists, Sanderstølen, 21 January 2005. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain new assessments 
of the economic situation or of current interest rate setting. 
The references and the
Charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 In  2004,  the  Norwegian  Finn  Kydland  and  the  American  Edward  Prescott  were  awarded  the  Nobel 
Prize  in  economic  sciences.  They  received  the  prize  for  their  theoretical  studies  in  the  1970s  on 
economic  policy  rules  and  the  importance  of  anchoring  economic  agents’  expectations.  Norway’s 
current economic policy, with an inflation target for monetary policy and a fiscal policy rule, is partly 
based  on  the  insights  of  Kydland  and  Prescott.  But  it  is  not  just  theory  that  has  brought  us  here. 
Practice and experience over the last 30 to 40 years have perhaps been just as important. In his book 
“Doctrines and economic management in retrospect”, Hermod Skånland, former Governor of Norges 
Bank, points out that until the 1980s, the perception that government had to assume responsibility for 
employment and that borrowing should be inexpensive contributed to both the currency crisis and the 
banking  crisis.1  Today’s  economic  policy  can be seen  as a result  of  a  long  learning  process  where 
academicians and the authorities have contributed. 
First, I will discuss the historical and theoretical basis for the current monetary policy. I will then move 
on to discuss monetary policy in practice and will also look more closely at the requirements inflation 
targeting imply for our analytical tools. 
Historical and theoretical basis for inflation targeting - lessons and experiences 
In  particular,  two  fundamental  lessons  from  the  last  30-40  years  have  taken  on  considerable 
importance for economic policy in general and monetary policy in particular. We can, perhaps, say that 
these lessons have led to a paradigm shift in economic policy. 
One lesson is that if the authorities do not take into account that economic agents are forward-looking 
when  they  make  decisions  about  consumption  and  investment,  wages  and  prices,  this  may  have 
adverse  consequences.  Agents  take  into  account  their  expectations  concerning  future  economic 
policy, not only today’s economic policy. It is thus important that the authorities do not sow doubt about 
their  objectives.  They  must  act  in  a  predictable  and  credible  manner  within  a  long-term  framework. 
There  must  be  consistency  between  the  stated  objectives  of  economic  policy  and  what  is  actually 
done to achieve these objectives. 
This is exactly what Kydland and Prescott pointed out in their pioneering work from 1977.2 Their work 
was  based  on  insights  from  the  theory  of  rational  expectations,  an  area  where  Robert  Lucas,  who 
received  the  Nobel  Prize  in  1995,  made  a  significant  contribution.3  Economic  agents  will  not 
systematically  misjudge what  the  authorities plan  to do  in  the  future.  Kydland  and  Prescott  showed 
that  room  for  manoeuvre  in  economic  policy  may  have  a  price.  The  insight  they  provided  was  that 
economic  policy  can  achieve  better  results  if  the  authorities  can  commit  themselves  to  a 
pre-established  set  of  credible  policy  rules,  rather  than  give  themselves  the  possibility  of  changing 
policy at any given time in the future. This was a fundamentally new insight compared with the belief 
that the authorities had unlimited possibilities for managing the economy, a view that had dominated 
economic policy in previous decades. 
                                                      
1  Skånland, Hermod (2004): “Doktriner og økonomisk styring. Et tilbakeblikk”, Norges Banks skriftserie nr. 36 (“Doctrines and 
economic management in retrospect”, Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers, no. 36) (in Norwegian only). 
2  See Kydland, F. E. and E. C. Prescott (1977): “Rules rather than discretion: the inconsistency of optimal plans”, Journal of 
Political Economy 85, 473-490. 
Lucas, R. E. (1976): “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 1, 
19-46. 
3 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 1
One example used by Kydland and Prescott is what can happen when the authorities impose heavy 
taxes on capital today at the same time as they promise to lower taxes in the future. If firms believe 
this, they will increase investment now. However, when the increased real capital stock becomes a 
fact, the authorities may be tempted to disregard their promise of lower taxes. The purpose of reducing 
taxes  has  already  been  achieved.  A  breach  of  promise  may  be  accepted  once.  Having  learned  by 
experience,  however,  economic  agents  will  not  believe  this  kind  of  promise  unless  the  authorities 
commit themselves to delivering what they promise. In order to function, policy must therefore be time-
consistent and credible. 
In Norway, the devaluation decade from 1976 to 1986 may be an example of economic policy that did 
not  fully  recognise  the  role  of  expectations  and  the significance of  credible  policy  rules.  During  this 
period, the krone was devalued ten times if we also include “technical adjustments”, which also implied 
devaluation. The many exchange rate adjustments in this period were in part aimed at remedying the 
deterioration of Norway’s relative cost level, which in turn was related to the government’s attempt to 
take  responsibility  for  employment  also  when  the  social  partners  failed  to  do  so.  Gradually, 
expectations  of  a  continued  exchange  rate  policy  that  would  maintain  manufacturing’s  cost 
competitiveness  became  widespread.  This  weakened  the  incentives  for  the  social  partners  to  keep 
wage and cost inflation at a reasonable level. The devaluations contributed to high inflation. When it 
finally became clear that this could not continue, it took many years before inflation was brought under 
control and interest rates in Norway could be reduced to the level of interest rates in other countries. 
The other lesson drawn from economic theory and economic policy in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s 
was that in the medium and long term it is not possible to reduce employment by accepting somewhat 
higher inflation. An attempt to increase output beyond the level that is consistent with stable inflation 
will  over  time  lead  to  steadily  rising  inflation.  Economic  agents  will  eventually  incorporate  higher 
inflation  into  their  inflation  expectations.  In  the  long  run,  the  result  will  only  be  higher  inflation,  not 
higher employment. Output and employment will return to their supply-determined level. In the long 
term,  output  is  determined  by  the  supply  of  labour,  capital,  technology  and  adaptability.  Monetary 
policy  has  little  effect  on  these  factors.  In  other  words,  there  is  no  permanent  trade-off  between 
inflation and output. 
Very high inflation is a wartime phenomenon and a phenomenon of the 1970s and 1980s. Substantial 
real economic losses have followed in the wake of high inflation. High and variable inflation impairs the 
function  of  prices  as  an  information  vehicle.  Over  time,  monetary  policy  can  determine  the  inflation 
rate. Low inflation is monetary policy’s contribution to stable, high economic growth over time. 
The  responsibility  for  interest  rate  decisions  was  delegated  to  Norges  Bank  pursuant  to  the 
amendment  to  the  1985  Norges  Bank  Act  and  through  the  change  in  its  application  in  1986.  The 
interest rate would no longer be an instrument of industrial or social policy. The last devaluation took 
place in 1986 after a fall in oil prices. We then shifted to a fixed exchange rate regime. The Norwegian 
economy had to go through an extensive turnaround operation. The objective of monetary policy was 
to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. Confidence in the Norwegian krone had to be restored 
in order to avoid persistently high inflation. This required very high interest rates. The fixed exchange 
rate regime resulted in a gradual reduction in inflation and succeeded in providing the economy with a 
nominal anchor. 
However,  fine-tuning  the  exchange  rate  proved  to  be  an  extremely  demanding  task.  We  had  to 
abandon  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  in  December  1992.  Important  reasons  were  freer  capital 
flows,  deeper  financial  markets  and  hence  a  surge  in  cross-border  capital  movements.  Initially, 
however, the krone exchange rate showed little change and quickly found a new range. 
The exchange rate remained stable until autumn 1996, but gradually began to show wider fluctuations. 
Developments  in  international  financial  markets  led  to  more  pronounced  fluctuations.  And  more 
fundamentally, exchange rate developments no longer provided signals to wage formation and fiscal 
policy when labour market pressures mounted and incomes policy failed. High petroleum revenues, 
fiscal  slippage  and  expectations  of  increased  use  of  petroleum  revenues  contributed  to  this.  The 
exchange  rate  was  no  longer  appropriate  as  a  nominal  anchor.  Norges  Bank  therefore  placed 
increasing emphasis on low and stable inflation in its conduct of monetary policy. 
Petroleum  revenues  posed  particular  challenges  to  stabilisation  policy.  It  became  increasingly 
challenging  to  smooth  cyclical  fluctuations  by  means  of  fiscal  policy.  The  pressure  on  fiscal  policy 
made it appropriate to tie oneself to the mast to a further extent to protect petroleum revenues from 
special interest groups. But this meant that monetary policy had to be given greater responsibility for 
stabilising inflation, output and employment. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2005
The response to this challenge was the revision of economic policy in spring 2001. The most important 
policy change was the plan for phasing in petroleum revenues - the so-called fiscal rule. An inflation 
target for monetary policy was introduced at the same time. We can now say that inflation targeting is 
normal in small and medium-sized economies with financial markets that function relatively smoothly. 
The fiscal rule and the inflation target can be seen as an answer to the problems raised by Kydland 
and Prescott. 
Inflation targeting in practice 
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in 
inflation and variability in output and employment in setting interest rates. Thus, we take into account 
that monetary policy affects output and employment in the short term and that it is appropriate to take 
this into account when setting the interest rate to reach the inflation target over time. Flexible inflation 
targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is to keep inflation 
at bay, and the task of real economic stability. The inflation target is a vehicle for, not an obstacle to, 
monetary policy’s contribution to smoothing fluctuations in the real economy. 
The effect of monetary policy depends on market participants’ expectations concerning future policy as 
much  as  the  central  bank’s  interest  rate  decisions.  It  is  primarily  economic  agents’  interest  rate 
expectations that influence consumption and investment decisions - and consequently inflation. To be 
successful, monetary policy must be capable of influencing expectations. Michael Woodford, a leading 
academician in modern monetary theory, states the following in his book “Interest and Prices”: “For 
successful monetary policy is not so much a matter of effective control of overnight interest rates as it 
is of shaping market expectations of the way in which interest rates, inflation, and income are likely to 
evolve over the coming year and later. (…) It follows that, insofar as it is possible for the central bank 
to affect expectations, this should be an important tool of stabilization policy.” 4
As long as the central bank’s behaviour is credible and predictable, an inflation target for monetary 
policy can contribute to anchoring expectations of future inflation. This also contributes to providing a 
basis for economic agents’ interest rate expectations. 
In  the  Inflation  Report,  Norges  Bank  provides  its  assessments  of  the  outlook  for  economic 
developments.  The  chart  shows  Norges  Bank’s  projections  from  Inflation  Report  3/04,  which  was 
published  in  November.  The  projections  are  conditional  on  the  market’s  interest  rate  expectations. 
This interest rate path is then assessed by the Executive Board on the basis of the derived projections 
for inflation and the output gap. Since summer 2004, the Inflation Report has presented the Executive 
Board’s assessments of monetary policy in the next four-month period. 
In the last Inflation Report, it was the Executive Board’s assessment that the projections conditional on 
the market’s interest rate expectations seemed to provide a reasonable balance between the objective 
of  bringing  up  inflation,  while  avoiding  excessive  growth  in  output  and  employment.  The  previous 
Inflation Report, from July 2004, stated that “the most appropriate alternative now seems to be that the 
interest  rate  should  be  kept  unchanged  for  a  longer  period  than  indicated  by  market  expectations.” 
After this, we saw that interest rate expectations fell. 
By  communicating  our  view  concerning  interest  rate  expectations,  Norges  Bank  seeks  to  influence 
interest  rate  expectations.  The  objective  is  for  interest  rate  expectations  to  be  consistent  with 
economic developments where inflation is on target over time and output is stable around its potential 
level. Most often, however, there will be a number of ways to achieve this. We need some references 
that provide some indication of whether a given interest rate path is reasonable. It is natural to turn first 
to monetary policy theory. 
In  the  theoretical  literature,  the  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  stability  in  the  real  economy  is 
often  described  as  a  problem  of  minimisation,  where  the  central  bank  wants  to  minimise  a  loss 
function,  which  includes  variations  in  output  and  variations  in  inflation.  The  central  bank  shall  then 
choose  the  path  for  the  interest  rate  ahead  that  minimises  the  expected  discounted  “losses”  in  all 
future periods. In practice, no inflation-targeting central bank uses a loss function of this kind directly. 
However, what they do contains elements of theoretical thinking. We try to set the interest rate so that 
                                                      
4  Woodford, Michael (2003): “Interest and Prices”, Princeton University Press, page 15. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 3
it provides a “reasonable balance” between the objective of stabilising inflation around the target and 
the objective of stable developments in the real economy. 
The theoretical framework provides limited concrete and easily communicable guidance. In practice, it 
may  be  useful  to  have  some  simple  points  of  reference  that  can  help  us  to  evaluate  whether  an 
interest rate path seems reasonable in relation to the monetary policy objective. 
The most important task of monetary policy is to provide an anchor for inflation expectations. Norges 
Bank  sets  the  interest  rate  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation  at  the  target  within  a  reasonable  time 
horizon,  normally  1-3  years.  Therefore,  when  evaluating  the  interest  rate  path,  the  most  important 
criterion is whether inflation reaches the target within this time horizon and remains there. If we do not 
reach the target within this time horizon, there may be a risk that inflation expectations will gradually 
move away from the target. This could weaken confidence in monetary policy and the inflation target 
as a nominal anchor. For the same reason, inflation should also be moving towards the target well 
before the end of the three-year period. 
The inflation gap and the output gap should be in reasonable proportion to each other until closure. 
This assessment must also take account of the substantial uncertainty surrounding the calculation of 
the output gap, and of Norges Bank’s mandate which specifies that inflation shall be 2.5 per cent over 
time. 
The inflation gap and the output gap shall normally not be positive or negative at the same time further 
ahead. If, for example, both gaps are positive, a higher interest rate path would be preferable as this 
would bring inflation closer to the target and contribute to stabilising output. 
Depending on the initial situation for inflation and production, it may be difficult to meet these criteria 
simultaneously.  How  easy  it  is  to  meet  these  criteria  will  depend  on  the  disturbances  to  which  the 
economy has been exposed. 
There are also other important considerations when assessing the interest rate path. We must assess 
whether the interest rate path, at least in the next few months, results in acceptable developments also 
under alternative, but realistic assumptions concerning economic developments and the functioning of 
the  economy.  In  other  words,  is  the  strategy  robust?  We  must  also  evaluate  the  consequences  for 
financial stability. 
Last,  but  not  least,  a  successful  monetary  policy  requires  a  reasonably  good  understanding  of  the 
state of the economy and its functioning. I will now discuss this in more detail. 
Analyses and models at Norges Bank 
The  Executive  Board’s  assessments  of  various  interest  rate  paths  are  based  on  projections  of 
economic developments, supplemented by other information and discretion. To provide you with some 
insight into how we work when we make projections for the Norwegian economy, it may be practical to 
use a tripartite approach: the short-term or current situation, the medium-term or projection period and 
finally what we call the long-term. The dividing lines are not clearly defined, but are to some extent 
overlapping as indicated in the chart. 
Knowledge  about  the  current  economic  situation  is  absolutely  essential  to  making  projections  of 
economic  developments  that  are  useful  for  monetary  policy.  We  must  form  a  picture  of  capacity 
utilisation in the economy and whether it is increasing or decreasing. We must also try to identify the 
driving forces or disturbances that influence developments. A macroeconomic model will be a useful 
tool in this connection. Nevertheless, thorough analyses of available economic statistics are the most 
important source when we are assessing the current situation. 
To obtain a good picture of the current situation, it is important to consider developments in context 
and  to  distinguish  between  genuinely  new  information  and  noise.  There  is  always  uncertainty 
associated with statistics and the quality can vary depending on the source. Frequency and the time 
from measurement to publication also vary considerably. Economic data are published with a time lag 
and  are  often  revised.  A  very  useful  cross-reference  and  alternative  information  channel  to  official 
statistics is therefore our own regional network which consists of enterprises, organisations and local 
authorities  throughout  the  country.  We  engage  in  five  rounds  of  talks  each  year  with  business  and 
community  leaders  concerning  economic  developments  in  their  industries.  All  of  this  information 
provides a basis for our analysis of the current situation. A large share of the overall resources used 
for analyses and projections of the Norwegian economy is devoted to this work. 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2005
Based on experience and economic theory, we can assume that certain relationships will hold in the 
long term. There is fairly broad agreement that monetary policy cannot affect the level of output and 
employment over time. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that output and employment over time 
are determined by supply-side factors. At the same time, inflation is determined over time by monetary 
policy. Both theory and experience indicate that in the long term, the real interest rate must be positive 
and  consistent  with  the  growth  potential  of  the  Norwegian  and  international  economy.  Experience 
shows  that  the  real  interest  rate  has  generally  ranged  somewhere  between  2  and  4  per  cent.  In 
keeping with experience, we can assume that wage income, consumption and investment as a share 
of production are fairly stable over time. Hence, we have some fairly robust reference points for the 
economy in the long term. 
In the work on medium-term forecasting, short-term developments are linked to our assessments of 
long-term developments. In this context, a macroeconomic model can function as a bridge. Moreover, 
a macro model can ensure consistency between important economic variables. As an alternative and 
a cross-reference, we also make medium-term projections using a more detailed analysis of a number 
of economic variables. Simple equations where the parameters are econometrically determined and 
smaller  systems  of  equations  are  used  in  this  work.  The  baseline  scenario  that  is  published  in  the 
Inflation  Report  is  based  on  a  discretionary  overall  assessment  of  the  projections  derived  from  the 
model  and  the  projections  from  the  more  detailed  analysis.  Thus,  we  do  not  use  a  macro  model 
mechanically. But a macro model can function as a reference and a guide while ensuring consistency 
in the projections over time. 
The value of a macro model depends on how useful it is for monetary policy assessments. Under an 
inflation targeting regime, the focus is largely on risks, on understanding what type of disturbances to 
which  the  economy  may  be  exposed  and  on  analysing  the  monetary  policy  response  to  various 
disturbances. The recurrent question that we seek to answer is at what level the interest rate should 
be set to bring inflation back to target and stabilise economic developments around trend. In the policy 
analysis and the risk analysis, we look at the consequences for economic developments of alternative 
assumptions  about  the  interest  rate,  the  current  economic  situation  and  the  functioning  of  the 
economy. Such analyses of alternative scenarios must be based on a macro model. 
What  are  the  requirements  we  set  for  a  macro  model?  First,  it  is  of  particular  importance  that  the 
mechanisms in the model can be interpreted and communicated so that the model is perceived as a 
sound  tool,  both  in  the  internal  process  and  in  the  Bank’s  external  communication.  In  the  policy 
analysis, we also need a framework where the various disturbances can be interpreted and described. 
The  importance  of  analysing  risks  also  means  that  we  must  be  able  to  change  the  various  model 
mechanisms  in  a  straightforward  way.  Moreover,  the  model  must  reflect  the  lessons  that  led  to  a 
paradigm shift in economic policy. Expectations must therefore play an explicit role in the model. The 
model must reflect that inflation is a monetary phenomenon in the long term and that monetary policy 
provides the economy with a nominal anchor. 
Norges  Bank’s  macro  models  have  played  a  key  role  in  forecasting  work  over  many  years.  The 
models satisfy many of the requirements for a sound model, but the introduction of inflation targeting 
revealed new needs that these models were not designed to meet. Developments in economics and 
computational  technology  have  also  provided  new  possibilities  for  constructing  and  solving 
macroeconomic models. Norges Bank has therefore started work on developing a new macro model. 
An  important  purpose  of  constructing  a  new  model  is  to  expand  our  tool  kit  so  that  we  are  better 
equipped  to  conduct  policy  analyses.  I  would  therefore  like  to  devote  some  attention  to  this  model 
here, also because it may help explain our thinking as to the functioning of the economy. 
We have called the new macro model “Norwegian Economy Model”, or abbreviated “NEMO”. In the 
work on developing the model, we have benefited greatly from our close cooperation with the IMF and 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We have also been inspired by and learned from the work of 
a number of other central banks, for example in the UK, Sweden and Canada. In addition, we have the 
benefit of a long history of model-building in Norway. 
NEMO belongs to a class of macroeconomic models that tends to be referred to as DSGE models, 
which stands for “Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium”. The term dynamic means that the entire 
path from the short term to the long term is modelled. The model is stochastic in the sense that the 
economy  is  exposed  to  random  disturbances.  Such  disturbances  can,  for  example,  stem  from  a 
change  in  preferences,  technology  and  market  structure.  General  equilibrium  implies  that  supply 
equals demand at all times in all markets, but there may be considerable temporary deviations from 
the long-term growth path. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 5
A  prominent  feature  of  this  type  of  model  is  that  the  behaviour  of  different  economic  agents  is 
modelled explicitly. Each model parameter therefore has its own economic interpretation. Households 
maximise  utility  and  choose  the  optimal  distribution  between  work  and  leisure  and  between 
consumption and saving. Firms maximise profit. The authorities have defined specific economic policy 
objectives. 
The first DSGE models were developed in the early 1980s, and were closely linked to real business 
cycle  theory  which  Kydland  and  Prescott  pioneered.  These  models  included  elements  of  classical 
theory such as perfect competition, flexible prices and market clearing. A main thesis of real business 
cycle theory is that not only is long-term economic growth, but also the business cycle, driven from the 
supply side, specifically by an uneven development in technology. Lags in the economy were linked to 
real  variables  in  these  models,  for  example  that  it  takes  time  to  install  new  capital.  A  result  of  this 
theory  was  that  stabilisation  policy  is  superfluous.  The  one-sided  focus  on  technology  shocks  as  a 
driving force of the business cycle drew criticism from many economists. 
The DSGE models have been further developed over the past decade and they have gained a more 
prominent  role.  Important  additions  are  Keynesian  elements  such  as  monopolistic  competition  and 
nominal rigidities. Monopolistic competition means that firms have market power and set prices as a 
mark-up on their marginal costs. In the more recent DSGE models, prices and wages are also rigid in 
the  short  term,  partly  reflecting  contracts  and  costs  associated  with  price  adjustments.  These  two 
assumptions imply that production is determined by demand in the short term and that monetary policy 
affects the real economy. Therefore, more recent DSGE models have features that combine elements 
of  both  Neoclassical  and  Keynesian  models.  This  body  of  theory  is  often  referred  to  as  the  “New 
Neoclassical Synthesis”, but these types of models are also frequently called “New Keynesian”. The 
long-term properties of the models can be qualified as classical: Monetary policy can only influence 
nominal variables, while production is determined by technology, preferences and the supply of factor 
inputs.  In  the  short  term,  the  model  has  Keynesian  features:  Production  is  determined  by  demand. 
Monetary policy can influence production and employment because it takes time to change prices and 
wages. 
NEMO  will  be  quantified  so  that  it  reflects  our  perception  of  the  central  mechanisms  that  apply  to 
today’s  economy.  In  this  process,  we  must  combine  our  overall  theoretical  and  empirical  insight. 
Econometrics  and  other  empirical  methods  are  used  as  an  aid  in  providing  us  with  insight  into  the 
functioning of the economy. The strategy and methods that we use in this work are broad-based and 
include  traditional  econometrics,  insight  gained  from  many  years  of  work  on  the  RIMINI  model  and 
other Norwegian macro models, structural VAR models, Bayesian estimation techniques, analyses of 
stylised facts and micro observations. Different approaches can yield different results. Discretion must 
therefore always be exercised in quantifying the model. 
We have not completed the work on quantifying the model parameters. I would nevertheless like to 
illustrate how NEMO can already be qualitatively used as input in analysing the Norwegian economy. 
During most of the 1990s and until 2002, inflation was close to the current inflation target. Consumer 
price  inflation  in  Norway  declined  sharply,  however,  through  2003  and  into  2004.  It  is  important  to 
understand  the  background  for  these  developments.  The  most  appropriate  -  or  optimal  -  monetary 
policy response will depend on underlying shocks or disturbances. 
A  number  of  factors  seem  to  have  contributed  to  pushing  down  inflation  to  such  a  low  level.  The 
appreciation  of  the  krone  through  2002  contributed  to  a  sharp  fall  in  prices  for  imported  consumer 
goods.  A  shift  in  trade  patterns  and  the  cyclical  downturn  in  the  world  economy  may  also  have 
contributed. Since mid-2003, however, a more subdued rise in prices for domestically produced goods 
and services was primarily responsible for reducing overall price inflation. In our Inflation Report, we 
have pointed out that intensified competition in retail trade and other service sectors in recent years 
may  have  contributed.  In  the  first  round,  increased  competition  affects  companies’  profit  margins 
because  prices  are  pushed  down.  Many  companies  have  probably  responded  by  rationalising 
operations in order to cut costs. 
Although there is probably no model that would a priori have captured the considerable disturbances 
to which the Norwegian economy has been exposed, it is useful to be able to analyse the effects of 
the disturbances after they have occurred. Therefore, let us use the model to look at the qualitative 
effects of a fairly long-lasting increase in competition in product markets. The magnitude and duration 
of the shock has been adjusted so that inflation in the model illustration falls by around 1 percentage 
point. In the charts, all the variables are shown as deviations from a baseline scenario, i.e. a path for 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2005
economic developments without such a disturbance. The figures on the X-axis indicate the number of 
quarters. 
Increased  competition  reduces  companies’  possibilities  for  setting  prices  higher  than  marginal 
production  costs.  This  contributes  to  a  reduction  in  prices.  Owing  to  nominal  rigidities,  however,  it 
takes time for prices to adapt to increased competition. Therefore, inflation falls gradually. 
The  interest  rate  is  reduced  to  counter  the  fall  in  inflation  and  to  bring  inflation  back  to  the  target. 
Lower real interest rates combined with lower price inflation contribute to higher consumer demand. 
Output increases to meet higher demand. Higher output increases demand for factor inputs such as 
labour and capital. Therefore, the number of man-hours increases. Investment also rises as a result of 
lower real interest rates. Increased demand for labour results in a tighter labour market and upward 
pressure on nominal wages. Lower price inflation has the opposite effect. Therefore, nominal wages 
may remain relatively stable, while real wages increase sharply. Thus, real marginal costs increase. 
This will gradually contribute to pushing up price inflation. The prospect of higher inflation leads to a 
gradual increase in the interest rate. An increase in real interest rates curbs demand. Since increased 
competition is assumed to be only temporary in this illustration, there will be no permanent effects on 
output. Therefore, the economy will gradually return to the baseline scenario. 
Of  course,  we  do  not  believe  that  increased  competition  alone  can  explain  developments  in  the 
Norwegian  economy  in  the  last  couple  of  years.  There  have  been  many  driving  forces  behind  low 
inflation  and  developments  in  output.  Nevertheless,  the  developments  resulting  from  the  model 
analysis  are  fairly  consistent  in  qualitative  terms  with  the  picture  we  seem  to  be  observing  for  the 
Norwegian economy. Inflation and the interest rate are low. Real wages have risen and consumption 
growth  is  high.  Mainland  investment  and  in  particular  housing  investment  have  gradually  increased 
substantially. The number of man-hours worked has also picked up markedly, although employment 
growth measured by the number of persons has been more subdued. 
The model can thus support an assumption that increased competition in the Norwegian economy is 
one  of  several  driving  forces  behind  low  inflation.  The  model  may  also  provide  an  indication  of  the 
appropriate monetary  policy  response to  such  disturbances. However,  let  me  again  emphasise  that 
this model is still in the development process and that in addition to this model, we are also working on 
other  empirically-based  analyses  to  understand  relationships  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  It  is 
important to have an abundance of tools so that we can combine different models and theories in our 
economic analyses. 
Conclusion 
The  lesson  from  Kydland  and  Prescott  was  that  economic  policy  can  achieve  better  results  if  the 
authorities  can  commit  themselves  to  a  pre-established  set  of  credible  policy  rules.  The  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  in  Norway,  as  in  many  other  countries,  is  delegated  to  the  central  bank  with  an 
objective of low and stable inflation. The inflation target can be seen as an answer to the problems 
raised by Kydland and Prescott. 
However,  inflation  targeting  probably  places  greater  demands  on  our  understanding  of  the  way  the 
economy  functions  than  earlier.  Macroeconomic  models  are  useful  tools  that  can  combine  our 
empirical and theoretical insights. But models cannot provide definitive answers to all the questions 
that we as decision-makers face on a daily basis. Nor can they reduce the uncertainty surrounding 
economic developments. Therefore, it is necessary to analyse the economy from different angles. We 
must also look out the window, we must be pragmatic and we must exercise discretion. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 7
