Derick Latibeaudiere: Workshop for mutual evaluation examiners on the 2004 
IMF/World Bank AML/CFT Assessment Methodology 
Remarks  by  Mr  Derick  Latibeaudiere,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  the  opening  of  the 
week-long  workshop  for  examiners,  held  at  the  Bank’s  Training  Institute,  Kingston,  14-18 February 
2005.  
 Let me extend to you all a warm Jamaican welcome to the Bank of Jamaica and to this workshop. 
Special  welcome  to  the  representatives  from  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (CFATF), 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  World  Bank,  and  our  visitors  from  Central  America  and  the 
Caribbean.  
News reports show record low temperatures in North America this winter, so I therefore trust that our 
visitors from that region will particularly enjoy our tropical climate this week.  
I recall that it was not too long ago that we hosted a similar training programme on what was then a 
new  methodology  for  evaluating  anti-money  laundering  frameworks.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  speed 
with which the assessment methodologies have been evolving is true testimony to the dynamic nature 
of money laundering and terrorism financing.  
Recent trends indicate that although currency is still the primary form of illegal proceeds and although 
financial  institutions  remain  the  most  common  avenue  for  money  laundering,  new  AML/CFT 
challenges  are  emerging  from  electronic  money,  internet  banking,  internet  casinos  and  other 
state-of-the-art forms of money transfer. This makes it very difficult to apply the standard AML/CFT 
techniques,  including  “Know  Your  Customer”  and  requires  that  regulators  and  supervisors  impose 
even more stringent methods of detection, prevention and sanctions. These developments also call for 
a  dynamic  response  from  national  authorities  to  ensure  that  their  economies  and  societies  are 
protected from the scourge of money laundering.  
Consequently,  we  welcome  this  workshop  from  which  we  hope  to  gain  fresh  insights  into  the  new 
methodology  that  has  been  developed  by  the  IMF  and  assistance  in  adopting  more  proactive 
mechanisms  for  countering  the  twin  threats  of  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  in  our 
respective jurisdictions. 
The reports from various regional CFATF meetings have indicated that the entire Caribbean region 
remains  committed  to  the  fight  against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  activities.  Our 
countries are at various stages of endorsing the international standards and recommendations for best 
practice, but more importantly, our respective jurisdictions are all actively involved in the initiatives to 
give practical effect to these standards.  
Furthermore, the seriousness with which the Caribbean as a region treats with anti-money laundering 
and  terrorist  financing  measures,  is  reflected  in  the  fact  that  several  individual  jurisdictions  have 
already subjected themselves to mutual evaluation examinations.  
For Jamaica, this workshop is extremely timely. We will, within the next few months, undergo the full 
range  of  evaluations  related  to  this  subject  area.  The  advantages  that  we  expect  to  gain  from  this 
week’s training are therefore of significance to Jamaica. 
However, our interests are not purely selfish, for Jamaica is not only committed to the promotion of 
sound anti-money laundering measures within our borders, but we are also dedicated to ensuring that 
these  measures  are  entrenched  in  the  wider  region.  Indeed,  we  have  participating  from  within  the 
public  sector,  six  senior  officers  who  are  being  trained  as  evaluators  to  take  part  in  the  peer 
assessment exercises of our Caribbean neighbours. The support of CFATF members as indicated by 
the  large  representation  of  jurisdictions  registered  here  today,  further  underlines  the  region’s 
commitment to adopting and applying new international standards and methodologies. 
With  regard  to  Jamaica,  the  Government  has  made  significant  strides  in  amending  and  enacting 
appropriate  legislation  to  prevent  and  detect  money  laundering  and  financial  terrorism.  From  as  far 
back  as  1994,  the  Drug  Offences  (Forfeiture  of  Proceeds)  Act  was  passed.  In  1996,  we  had  the 
passage of the Money Laundering Act (MLA) and in 1997, the Money Laundering Regulations. The 
MLA was subsequently amended in 2002 to widen its scope to include money transfer and remittance 
agencies. 
BIS Review 23/2005 
 1
Further strengthening of the legislative framework continues. In December 2004, the Senate approved 
amendments  to  the  financial  legislation,  geared  towards  increasing  the  powers  of  disclosure  of 
information  to  the  Financial  Investigations Division  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  and  to  the  sharing  of 
information  with  overseas regulatory  authorities.  Further  amendments  to  the Money  Laundering  Act 
and  the  Financial  Investigations  Act  are  currently  before  a  Joint  Select  Committee  of  Parliament. 
These amendments are aimed at fully aligning the country’s money laundering legislation with existing 
international guidelines.  
The developments in the legislative framework are being complemented by operational initiatives in 
various public sector organizations that are involved in different aspects of the measures to counter 
money laundering activities.  
As  supervisor  for  the  deposit-taking  financial  sector,  the  Bank  of  Jamaica  first  issued  money 
laundering  guidelines  to  its  supervisees  in  1988.  Since  then,  these  guidelines  have  undergone 
substantial updates, the most recent being in 2004 when they were upgraded to take account of the 
‘Eight  Special  Recommendations’  on  Terrorist  Financing  which  were  issued  by  the  Financial  Action 
Task Force (FATF) during 2003. These guidelines also give recognition to the Best Practice Standards 
for Customer Due Diligence Procedures issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The 
Financial  Services  Commission,  which  has  responsibility  for  non-deposit-taking  financial  institutions 
such  as  insurance  companies,  securities  dealers,  unit  trusts  and  mutual  funds,  has  also  recently 
issued similar guidelines.  
The  Bank  of  Jamaica  actively  participates  in  national  efforts  to  ensure  that  Jamaican  financial 
intermediaries  are  not  being  used  as  conduits  for  the  funding of  terrorist  groups.  The Central  Bank 
chairs  a  Financial  Crimes  Task  Force  that  has  been  charged  with  the  responsibility  of  making 
proposals  for  relevant  amendments  and/or  enactment  of  legislation  covering  all  facets  of  financial 
crime,  inclusive  of  money  laundering,  terrorism  financing,  and  related  issues.  These  efforts  have 
culminated in the legislative amendments that were referred to earlier. 
In closing, let me stress the importance of the collaborative efforts of the relevant authorities within 
jurisdictions, regionally and internationally, in ensuring the effectiveness and success of the AML/CFT 
measures. The effectiveness and success of these measures depend critically on this collaboration. I 
therefore trust that the combined efforts of all our Caribbean colleagues will restrict those who seek to 
exploit our financial systems and corrupt our economies and societies for their own selfish gains. 
I  believe  that  over  the  next  five  days  the  sessions  will  serve  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  our 
examiners and facilitate the application of the new 2004 IMF/World Bank Assessment Methodology as 
the basis for future Anti-Money Laundering/Combating of Financing Terrorism (AML/CFT) assessment 
exercises.  
In  the  meantime,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force,  the  International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, for the timely scheduling of this workshop. I hope that you will all 
have a very productive week, as you learn how to implement the IMF 2004 Assessment Methodology 
and draw on the wealth of knowledge of the presenters and the experience of your fellow participants. 
To all our overseas visitors, I hope that you will find some time to make it Jamaica again in the near 
future, when you can relax and explore our beautiful island. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2005
