Shyamala Gopinath: Retail banking - opportunities and challenges 
Keynote address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
IBA  -  Banking  Frontiers  International  Conference  on  “Retail  Banking  Directions:  Opportunities  & 
Challenges”, Mumbai, 28 May 2005.  
The assistance of S/Shri P. Vijaya Bhaskar and Partha Ray in preparing this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
 The  issue  of  retail  banking  is  extremely  important  and  topical.  Across  the  globe,  retail  lending  has 
been a spectacular innovation in the commercial banking sector in recent years. The growth of retail 
lending,  especially,  in  emerging  economies,  is  attributable  to  the  rapid  advances  in  information 
technology,  the  evolving  macroeconomic  environment, 
financial  market  reform,  and  several 
micro-level demand and supply side factors.  
India too experienced a surge in retail banking. There are various pointers towards this. Retail loan is 
estimated to have accounted for nearly one-fifth of all bank credit. Housing sector is experiencing a 
boom in its credit. The retail loan market has decisively got transformed from a sellers’ market to a 
buyers’ market. Gone are the days where getting a retail loan was somewhat cumbersome. All these 
emphasise the momentum that retail banking is experiencing in the Indian economy in recent years.  
What is retail banking? 
Retail banking is, however, quite broad in nature - it refers to the dealing of commercial banks with 
individual customers, both on liabilities and assets sides of the balance sheet. Fixed, current / savings 
accounts on the liabilities side; and mortgages, loans (e.g., personal, housing, auto, and educational) 
on the assets side, are the more important of the products offered by banks. Related ancillary services 
include  credit  cards,  or  depository  services.  Today’s  retail  banking  sector  is  characterized  by  three 
basic characteristics: 
• 
• 
• 
What is the nature of retail banking? In a recent book, retail banking has been described as “hotter 
than  vindaloo”1.  Considering  the  fact  that  vindaloo,  the  Indian-English  innovative  curry  available  in 
umpteen numbers of restaurants of London, is indeed very hot and spicy, it seems that retail banking 
is perceived to be the in-thing in today’s world of banking.  
multiple products (deposits, credit cards, insurance, investments and securities);  
multiple channels of distribution (call centre, branch, Internet and kiosk); and  
multiple customer groups (consumer, small business, and corporate).  
Retail banking in India 
Retail  banking  in  India  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  It  has  always  been  prevalent  in  India  in  various 
forms. For the last few years it has become synonymous with mainstream banking for many banks.  
The  typical  products  offered  in  the  Indian  retail  banking  segment  are  housing  loans,  consumption 
loans  for  purchase  of  durables,  auto  loans,  credit  cards  and  educational  loans.  The  loans  are 
marketed under attractive brand names to differentiate the products offered by different banks. As the 
Report on Trend and Progress of India, 2003-04 has shown that the loan values of these retail lending 
typically range between Rs.20,000 to Rs.100 lakh. The loans are generally for duration of five to seven 
years  with  housing  loans  granted  for  a  longer  duration  of  15  years.  Credit  card  is  another  rapidly 
growing sub-segment of this product group. 
In  recent  past  retail  lending  has  turned  out  to  be  a  key  profit  driver  for  banks  with  retail  portfolio 
constituting 21.5 per cent of total outstanding advances as on March 2004. The overall impairment of 
the retail loan portfolio worked out much less then the Gross NPA ratio for the entire loan portfolio. 
                                                      
1   DiVanna, Joseph A. (2004): The Future of Retail Banking, New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Within  the retail  segment,  the  housing loans  had  the  least  gross  asset  impairment.  In  fact,  retailing 
make ample business sense in the banking sector.  
While new generation private sector banks have been able to create a niche in this regard, the public 
sector  banks  have  not  lagged  behind.  Leveraging  their  vast  branch  network  and  outreach,  public 
sector  banks  have  aggressively  forayed  to  garner  a  larger  slice  of  the  retail  pie.  By  international 
standards, however, there is still much scope for retail banking in India. After all, retail loans constitute 
less than seven per cent of GDP in India vis-à-vis about 35 per cent for other Asian economies - South 
Korea (55 per cent), Taiwan (52 per cent), Malaysia (33 per cent) and Thailand (18 per cent). As retail 
banking in India is still growing from modest base, there is a likelihood that the growth numbers seem 
to get somewhat exaggerated. One, thus, has to exercise caution is interpreting the growth of retail 
banking in India.  
Drivers of retail business in India 
What has contributed to this retail growth? Let me briefly highlight some of the basic reasons. 
First,  economic  prosperity  and  the  consequent  increase  in  purchasing  power  has  given  a  fillip  to  a 
consumer boom. Note that during the 10 years after 1992, India's economy grew at an average rate of 
6.8  percent  and  continues  to  grow  at  the  almost  the  same  rate  –  not  many  countries  in  the  world 
match this performance.  
Second,  changing  consumer  demographics  indicate  vast  potential  for  growth  in  consumption  both 
qualitatively  and  quantitatively.  India  is  one  of  the  countries  having  highest  proportion  (70%)  of  the 
population below 35 years of age (young population). The BRIC report of the Goldman-Sachs, which 
predicted a bright future for Brazil, Russia, India and China, mentioned Indian demographic advantage 
as an important positive factor for India.  
Third,  technological  factors  played  a  major  role.  Convenience  banking  in  the  form  of  debit  cards, 
internet and phone-banking, anywhere and anytime banking has attracted many new customers into 
the banking field. Technological innovations relating to increasing use of credit / debit cards, ATMs, 
direct debits and phone banking has contributed to the growth of retail banking in India.  
Fourth, the Treasury income of the banks, which had strengthened the bottom lines of banks for the 
past few years, has been on the decline during the last two years. In such a scenario, retail business 
provides  a  good  vehicle  of  profit  maximisation.  Considering  the  fact  that  retail’s  share  in  impaired 
assets is far lower than the overall bank loans and advances, retail loans have put comparatively less 
provisioning burden on banks apart from diversifying their income streams.  
Fifth,  decline  in  interest  rates  have  also  contributed  to  the  growth  of  retail  credit  by  generating  the 
demand for such credit.  
In this backdrop let me now come two specific domains of retail lending in India, viz., (a) credit cards 
and (b) housing. 
Credit cards in India 
While usage of cards by customers of banks in India has been in vogue since the mid-1980s, it is only 
since  the  early  1990s  that  the  market  had  witnessed  a  quantum  jump.  The  total  number  of  cards 
issued by 42 banks and outstanding, increased from 2.69 crore as on end December 2003 to 4.33 
crore  as  on  end  December  2004.  The  actual  usage  too  has  registered  increases  both  in  terms  of 
volume  and  value.  Almost  all  the  categories  of  banks  issue  credit  cards.  Credit  cards  have  found 
greater  acceptance  in  terms  of  usage  in  the  major  cities  of  the  country,  with  the  four  major 
metropolitan cities accounting for the bulk of the transactions. 
In  view  of  this  ever  increasing  role  of  credit  cards  a  Working  Group  was  set  up  for  regulatory 
mechanism for cards. The terms of reference of the Working Group were fairly broad and the Group 
was  to  look  into  the  type  of  regulatory  measures  that  are  to  be  introduced  for  plastic  cards  (credit, 
debit and smart cards) for encouraging their growth in a safe, secure and efficient manner, as also to 
take care of the best customer practices and grievances redressal mechanism for the card users. The 
Reserve Bank has been receiving a number of complaints regarding various undesirable practices by 
credit card issuing institutions and their agents. Some of them are: 
• 
Unsolicited  calls  to  members  of  the  public  by  card  issuing  banks/  direct  selling  agents 
pressurising them to apply for credit card.  
   Communicating misleading / wrong information regarding credit cards regarding conditions 
for issue, amount of service charges/ waiver of fees, gifts/prizes.  
Sending credit cards to persons who have not applied for them / activating unsolicited cards 
without the approval of the recipient. 
Charging very high interest rates /service charges. 
Lack of transparency in disclosing fees/charges/penalties. Non-disclosure of detailed billing 
procedure. 
The Working Group deliberated a number of major issues relating to: a) to customer grievances and 
rights: a) Transparency and Disclosure, b) Customer Rights Protection, and c) Code of Conduct. The 
Group  recommended  that  the  Most  Important  Terms  and  Conditions  should  be  highlighted  and 
advertised  and  sent  separately  to  the  prospective  customer.  These  terms  and  conditions  include 
various issues relating to: a) fees and charges, (b) drawal limits, (c) billing, (d) default, (e) termination / 
revocation of card membership, (f) loss / theft / misuse of card, and (g) disclosure.  
These recommendations are being processed within the RBI and a set of guidelines would be issued 
which are going to pave the path of a healthy growth in the development of plastic money in India. The 
RBI  is  also  considering  bringing  credit  card  disputes  within  the  ambit  of  the  Banking  Ombudsman 
scheme. While building a regulatory oversight in this regard we need to ensure that neither does it 
reduce the efficiency of the system nor does it hamper the credit card usage.  
Housing credit in India 
In view of its backward and forward linkages with other sectors of the economy, housing finance in 
developing  countries  is  seen  as  a  social  good.  In  India,  growth  of  housing  finance  segment  has 
accelerated in recent years. Several supporting policy measures (like tax benefits) and the supervisory 
incentives instituted had played a major role in this market.  
Housing credit has increased substantially over last few years, but from a very low base. During the 
period  1993-2004,  outstanding  housing  loans  by  scheduled  commercial  banks  and  housing  finance 
companies grew at a trend rate of 23 per cent. The share of housing loans in total non-food credit of 
scheduled commercial banks has increased from about 3 per cent in 1992-93 to about 7 per cent in 
2003-04.  Recent  data  reveal  that  non-priority  sector  housing  loans  outstanding  as  on  February  18, 
2005  were  around  Rs.  74  thousand  crore,  which  is,  however,  only  8.0  per  cent  of  the  gross  bank 
credit. As already pointed out, direct housing loans up to Rs. 15 lakh irrespective of the location now 
qualify  as  priority  sector  lending;  housing  loans  are  understood  to  form  a  large  component  of  such 
lending. In addition, housing credit is also being provided by housing finance companies, which in turn 
are also receiving some bank finance.  
Thus,  from  miniscule  amounts,  the  exposure  of  the  banking  sector  to  housing  loans  has  gone  up. 
Unlike many other countries, asset impairment on account of housing finance constitutes a very small 
portion. However, with growing competition in the housing finance market, there has been a growing 
concern  over  its  likely  impact  on  the  asset  quality.  While  no  immediate  financial  stability  concerns 
exist, there is a need to put in place appropriate risk management systems, strengthen internal control 
procedures  and  also  improve  regulatory  oversight  in  this  area.  Banks  also  need  to  monitor  their 
exposure  and  the  credit  quality.  In  a  fiercely  competitive  market,  there  may  be  some  temptation  to 
slacken the loan scrutiny procedures and this needs to be severely checked.  
Having delineated the broad contours of retail banking in India let me now come to its opportunities 
and challenges.  
Opportunities and challenges of retail banking in India 
Retail banking has immense opportunities in a growing economy like India. As the growth story gets 
unfolded in India, retail banking is going to emerge a major driver. How does the world view us? I have 
already referred to the BRIC Report talking India as an economic superpower. A. T. Kearney, a global 
management consulting firm, recently identified India as the "second most attractive retail destination" 
of 30 emergent markets.  
The rise of the Indian middle class is an important contributory factor in this regard. The percentage of 
middle to high income Indian households is expected to continue rising. The younger population not 
only wields increasing purchasing power, but as far as acquiring personal debt is concerned, they are 
perhaps more comfortable than previous generations. Improving consumer purchasing power, coupled 
with more liberal attitudes toward personal debt, is contributing to India's retail banking segment.  
The combination of the above factors promises substantial growth in the retail sector, which at present 
is  in  the  nascent  stage.  Due  to  bundling  of  services  and  delivery  channels,  the  areas  of  potential 
conflicts of interest tend to increase in universal banks and financial conglomerates. Some of the key 
policy issues relevant to the retail banking sector are: financial inclusion, responsible lending, access 
to finance, long-term savings, financial capability, consumer protection, regulation and financial crime 
prevention. What are the challenges for the industry and its stakeholders?  
First, retention of customers is going to be a major challenge. According to a research by Reichheld 
and Sasser in the Harvard Business Review, 5 per cent increase in customer retention can increase 
profitability by 35 per cent in banking business, 50 per cent in insurance and brokerage, and 125 per 
cent  in  the  consumer  credit  card  market.  Thus,  banks  need  to  emphasise  retaining  customers  and 
increasing market share. 
Second, rising indebtedness could turn out to be a cause for concern in the future. India's position, of 
course,  is  not  comparable  to  that  of  the  developed  world  where  household  debt  as  a  proportion  of 
disposable  income  is  much  higher.  Such  a  scenario  creates  high  uncertainty.  Expressing  concerns 
about  the  high  growth  witnessed  in  the  consumer  credit  segments  the  Reserve  Bank  has,  as  a 
temporary measure, put in place risk containment measures and increased the risk weight from 100 
per  cent  to  125  per  cent  in  the  case  of  consumer  credit  including  personal  loans  and  credit  cards 
(Mid-term Review of Annual Policy, 2004-05). 
Third, information technology poses both opportunities and challenges. Even with ATM machines and 
Internet Banking, many consumers still prefer the personal touch of their neighbourhood branch bank. 
Technology has made it possible to deliver services throughout the branch bank network, providing 
instant updates to checking accounts and rapid movement of money for stock transfers. However, this 
dependency on the network has brought IT departments additional responsibilities and challenges in 
managing,  maintaining  and  optimizing  the  performance  of  retail  banking  networks.  Illustratively, 
ensuring  that  all  bank  products  and  services  are  available,  at  all  times,  and  across  the  entire 
organization  is  essential  for  today’s  retails  banks  to  generate  revenues  and  remain  competitive. 
Besides,  there  are  network  management  challenges,  whereby  keeping  these  complex,  distributed 
networks  and  applications  operating  properly  in  support  of  business  objectives  becomes  essential. 
Specific challenges include ensuring that account transaction applications run efficiently between the 
branch offices and data centres.  
Fourth, KYC Issues and money laundering risks in retail banking is yet another important issue. Retail 
lending is often regarded as a low risk area for money laundering because of the perception of the 
sums involved. However, competition for clients may also lead to KYC procedures being waived in the 
bid for new business. Banks must also consider seriously the type of identification documents they will 
accept  and  other  processes  to  be  completed.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  details  guidelines  on 
application of KYC norms in November 2004.  
Some random thoughts 
How do we see the future of retail banking? What are the major attributes of the shape of things to 
come in this sector? Let me share with you some of my random thoughts.  
First, customer service should be the be-all and end-all of retail banking. The other day a document 
released  by  the  British  Bankers  Association,  entitled  UK  Retail  Banking  Manifesto:  addressing  the 
challenges that lie ahead for the industry and its stakeholders on September 29, 2004 came to my 
notice.  This  document  analysed  the  key  policy  issues  relevant  to  the  retail  banking  sector  and 
highlighted  the  role  of  financial  inclusion,  responsible  lending,  access  to  finance,  and  consumer 
protection. It is in this context that that one is reminded of the needs to develop the standards and 
codes for banking. The contribution of the Committee on Procedure & Performance Audit on Public 
Services  (CPPAPS)  (Chairman:  Shri  S.S.  Tarapore)  has  been  invaluable  and  has  provided  great 
insight.  Based  on  the  recommendation  of  the  CPPAPS,  the  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  2005-06 
announced the decision to set up an independent Banking Codes & Standards Board of India on the 
model  of  the  mechanism  in  the  UK  in  order  to  ensure  that  comprehensive  code  of  conduct  for  fair 
treatment  of  customers  is  evolved  and  adhered  to.  The  codes  and  standards,  together  with  the 
institutional mechanism to monitor them, are expected to enhance the quality of customer service, to 
the individual customer in particular. The codes will bring about greater transparency in the system 
and  also  tackle  the  issue  of  information  asymmetry.  The  Board  would  function  as  an  industry-wide 
watchdog of the banking code and ensure that the banks comply with the banking codes. The codes 
would establish the banking industry’s key commitments and obligations to customers on standards of 
practice,  disclosure  and  principles  of  conduct  for  their  banking  services.  The  Board  will  monitor 
compliance with the Codes by the affiliated banks.  
Second,  sharing  of  information  about  the  credit  history  of  households  is  extremely  important  as  far 
retail banking is concerned. Perhaps due the confidential nature of banker-customer, banks have a 
traditional  resistance  to  share  credit  information  on  the  client,  not  only  with  one  another,  but  also 
across  sectors.  Globally,  Credit  Information  Bureaus  have,  therefore,  been  set  up  to  function  as  a 
repository of credit information - both current and historical data on existing and potential borrowers. 
The  database  maintained  by  these  institutions  can  be  accessed  by  the  lending  institutions.  Credit 
Bureaus  have  been  established  not  only  in  countries  with  developed  financial  systems  but  also  in 
countries with relatively less developed financial markets, such as, Sri Lanka, Mexico, Bangladesh and 
the Philippines. In Indian case, the Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL), incorporated in 
2000, aims at fulfilling the need of credit granting institutions for comprehensive credit information by 
collecting, collating and disseminating credit information pertaining to both commercial and consumer 
borrowers.  At  the  same  time  banks  must  exercise  due  diligence  before  declaring  a  borrower  as 
defaulter. 
Third,  outsourcing  has  become  an  important  issue  in  the  recent  past.  With  the  increasing  market 
orientation  of  the  financial  system  and  to  cope  with  the  competition  as  also  to  benefit  from  the 
technological innovations such as, e-banking, the banks are making increasing use of "outsourcing" as 
a means of both reducing costs and achieving better efficiency. While outsourcing does have various 
cost advantages, it has the potential to transfer risk, management and compliance to third parties who 
may not be regulated. A recent BIS Report on “Outsourcing in Financial Services” developed some 
high-level principles. A basic requirement in this context is that a regulated entity seeking to outsource 
activities  should  have  in  place  a  comprehensive  policy  on  outsourcing  including  a  comprehensive 
outsourcing  risk  management  programme  to  address  the  outsourced  activities  and  the  relationship 
with the service provider. Application of these principles in the Indian context is under consideration.  
Finally,  retail  banking  does  not  refer  to  lending  only.  In  the  whole  story  of  retailing  one  should  not 
forget  the  role  played  by  retail  depositors.  The  homemaker,  the retail shop  keeper,  the  pensioners, 
self-employed and those employed in unorganised sector - all need to get a place in the banks. It is in 
this backdrop that the Annual Policy for 2005-06 pointed out issues relating to financial exclusion and 
had announced that the RBI would implement policies to encourage banks which provide extensive 
services while disincentivising those which are not responsive to the banking needs of the community, 
including  the  underprivileged.  Furthermore,  the  nature,  scope  and  cost  of  services  need  to  be 
monitored to assess whether there is any denial, implicit or explicit, of basic banking services to the 
common person and banks have been urged to review their existing practices to align them with the 
objective of financial inclusion.  
Conclusion 
There is a need of constant innovation in retail banking. In bracing for tomorrow, a paradigm shift in 
bank  financing  through  innovative  products  and  mechanisms  involving  constant  upgradation  and 
revalidation of the banks’ internal systems and processes is called for. Banks now need to use retail 
as a  growth  trigger.  This requires  product  development  and  differentiation,  innovation  and business 
process  reengineering,  micro-planning,  marketing,  prudent  pricing,  customisation,  technological 
upgradation, home / electronic / mobile banking, cost reduction and cross-selling. 
While retail banking offers phenomenal opportunities for growth, the challenges are equally daunting. 
How far the retail banking is able to lead growth of the banking industry in future would depend upon 
the capacity building of the banks to meet the challenges and make use of the opportunities profitably. 
However, the kind of technology used and the efficiency of operations would provide the much needed 
competitive edge for success in retail banking business. Furthermore, in all these customers’ interest 
is  of  paramount  importance.  The  banking  sector  in  India  is  demonstrating  this  and  I  do  hope  they 
would continue to chart in this traded path.  
Thank You. 
