Alan Greenspan: Semiannual monetary policy report to the US Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  semiannual  monetary  policy  report  to 
Congress, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 20 July 2005. 
Mr Greenspan presented identical testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs, US Senate on 21 July 2005. 
 Mr Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to present the Federal 
Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.  
In mid-February, when I presented our last report to the Congress, the economy, supported by strong 
underlying fundamentals, appeared to be on a solid growth path, and those circumstances prevailed 
through March. Accordingly, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued the process of a 
measured  removal  of  monetary  accommodation,  which  it  had  begun  in  June  2004,  by  raising  the 
federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point at both the February and the March meetings.  
The upbeat picture became cloudier this spring, when data on economic activity proved to be weaker 
than most market participants had anticipated and inflation moved up in response to the jump in world 
oil prices. By the time of the May FOMC meeting, some evidence suggested that the economy might 
have been entering a soft patch reminiscent of the middle of last year, perhaps as a result of higher 
energy costs worldwide. In particular, employment gains had slowed from the strong pace of the end 
of 2004, consumer sentiment had weakened, and the momentum in household and business spending 
appeared to have dissipated somewhat. 
At the May meeting, the Committee had to weigh the extent to which this weakness was likely to be 
temporary--perhaps simply the product of the normal ebb and flow of a business expansion--and the 
extent to which it reflected some influence that might prove more persistent, such as the further run-up 
in  crude  oil  prices.  While  the  incoming  data  highlighted  some  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for 
economic growth, the FOMC judged the balance of information as suggesting that the economy had 
not weakened fundamentally. 
Moreover, core inflation had moved higher again through the first quarter. The rising prices of energy 
and other commodities continued to place upward pressures on costs, and reports of greater pricing 
power of firms indicated that they might be more able to pass those higher costs on to their customers. 
Given  these  considerations,  the  Committee  continued  the  process  of  gradually  removing  monetary 
accommodation in May. 
The data released over the past two months or so accord with the view that the earlier soft readings 
on the economy were not presaging a more serious slowdown in the pace of activity. Employment has 
remained  on  an  upward  trend,  retail  spending  has  posted  appreciable  gains,  inventory  levels  are 
modest, and business investment appears to have firmed. At the same time, low long-term interest 
rates  have  continued  to  provide  a  lift  to  housing  activity.  Although  both  overall  and  core  consumer 
price inflation have eased of late, the prices of oil and natural gas have moved up again on balance 
since May and are likely to place some upward pressure on consumer prices, at least over the near 
term. Slack in labor and product markets has continued to decline. In light of these developments, the 
FOMC  raised  the  federal  funds  rate  at  its  June  meeting  to  further  reduce  monetary  policy 
accommodation. That action brought the cumulative increase in the funds rate over the past year to 
2¼ percentage points. 
Should  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and  natural  gas  flatten  out  after  their  recent  run-up--the  forecast 
currently  embedded  in  futures  markets--the  prospects  for  aggregate  demand  appear  favorable. 
Household spending--buoyed by past gains in wealth, ongoing increases in employment and income, 
and relatively low interest rates--is likely to continue to expand. Business investment in equipment and 
software  seems  to  be  on  a  solid  upward  trajectory  in  response  to  supportive  conditions  in  financial 
markets and the ongoing need to replace or upgrade aging high-tech and other equipment. Moreover, 
some recovery in nonresidential construction appears in the offing, spurred partly by lower vacancy 
rates  and  rising  prices  for  commercial  properties.  However,  given  the  comparatively  less  buoyant 
growth of many foreign economies and the recent increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, 
our external sector does not yet seem poised to contribute steadily to U.S. growth. 
   1/5 
A  flattening  out  of  the  prices  of crude oil  and natural  gas,  were it  to  materialize,  would also  lessen 
upward  pressures  on  inflation.  Overall  inflation  would  probably  drop  back  noticeably  from  the  rates 
experienced  in  2004  and  early  2005,  and  core  inflation  could  hold  steady  or  edge  lower.  Prices  of 
crude materials and intermediate goods have softened of late, and the slower rise in import prices that 
should result from the recent strength in the foreign exchange value of the dollar could also relieve 
some pressure on inflation. 
Thus, our baseline outlook for the U.S. economy is one of sustained economic growth and contained 
inflation pressures. In our view, realizing this outcome will require the Federal Reserve to continue to 
remove  monetary  accommodation.  This  generally  favorable  outlook,  however,  is  attended  by  some 
significant uncertainties that warrant careful scrutiny. 
With regard to the outlook for inflation, future price performance will be influenced importantly by the 
trend in unit labor costs, or its equivalent, the ratio of hourly labor compensation to output per hour. 
Over  most  of  the  past  several  years,  the  behavior  of  unit  labor  costs  has  been  quite  subdued.  But 
those  costs  have  turned  up  of  late,  and  whether  the  favorable  trends  of  the  past  few  years  will  be 
maintained is unclear. Hourly labor compensation as measured from the national income and product 
accounts  increased  sharply  near  the  end  of  2004.  However,  that  measure  appears  to  have  been 
boosted  significantly  by  temporary  factors.  Other  broad  measures  suggest  that  hourly  labor 
compensation continues to rise at a moderate rate. 
The evolution of unit labor costs will also reflect the growth of output per hour. Over the past decade, 
the  U.S.  economy  has  benefited  from  a  remarkable  acceleration  of  productivity:  Strong  gains  in 
efficiency have buoyed real incomes and restrained inflation. But experience suggests that such rapid 
advances  are  unlikely  to  be  maintained  in  an  economy  that  has  reached  the  cutting  edge  of 
technology. Over the past two years, growth in output per hour seems to have moved off the peak that 
it reached in 2003. However, the cause, extent, and duration of that slowdown are not yet clear. The 
traditional measure of the growth in output per hour, which is based on output as measured from the 
product  side  of  the  national  accounts,  has  slowed  sharply  in  recent  quarters.  But  a  conceptually 
equivalent measure that uses output measured from the income side has slowed far less. Given the 
divergence  between  these  two  readings,  a  reasonably  accurate  determination  of  the  extent  of  the 
recent slowing in productivity growth and its parsing into cyclical and secular influences will require the 
accumulation of more evidence. 
Energy prices represent a second major uncertainty in the economic outlook. A further rise could cut 
materially into private spending and thus damp the rate of economic expansion. In recent weeks, spot 
prices for crude oil and natural gas have been both high and volatile. 
Prices for far-future delivery of oil and gas have risen even more markedly than spot prices over the 
past year. Apparently, market participants now see little prospect of appreciable relief from elevated 
energy prices for years to come. Global demand for energy apparently is expected to remain strong, 
and market participants are evidencing increased concerns about the potential for supply disruptions 
in various oil-producing regions. 
To  be  sure,  the  capacity  to  tap  and  utilize  the  world's  supply  of  oil  continues  to  expand.  Major 
advances  in  recovery  rates  from  existing  reservoirs  have  enhanced  proved  reserves  despite  ever 
fewer discoveries of major oil fields. But, going forward, because of the geographic location of proved 
reserves,  the  great  majority  of  the  investment  required  to  convert  reserves  into  new  crude  oil 
productive capacity will need to be made in countries where foreign investment is currently prohibited 
or restricted or faces considerable political risk. Moreover, the preponderance of oil and gas revenues 
of  the  dominant  national  oil  companies  is  perceived  as  necessary  to  meet  the  domestic  needs  of 
growing populations. These factors have the potential to constrain the ability of producers to expand 
capacity  to  keep  up  with  the  projected  growth  of  world  demand,  which  has  been  propelled  to  an 
unexpected extent by burgeoning demand in emerging Asia.  
More favorably, the current and prospective expansion of U.S. capability to import liquefied natural gas 
will help ease longer-term natural gas stringencies and perhaps bring natural gas prices in the United 
States down to world levels.  
The third major uncertainty in the economic outlook relates to the behavior of long-term interest rates. 
The yield on ten-year Treasury notes, currently near 4-1/4 percent, is about 50 basis points below its 
level of late spring 2004. Moreover, even after the recent widening of credit risk spreads, yields for 
both  investment-grade  and  less-than-investment-grade  corporate  bonds  have  declined  even  more 
than those on Treasury notes over the same period. 
   2/5 
This  decline  in  long-term  rates  has  occurred  against  the  backdrop  of  generally  firm  U.S.  economic 
growth, a continued boost to inflation from higher energy prices, and fiscal pressures associated with 
the  fast  approaching  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation.1  The  drop  in  long-term  rates  is 
especially surprising given the increase in the federal funds rate over the same period. Such a pattern 
is clearly without precedent in our recent experience.  
The unusual behavior of long-term interest rates first became apparent last year. In May and June of 
2004,  with  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  by  the  Federal  Reserve  widely  expected,  market 
participants built large short positions in long-term debt instruments in anticipation of the increase in 
bond  yields  that  has  been  historically  associated  with  an  initial  rise  in  the  federal  funds  rate. 
Accordingly, yields on ten-year Treasury notes rose during the spring of last year about 1 percentage 
point. But by summer, pressures emerged in the marketplace that drove long-term rates back down. In 
March of this year, long-term rates once again began to rise, but like last year, market forces came 
into play to make those increases short lived. 
Considerable debate remains among analysts as to the nature of those market forces. Whatever those 
forces are, they are surely global, because the decline in long-term interest rates in the past year is 
even more pronounced in major foreign financial markets than in the United States. 
Two distinct but overlapping developments appear to be at work: a longer-term trend decline in bond 
yields  and  an  acceleration  of  that  trend  of  late.  Both  developments  are  particularly  evident  in  the 
interest rate applying to the one-year period ending ten years from today that can be inferred from the 
U.S. Treasury yield curve. In 1994, that so-called forward rate exceeded 8 percent. By mid-2004, it 
had declined to about 6-1/2 percent--an easing of about 15 basis points per year on average.2 Over 
the past year, that drop steepened, and the forward rate fell 130 basis points to less than 5 percent. 
Some,  but  not  all,  of  the  decade-long  trend  decline  in  that  forward  yield  can  be  ascribed  to 
expectations  of  lower  inflation,  a  reduced  risk  premium  resulting  from  less  inflation  volatility,  and  a 
smaller real term premium that seems due to a moderation of the business cycle over the past few 
decades.3 This decline in inflation expectations and risk premiums is a signal development. As I noted 
in  my  testimony  before  this  Committee  in  February,  the  effective  productive  capacity  of  the  global 
economy  has  substantially  increased,  in  part  because  of  the  breakup  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  the 
integration of China and India into the global marketplace. And this increase in capacity, in turn, has 
doubtless contributed to expectations of lower inflation and lower inflation-risk premiums. 
In addition to these factors, the trend reduction worldwide in long-term yields surely reflects an excess 
of  intended  saving  over  intended  investment.  This  configuration  is  equivalent  to  an  excess  of  the 
supply of funds relative to the demand for investment. What is unclear is whether the excess is due to 
a glut of saving or a shortfall of investment. Because intended capital investment is to some extent 
driven by forces independent of those governing intended saving, the gap between intended saving 
and  investment  can  be  quite  wide  and  variable.  It  is  real  interest  rates  that  bring  actual  capital 
investment worldwide and its means of financing, global saving, into equality. We can directly observe 
only the actual flows, not the saving and investment tendencies. Nonetheless, as best we can judge, 
both high levels of intended saving and low levels of intended investment have combined to lower real 
long-term interest rates over the past decade.  
Since  the  mid-1990s,  a  significant  increase  in  the  share  of  world  gross  domestic  product  (GDP) 
produced by economies with persistently above-average saving--prominently the emerging economies 
of  Asia--has  put  upward  pressure  on  world  saving.  These  pressures  have  been  supplemented  by 
shifts in income toward the oil-exporting countries, which more recently have built surpluses because 
of steep increases in oil prices. The changes in shares of world GDP, however, have had little effect 
                                                      
1   Under current law, those longer-run pressures on the federal budget threaten to place the economy on an unsustainable 
path. Large deficits could result in rising interest rates and ever-growing interest payments on the  accumulating stock of 
debt, which in turn would further augment deficits in future years. That process could result in deficits as a percentage of 
gross  domestic  product  rising  without  limit.  Unless  such  a  development  were  headed  off,  these  deficits  could  cause  the 
economy to stagnate or worse at some point over the next couple of decades. 
2   Dollar interest rate swaps five years forward and maturing in ten years declined 19 basis points per year on average over 
the  same  period.  Comparable  euro  (pre-1999,  Deutschemark)  swaps  declined  27  basis  points,  sterling  swaps  35  basis 
points, and yen swaps 23 basis points. 
3   Term premiums measure the extent to which current prices of bonds discount future uncertainties. 
   3/5 
on actual world capital investment as a percentage of GDP. The fact that investment as a percentage 
of GDP apparently changed little when real interest rates were falling, even adjusting for the shift in 
the  shares  of  world  GDP,  suggests  that,  on  average,  countries'  investment  propensities  had  been 
declining.4  
Softness  in  intended  investment  is  also  evident  in  corporate  behavior.  Although  corporate  capital 
investment in the major industrial countries rose in recent years, it apparently failed to match increases 
in corporate cash flow.5 In the United States, for example, capital expenditures were below the very 
substantial level of corporate cash flow in 2003, the first shortfall since the severe recession of 1975. 
That  development  was  likely  a  result  of  the  business  caution  that  was  apparent  in  the  wake  of  the 
stock market decline and the corporate scandals early this decade. (Capital investment in the United 
States has only recently shown signs of shedding at least some of that caution.) Japanese investment 
exhibited prolonged restraint following the bursting of their speculative bubble in the early 1990s. And 
investment in emerging Asia excluding China fell appreciably after the Asian financial crisis in the late 
1990s. Moreover, only a modest part of the large revenue surpluses of oil-producing nations has been 
reinvested in physical assets. In fact, capital investment in the Middle East in 2004, at 25 percent of 
the  region's  GDP,  was  the  same  as  in  1998.  National  saving,  however,  rose  from  21  percent  to 
32 percent of GDP. The unused saving of this region was invested in world markets. 
Whether  the excess  of  global  intended saving  over  intended  investment  has  been caused by  weak 
investment or excessive saving--that is, by weak consumption--or, more likely, a combination of both 
does not much affect the intermediate-term outlook for world GDP or, for that matter, U.S. monetary 
policy. What have mattered in recent years are the sign and the size of the gap of intentions and the 
implications for interest rates, not whether the gap results from a saving glut or an investment shortfall. 
That  said,  saving  and  investment  propensities  do  matter  over  the  longer  run.  Higher  levels  of 
investment relative to consumption build up the capital stock and thus add to the productive potential 
of an economy. 
The  economic  forces  driving  the  global  saving-investment  balance  have  been  unfolding  over  the 
course of the past decade, so the steepness of the recent decline in long-term dollar yields and the 
associated distant forward rates suggests that something more may have been at work over the past 
year.6 Inflation premiums in forward rates ten years ahead have apparently continued to decline, but 
real yields have also fallen markedly over the past year. It is possible that the factors that have tended 
to  depress  real  yields  over  the  past  decade  have  accelerated  recently,  though  that  notion  seems 
implausible. 
According to estimates prepared by the Federal Reserve Board staff, a significant portion of the sharp 
decline in the ten-year forward one-year rate over the past year appears to have resulted from a fall in 
term premiums. Such estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty. Nevertheless, they suggest 
that risk takers have been encouraged by a perceived increase in economic stability to reach out to 
more  distant  time  horizons.  These  actions  have  been  accompanied  by  significant  declines  in 
measures  of  expected  volatility  in  equity  and  credit  markets  inferred  from  prices  of  stock  and  bond 
options and narrow credit risk premiums. History cautions that long periods of relative stability often 
engender unrealistic expectations of its permanence and, at times, may lead to financial excess and 
economic stress. 
Such perceptions, many observers believe, are contributing to the boom in home prices and creating 
some associated risks. And, certainly, the exceptionally low interest rates on ten-year Treasury notes, 
and hence on home mortgages, have been a major factor in the recent surge of homebuilding, home 
turnover, and particularly in the steep climb in home prices. Whether home prices on average for the 
                                                      
4   Nominal  GDP  figures  by  country  are  estimated  in  dollars  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  using  purchasing  power 
parities (PPP) of currencies. These GDP figures are used to calculate weights applied to national saving and investment 
rates  to  form  global  measures.  When  the  GDP  figures  are  instead  measured  at  market  exchange  rates,  the  results  are 
similar. The PPP estimates emphasize the economic factors generating investment and the use of saving. Exchange rates 
emphasize the financial forces governing the financing of investment across borders. Both approaches are useful. 
5   A significant part of the surge in cash flow of U.S. corporations was accrued by those financial intermediaries that invest 
only a small part in capital assets. It appears that the value added of intermediation has increased materially over the past 
decade because of major advances in financial product innovation. 
6   The decline of euro, sterling, and yen forward swap rates also steepened. 
   4/5 
nation as a whole are overvalued relative to underlying determinants is difficult to ascertain, but there 
do appear to be, at a minimum, signs of froth in some local markets where home prices seem to have 
risen to unsustainable levels. Among other indicators, the significant rise in purchases of homes for 
investment since 2001 seems to have charged some regional markets with speculative fervor.  
The apparent froth in housing markets appears to have interacted with evolving practices in mortgage 
markets.  The  increase  in  the  prevalence  of  interest-only  loans  and  the  introduction  of  more-exotic 
forms  of  adjustable-rate  mortgages  are  developments  of  particular  concern.  To  be  sure,  these 
financing  vehicles  have  their  appropriate  uses.  But  some  households  may  be  employing  these 
instruments  to  purchase  homes  that  would  otherwise  be  unaffordable,  and  consequently  their  use 
could  be  adding  to  pressures  in  the  housing  market.  Moreover,  these  contracts  may  leave  some 
mortgagors  vulnerable  to  adverse  events.  It  is  important  that  lenders  fully  appreciate  the  risk  that 
some  households  may  have  trouble  meeting  monthly  payments  as  interest  rates  and  the 
macroeconomic climate change. 
The U.S. economy has weathered such episodes before without experiencing significant declines in 
the national average level of home prices. Nevertheless, we certainly cannot rule out declines in home 
prices, especially in some local markets. If declines were to occur, they likely would be accompanied 
by  some  economic  stress,  though  the  macroeconomic  implications  need  not  be  substantial. 
Nationwide  banking  and  widespread  securitization  of  mortgages  make  financial  intermediation  less 
likely  to  be  impaired  than  it  was  in  some  previous  episodes  of  regional  house-price  correction. 
Moreover,  a  decline  in  the  national  housing  price  level  would  need  to  be  substantial  to  trigger  a 
significant  rise  in  foreclosures,  because  the  vast  majority  of  homeowners  have  built  up  substantial 
equity  in  their  homes  despite  large  mortgage-market-financed  withdrawals  of  home  equity  in  recent 
years.  
Historically, it has been rising real long-term interest rates that have restrained the pace of residential 
building  and  have  suppressed  existing  home  sales,  high  levels  of  which  have  been  the  major 
contributor to the home equity extraction that arguably has financed a noticeable share of personal 
consumption expenditures and home modernization outlays. 
The  trend  of  mortgage  rates,  or  long-term  interest  rates  more  generally,  is  likely  to  be  influenced 
importantly by the worldwide evolution of intended saving and intended investment. We at the Federal 
Reserve  will  be  closely  monitoring  the  path  of  this  global  development  few,  if  any,  have  previously 
experienced. As I indicated earlier, the capital investment climate in the United States appears to be 
improving following significant headwinds since late 2000, as is that in Japan. Capital investment in 
Europe, however, remains tepid. A broad worldwide expansion of capital investment not offset by a 
rising  worldwide  propensity  to  save  would  presumably  move  real  long-term  interest  rates  higher. 
Moreover, with term premiums at historical lows, further downward pressure on long-term rates from 
this source is unlikely.  
We  collectively  confront  many  risks  beyond  those  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  As  was  tragically 
evidenced again by the bombings in London earlier this month, terrorism and geopolitical risk have 
become  enduring  features  of  the  global  landscape.  Another  prominent  concern  is  the  growing 
evidence  of  anti-globalization  sentiment  and  protectionist  initiatives,  which,  if  implemented,  would 
significantly  threaten  the  flexibility  and  resilience  of  many  economies.  This  situation  is  especially 
troubling for the United States, where openness and flexibility have allowed us to absorb a succession 
of  large  shocks  in  recent  years  with  only  minimal  economic  disruption.  That  flexibility  is,  in  large 
measure,  a  testament  to  the  industry  and  resourcefulness  of  our  workers  and  businesses.  But  our 
success in this dimension has also been aided importantly by more than two and a half decades of 
bipartisan effort aimed at reducing unnecessary regulation and promoting the openness of our market 
economy. Going forward, policymakers will need to be vigilant to preserve this flexibility, which has 
contributed so constructively to our economic performance in recent years. 
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, despite the challenges that I have highlighted and the many I have not, 
the  U.S.  economy  has  remained  on  a  firm  footing,  and  inflation  continues  to  be  well  contained. 
Moreover,  the  prospects  are  favorable  for  a  continuation  of  those  trends.  Accordingly,  the  Federal 
Open Market Committee in its June meeting reaffirmed that it 
"...  believes  that  policy  accommodation  can  be  removed  at  a  pace  that  is  likely  to  be  measured. 
Nonetheless,  the  Committee  will  respond  to  changes  in  economic  prospects  as  needed  to  fulfill  its 
obligation to maintain price stability." 
 
   5/5 
