V Leeladhar: Banking with technology - the road ahead 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  V  Leeladhar,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
IT@BFSI-200 Conclave, Bangalore, 9 June 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I deem it a privilege to be present at this conclave being conducted by the Indian Banks’ Association, 
on  an  appropriate  topic  at  an  appropriate  time  and  to  an  appropriate  audience  who  would  be  the 
catalysts of change as banking in India is poised for greater leaps in the near future. I am sure that 
bankers in India are feeling the positive impact of the technological revolution in the way banking is 
being transformed. Banks need to be ready to take on the challenges unleashed by various external 
forces  such  as  competition,  globalisation,  shrinking  margins,  and  internal  forces  relating  to  human 
resources, need for changes in procedures etc. To my mind, a substantial portion of these challenges 
can be easily addressed by technology; I shall, therefore, dwell a while on the role of technology in the 
banking of the near future. 
Banks  in  India  need  to  be  complimented  on  the  inculcation  of  technology  in  a  large  way  in  their 
day-to-day operations. Credit must be given to Indian Banks who have brought on the new wave of 
techno-banking in the country. In a short span of less than two decades, customers of banks have felt 
the positive impact of technological solutions implemented by banks. The customer of banks of today 
have a virtual menu of options as far as delivery channels are concerned and all these are the benefits 
of technology, with the most visible benefits happening in the areas of payments for retail transactions. 
A  variety  of  cards,  Automated  Teller  Machines,  electronic  based  funds  transfers,  Internet  banking, 
Mobile  banking  are  all  some  of  the  latest  technology  based  payment  solutions,  which  have  gained 
large  acceptance  amongst  the  Indian  banking  public.  With  technological  solutions  rapidly  evolving, 
more new products and services may soon become the order of the day. 
While addressing a critical topic such as Technology which has today become a basic necessity rather 
than  a  luxury  in  the  banking  sector,  I  must  examine  the  various  components  which  comprise  the 
building blocks on which banking would be functioning in the morrow. I would, therefore, enlist some of 
the major aspects which, to my mind, appear to be the corner stones in the road that we are paving so 
that the highway would ensure free, safe and secure conduct of banking business. 
The  first  major  aspect  which  needs  to  be  addressed  is  that  of  Consolidation.  Banking  in  India  has 
evolved  as  a  mix  of  various  independent  functions.  Thus  we  have  credit  functions  as  a  separate 
activity, deposit taking as another different function, a host of payment facilities - each as a distinct 
activity,  other  services  and  so  on.  It  is  now  time  to  look  at  consolidation  of  all  these  inter-related 
functions. Technology has already provided an answer in the form of Total Branch Automation, which 
has  now  given  way  to  the  Core  Banking  Systems,  and  the  facility  of  single-window  service  at 
branches. While this traditional approach towards consolidation may be ensuring that the customers of 
today are retained by a bank, the growth of new clientele will, however, be related to other progressive 
measures to be taken by banks. An outward looking consolidation holds the key. Consolidation of all 
types  of  financial  services  which  a  customer  of  a  bank  may  require  needs  to  be  offered  by  banks. 
While  some  steps  have  been  taken  by  banks  in  the  form  of  universal  banking  and  the  offering  of 
related  financial  services  such  as  insurance,  tax  advice,  securities  market  operations,  depository 
functions  and  the  like,  the  future  may  witness  alliances  with  service  providers  who  may  in  today’s 
context appear to have to relationship with traditional banking concepts. For example, a mobile phone 
user, who is a customer of particular telecommunication service provider, may switch preferences to 
another bank if the phone company does not link its services to that of a particular bank with whom the 
user is banking with. Thus strategic alliances with varied service providers may become a necessity. 
The  next  major  challenge  arises  out  of  the  forces  of  competition.  Traditional  concepts  relating  to 
competition from other players in the same line of business will indeed exist but these will pale into 
oblivion  in  the  form  of  competition  from  hitherto  unexplored  and  unanticipated  areas.  Easy  finance 
schemes  by  retailers  of  consumer  durable  articles  will  obviate  the  need  for  short  term  loams  by 
customers  of  banks,  thus  resulting  in  a  dwindling  retail  loan  portfolio.  Banks  can  overcome  this 
challenge by providing refinance to the retailer who would be in requirement of funds for improving his 
business turnover portfolio. The essence of this is that competition may have to be exploited as an 
opportunity. Planning for the unanticipated and looking for opportunities hold the key to the successful 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
bank of the future. In this connection, I draw your attention to the report of the RBI group on rural credit 
and microfinance and suggest that banks which are first movers would stand to gain substantially in 
terms of expanding their retail portfolio. 
Technology  implementation  comes  with  its  attendant  requirements  too.  A  few  major  aspects  which 
need to be reckoned relate to the 
• 
Need for standardisation - across hardware, operating systems, system software, application 
software to facilitate inter-connectivity of systems across branches 
Need  for  high  levels  of  security  -  in  an  environment  which  requires  high  levels  of 
confidentiality, security is an important requirement 
Once  both  the  above  are  achieved,  the  next  logical  approach  would  be  towards 
communication  and  networking  -  use  of  networks  which  would  facilitate  centralised 
databases  and  distributed  processing.  Exploitation  of  computer  networks  by  banks  would 
result in savings in cost and increase in efficiency 
Need  for  a  technology  plan  which  has  to  be  periodically  monitored  and  also  upgraded 
consequent upon changes in technology itself 
Need  for  business  process  re-engineering  with  the  large  scale  usage  of  computers  -  the 
objective  is  not  to  merely  mechanise  activities  but  to  result  in  holistic  benefits  of 
computerisation for both the customer and the staff at branches 
Need  to  address  the  issue  of  Human  Relations  in  a  computerised  environment  especially 
from the point of Human Resources Development 
Sharing  of  technology  experiences and  expertise so  as  to  reap  the  benefits  of  technology 
implementation across a wider community 
      All  these  changes  have,  however,  a  host  of  attendant  challenges.  Prominent  among  them  is  the 
paradigm shift in the concept of security. With the delivery channels relating to funds based services - 
such as movement of funds electronically between different accounts of customers - taking place with 
the use of technology, the requirements relating to security also need to undergo metamorphosis at a 
rapid  pace.  Various  concepts  such  as  digital  signatures,  certification,  storage  of  information  in  a 
secure  and  tamper-proof  manner  all  assume  significance  and  have  to  be  part  of  the  practices  and 
procedures  in  the  day-to-day  functioning  of  banks  of  tomorrow.  I  must  at  this  juncture,  add  that  all 
these would be added requirements and the well established practices of today may also have to not 
only  continue  but  also  co-exist  along  with  the  new  requirements.  Security  requirements  have  to  be 
provided from a two pronged perspective - first for the internal requirements of the banks themselves 
and the second relating to the legal precincts of the laws of the land. It will be a matter of satisfaction 
to  note  that  the  INFINET (Indian Financial Network)  is  a safe, secure and efficient communications 
network  for  the  exclusive  use  of  the  banking  sector,  which  provides  for  inter-bank  communication  - 
which implies that banks have to now function as a group and at the same time competing with one 
another too. The key advantage of the INFINET is its own security framework in the form of the Public 
key  Infrastructure -  PKI,  which  is  in conformity  to  the  provisions of  the  Information  Technology  Act, 
2000. 
An  effective  security  policy  which  would  offer  a  shared  vision  of  how  the  controls  in  the  workplace 
should be implemented with the objective of protecting data, information and eventually, the economic 
value of the organisation. This has to be supplemented by education and training in these areas and 
reinforced by the actions and concerns of the top management so that a culture of security can be 
created. These controls have to be supplemented by surveillance, monitoring and auditing to detect 
unusual usage patterns and deficiencies. Banks have to put in place such a policy and ensure that it is 
being implemented effectively, and then audit the IT related functions so as to ensure that there are no 
lapses or deviations from the approved Information Security Policy. 
Another major challenge relates to the bridging the divide caused by distances. Today, banking has 
broken  all  geographical  barriers  and  demand  from  customers  relates  to  ‘anywhere  and  anytime 
banking’. Currently, IT based offerings such as Internet and Mobile Banking have provided customers 
with  the  means  for  meeting  the  requirement  of  being  able  to  perform  banking  transactions  from 
anywhere.  The  death  of  distances  have  also  necessitated  that  banks  in  India  do  not  merely  look 
inward. Developments elsewhere in the world have also a strong impact on the efforts of Indian banks 
and these have to be factored in an always vibrant world of technology based banking. Added to this 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2005
is the fact that markets have shrunk digitally and this gap would reduce further in the morrow. It would 
be  necessary  to  prepare  ourselves  for  functioning  in  a  very  small  knit  shrunk  world.  Information 
availability across a large section of people will bring in the challenge of being able to process such 
large masses of information. This is an opportunity not only for the banking sector but for other sectors 
including  the  IT  industry  as  well.  Banks  will,  therefore,  brace  themselves  for  co-operation  and 
co-existence and geographical boundaries may move away into oblivion just as sharing of resources 
(such as ATMs) has already commenced propagation. 
We have all heard of the digital divide which is a challenge to be overcome by the banking industry as 
well. While the average Indian customer may be as technology savvy or even better than his Western 
counterpart, the cultural aspects of his relationships may necessitate a personal touch to the offerings 
of banks. Further, all the technology based offerings by banks have a bias towards the major towns 
and cities and the need for reaching the mid size cities as well as the large rural population assumes 
significance. These pockets hold promises of substantial growth prospects and today with networking 
capabilities being available at much higher reliability levels than before and at affordable costs, banks 
may have to pay attention to these segments of the country as well. 
To achieve all these, banks will also have to re-orient their internal processes and procedures. Just as 
mechanisation of processes in a manufacturing company required changes in the steps involved in the 
production cycle, suitable changes in the job processes within banks will also have to be made. No 
technology  implementation  is  complete  without  the  attendant  changes  in  the  basic  way  of  process 
functions  at  the  organisation  where  such  implementation  shave  been  made,  and  if  technology 
implementations  have  to  be  successful,  they  have  to  be  accompanied  by  suitable  changes  in  the 
process  flows  across  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  which  is  at  the  base  of  Business  Processing 
Re-engineering. It is essential that banks embark upon Business Process Re-engineering in a large 
scale and preferable even before the large scale implementation of technology has commenced. 
The management of external relationships is another requirement which would have to be taken care 
of  by  bankers  of  the  future.  Convergence  of  the  services  of  more  industries  and  organisations  is 
emerging so as to provide holistic service offerings to the discerning customer, and banks would be 
the prime target by customers if they have to provide service levels which match their expectations. 
This  would  necessitate  that  banks  operate  in  an  environment  which  will  facilitate  ease  of  inter-
operability. Just as inter-operable IT systems and Straight Through processing (STP) will become the 
order of the day, inter-operable business domains will also prevail and banks have to overcome this 
challenge in their stride. This will also be observed in managing external functions such as Business 
Process  Outsourcing,  management  of  IT  service  providers  and  better  vendor  management  -  all  of 
which are hitherto unknown domains for the banks’ personnel. 
The challenges staring at banking today need not result in a feeling of inadequacy. The I T framework 
in India is on strong ground and the industry has been showing significant growth rates in the previous 
years, with the financial sector having benefited immensely from the offerings of IT. Banks, for their 
part, have proved their mettle and I must add that in the few years since liberalisation, banks in India 
have proved that they can not only withstand the forces of change but blend the changes gracefully in 
such a manner as to even provide a challenge to the hitherto existing leaders in the line of business. 
Banks  have  commenced  to  grow  laterally  and  at  an  exponential  rate.  We  have  the  best  talent  of 
personnel  and  the  best  institutes  to  develop  more  resources  and  the  best  brains  to  manage  these 
changes. 
Our society has held a pride of place of being largely knowledge based, ever since the time of the 
Vedas  and  the  early  days  of  the  world.  As  India  develops  into  a  formidable  force,  it  is  Information 
Technology which holds the key to the process of transformation. Our key strengths lie in knowledge 
processing and as bankers we have been performing this function quite well both for our customers as 
well  as  for  the  growth  of  our  own  organisations.  This  underlying  strength  will  ensure  our  key  to 
success. 
As banks are poised for challenging but exciting times ahead, I am sure that this conclave will also 
provide substantial inputs as the day progresses on the various opportunities which banks will harbour 
for  implementation  within  their  respective  confines.  I  am  sure  that  this  conclave  will  provide  the 
kindling fire of transformation which banks in India will light up with enthusiasm and as Indian Banking 
transcends  all  barriers  and  gains  greater  coverage,  they  would  make  a  mark  as  world  leaders  in 
providing  unparalleled,  efficient  service  at  affordable  rates  resulting  in  high  levels  of  customer 
satisfaction  and  an  overall  vibrant  economy.  Lastly,  before  I  conclude  I  would  like  to  draw  your 
attention to the two vision documents , one relating to payment system and the other a draft of the 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 3
proposed financial sector technology that RBI have recently put out on its website. These documents 
set  out  our  vision  for  the  next  three  years.  We  welcome  your  reaction.  Need  less  to  say  your 
preparedness should be synchronous with the vision of the Central Bank. 
I wish the conclave all success. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2005
