Arnold Schilder: Good governance 
Speech by Professor Arnold Schilder, Chairman of the BCBS Accounting Task Force and Executive 
Director  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  leave-taking  of 
Mr Jan Hommen, member of the Executive Board of Philips, Amsterdam, 11 April 2005. 
 This speech will highlight the role of public oversight concentrating on recent developments in the field 
of governance, accounting and supervision. Some concrete examples will be used from the practice 
as  prudential  supervisors  and  to  show  you  how at  DNB  ´Sense  and  Simplicity´ are  an  objective  as 
well.  
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to speak here on Good Governance. I will highlight the 
role of public oversight concentrating on recent developments in the field of governance, accounting 
and supervision. I will use some concrete examples from our practice as prudential supervisors and to 
show you how for us at DNB ´Sense and Simplicity´ are an objective as well. I am sure you are familiar 
with that slogan. 
The main subjects of this speech 
In the first part of my speech I will briefly discuss the way DNB has incorporated governance issues in 
its supervisory approach and how this compares with views held among the business community. I 
would like to emphasise here that as prudential supervisors for the financial sector we highly value 
Good  Governance,  especially  such  aspects  as  checks  and  balances  -  mainly  in  risk  management 
structures - quality of management and accountability.  
The second part of my speech is about how public overseers can help establish the rules of the game. 
In this capacity DNB uses its influence in the international regulatory environment. There we liaise with 
standard-setting bodies to ensure that new regulations and standards advance the public good. I will 
illustrate how we have played this role in practice, using recent developments of International Financial 
Reporting Standards as an example. 
Governance as part of our supervisory approach 
The widespread attention Good Governance receives nowadays could give the impression that this 
concept  has  only  a  brief  history.  On  the  contrary  -  looking  back  across  the  history  of  prudential 
financial supervision – we see that governance has been on our agenda for decades. Over time, the 
concept  has  been  broadened  and  deepened,  partly,  of  course  due  to  the  eruption  of  scandals. 
Undoubtedly, one of the milestones in the development of Good Governance is the 1997 Report of the 
so-called  Peters  Committee.  This  Report  contained  40  recommendations  to  promote  good 
governance.  It  appeared  that  these  recommendations  were  not  followed  up  satisfactorily.  But  the 
report set out important principles about a company´s risk management and necessary checks and 
balances. Its recommendations were based on the COSO-framework, an internal control framework of 
global standing. The Peters Report was, in fact, the first Dutch Code of Corporate Governance. It gave 
an impulse to the development of explicit requirements on good governance for banks. How? Well, in 
1999 DNB issued its Regulation on Organisation and Control or ROC. In drafting the ROC, we used 
the governance framework of the Peters Report as its backbone. So in addition to risk management 
requirements, this Regulation includes checks and balances for the Managing and Supervisory Boards 
of banks. For example, the ROC requires all banks to establish an audit committee function involving 
knowledgeable and independent Supervisory Board Members. All banks, you may wonder? Yes, we 
require  such  an  audit  committee  function  for  all,  but  we  allow  smaller  institutions  to  meet  this 
requirement within their limited capabilities. This is an example of a principle-based regulation which 
allows congruence with reality. It will come as no surprise that the second Dutch Code on Corporate 
Governance, the Tabaksblat Code, contains many of the same aspects as DNB´s ROC, since both are 
based on the same source. The same goes for some papers of the international Basel Committee on 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
Banking  Supervision, 
recommendations. 
in  which  we  were  again  able 
to 
integrate 
the  Peters  Committee´s 
Oversight promotes a level playing field 
This leads us to an important purpose of public oversight. I refer to the aspect of promoting a level 
playing  field.  Maintaining  a  level  playing  field  requires  not  only  adequate  regulations  but  also 
transparent  supervision.  You  will  agree  with  me  that  supervising  an  organisation  that  applies  Good 
Governance  will  differ  strongly  from  supervising  an  organisation  that  applies  Bad  Governance. 
Supervisory action towards supervised organisations can have direct or indirect benefits for those who 
apply  Good  Governance.  In  that  sense  supervision  is  in  the  corporation´s  as  well  as  in  the  public 
interest. 
Transparency 
I  have  just  mentioned  transparency  as  an  important  aspect  of  supervision.  It  is  beneficial  for 
enforcement  purposes.  After  all,  it  is  important  for  supervised  organisations  to  know  what  our 
enforcement instruments are and when we will use them. An important new development here results 
from the Revised European Directive on banking Capital Requirements. This Directive adopts the new 
Basel II capital framework for European legislative purposes. It also requires supervisory disclosures 
from  all  European  competent  authorities  -  a  development  which  we  support  actively.  So  in  future 
everybody will be able to compare the supervisory level playing field for banks through the websites of 
the European Banking Supervisors. 
The view of Jan Hommen 
Such supervisory objectives compare well with those of the business community. To illustrate this I will 
select some sound bites from a recent speech by Jan Hommen. Speaking before a financial reporting 
oversight  seminar  organised  by  VNO/NCW  and  AFM,  Jan  stressed  the  importance  of  oversight  in 
preventing  regulatory  arbitrage,  and  of  harmonised  accounting  standards.  Such  prevention  is 
important,  according  to  him,  in  order  to  guarantee  a  level  playing  field.  He  also  said  that  public 
oversight of financial reporting contributes to the confidence in financial markets. And he went even 
further to say that the benefits of this type of public oversight may be diminished if not accompanied by 
good  governance  within  the  company  itself.  Indeed,  congruence is  important both  ways.  Rules  and 
regulations  should  align  with  internal  practices,  and  internal  practices  should  be  in  line  with  formal 
governance structures. It is good to see that our views align to such a great extent. 
Conclusion on the role of public oversight 
In  sum,  only  a  balanced  mix  of  sound  governance  structures  and  related  practices  together  with 
transparent public oversight will give Europe a competitive Internal Market. 
Public overseers´ efforts for ´Sense and Simplicity´; an example 
I now come to the second part of my speech. The business community, including the financial sector, 
also needs legislation, standards, codes and guidance to be able to play the game. The rules of the 
game  should,  however,  be  conducive  to  the  ´sense  and  simplicity´  in  their  appliance.  As  you  know 
better than anybody, this is an important principle, but far from easy to apply. This is also an important 
aspect of the role of the public overseers. Allow me to illustrate this role by taking an example from 
recent experience. As you know, the International Accounting Standards Board has issued the revised 
Standard on Financial Instruments, IAS 39. The European Community faced the issue of endorsing 
this revised accounting standard by the end of last year. A key issue here was the so-called Fair Value 
Option. This option allows financial reporting entities to use fair values for the financial instruments in 
their  accounts.  The  business  community,  amongst  others  banks  and  insurers,  expressed  concern 
about  the  revised  Standard.  Moreover  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision criticized in particular the risk of inappropriate use of the Fair Value Option. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
The Fair Value Option 
What was the problem? The International Accounting Standards Board, as a matter of policy, issues 
standards which can be applied by all relevant organisations, without specifics for individual sectors. 
For some sectors, such as the financial sector, these standards appear to be too broad. Regarding the 
Fair Value Option, the gap between the parties involved related mainly to the reliability, comparability 
and  relevance  of  accounting  figures  in  firms´  financial  statements.  There  were  fears  that  the 
unrestricted use of fair values could open the door to manipulation and the use of inaccurate valuation 
methods, which might hurt reliability. Moreover, different institutions could use the Fair Value Option in 
very different ways, which might hamper comparability. And finally, the use of fair values might not be 
in line with sound risk management practices within institutions, bringing into question the relevance of 
reported figures. Now, congruence between sensible standards and sound internal risk management 
practice  is  important.  Jan  Hommen  said  as  much,  in  the  speech  I  referred  to  earlier:  for  financial 
institutions, accounting requirements must align as much as possible with internal risk management 
policies. 
And  with  time  running  short,  the  question  how  to  bridge  the  gap  became  more  and  more  urgent: 
between a broad standard on the one hand, and the restriction to a context of good governance and 
risk management on the other. 
Searching for an acceptable outcome 
It  is  important,  in  this  kind  of  process,  to  listen  carefully  to  each  other  and  to  search  for  common 
ground.  IASB  was  strongly  bent  on  an  unrestricted  option  for  reasons  of  principle  and  in  order  to 
maintain simplicity. Banks and insurers disagreed on the proposed restrictions. And regulators were 
concerned about the possible abuse of the option. We as banking regulators then engaged in very 
informal  discussions  with  banking  representatives.  We  drafted  proposals  that  made  sense  to  both 
banks  and  banking  regulators.  This  was  possible  because  we  applied  a  simple  principle:  good 
governance banks want a level playing field based on sound risk management practices. Four months 
later, the now likely outcome is that IASB will have framed the Option within sensible boundaries – and 
will require comprehensive disclosures about underlying risk management practices, thereby serving 
transparency.  Simple,  in  the  end,  and  sensible  –  but  after  much  perspiration.  This  outcome  should 
strike  the  right  balance  between  IASB  on  the  one  hand,  and  financial  institutions  and  prudential 
regulators  on  the  other.  I  trust  this  balance  in  outcome  will  receive  the  support  of  the  European 
Commission as well. 
Wrap up 
Let me now wrap up my speech. I have given you DNB´s view on some elements of public oversight 
and how we contribute to transparency and to solutions that make sense. Both from a business and a 
supervisory perspective, one thing is of particular importance, and that is congruence. This means the 
congruence of sensible structures and regulations with sound internal practices and vice versa. And 
transparency can help achieve this. How gratifying it is, then, that Jan Hommen recently also marked 
these terms as overarching principles for the Philips corporate policy. He did so, not only for financial 
reporting, but also, if I understand correctly, for the governance structure in general. And as you will 
understand from my speech, I would like to congratulate Philips on these outstanding principles and 
Jan Hommen on his undoubtedly large contribution to their development. Ladies and gentlemen, thank 
you very much. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 3
