Ishrat Husain: Seminar on anti-money laundering 
Welcome  speech  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Anti-Money 
Laundering Seminar, Islamabad, 29-30 March 2005. 
 for 
financial 
institutions 
include  reputational  risk,  operational  risk, 
Mr. Prime Minister, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good  morning.  I  am  honoured  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  international  seminar  on  anti-money 
laundering. I am grateful to the Prime Minister for taking time out of his busy schedule and inaugurate 
this seminar. I would like to extend a special welcome to the foreign visitors and wish them a pleasant 
and productive stay in our country. 
The topic of the seminar is of great importance in today’s world. One of the main objectives of this 
seminar is to discuss the core issues, which significantly involve financial sector in the fight against 
money laundering and terrorist financing. I hope the seminar comes up with practical suggestions for 
effective tackling of money laundering and terrorist financing. 
While  the  speakers  would  be  highlighting  the  technical  aspects  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing,  I  would  like  to  mention  a  few  general  observations  about  the  menaces.  The  process  of 
laundering dirty money by way of placement, layering and integration is harmful for each and every 
segment of the society. Its ill effects on society, institutions and governments have been enormous. 
The tainted money adversely affects productive sectors of the economy in multifarious ways. 
The  financial  sector  is  particularly  hurt  if  used  for  laundering  of  ill-gotten  proceeds.  The  adverse 
consequences 
legal  and 
concentration risks. It costs the financial institutions, in the following ways: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Society,  as  a  whole,  bears  the  costs  of  money  laundering  in  multiple  ways.  Unchecked  money 
laundering enables criminals to enjoy the profits of their crimes who in turn commit more crimes. When 
there are more frauds and robberies in banks, depositors will receive less return on their deposits and 
will have to pay high rates on their loans. When public projects are inflated by corruption, citizens have 
to pay in the form of more taxes. These acts further distort equitable distribution of wealth and, hence, 
increase in the incidence of poverty. 
Terrorism in its all forms and facets is one of the greatest challenges of today’s world. One of the key 
measures to check terrorism is to choke of financial resources flowing toward perpetrators of terrorist 
acts  i.e.  counter  finance  terrorism.  Terrorist  financing  is  in  a  way  a  case  of  “reverse  money 
laundering”.  In  money  laundering,  crime  precedes  the  process  of  laundering  whereas  in  terrorist 
financing clean or dirty money is pooled to support a violent act in future. 
The tackling of the issues is by no means an isolated activity. It needs coordinated effort of host of 
stakeholders  including  financial  institutions,  regulators,  law  enforcement  agencies  and  active 
involvement  of  host  of  other  government  functionaries  to  frustrate  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing. However, financial sector is believed to be at the core of the problem. 
Let me briefly mention some of the steps which State bank of Pakistan has taken to prevent use of 
banking sector from crime proceeds. 
Loss of profitable business 
Liquidity problems through sudden withdrawal of funds 
Termination of correspondent banking facilities 
Investigations costs and fines/ penalties 
Assets seizures 
Loans losses 
Use of senior management’s time in doing damage control. 
Declines in the stock value of the financial institution concerned. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
      Introduced  a  comprehensive  regulatory  framework  by  issuing  prudential  regulations  for 
banks/  DFIs.  These  regulations  cover  the  necessary  features  of  AML  regime  for  financial 
institutions as required under FATF recommendations. Implementation of these regulations 
is ensured through on-site examination and off-site surveillance. Our inspectors specifically 
verify the adequacy of KYC policies and other Antimoney laundering safeguards. 
Another major step is the replacement of Money Changers with properly regulated Exchange 
Companies,  hence,  formalizing  the  business  of  money  changing  and  the  underlying 
transactions. 
State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has  been  instrumental  in  freezing  bank  accounts  of  proscribed 
entities and individuals as per UNSC Resolutions. Report of freezing accounts is called from 
banks and proper record of frozen accounts maintained. 
State Bank of Pakistan has signed MOUs with a number of Central banks for exchange of 
information  and  expertise,  which  also  covers 
laundering  and 
terrorist-financing areas. 
The  banks  in  Pakistan  were  issuing  Traveller  Cheques  in  local  currency  called  “Rupee 
Travellers Cheques” (RTCs) in exceptionally high denomination of up to Rs.500,000 which 
was not in line with the true spirit and purpose of Traveller Cheques. Instead of using RTCs 
to meet the needs of travellers, the holder of these instruments often used them as a mode 
of settling undocumented transactions thereby, defeating the objective of the Government of 
documentation  of  the  economy.  SBP,  therefore,  prohibited  the  issuance  of  RTCs  in 
denominations exceeding Rs.10,000/- in May, 2002. 
Various kinds of bearer instruments were previously available in the market which have been 
gradually phased out in collaboration with the Federal Government. The measure is helping 
the Government’s efforts towards documentation of the economy. 
the  anti-money 
I  would  urge  upon  the  leaders  of  the  banking  community  present  here,  to  avail  this  opportunity  of 
learning  from  the  international  and  regional  experiences  and  highlight  concerns,  if  any.  Your 
involvement is vital for success of the seminar and the subject matter itself. We are fortunate to have 
with us today resource persons who are professionals of international repute. At the same time, State 
Bank,  in  its  capacity  of  regulator,  welcomes  suggestions  and  recommendations  for  improving 
regulatory and supervisory systems for a clean and healthy banking sector. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  that  the  Prime  Minister’s  presence  has  provided  us 
tremendous  support  and  confidence.  This  is  reflective  of  the  government’s  resolve  and  priority  in 
tackling  the  issues  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the 
support and cooperation of World Bank and IMF in hosting this seminar. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
