Ishrat Husain: Banking sector reforms in Pakistan 
Article by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, reproduced from Blue Chip - The 
Business People’s Magazine, January 2005. 
 Why  did  we  need  reforms  in  the  banking  sector  in  the  first  place?  Why  is  it  so  important  to  have 
healthy  and  buoyant  banks?  What  is  the  exact  role  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  how  does  it  go 
about performing this role? Where does the Government come in this picture? How do these reforms 
serve the interests of a common citizen as a consumer, depositor, and businessman? These and a 
host of other questions arise in the minds of a layman who is not so familiar with all the jargon and 
specialized terminology of finances. 
We start with the simplest proposition: Financial Sector Development and Economic Development are 
inter-related. No economy can grow and improve the living standards of its population in the absence 
of  a  well  functioning  and  efficient  financial  sector.  Banks  in  Pakistan  account  for  95  percent  of  the 
financial  sector  and  hence  good  health  of  banks  is  directly  related  to  economic  growth  and 
development of Pakistan. 
What was wrong with the Pakistani banking system that such massive reforms had to be undertaken? 
Banks  in  Pakistan  have  been  catering  basically  to  the  needs  of  the  Government  organizations, 
subsidizing the fiscal deficit, serving a few large corporations and engaging in trade financing. There 
was no lending to small and medium enterprises, to the housing sector or to the agricultural sector, 
which create  most  of  the growth  and  employment  in  Pakistan.  Most  important,  the  financial  system 
suffered from political interference in lending decisions and also in the appointment of managers. The 
middle  class  which  is  the  backbone  of  any  economy  was  not  given  due  attention  by  the  banking 
sector. There were legitimate reasons for such an errant behaviour. 
First, the government’s fiscal deficit was so high that most of the deposits the banks used to get, were 
loaned to the government and government corporations. This was safe lending which fetched good 
returns and the banks made good profit out of it. Naturally, there was little incentive for them to do 
anything else except lend to the Government which was both risk free and highly remunerative. 
Secondly, the government owned most of the banks. In the government banks the staff worked like 
typical government employees, coming to office at 9:00 a.m., checking files; having nothing important 
to  do  and  leaving  at  5.00  p.m.  without  doing  much  work.  These  banks  suffered  from  a  high 
bureaucratic approach, overstaffing, unprofitable branches and poor customer service. Administrative 
costs were high reducing profits of depositors. 
Thirdly, recovery rate was so low that almost 25% of the loans were stuck up as a large number of 
loans  to  the  private  sector  borrowers  were  not  given  on  the  merit  of  the  proposal  but  on  political 
considerations. These influential borrowers hardly repaid their loans. 
Fourth, banking industry faced a high tax rate of 58 percent while the rest of the corporate sector paid 
only 35 percent. This high punitive rate along with the burden of stuck loans and inefficiency of the 
staff was passed on to the customers in form of high lending rates and low deposit rates. The banking 
industry was not attractive for new entrants who could foster competition and improve efficiency. 
Because of these factors, i.e. high administrative costs, burden of stuck-up loans and excessive tax 
rates, the average interest rate for lending was about 21% per annum. The middle class borrowers 
could not afford to get credit on such high interest rates and pay it back. 
Banking sector reforms were thus needed badly to address these and other constraints so that the 
banks  could  play  their  due  role  in  the  economic  development  of  the  country.  Although,  there  is  no 
room for complacency and a lot still needs to be done, even the worst critics of this government do 
concede  that  if  there  is  one  sector  which  has  undergone  basic  transformation  that  is  the  banking 
sector.  The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  who  are  not  always  very  generous  or  effusive  in  their 
praise had this to say about the Banking sector in Pakistan after completing a comprehensive 
and thorough review in early 2004. 
Quote:  “far  reaching  reforms  have  resulted  in  a  more  efficient  and  competitive 
financial  system.  In  particular,  the  pre-dominantly  state-owned  banking 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
system  has  been  transformed  into  one  that  is  predominantly  under  the 
control of the private sector. The legislative framework and the State Bank 
of Pakistan’s supervisory capacity have been improved substantially. As a 
result, the financial sector is sounder and exhibits an increased resilience 
to shocks”. Unquote. 
ensuring soundness of the financial sector. 
maintaining price stability with growth. 
prudent management of the exchange rate. 
strengthening of the payment system. 
What was the role of the State Bank of Pakistan in these reforms and how did it go about performing 
this role? The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) has four major functions to perform under the law: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It  was  felt  and  agreed  between  the  Government  and  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  that  major  deep 
rooted reforms had to be undertaken as cosmetic changes have not achieved anything tangible. As a 
regulator and supervisor as well as adviser to the Government, the SBP carried out diagnostic studies, 
prioritized  the  constraints  facing  the  banking  sector,  designed  the  reform  strategy  and  action  plan, 
sought the assistance of the Government of Pakistan and international financial institutions, monitored 
the progress and made policy, regulatory and institutional changes to facilitate the process. 
Where  does  the  Government  come  in  the  picture  and  what  did  it  do?  The  Musharraf  Government 
made some critical policy decisions, i.e. they  will not keep the banks under Government ownership 
and  control  but  privatize  them.  Politically  tough  problems  such  as  reducing  the  labour  force  and 
closing down redundant and unprofitable branches were dealt with boldly. The Government injected 
Rs. 30.7 billion to offset the losses incurred by these nationalized commercial banks and recapitalize 
them.  Professional  bankers  were  appointed  as  Chief  Executives  and  persons  from  private  sector 
enjoying reputation of competence and integrity on the Board of Directors. 
I must say that the Nawaz Sharif Government in 1997 had initiated some of the reform measures by 
appointing Chief Executives, Boards of Directors on non political, nonpartisan basis for the first time. 
That  Government  had  also  injected  fresh  equity  to  strengthen  the  capital  base  of  the  nationalized 
commercial  banks.  Both  Sartaj  Aziz  Sahib  and  Ishaq  Dar  Sahib  were  very  much  committed  to  put 
these banks on sound footing. They did away with the undue interference of labour unions in decision 
making process of the banks, abolished the Pakistan Banking Council and gave autonomy to the State 
Bank of Pakistan. 
The point I would like to highlight in this context is that continuity of reforms and sound policies that 
transcend political partisanship and survive political regime changes are good for the country and also 
for these political parties. 
What were the major reforms that had been implemented during the last seven years? I would not go 
into the details of each one of them, but summarize some of the salient features: 
(i) 
 
(ii) 
 
(iii) 
 
2 
 Privatization of NCBs: 
All the nationalized commercial banks, except one, have been privatized. As a consequence 
their domination of the banking sector has been reduced from almost 100 percent in 1991 to 
about 20 percent by June 2004. Even in the case of National Bank of Pakistan 23.5 percent 
shares have been floated through Stock Market mainly aimed at small retail investors. 
Corporate governance: 
Strong  corporate  governance  is  absolutely  essential  if  the  banks  have  to  operate  in  a 
transparent  manner  and  protect  the  depositors’  interests.  The  SBP  has  taken  several 
measures in the last four years to put in place and enforce good governance practices to 
improve internal controls and bring about a change in the organizational culture. 
Capital strengthening: 
Capital requirements of the banking sector have to be adequate to ensure a strong base, 
ability  to  compete  and  withstand  unanticipated  shocks.  The  minimum  paid-up  capital 
BIS Review 5/2005
requirements of the banks have been raised from Rs. 500 million to Rs. 1 billion and have 
again  been  raised  to  Rs. 2  billion  (by  December  31,  2005).  This  has  already  resulted  in 
mergers and consolidation of many financial institutions and weeding out of several weaker 
banks from the financial system. 
Improving asset quality: 
The  stock  of  gross  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  that  amounted  to  Rs. 252  billion  and 
accounted for 22 percent of the advances of the banking system and DFIs has been reduced 
to Rs. 225 billion i.e. 14 percent of advances. More than two-thirds of these loans are fully 
provided for and net NPLs to net advances ratio has come down to as low as 5 percent for 
the commercial banks. The positive development is that the quality of new loans disbursed 
since 1997 has improved and recovery rate is 95 percent. 
Liberalization of foreign exchange regime: 
Pakistan  has  further  liberalized  its  foreign  exchange  regime  and  set  up  foreign  exchange 
companies to meet the demands of Pakistani citizens. Pakistani Corporate sector companies 
have also been allowed to acquire equity abroad. Foreign registered investors can bring in 
and take back their capital, profits, dividends, remittances, royalties, etc. freely without any 
restrictions. 
Consumer financing: 
By removing restrictions imposed on nationalized commercial banks for consumer financing, 
the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has  given  a  big  boost  to  consumer  financing.  Middle  class 
employees  can  now  afford  to  purchase  cars,  TVs,  air7  conditioners,  VCRs,  etc.  on 
installment basis. This, in turn, has given a large stimulus to the domestic manufacturing of 
these products. 
Mortgage financing: 
A number of incentives have been provided to encourage mortgage financing by the banks. 
The  upper  limit  has  been  raised  from  Rs. 5  million  to  Rs. 10  million.  Tax  deduction  on 
interest payments on mortgage have been allowed up to a ceiling of Rs. 1 million. The new 
recovery law is aimed at expediting repossession of property by the banks. The banks have 
been allowed to raise long term funds through rated and listed debt instruments like TFCs to 
match their long term mortgage assets with their liabilities. 
Legal reforms: 
Legal difficulties and time delays in recovery of defaulted loans have been removed through 
a new ordinance i.e. The Financial Institutions (Recovery of Finances) Ordinance, 2001. The 
new recovery laws ensures the right of foreclosure and sale of mortgaged property with or 
without  intervention  of  court  and  automatic  transfer  of  case  to  execution  proceeding.  A 
Banking  Laws  Reforms  Commission  is  reviewing,  revising  and  consolidating  the  banking 
laws and drafting new laws such as bankruptcy law. 
Prudential regulations: 
The prudential regulations in force were mainly aimed at corporate and business financing. 
The SBP in consultation with the Pakistan Banking Association and other stakeholders has 
developed a new set of regulations which cater to the specific separate needs of corporate, 
consumer  and  SME  financing.  The  new  prudential  regulations  will  enable  the  banks  to 
expand their scope of lending and customer outreach. 
Micro financing: 
To provide widespread access to small borrowers particularly in the rural areas the licensing 
and  regulatory  environment  for  Micro  Credit  and  Rural  financial  institutions  have  been 
(iv) 
 
(v) 
 
(vi) 
 
(vii) 
 
(viii) 
 
(ix) 
 
(x) 
 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
relaxed  and  unlike  the  commercial  banks  these  can  be  set  up  at  district,  provincial  and 
national  levels  with  varying  capital  requirements.  There  is  less  stringency  and  more 
facilitative thrust embedded in the prudential regulations designed for this type of institutions. 
Khushali  Bank  and  the  First  Microfinance  Bank  in  the  private  sector  have  already  started 
working  under  this  new  regulatory  environment.  Khushali  Bank  has  already  reached  a 
customer base of 125,000 mainly in poorer districts of the country and its recovery rate is 
above 95 percent. 
SME financing: 
The  access  of  small  and  medium  entrepreneurs  to  credit  has  been  a  major  constraint  to 
expansion  of  their  business  and  up  gradation  of  their  technology.  A  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprise  (SME)  Bank  has  been  established  to  provide  leadership  in  developing  new 
products such as program loans, new credit appraisal and documentation techniques, and 
nurturing  new  skills  in  SME  lending which  can  then  be replicated  and  transferred  to  other 
banks  in  the  country.  Program  lending  is  the  most  appropriate  method  to  assist  the  SME 
financing needs. The new prudential regulations for SMEs do not require collateral but asset 
conversion cycle and cash flow generation as the basis for loan approval. The State Bank is 
also  contemplating  to  develop  capacity  building  among  a  select  group  of  banks  for  SME 
lending. This will revitalize the lending to SMEs particularly export oriented ones. 
Taxation: 
The Government has already reduced the corporate tax rate on banks from 58 percent to 
41 percent  during  the  last  four  years  and  it  is  envisaged  that  the  rate  will  be  reduced 
gradually and brought at par with the corporate tax rate of 35 percent in the next two years. 
This will, in turn, help in reducing the spread between the deposit rate and lending rate and 
benefit financial savers. 
Agriculture credit: 
A complete revamping of Agriculture Credit Scheme has been done recently with the help of 
commercial  banks.  The  scope  of  the  Scheme  which  was  limited  to  production  loans  for 
inputs has been broadened to the whole value chain of agriculture sector. The broadening of 
the scope as well the removal of other restrictions have enabled the commercial banks to 
substantially  increase  their  lending  for  agriculture  by  a  multiple  of  four  times  compared  to 
FY 1999-00  thus  mainstreaming  agriculture  lending  as  part  of  their  corporate  business. 
Unlike the previous years when they were prepared to pay penalties for under performance 
they  have  achieved  consistently  rising  higher  targets  every  year.  The  private  commercial 
banks have also agreed to step in and increase their lending to agriculture. 
Islamic banking: 
Pakistan has introduced Islamic banking system to operate in parallel with the conventional 
banking providing a choice to the consumers. A large number of Pakistanis have remained 
withdrawn  from  commercial  banking  because  of  their  strong  belief  against  riba-based 
banking. These individuals and firms - mainly middle and low class - will have the opportunity 
to invest in trade and businesses by availing of loans from Islamic banks and thus expand 
economic activity and employment. A full-fledged Islamic bank has already opened the doors 
for  business  and  several  banks  have  branches  exclusively  dedicated  to  Islamic  banking 
products and services. 
The  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has  set  up  a  full-fledged  Islamic  Banking  Department  and  a 
Shariah Advisory Board to help it in the promotion of Islamic banking in the country. 
E-banking: 
There  is  a  big  surge  among  the  banks  including  NCBs  to  upgrade  their  technology  and 
on-line banking services. During the last three years there has been a large expansion in the 
ATMs  and  at  present  about  700  ATMs  are  working  throughout  the  country.  The  decision 
BIS Review 5/2005
(xi) 
 
(xii) 
 
(xiii) 
 
(xiv) 
 
 (xv) 
 
4 
 (xvi) 
 
(xvii) 
 
(xviii) 
 
mandating  the  banks  to  join  one  of  either  two  ATM  switches  available  in  the  country  has 
provided a further boost. Progress in creating automated or on-line branches of banks has 
been quite significant so far and it is expected that by 2005 almost all the bank branches will 
be  on-line  or  automated.  Utility  bills  payment  and  remittances  would  be  handled  through 
ATMs, kiosks or personal computers reducing both time and cost. 
Human resources: 
The  banks  have  recently  embarked  on  merit-based  recruitment  to  build  up  their  human 
resource base - an area which has been neglected so far. The private banks have taken lead 
in  this  respect  by  holding  competitive  examinations,  interviews  and  selecting  the  most 
qualified  candidates.  The  era  of  appointment  on  the  basis  of  sifarish  and  nepotism  has 
almost come to an end as the private owners want to attract and retain the best available 
talent which can maximize their profits. This new generation of bankers will usher in a culture 
of professionalism and rigour in the banking industry and produce bankers of stature who will 
provide leadership in the future. 
Credit rating: 
To facilitate the depositors to make informed judgments about placing their savings with the 
banks,  it  has  been  made  mandatory  for  all  banks  to  get  themselves  evaluated  by  credit 
rating agencies. These ratings are then disclosed to the general public by the SBP and also 
disseminated to the Chambers of Commerce and Trade bodies. Such public disclosure will 
allow the depositors to choose between various banks. For example, those who wish to get 
higher return  may  opt  for banks  with  B  or C rating. But  those  who  want  to  play  safe  may 
decide to stick with only AAA or AA rated banks. 
Supervision and regulatory capacity: 
The banking supervision and regulatory capacity of the Central Bank has been strengthened. 
Merit-based  recruitment,  competency-enhancing  training,  performance-linked  promotion, 
technology-driven  process,  induction  of skilled  human  resources and  greater emphasis  on 
values such as integrity, trust, team work have brought about a structural transformation in 
the  character  of  the  institution.  The  responsibility  for  supervision  of  non-bank  finance 
companies  has  been  separated  and  transferred  to  Securities  Exchange  Commission.  The 
SBP itself has been divided into two parts - one looking after central banking and the other 
after retail banking for the government. 
(xix) 
 
Payment systems: 
Finally,  the  country’s  payment  system  infrastructure  is  being  strengthened  to  provide 
convenience  in  transfer  of  payments  to  the  customers.  The  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS) system will process large value and critical transactions on real time while electronic 
clearing systems will be established in all cities. 
These reforms will go a long way in further strengthening the Banking sector but a vigilant supervisory 
regime by the State Bank will help steer the future direction. 
Outcomes: 
What have been the results of the above reforms? 
We have been working for the last five years to decrease the lending rates to the extent that middle 
and low-income professionals, who have no other source than their monthly income, may get a home 
or a car on installments from the banks. If he/she is a small entrepreneur he/she can get loans from 
SME. Agriculture, the largest sector of economy, which the commercial banks had neglected, has now 
begun to receive large allocations. The commercial banks are giving more agriculture loans than the 
ZTBL. If this trend persists, the rural households will be able to intensify the use of modern inputs and 
raise their productivity and income. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 5
Credit  cards,  debit  cards,  personal  loans  and  consumer  durable  loans  are  catching  up  fast. 
Refrigerators,  air  conditioners,  VCRs,  Televisions  are  now  available  on  credit.  The  consumers  are 
forced  to  save  when  a  specific  amount  is  cut  from  their  salary  every  month  to  pay  the  installment. 
Mortgage financing is one way in which wealth is created. For example, you bought an apartment for 
Rs. 100,000 and paid Rs. 20,000 as equity and borrowed Rs. 80,000 from the bank. Next year, let us 
say that the value of the same apartment rises to Rs. 120,000/-. Your loan is still Rs. 80,000, but your 
own equity has now doubled from Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 40,000. In this way, growth of the middle class 
wealth  takes  place  through  judicious  use  of  bank  credit.  As  the  lending  rates  have  come  down 
drastically from 21% to 5% the banks find it profitable to extend the customer base for mortgage and 
auto  loans,  agriculture  credit,  small  business  and  consumers.  For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of 
Pakistan, the middle class is beginning to benefit from the banking system. Before these reforms only 
400,000 farmers used to get loans from the Agriculture Development Bank, but this year, more than 
one million farmers have been granted loans by the banking system. 
For the poor, who don’t have anything to mortgage, we have established microfinance banks where no 
collateral  is  required.  They  can  get  up  to  Rs. 20-25  thousand  in  micro  loans.  Many  people  have 
availed this opportunity, some bought a cow, some bought a milch buffalo or opened a small shop and 
female  borrowers  bought  sewing  machines.  They  have  started  income-generating  activities  and 
recovery is no problem from the micro-finance banks. Approximately, 125,000 poor people have been 
given loans in the last two years. 
The customer base of the banks has more than doubled during the last few years and covers almost 
2 million households in agriculture, SMEs, Microfinance, Credit Cards, consumer loans, mortgage and 
auto loans, etc. 
Another initiative taken by the State Bank of Pakistan was to revive sick units which were lying closed 
due to unsustainable debt burden. Now these sick industries can be revived through a well designed 
and transparent scheme. If the loanees pay 75% of the forced sale value to the bank, then these units 
would  be  handed  over  back  to  the  owners.  They  can  run  the  units  and  create  employment 
opportunities.  If  it’s  an  export  industry,  it  will  increase  exports.  This  scheme  is  for  all  and  sundry, 
across the board and round about 51,000 borrowers will be benefiting from it. The banks will be able to 
clean up their balance sheets by transforming these stuck loans into paying loans. 
Pakistan  is  one  of  the  few  developing  countries  where  the  public  sector  banks  went  to  the  private 
hands in a very short span of time. The government only owns the National Bank, while 80% of the 
bank  assets  are  in  the  private  sector.  And  there  is  tough  competition  among  the  banks  as  in  the 
private  sector  everything  is  performance-based.  Unlike  the  public  sector  or  the  Government,  any 
employee  not  producing  results  is  fired  because  he  affects  profit  of  the  organization.  The  bankers 
these days go out of their cozy offices to market their financial products and build up customer base. 
The seller market has changed into a buyer market. The customer may choose the bank with best 
products and services. There was a time - only a few years back - people used to go to the banks and 
the staff treated them shabbily, was generally uncooperative and unfriendly. Now, they are after the 
customers. 
Cynics  say  that  banking  reforms  are  also  promoting  consumerism  but  when  you  give  loan  to  a 
consumer, he goes and buys a car. But loan is given to a person who can demonstrate that he has 
sufficient disposable income to repay the monthly installments after taking care of his family needs. 
Before  1999  only  30  thousand  cars  were  produced  but  in  the  last  fiscal  100,000  cars  were  being 
produced.  70%  of  the  parts  and  components  for  these  cars  are  manufactured  in  Pakistan  which  is 
creating employment. Those who are producing the auto parts have made an investment of millions of 
rupees  and  generated  new  job  opportunities.  As  they  have  attained  economies  of  scale,  Pakistani 
auto parts are being exported to Dubai and other countries. The whole industry is benefiting from it. 
Very  limited  numbers  of  air-conditioners  were  manufactured  here  but  now  they  are  produced  in 
hundreds  of  thousands,  similarly  several  hundred  thousands  of  refrigerators  and  television sets  are 
manufactured locally. If a company produces such products, they make huge investments in industry, 
people are employed and incomes are generated. This is not consumerism; rather we are stimulating 
demand in the economy by giving purchasing power to the people who can afford to pay them not in 
one shot but in installments spread over several years. If domestically manufactured goods are bought 
it’s boosting the industrial growth. How have we achieved 17% industrial growth during the last fiscal 
year? The private sector is doing all this because they see a rising demand for their goods. For the 
first  time  in  the  history  of  Pakistan,  the  private  sector  received  bank  credit  worth  more  than 
Rs. 325 billion.  They  used  this  money  to  invest  in  the  industry  and  expand  their  capacity.  This  is  a 
complete  cycle  -  banks  provide  credit  to  consumers  who  purchase  goods  with  this  money,  the 
6 
 BIS Review 5/2005
in 
jobs 
there 
this  sector.  Unless 
is  credit  available,  except 
manufacturers  respond  to  this  higher  demand  by  investing  in  new  capacity  and  employing  more 
people. As the new employees receive income they also add to the demand for these goods. 
Similarly, the housing industry where steel, cement, paint, timber wood, electric gadgets, etc. are used 
is  creating  many  more 
the 
millionaire/billionaire,  the  common  man  doesn’t  have  enough  money  to  build  a  house  for  himself. 
Credit increases his purchasing power. Home is a basic need. He will cut his monthly expenses but 
pay installments to the bank to keep his house. It will change his thinking. This is a kind of motivation 
for him. Everybody wants to have a home and a car. The banking sector is catering to such needs all 
over the world. 
One of the adverse effects of lower interest rates in the country has been erosion of rates of returns on 
bank deposits. Small depositors who keep their savings in the banks have been badly hurt as they 
hardly get a decent return these days. The Government, therefore, had to come up with some scheme 
to  safeguard  the  most  vulnerable  groups  of  our  society  whose  only  source  of  livelihood  is  their 
savings.  To  compensate  the  senior  citizens,  pensioners  and  widows  we  have  launched  “Behbood 
Scheme”  through  which  they  get  10.25%  per  annum.  These  returns  are  not  affordable  by  the 
Government as they have reduced their fiscal deficit and do not need this money. Moreover, people 
used to misuse the saving schemes. They were in the habit of buying national saving certificates and 
then getting loans against those certificates and again buying more saving certificates. 
As interest rates move up in the economy, it will be the depositors who will get the benefit while the 
borrowers  will  have  to  a  pay  higher  price.  This  is  the  normal  cycle  through  which  market-based 
economies work. If we have chosen to live with this type of economy, we have to bear its costs along 
with its benefits. But it is our duty to protect the poor and vulnerable groups of the society. Here the 
Behbood saving schemes, Bait-ul-Mal, Zakat, Microfinance loans and Poverty Alleviation Funds come 
handy. 
It  can  be  seen  from  the  above  description  and  analysis  that  in  the  banking  system  the  interests  of 
depositors and borrowers are quite different. What we have been able to ensure is that competition 
reduces  inefficiencies  in  the  system  and  the  gains  are  passed  on  to  both  the  depositors  and  the 
borrowers. But, beyond this, there will always remain a tension between depositors who want higher 
returns on their savings and the borrowers who want lower interest rate on their loans. 
To sum up, banking sector reforms have brought in competition within the system, improved internal 
efficiency,  reduced  the  lending  rates  significantly  and  broadened  access  to  the  middle  class.  While 
these results are encouraging, a lot more needs to be done and, therefore, we have spelled out the 
agenda for the second generation reforms in the financial sector covering the period 2005-2010. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 7
