Jean-Claude Trichet: Communication, transparency and the ECB’s monetary 
policy 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  New 
Year’s  reception  of  the  International  Club  of  Frankfurt  Economic  Journalists,  Frankfurt,  24  January 
2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  New  Year’s  reception  of  the  International  Club  of  Frankfurt 
Economic  Journalists.  This  is  certainly  the  right  place  for  me  to  discuss  the  “art  of  external 
communication”.  The  members  of  this  club  are  among  the  most  experienced  and  knowledgeable 
watchers of the ECB. Through your reporting you play a decisive role in our communication policy. 
Along  with  other  media  you  have  the  important  responsibility  of  informing  the  public  about  the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  as  well  as  other  central  banking  activities  and  of  contributing  to  a 
constructive public dialogue on our policies. 
Much has been said about the external communication of central banks in recent years and central 
bankers  have  reflected 
their  external  communication.  Transparency,  candid 
explanations given to investors, savers, market participants, households and, last but not least, to our 
306 million European fellow citizens are of the essence for the ECB and its Governing Council. It is fair 
to say that communication is an integral part of monetary policy. 
intensively  on 
Why are accountability and transparency so important for monetary policy? 
Over the last few decades, it has been widely recognised that the maximum degree of independence 
for central banks, together with a clearly defined mandate, is the best way to ensure time consistency 
in the implementation of monetary policy and therefore to guarantee stable prices. Consequently, the 
Maastricht  Treaty  has  granted  the  ECB  full  independence  in  the  pursuit  of  its  mandate.  In  a 
democracy,  transparency  and  accountability  are  the  quid  pro  quo  for  that  independence.  In  other 
words, it is the duty of independent central banks to be transparent and to communicate. We help to 
make the ECB accountable by explaining our objectives and decisions to the general public, to the 
people  of  Europe,  its  elected  representatives  -  namely  the  European  Parliament  -  and  to  the 
professionals in the financial markets. 
But transparency is not only a duty for a central bank. It is clearly also in the bank’s own interest to 
embark on an effective communication as it contributes considerably to the efficiency of its policies. 
This helps to anchor the inflation expectations of the financial markets and the public. Through efficient 
communication we can reduce inflation uncertainty and the costs associated with such uncertainty for 
consumers and investors. Therefore it has immediate economic benefits for society. We achieve this 
by being clear about our strategy, clear about our definition of price stability and by being transparent 
in  our  actions.  The  economic  agents  and  the  public  need  to  be  convinced  that  the  central  bank’s 
monetary policy decisions are consistently focused over time on achieving the announced aim. 
In  a  market-based  economy  the  central  bank  can  directly  influence  only  short-term  interest  rates 
through its monetary policy instruments. However, consumption and investment decisions, and thus 
medium-term price developments, are to a large extent influenced by longer-term interest rates, which 
depend  on  private  expectations  regarding  future  central  bank  decisions  and  future  inflation.  It  is 
important  that  these  developments  in  longer-term  rates  support  the  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability over the medium term. This in turn requires that the central bank is regarded as credible and 
predictable.  A  central  bank  which  does  not  succeed  in  communicating  the  principles  underlying  its 
monetary policy and is perceived as acting in a non-systematic, discretionary manner will over time 
endanger its reputation. 
Therefore, the central bank’s communication should ensure that markets understand the systematic 
responses of monetary policy to economic developments and the current assessment of the central 
bank.  Successful  central  bank  communication  supports  predictability  and  correct  price  formation  in 
financial  markets,  contributes  to  efficient  allocation  of  funds  and  reduces  uncertainty  about  future 
interest rates. In an environment where the predictability of interest rate movements and their relation 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
with  key  macroeconomic  developments  is  well  understood,  firms  can  better  manage  their  balance 
sheets. This reduces both their vulnerability to economic shocks and their risk management costs and 
creates the conditions for better investment decisions. 
Finally, transparency contributes to macroeconomic stability and long-term growth by enhancing the 
price and wage setting mechanism, and by improving the functioning of the labour market. A credible 
monetary  policy  strategy  oriented  towards  price  stability  contributes  to  moderate  nominal  and  real 
wage developments. Workers do not have to ask for extra wage increases to compensate for inflation 
risk and firms know beforehand that they will not be able to pass higher wages on to consumer prices. 
Overall, transparent and credible monetary policy enhances firms ability to manage their production 
costs, retain profitability and create new jobs. 
Transparency of the ECB 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  ECB  and  its  concept  of  transparency  and  external  communication.  It  was 
understood at an early stage that external communication would be crucial for the ECB. Already during 
the time of the European Monetary Institute the ECB’s future communication policy was discussed; 
consequently,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  adopted  some  communication  policy  objectives  and 
principles as early as 1998. They reflect the duty and “self-interest” elements already mentioned: since 
then we have communicated to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of our monetary policy and to 
make the ECB, an independent central bank, accountable. 
On  this  score,  the  publication  of  the  key  elements  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  back  in  October 
1998  constituted  in  itself  a  major  step  towards  monetary  policy  transparency.  One  element  of  the 
strategy  is  to  quantify  what  the  ECB  is  aiming  at  in  terms  of  price  stability,  namely  an  increase  in 
consumer prices of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. This provides guidance for inflation 
expectations. At the same time, it serves the purpose of accountability, for it sets a benchmark against 
which  the  ECB’s  performance  in  maintaining  price  stability  can  be  measured.  The  ECB’s  monetary 
policy  strategy  also  provides  a  clear  and  coherent  framework  for  structuring  analysis  and  our 
discussion  in  the  Governing  Council,  and  it  has  a  remarkable  role  in  structuring  our  external 
communication. From the start, it has helped to achieve the consistency between internal analysis and 
external communication which is the essence of transparency.  
It is also important for the ECB and the Eurosystem to clearly communicate what monetary policy can, 
and cannot, achieve. For example, monetary policy cannot offset short-term changes in the inflation 
rate which are caused by economic shocks, such as sharp oil price increases or higher administered 
prices. It is thus a permanent challenge to explain any deviations in inflation from the definition of price 
stability. At the same time, it is essential for the public to be confident that such shocks do not call into 
question the determination and ability of the ECB to deliver price stability over the medium term. 
Already  the  detailed  public  display  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  as  such  is  a  very  useful 
communication  device.  Of  course,  real  situations  are  always  more  complex  than  the  simplified 
representation that a single model or a single system of equations can offer. That is the reason why 
our monetary policy concept is as comprehensive as possible, relying both on an economic analysis 
and a monetary analysis, and it reserves a central role for judgement, for the collegial wisdom of the 
Governing Council. Explaining thoroughly and convincingly our assessment of complex situations is 
therefore of the essence. 
It  is  this  combination  of  full  knowledge  of  the  monetary  policy  concept  and  strategy,  of  precise 
arithmetic definition of price stability and of detailed explanations on the assessment of the ECB every 
month which permits market participants to have an intimate understanding of our policy and of the 
way it is implemented. In doing so a central bank avoids two opposed inappropriate behaviours. The 
first would be to give no guidance on its monetary policy and to communicate an unstructured, very 
complex  and  partially  self-contradictory  representation  of  the  economic  situation;  such  behaviour 
would not permit market participants and public opinion to be able to form pertinent expectations on 
future  monetary  policy  decisions.  On  the  other  hand,  a  central  bank  cannot  in  normal  times 
preannounce with an arithmetic precision its future monetary policy decisions. These must be derived 
from  the  full  consistency  between  strategy  and  monetary  policy  concept,  the  medium-term  price 
stability goal and the economic situation which is itself moving and always incorporates elements of 
uncertainty,  chances  and  risks  that can  materialize.  What  is  important  is  that  at  the  moment  of  the 
decision,  after  having  had  the  possibility  of  analysing  all  pertinent  information  and  data,  market 
participants can correctly predict our decision thanks to their intimate knowledge of our policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2005
features  of 
the  ECB  are  bringing  about  major  additional  challenges 
ECB’s communication in practice 
Some 
for  external 
communications.  In  particular,  the  ECB  operates  in  a  multicultural  environment  with  12  different 
cultures  and  10  different  languages  in  the  euro  area  and  25  cultures  and  20  languages  within  the 
scope  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  And,  the  ECB  was  given  the  very  ambitious 
challenge to be fully credible from day one, without track record and to issue a currency which would 
be immediately as credible as the most credible legacy currencies. 
In  the  practical  implementation  of  the  communication  policy  we  make  use  of  a  wide  range  of 
communication tools. I will mention only a few of them here: 
First,  the  monthly  press  conferences  after  the  first  Governing  Council  meeting  in  each  month.  The 
introductory statement at the press conference is a key element in our communication as it conveys 
the collective view of the ECB’s Governing Council on the monetary policy stance in real time. In fact, 
the decision to hold a press conference after each policy meeting was unheard of among major central 
banks prior to the euro. To use real time detailed communication and press conferences in this way 
was a logical decision, bearing in mind (i) the attention the ECB would receive as a major player in the 
world  financial  markets  and  the  global  economy,  (ii)  the  necessity  to  “frontload”  the  public  and  the 
markets  with  information  on  the  thinking  of  the  new  institution  and  (iii)  the  interest  as  regards 
communication  at  national  level  through  many  different  languages  of  having  timely  public  terms  of 
reference. I do not hesitate to say that this new ECB concept of real time detailed communication has 
been an important element of the new paradigm in central banking communication. 
Second,  there  is  the  ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin,  which  is  always  published  one  week  after  the  press 
conference. It gives a more detailed explanation of the analysis behind the monetary policy decisions. 
It regularly reports on information collected by the ECB, such as the bank lending survey. Importantly, 
it  now  also  includes  the  ECB  staff  projections  four  times  a  year.  An  advance  copy  is  published 
immediately after the Press Conference following the Council meeting. This is another example where 
the  ECB  has  gone  very  far  in  making  its  policy  transparent  and  communicating  its  economic 
assessment  in  real  time.  The  Monthly  Bulletin  also  contains  articles  which  provide  insights  into  the 
principles governing our policy. 
Third,  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  members  give  interviews  and  speeches  to  many 
different audiences. In them they explain the decisions taken and the ECB’s view on current topics 
within our sphere of competence. The decentralised nature of the Eurosystem is an asset especially 
for  communications  with  the  general  public.  The  Governors  address  in  their  country  their  national 
public in their own language. They are very well placed to participate in economic debates taking place 
in their home country. 
Finally, the ECB publishes a large array of statistics, adding essential information on the euro area 
available to financial markets and all other interested agents. There has been an ongoing process of 
extending  the  number  of  statistical  series  released  by  the  ECB,  which  I  expect  to  continue  in  the 
future. As a latest example, last week we have published for the first time a press release providing a 
geographical breakdown of balance of payments and international investment position statistics. 
Our concept of transparency 
Transparency serves our main objective of maintaining price stability. As we are a unique institution 
which has no precedent we have to consider very carefully the appropriate concept of transparency in 
our decision-making. 
We are convinced that as a collective body it is beneficial for the Governing Council to give its collegial 
assessment  in  the  form  of  a  comprehensive  and  detailed  statement  rather  than  only  stating  the 
decision and letting the interested parties wait for the detailed statement to be published later in the 
form of minutes. 
Our method of real-time communication on behalf of the Governing Council also goes to demonstrate 
that we are collectively accountable to the public. Each of us inside the 18-member Governing Council 
has  to  take  into  account  the  superior  interests  of  the  whole  euro  area.  My  colleagues  and  I  are 
convinced that our present real time detailed communication is, in our case which is unique, superior 
to mentioning individual votes which could wrongly suggest in the eyes of some that the Governing 
Council is a place where we are confronting national interests which is not the case and should never 
be the case. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
As the “porte parole” of the ECB and its Governing Council, I think it is remarkable that we act as a 
team with high team spirit as regards the handling of a complex communication network dealing with 
306 million European fellow citizens speaking their languages. The “single voice” principle in monetary 
policy was introduced from the very beginning and has been efficiently applied in my judgement. 
As  regards  non-monetary  policy  decisions  by  the  Governing  Council  we  have  adopted  a  new 
procedure in December by placing a communication on our website one day after the second meeting 
of  the  month.  Previously  we  communicated  these  decisions  in  various  ways,  for  example  by  press 
releases or by inserting information under other matters into the introductory statement. I hope that the 
new procedure will contribute to easier access to non-monetary policy decisions. The document refers 
to “Decisions” which means that, as a rule, it will cover those issues for which the Governing Council 
has concluded its deliberations, i.e. decisions have been taken. 
Has the ECB been successful in its monetary policy communication? 
Having talked about the objectives of transparency and modes of external communication, I’d now like 
to consider how successful the ECB has been in establishing credibility and predictability. 
Evidence can be gained from financial markets and economic surveys. A key indicator of the credibility 
of ECB monetary policy comes from expectations of inflation implied by the differences between the 
returns  on  index-linked  and  nominal  bonds  and  inflation-linked  swap  rates.  When  looking  at  these 
market prices, one has to bear in mind that the spread between these nominal and real yields not only 
measures  market  participants’  inflation  expectations,  but  also  carries  the  inflation  uncertainty  risk 
premium which investors require as compensation for the risk of a loss in purchasing power. Keeping 
this in mind, and also looking at various measures of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, 
such  as  Consensus  Forecast  and  the  ECB’s  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters,  one  can  say  that 
long-term inflation expectations have been pretty well anchored by the ECB’s quantitative definition of 
price stability from the beginning of the Euro. This is a remarkable success that observers and markets 
considered quasi impossible before the euro was set up. This does not mean that there is any room 
for complacency. Continued vigilance is key to preserve credibility and some increases in long-term 
inflation expectations last year remind us how important it is to be permanently vigilant. 
As  regards  the  short-term  predictability  of  monetary  policy,  policy  moves  have  been  pretty  well 
anticipated by money markets. Recent studies by academics have confirmed the predictability of the 
ECB at the highest level amongst major central banks. Investors have indeed become more confident 
in  their  forecasts  of  future  short-term  interest  rate  developments  prior  to  ECB  monetary  policy 
announcements.  Bond  market  indicators  paint  essentially  the  same  picture.  Implied  bond  market 
volatility in the euro area is currently close to its lowest level since January 1999. 
Communication is an ongoing challenge 
Financial  markets  evidence  indeed  indicates  that  we  as  a  central  bank  have  managed  to  be 
understood by market professionals. But this is only part of the picture and should give no reason for 
complacency. We are well aware that earning people’s trust in the credibility of the ECB remains an 
ongoing challenge. And we know that the familiarity of the general public with the Eurosystem and the 
ECB still needs to be further enhanced. 
One indication of the daunting size of our communication task was the issue of so-called perceived 
inflation  rising  much  higher  than  the  actual  measured  inflation.  It  has  turned  out  to  be  difficult  to 
explain people that they should not judge the general price level just by observing the prices of some 
individual goods. We see the dichotomy of different target groups in the fact that there was at times a 
heated debate about deflation risks among financial analysts while at the same time the general public 
was  deeply  concerned  about  inflation.  Fortunately,  the  gap  between  perceived  and  actual  price 
developments is narrowing down again significantly. 
We are responsible for ensuring price stability for 306 million people in the euro area, who use the 
euro and make economic decisions every day. So it is essential, absolutely essential, that we preserve 
and  enhance  their  trust  in  our  single  currency.  They  know  they  can  rely  on  us  to  preserve  their 
purchasing  power  over  time.  We  are  an  anchor  of  stability  created  by  the  Treaty  to  ensure  low 
inflation, in line with our definition of price stability. 
Let me conclude on a more personal note. 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2005
The times when central banks were rather reclusive and closed institutions administering interest rates 
with  some  dedication  to  surprise  observers  and  markets  have  gone.  One  of  the  main  goal  of  a 
responsible  central  bank  now  is  to  have  a  reliable  communication  guiding  expectations  in  a  rapidly 
changing environment. In this respect one has to fully realize that the ECB has unique challenges to 
cope with. 
First, when we start the press conference the Vice-President and I know that we are speaking in quasi 
real  time,  through all  of  you,  not  only  to  European market  participants,  investors, savers, economic 
agents, entrepreneurs but also to all our European fellow citizens to whom we are accountable as a 
last resort. This is already a demanding and exciting task taking into account the fact that we are the 
only  major  central  bank  embarking  on  a  press  conference  immediately  after  the  monetary  policy 
meeting. 
Second, on top of that, we are fully conscious that we are speaking simultaneously to twelve different 
cultures today, and many more when time comes. Making sure that a decision is exactly understood 
simultaneously  by  a  German,  an  Italian  or  a  Spanish  household,  by  an  Irish,  a  Portuguese  and  a 
Dutch citizen is another extraordinary challenge that no other central bank has to cope with. 
Third, last but not least, we are also simultaneously speaking to the global market participants who 
have themselves their own language and their own culture. 
For  the  ECB  to  be  credible  means  being  credible  vis-à-vis  all  parties  concerned.  Our  transparent 
communication  must  permit  all  parties  to  understand  our  mandate  and  our strategy  to ensure price 
stability, to anchor their medium term and long term expectations and to accurately predict our future 
behaviour. 
For the European and global market participants in particular I know how predictability is important. I 
attach the utmost importance to our predictability which has been very good in the past, thanks to our 
conceptual transparency, to our own candid explanations on our diagnosis and decisions and - last but 
not least - to the quality and lucidity of yourself, members of the Frankfurt Economic Journalists, of 
ECB watchers in general, of economists and of market participants. I will continue to take care that this 
predictability remains as excellent as possible. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 5
