Ishrat Husain: SME financing - issues and strategies 
Welcome address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Conference on 
SME Financing: Issues and Strategies, Lahore, 10 May 2005. 
 Mr. President, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is an honour for me to welcome you all and particularly Mr. President to this Conference on SME 
Financing: Issues and Strategies. I wish to thank you Mr. President, Sir, for your continued support in 
our efforts to develop a vibrant SME sector as an integral part of the poverty reduction strategy. You 
have spelled out this strategy on several occasions very clearly and I would like to dwell upon it this 
morning.  But  I  would  like  to  assure  you  that  this  conference  is  a  modest  contribution  towards  the 
fulfillment of that strategy. I would also like to welcome our foreign speakers and wish them a pleasant 
stay in our country. 
The overall objective of the Conference is to bring together all the stakeholders in the SME sector to 
generate  debate  on  the  issues  confronting  the  sector  and  look  at  the  various  strategies  being 
developed at the regulatory and policy level to increase the flow of credit and financial services to this 
very important sector of our economy. The speakers of this Conference will provide us with valuable 
insight  into  main  issues  as  well  as  some  of  the  “nuts  and  bolts”  of  how  to  do  SME  finance  more 
profitably, as the State Bank is not going to force the banks to undertake lending operations which are 
not profitable. The international speakers will share with us the best practices that have successfully 
worked elsewhere and we can explore ways of adapting them to our own situation. Let me also remind 
you  that  lending  to  SMEs,  if  developed  and  practiced  on  modern  lines  shall  primarily  remain  a 
profitable options for banks and can guarantee earning for banks at a rate higher than the lending to 
corporate clients. 
There exists strong evidence that SMEs expansion boosts employment more than large firm growth 
because SMEs are more labour intensive. In Pakistan, the SME sector contributes 30 percent towards 
the country’s GDP, along with agriculture provides 90 percent of the jobs, accounts for 35 percent of 
the  value  added  in  the  manufacturing  industry  and  generates  25  percent  of  manufacturing  sector 
export earnings ($ 2.5 billion). Given its huge potential for generating employment, the Government 
has identified the SME sector as one of the leading sectors along with agriculture and construction 
and housing which will spearhead its efforts towards generating employment to alleviate poverty in the 
country within the framework of the Pakistan Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. 
While  the sustained  and  long-term  growth  of  the  SME  sector  in  Pakistan  remains constrained  by a 
number of factors that include skills shortage, scarcity of capital goods, poor management, lack of data 
on the sector, resistance to change and marketing difficulties especially for export-oriented SMEs; by 
far  the  biggest  problem  facing  the  sector  is  the  unavailability  of  adequate  financing  facilities.  The 
problem of limited access to credit for the SMEs is not exclusive to Pakistan as a recently conducted 
World  Business  Environment  Survey  covering  4000  firms  in  54  countries  found  that  SMEs  cited 
inadequate  access  to  finance  as  their  primary  constraint  to  growth.  This  sector  is  characterized  by 
information  asymmetries;  the  creditors’  search  costs,  information  acquisition  and  processing  costs 
exceed the returns. Hence, there is risk aversion by the banks towards extending credit to small and 
medium  enterprises.  It  is  relatively  easy  to  lend  to  large  corporates  where  the  economies  of  scale, 
published  financial  information,  collaterals  and  creditworthiness  parameters  favour  such  types  of 
lending. As the small businesses cannot offer adequate collateral, the banks are unable to determine 
whether  the  borrower  possesses  technical,  managerial  and  marketing  skills  that  will  allow  him  to 
generate  adequate  cash  flows  and  repay  the  loan  on  time.  The  process  of  financial  intermediation 
therefore breaks down for the SME borrowers. 
A sustainable solution requires that we take a more holistic view of this problem, instead of looking at 
the  issue  of  financing  to  the  SMEs  in  isolation.  A  large  number  of  players  have  to  be  involved  in 
contributing to the success of the SMEs. There are number of different stakeholders who have to work 
together in a coordinated and cohesive manner to ensure that these market failures in case of SME 
credit market are removed and the process of financial intermediation takes place. These include the 
government  and  the  regulatory  agencies  such  as  the  Small  and  Medium  Enterprise  Development 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 1
Authority  (SMEDA)  and  SBP,  provincial  and  local  governments,  SME  Bank  and  other  commercial 
banks engaged in SME financing. 
First of all, the government and the regulatory agencies such as the State Bank of Pakistan need to 
provide  a  conducive  and  enabling  environment  for  SMEs  to  operate.  This  requires  that  the  macro 
economic  policies  are  sound,  the  regulatory  regime  is  supportive  and  the  legal  system  is  able  to 
enforce contracts and property rights. There ought to be a level playing field for both the small and 
large entrepreneur and there is no preferential treatment for any particular class. In the past the SROs 
were being used to favour certain individuals or tariffs were raised to protect selective groups or banks 
loans were given to supporters of the ruling parties. In the past five years, however, these practices 
have been done away and a level playing field now exists for all businesses – small or large – in the 
economy. 
The second player in this process is the Provincial and the local Governments. They have to allocate 
and  earmark  land  for  setting  up  industrial  estates  and  deliver  the  infrastructure  facilities  in  these 
estates. The economies of agglomeration dictate that if clusters of same industries are relocated in the 
same vicinity the suppliers of raw materials and components, and providers of services and marketing 
of output also move to the same areas. The logistics management and reduction in transportation cost 
reduce  the  unit  cost  of  production  and  distribution  for  a  single  enterprise  and  also  improve  the 
reliability and timeliness in the delivery of products. In many countries such zones and clusters have 
worked very well and helped small and medium enterprises to become more competitive. 
Thirdly,  organizations  such  as  SMEDA  have  to  play  a  critical  role  in  the  business  developments 
support, advisory services and managerial training of SMEs. For example, most small enterprises do 
not maintain proper accounting of their operation and do not have a trained accountant on their staff. 
This  impedes  their  ability  to  access  credit  from  commercial  banks.  SMEDA  can  organize  training 
courses in accounting and assign these certified trainees to work on a part–time basis with a number 
of  enterprises.  Simple  accounting  software  packages  are  now  available  for  small  businesses  and 
these can be profitably used in a large number of SMEs. SMEDA can design simplified standardized 
book keeping, inventory management and ledger forms which can aid in the preparation of financials. 
The SME Bank, which was established in the public sector in 2002 to provide financing to the SME 
sector, is another important player in the sector. However, it alone cannot cater to the needs of the 
entire  sector  but  it  could  develop  a  prototype  of  program  lending,  credit  appraisal  and  delivery 
methodology,  standardized  documentation,  monitoring  mechanisms,  which  can  be  replicated  and 
followed  by  other  commercial  banks.  The  SME  Bank  can  produce  experienced  and  skilled 
professionals who are specialists in the SME credit for the whole industry. 
The commercial banks, leasing industry, modarabas themselves have to develop dedicated groups for 
servicing  the  SMEs.  They  should  establish  their  presence  and  branches  at  the  clusters  and  places 
such as Daska, D.I.Khan, Wazirabad, Khairpur, Kotri, Gwadur which have large untapped potential. If 
the SME branches of the banks remain limited to a few big cities you will never be able to make a 
profitable  business  out  of  the  SME  sector.  The  balance  sheet,  cost  of  funding,  the  geographical 
spread  do  confer  a  big  advantage  to  the  big  banks  and  if  they  do  not  make  innovative  use  of 
technology,  skills,  systems  and  procedures  to  capitalize  on  this  advantage  they  will  soon  be 
marginalized by the intrusion of more agile and nimble small private banks. The banking industry has 
to invest in people, processes and systems to minimize their risks and enhance their returns on the 
SME segment. 
Besides banks and DFIs, Leasing Companies and Modarabas are also the right vehicles for delivery of 
credit to the SME sector. Unfortunately with the exception of one or two leasing companies they have 
limited their activities so far to large urban areas and have not opened up their doors for business in 
those  cities  and  towns  where  the  clusters  of  SMEs  do  exist.  As  they  face  tough  competition  from 
banks in leasing business, it is expected that they would diversify both in product lines as well as in 
geographical coverage. 
Lastly, there is a widespread network of technical and vocational training institutes and polytechnics 
throughout  the  country.  Those  who  graduate  from  these  institutes  are  unable  to  find  suitable 
remunerative  jobs.  On  the  other  hand,  the  SMEs  lack  adequate  technicians  and  trained  manpower 
who have the requisite skills to help them in the production of their goods and services. Thus, there is 
a mismatch between the demand and supply of this type of manpower. The provincial governments 
who own these institutes should examine the contents and curriculum, pedagogical tools, evaluation 
and assessment procedure, incentive structure for the faculty members and bring about the necessary 
changes to align the supply of the graduates with the emerging needs of the SME sector. Synergies 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2005
can be generated if some of the institutes are located in the clusters and apprenticeship and internship 
programmes are instituted to give practical hands-on training to the students. 
the  SMEs,  as  an 
SME financing and SBP – achievements and strategies 
In recent years, the SBP has reviewed its own role to determine whether or not it was creating any 
hurdles in the way of lending to SMEs. We found out that the same prudential regulations which were 
applicable to corporate borrowers were also made applicable to consumer, SME and micro finance 
although the requirements were different for each market segment. We therefore decided to formulate 
a separate set of regulations for SMEs, which were developed after extensive consultations with the 
SME Associations, SMEDA, provincial departments and have been in force since January 2004. With 
the enforcement of these regulations a number of constraints in SME financing have been removed 
and the banks now in a better position to disburse loan to SMEs without fear of violating the prudential 
norms.  The  new  prudential  regulations  for  SMEs  do  not  make  it  mandatory  for  banks  to  require 
collateral but allow them to take into consideration asset conversion cycle and cash flow generation as 
the basis for loan approval. We would be willing to further improve and strengthen these regulations if 
any practical difficulties arise in their implementation. 
The SBP has geared up its efforts towards providing policy advice to relevant stakeholders in the SME 
sector  especially  the  banks/DFIs.  For  this  purpose,  a  separate  SME  Department  has been  recently 
established in the SBP, which will organize itself internally to respond to the financing needs of SMEs 
by  inducting  skilled  manpower  and  training  of  younger  staff.  The  newly  established  department  is 
tasked with creating a conducive macro-prudential environment for banks/DFIs to increase the flow of 
credit  to  SMEs;  to  promote  a  strategic  focus  on  SMEs  on  the  part  of  the  banks/DFIs  and  to  help 
banks/DFIs adopt best practices in the development of their SME business lines. 
Our short-to-medium term strategic plan also envisages Financial Sector Deepening and Broadening 
of Access to formal sources of finance by the SMEs as one of our top priorities for the next five years. 
For 
initial  step,  delivery  of  credit  by  banks  will  be  monitored  and 
intermediary/technical  support  organizations  will  be  encouraged  to  assist  the  SMEs  in  preparing 
bankable proposals. In the medium term, the staff of the banks will be trained in program lending. SBP 
will also endeavor that a guarantee scheme is established by the Government of Pakistan (GoP) to 
share  the  credit  risk  of  the  financing  banks.  To  pursue  this  strategy,  close  coordination  will  be 
established with the SMEDA. 
The SBP is also expanding the scope and coverage of its existing on-line Credit Information Bureau by 
including  all  loan  amounts.  This  database  will  be  a  powerful  tool  for  all  the  banks  and  financial 
institutions  in  mitigating  risks  in  lending  to  SMEs.  Under  the  framework  of  our  strategic  plan  for 
2005-2010 we will also explore the possibility of allowing the setting up of private sector credit bureaus 
that will incorporate a lot more information on credit history and behaviour of borrowers. 
The State Bank, with the help of ADB’s SME Sector Development Program, will also provide capacity 
building  support  to  a  select  group  of  banks  for  SME  lending  including  SME  Bank.  This  project  will 
revitalize the SME lending by the participating financial institutions and will be a prototype for other 
financial institutions who could see financing to SMEs as profitable business ventures. 
The SME Bank is being restructured under the SME Sector Development Program of ADB making it a 
viable Bank catering to the needs of SMEs in the country. SBP has also issued a commercial banking 
license to SME Bank. We hope that SME Bank would take a lead in developing innovative lending 
technologies and program lending tools where standardized credit scoring methodology may be used 
for each sub-sector rather than always relying on the current method of scrutiny and appraisal of each 
individual proposal. The present methods and documentation are onerous for small entrepreneurs and 
relatively costly for the banks. SME Bank has to experiment and come up with the standardized set of 
easy to fill but fully informational documentation, specification of risk parameters, credit appraisal and 
delivery techniques. 
Today, most big industrial establishments depend on SMEs for their value addition. It is on record in 
most  emerging  markets  that  the  fastest  growing  export  industries  (cotton  weaving,  textiles,  surgical 
instruments, carpets, leatherwear, etc) have been dominated by SMEs. Thus, SMEs have played very 
significant  roles  in  reducing  the  poverty  levels  in  many  developing  countries.  Emphasis  has  been 
placed  on  pro-poor  growth  led  by  the  private  sector  especially  through  SMEs.  Sectors  such  as 
agriculture,  services,  manufacturing  with  heavy  content  of  labor-intensive  activities  have  received 
much support  by  the  Governments  because  of  their  potential  for  reducing  poverty.  These countries 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 3
have also successfully integrated their SMEs with the large corporate sector through sub contracting. 
Sub contracting by the large firms has proved to be an extremely useful and efficient way of integration 
across the size and scale. Automobile industry provides an excellent example of this business model 
whereby 60-70 percent of the components and parts in the manufacturing of cars and 90-95 percent in 
case of motorcycles are provided by small vending industry. A vast network of showrooms and service 
stations again owned by small entrepreneurs are the example of forward linkages between the large 
manufacturers  and  SMEs.  This  model  can  be  replicated  in  case  of  other  industries  also.  This  will 
ensure  that  both  the  large  manufacturing  and  SME  sectors  grow  organically  through  the  forces  of 
interdependency. There is no substitute for economics of scales and the SMEs due to smallness of 
their size cannot excel in it and harvest its benefits. This makes their integration with the corporate 
sector more vital. I would urge upon the SMEDA and other government sector organizations involved 
in the SME policy formulation to take up this challenge of integrating SMEs with the corporate sector. 
Let me conclude by restating the fact that SMEs will continue to play a very important and vital role in 
our  economy  where  the  twin  problems  of  unemployment  and  poverty  constitute  major  development 
challenge. Well targeted government intervention in this sector remains indispensable provided such 
interventions do not displace the private sector. Given the quality of participants in the conference, I 
am convinced that useful policy recommendations will emerge at the end of the different sessions. I 
thank you Mr. President once gain for vision and leadership in the economic revival of this country and 
your personal support to the State Bank of Pakistan. I look forward to your guidance in creating an 
enabling environment for the promotion of SMEs in the country. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2005
