Toshihiko Fukui: Review of Japan’s economy 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s seminannual 
report on currency and monetary control, before the Committee on Financial Affairs, House of 
Representatives, Tokyo, 2 August 2005. 
 Introduction 
I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary 
policy.  
Developments in Japan’s Economy 
I.  
Japan's economy continues to recover, albeit with adjustments in IT-related sectors.  
In  more  detail,  although  the  momentum  of  growth  in  exports,  particularly  to  China,  has  been  weak 
recently after the significant increases through the middle of 2004, industrial production is on a gradual 
uptrend as inventory adjustments in the IT-related sectors are progressing. Business fixed investment 
has  continued  to  increase,  as  corporate  profits  have  remained  high  and  business  sentiment  has 
shown improvement again. Household income has been rising, albeit moderately, as the employment 
situation has been improving and wages have stopped declining. In this situation, private consumption 
has been steady.  
Based on these developments, it can be said that the economy is emerging from its temporary pause.  
As  for  the  outlook,  growth  in  exports  is  expected  to  accelerate  gradually  as  overseas  economies 
continue  to  expand,  and  domestic  private  demand  is  likely  to  continue  increasing  against  the 
background  of  high  corporate  profits  and  the  moderate  rise  in  household  income.  The  economy  is 
therefore expected to follow a sustainable growth path, albeit at a moderate pace.  
On the price front, as the output gap continues to narrow, domestic corporate goods prices have been 
increasing, mainly reflecting the effects of the rise in crude oil prices. They are likely to continue on an 
increasing  trend,  but  the  rate  of  growth  is  expected  to  slow  for  the  time  being.  Consumer  prices 
(excluding fresh food) have basically been declining slightly on a year-on-year basis, partly due to the 
reduction in electricity and telephone charges against the background of such factors as deregulation, 
and they are projected to continue falling slightly for the time being. However, they are expected to 
start increasing on a year-on-year basis at some point in late 2005 or early 2006, as the effects of 
temporary  factors,  such  as  the  decline  in  rice  prices  and  the  reduction  in  electricity  and  telephone 
charges, fall off.  
In  the  capital  markets,  stock  prices  have  been  firm  on  the  whole  and  long-term  interest  rates  have 
been stable. The environment for corporate finance is becoming more accommodative on the whole. 
That is to say, in a situation where the lending attitude of financial institutions is becoming more active, 
the rate of decline in lending by private banks has been diminishing at a moderate pace. Moreover, 
the  environment  in  the  capital  markets  for  firms  raising  funds  through  CP  and  corporate  bonds  is 
favorable.  
Conduct of Monetary Policy  
II.  
The Bank has been providing ample liquidity through its conduct of the quantitative easing policy. The 
framework  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  is  based  on  two  key  elements.  The  first  element  is  the 
Bank's  provision  of  ample  liquidity  to  the  money  market  so  that  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts at the Bank substantially exceeds the amount of required reserves. The second is the Bank's 
commitment to firmly maintain this ample provision of liquidity until the year-on-year rate of change in 
the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) registers zero percent or 
higher  on  a  sustainable  basis.  At  the Monetary Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  on  July  27,  2005,  the  Policy 
Board decided to maintain the target range for the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the 
Bank at "around 30 to 35 trillion yen."  
BIS Review 55/2005 
 1
In  the  money  market,  reflecting  the  dissipating  concern  about  financial  system  stability,  liquidity 
demand among financial institutions has been declining and they are feeling more strongly that there 
is an abundance of liquidity. Given this situation, since the MPM held on May 19 and 20, 2005, the 
Bank has been allowing a temporary fall of the outstanding balance below the target range when it is 
judged, in the situation where the Bank is doing its utmost to provide funds while at the same time 
giving  due  consideration  to  the  effects  on  the  functioning  of  the  market,  that  financial  institutions' 
liquidity  demand  is  exceptionally  weak.  The  Bank's  decision  is  intended  to  enable  the  quantitative 
easing policy to be conducted more smoothly, not to change its basic policy stance.  
III.  
The Bank's Measures regarding the Financial System after the Full Removal of the 
Blanket Guarantee of Deposits  
As I mentioned earlier, the financial system in Japan has been regaining stability, and the full removal 
of the blanket guarantee of deposits was carried out smoothly on April 1, 2005. Financial institutions 
are expected to amplify their efforts to develop innovative services tailored to customer needs, thus 
supporting economic activity. The Bank's basic stance regarding financial system policy is shifting its 
focus in response to this changing environment: from crisis management to, while maintaining overall 
system stability, supporting private-sector initiatives to provide more efficient and advanced financial 
services through, for example, improved management of risks and business activities.  
In order to contribute to enhancing the functioning and robustness of the financial system, the Bank 
will  actively  encourage  financial  institutions'  efforts  to  improve  their  business  activities,  and  devise 
various ways to enhance its own business operations.  
Conclusion  
Japan's economy continues to recover in a situation where overseas economies continue to expand. 
As for the outlook, it is expected to move onto a path of sustainable, albeit moderately paced, growth.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  watch  changes  in  the  economic  environment  and  will  conduct 
monetary policy in an appropriate manner. In the current situation where the CPI remains on a slight 
downtrend,  the  Bank  is  determined  to  support  Japan's  economy  from  the  financial  side  to  achieve 
sustainable economic growth with price stability, by maintaining monetary easing in accordance with 
the commitment based on the CPI.  
In addition to its efforts in conducting monetary policy, it has become increasingly important for the 
Bank to pursue more advanced services in a wide range of areas as well as ensure well-disciplined 
management to properly carry out the duties entrusted to it as the nation's central bank. In light of this, 
the  Bank  has  formulated  a  Medium-Term  Strategic  Framework  (MTSF)  for  fiscal  2005-2009,  which 
sets out the Bank's management policy for the next five years. The Bank is committed to continuing its 
efforts,  through  the  steady  implementation  of  this  MTSF,  to  retain  public  confidence  and  fulfill  its 
mission of contributing to the sound development of the economy.  
