Caleb M Fundanga: Zambia’s economic outlook - what have we learnt in the 
last 40 years and where do we go from here? 
Paper  presented  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  CIMA  Zambia 
annual business discussion on the theme “Zambia’s economic outlook - what have we learnt in the last 
40 years and where do we go from here?”, Lusaka, 7 January 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
The President of CIMA Zambia, Mr Cleaver Mulundu 
•  Mr Chairman 
• 
•  Distinguished Invited Guests 
• 
I wish to thank the President of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) Zambia 
Chapter,  Mr.  Mulundu  and  his  Executive  for  inviting  me  to  present  a  paper  to  this  distinguished 
gathering on the theme “Zambia’s Economic Outlook: What Have We Learnt in the Last 40 Years 
and Where Do We Go from Here.” The topic is timely, as it is very important to take stock of our past 
economic development efforts, including the mistakes and good policies of the past and assess the 
current economic conditions in order to put up a future strategy. In this respect, I will discuss what I 
consider to be the key lessons of macroeconomic management and present an outlook for the period 
ahead.  In  so  doing,  I  will  also  highlight  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  in  our  quest  to  develop  our 
economy. 
Mr Chairman 
May I start by reviewing our economic performance during the last 40 years. As many of you maybe 
aware,  at  independence  in  1964,  Zambia  had  one  of  the  most  vibrant  economies  in  Sub-Saharan 
Africa,  which  was  supported  by  a  strong  mining  industry.  The  country’s  external  position  was  in 
surplus between 1964 and 1974; inflation rates were low, averaging 7.7 percent; and experienced high 
economic growth rates. In addition, GDP per capita was one of the highest in Sub-Saharan Africa at 
about US$ 950. Further, unemployment levels were low. 
Between  1968  and  1972,  Government  announced  sweeping  economic  reforms  under  which 
80 percent of industry was nationalised, giving the state greater control over the country’s resources, 
with which it could implement an ambitious industrialisation programme to bring about rapid economic 
development.  In  addition,  nationalisation  was  aimed  at  empowering  Zambians  economically,  which 
was important following political independence. 
However, following the outbreak of the 1973/74 international oil price shock and the world economic 
recession  that  ensued,  Zambia  experienced  a  significant  change  in  her  economic  fortunes.  For 
instance, the external position deteriorated; inflation increased; per capita GDP fell; the performance of 
the  mining  sector,  which  accounted  for  over  80  percent  of  total  export  earnings  declined;  and 
Government capacity to finance economic and social infrastructure was severely curtailed. As a result 
of  these  budgetary  difficulties,  Government  began  to  run  huge  fiscal  deficits,  which  were  financed, 
primarily, by borrowing from the domestic banking system and the international financial markets. 
Other  important  events  that  affected  Zambia’s  economic  development  in  her  early  stages  of 
nationhood included: 
(i) 
The  pronouncement  of  the  Unilateral Declaration  of  Independence  (UDI)  by  the  Ian  Smith 
regime  in  the  then  Southern  Rhodesia  (now  Zimbabwe).  The  declaration  of  UDI  had  both 
positive  and  negative  impacts  on  the  Zambian  economy,  although  the  negative  effects 
outweighed  the  positive  gains.  The  positive  gains  relate,  mainly,  to  the  relocation  of 
industries  from  Southern Rhodesia  (now  Zimbabwe)  to  Zambia  to  avoid  being  affected  by 
the sanctions imposed by the International Community, as a result of the declaration of UDI 
in  1965.  This  contributed  to  the  growth  of  the  Zambian  manufacturing  sector  and  the 
increase in employment levels. 
However,  the  declaration  of  UDI  had  serious  adverse  effects  on  the  blossoming  Zambian 
economy. As you may recall, at independence, the economies of Southern Rhodesia (now 
 BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
Zimbabwe)  and  our  economy  were  intertwined.  Southern  Rhodesia  was  Zambia’s  biggest 
trading  partner  as  well  as  the  main  supply  route  to  the  sea.  The  severing  of  trading, 
commercial  and  transportation  relations  with  Southern  Rhodesia  on  account  of  UDI 
therefore, meant that Zambia had to invest heavily in her own transportation infrastructure, 
which finally led to the construction of the TAZAMA oil pipeline, Indeni refinery, TAZARA, the 
Great North Road (which used to be known as the Hell Run), etc., in order to transport her 
essential  imports  and  exports.  These  were  huge  projects  whose  construction  required 
enormous  borrowing  from  countries  like  China,  Italy,  France,  etc.  and  other  international 
financial creditors. This explains, in part, the huge external debt the country is overburdened 
with today. 
By  1964,  most  of  Zambia’s  neighbours,  such  as  Mozambique,  Zimbabwe,  Namibia,  and 
Angola, were at the height of their liberation struggles and Zambia had no option but to offer 
refuge  and  logistical  support  to  the  liberation  movements  like,  FRELIMO,  ZANU,  ZAPU, 
SWAPO,  UNITA,  and  MPLA.  This  meant  that  Zambia  had  to  sacrifice  some  of  its  scarce 
developmental resources for the sake of assisting these liberation movements to gain their 
independence, and in some instances, Zambia had to borrow to finance this expenditure. 
As a result of the liberation wars in the neighbouring countries, Zambia had to arm herself, 
militarily,  against  possible  foreign  aggression  by  procuring  weapons  and  other  military 
hardware  from  friendly  countries  such  as  Russia,  China,  etc.  This  again  explains  why 
Zambia  today  has  a  huge  debt  with  Russia.  Military  expenditure  was  unavoidable  as  the 
colonial regimes used to attack Zambia directly. In this regard, one can mention the bombing 
of Lusaka as well as the destruction of Luangwa bridge. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I have endeavoured to include these seemingly simple but critical factors so that we understand the 
historical context  of  some  of  the  policies  implemented  during  the  last  40  years  and  their  impact  on 
national development. 
Therefore, to contain the deteriorating macroeconomic situation, the Government introduced a myriad 
of economic policies including price controls because the economic shocks were considered transitory 
and, thus, the Government would easily balance its budget. This never happened! 
Hence,  during  the  1980s,  policymakers  realised  that  economic  reforms  were  needed  as  a  lasting 
solution  to  Zambia’s  economic  woes.  For  instance,  between  1985  and  1987,  Zambia  undertook  an 
IMF/World Bank-sponsored adjustment programme. This led to a partial decontrol of interest rates and 
the introduction of a Dutch Foreign Exchange System as a way of allocating scarce foreign exchange 
through  a  quasi-market  system.  It  also  entailed  the  removal  of  some  subsidies  as  a  remedy  to  the 
persistent fiscal deficits. The reforms proved to be highly unpopular and culminated in public protests 
and abandonment of the IMF supported reform programme in May 1987. 
Instead,  the  Government  pursued  an  indigenous  programme  called  ‘New  Economic  Recovery 
Programme’ (NERP) whose theme was “Growth from Own Resources”. Although this programme was 
successful  in  some  respects,  it  suffered  major  setbacks,  such  as  the  overvaluation  of  the  Kwacha, 
soaring inflation, lack of external financing, among others, that made the programme unsustainable, 
thus  prompting  the  Government  to  go  back  to  the  IMF  and  agreed  on  a  new  IMF  supported 
programme in 1989. The main policy measures under the programme included the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Privatisation; 
Decontrol of prices; 
Decontrol of interest rates; 
Abolition  of  exchange  controls  and  a  movement  to  a  market-determined  exchange  rate 
regime; 
A shift to the use of indirect instruments of monetary policy; 
Introduction of Government securities auctions; 
Establishment of an inter-bank money market; 
Modernisation of the national payments system; 
BIS Review 5/2005
 2 
  Strengthening of the legal framework; and 
Establishment of a stock exchange. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
After a new Government came to power in 1991, its priorities were to restore economic growth through 
market-based  stabilisation  policies  and  promotion  of  the  private  sector  as  a  prime-mover  of  the 
economy.  Consequently,  the  economy  was  liberalised,  giving  market  forces  a  greater  role  in  the 
allocation  of  resources.  Prices  were  decontrolled,  while  subsidies  on  all  consumer  items  were 
removed. In addition, the Government embarked on a privatisation programme, whose objectives were 
to: 
(a) 
(b) 
Improve efficiency and service delivery in the economy; 
Inject  fresh  capital  and  entrepreneurial  skills  given  the  ailing  nature  of  the  state  owned 
enterprises (SOEs); 
Secure, on a sustainable basis, employment in the privatized companies; 
Enhance the companies’ revenue contribution to the Government budget; and 
Overall,  increase  the  private  sector’s  contribution  to  economic  growth  and,  ultimately, 
poverty reduction. 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
In  the  financial  sector,  the  Government  undertook  further  reforms  that  included  the  use  of  market-
based  monetary  instruments  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  As  a  result  of  monetary  tightening, 
inflation fell from 197 percent in December 1992 to about 40 percent in 1995; 18.7 percent in 2001 
and 17.5 percent in December 2004.  
Similarly,  the  Government  took  fiscal  reforms  in  1993,  such  as  the  cash-budget  to  curtail  the 
monetisation  of  fiscal  deficits.  Consequently,  since  1993  we  have  seen  the  Government  take 
measures to strengthen fiscal performance through limiting domestic borrowing as a ratio of GDP to 
levels below 5 per cent. This should be commended. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Having outlined a brief history of our economic management since 1964, allow me at this juncture to 
summarise the lessons learnt. From the foregoing, several macroeconomic management lessons can 
be drawn. These include: 
(i) 
Attaining lower rates of inflation, as in the 1960s and early 1970s, continues to be elusive. 
However,  lower  rates  of  inflation  could  be  attained  if  the  Government  maintained  fiscal 
discipline by sticking to the budget and minimising its borrowing from the central bank and 
the financial sector, as a whole. This would contribute to the achievement of price stability, 
which in turn would facilitate sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction. 
Lowering of interest rates requires that all key stakeholders play their part. The Government 
reduction  of  domestic  borrowing  contributes  to  lowering  of  yield  rates  on  Government 
securities,  which  are  sometimes  used  as  anchors  by  commercial  banks.  The  commercial 
banks  should  also  respond  to  changing  macroeconomic  indicators  consistent  with  low 
interest  rates,  while  borrowers  need  to  improve  their  credit  culture.  As  for  the  Bank  of 
Zambia,  we  continue  monitoring  financial  conditions  and  take  appropriate  actions  to 
contribute to lowering of interest rates.  
A relatively stable and competitive exchange rate has a positive impact not only on inflation, 
but also on the performance of the external sector. In this regard, policies for stabilising the 
exchange  rate  must  aim  at  increasing  the  export  earning  capacity  of  the  country  through 
stimulation and maintenance of strong export sector by, among other things: 
• 
• 
In addition, continued implementation of appropriate monetary and fiscal policies, particularly 
the reduction in the fiscal deficits, is critical to maintaining stability in the exchange rate. 
Developing a diversified and competitive export base; and 
Ensuring food self-sufficiency to reduce food imports. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
 BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
including 
to  diversify 
the  economy, 
External  debt  should  be  contracted  to  finance  the  productive  sector  so  as  to  lessen  the 
burden of debt service. Otherwise, it will result, as we have seen in the last 40 years, in huge 
outflows at the expense of expenditures on social and economic infrastructure development, 
which are pre-requisites to sustainable poverty reduction efforts. 
the  external  sector,  cannot  be 
The  need 
overemphasised. Diversification is a sure way of preventing external shocks to the economy 
and will contribute to maintenance of macroeconomic stability. Dependence on one or a few 
products leaves the economy susceptible to external shocks. 
In the financial sector, the key lesson is that liberalisation of the industry is not tantamount to 
relaxing  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  measures.  In  fact  the  legal,  regulatory,  and 
supervisory frameworks should be strengthened to deal with any excesses arising from entry 
of  institutions  with  poor  management  or  governance  practices  due  to  the  attractive  liberal 
environment. 
Legal  and  operational  framework  requires  continuous  reviews  to  remain  relevant  in  this 
technologically fast moving world. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
After learning the lessons from the past 40 years, the following are some of the challenges we have to 
confront: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Achievement and maintenance of price stability, i.e. low and stable single digit inflation; 
Maintenance of a stable and competitive exchange rate; 
Diversification of the economy and the export base; 
Enhancing  economic  policy  credibility.  Policy  reversals  tend  to  undermine  gains  made  in 
achieving macroeconomic stability; and 
Sustained reduction of fiscal dominance (deficits) to contribute to low inflation, lowering of 
interest rates and release more funds for lending to the private sector. 
 Turning  to  the  question  of  where  we  go  from  here,  I  wish  to  state  that  all  indications  are  that  the 
economic  outlook  for  Zambia,  in  the  medium  and  long-term,  is  favourable.  This  is  premised  on  the 
continued favourable performance of a few sectors, such as agriculture, mining and tourism. 
With  respect  to  the  agricultural  sector,  the  favourable  performance  is,  largely,  on  account  of  the 
affirmative Government agricultural policy that is supportive of expansion activities in the sector as well 
as good weather conditions. For instance, the continued improved performance in cash crops such as 
tobacco, sugar, cotton, groundnuts, floriculture and horticulture, among others, all point to increased 
economic activity in the medium term. In addition, improved investor confidence in the Government’s 
economic policies has also contributed to increased production in the sector. 
In the mining sector, the prospects are buoyant, mainly, due to favourable international metal prices as 
well as the increase in production due to the recapitalisation of the existing mines. Further, the coming 
on-stream of greenfield mines, such as Kansanshi and Lumwana, are expected to boost production in 
this  sector.  This  will  further  enhance  economic  activity  in  the  country  since  growth  in  the  mining 
industry positively affects several sectors of the economy, such as manufacturing and construction. 
With regard to the tourism sector, the potential for growth is immense, as long as Government support 
to  the  sector  through  tax  incentives  and,  most  importantly,  infrastructural  development,  such  as 
improvement  of  access  roads  and  airports, continues.  If  well  nurtured,  this  sector  could  be  a  major 
employment generating and foreign exchange earner in the country. 
Given the above favourable economic outlook, it is anticipated that the annual rate of inflation would 
be  in  the  single  digit  region  by  the  end  of  2006,  mainly,  due  to  the  current  momentum  in  policy 
implementation  and  developments  in  the  real  sector.  This  in  turn  will  provide  an  environment  for 
further stability in the exchange rate and lowering of lending interest rates. 
In the financial sector, enormous progress has been made towards the development and deepening of 
the financial markets in Zambia. Additionally, significant achievements have been made in areas, such 
as  monetary  policy  formulation  and  implementation,  broadening  of  the  money  markets,  foreign 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2005
exchange policy management and establishment of the capital market. Improvements have also been 
made in the formulation of prudential and regulatory regulations to enhance financial system stability 
and development. 
However, the development of a more active secondary financial market to enhance efficiency in the 
financial  system  remains  a  key  challenge  for  all  stakeholders  in  the  financial  services  industry.  To 
address this challenge therefore, the Government approved the Financial Sector Development Plan 
(FSDP),  which,  after  implementation,  will  enhance  financial  intermediation  and  efficiency  of  the 
financial sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
As I conclude, I wish to reiterate that during the past 40 years, several achievements have been made 
in macroeconomic management in Zambia, but more could have been done had it not been for the 
reasons  I  alluded  to  earlier.  However,  there  have  been  a  lot  of  challenges  and  lessons  have  been 
learnt from the experiences we have undergone through as a country. These lessons must be turned 
into a platform to design and implement more effective medium and long-term policies. 
It is also important to note that one of the challenges confronting developing countries such as Zambia 
is the need to reduce inflation and ensure affordable credit through low lending interest rates. In this 
regard, I wish to appeal to professional bodies, like yours, to come up with options or ideas on how the 
issue could be tackled within the existing liberal financial environment.  
Although significant steps and progress have been made in improving the performance of the foreign 
exchange market, a number of challenges still remain. The main challenges in this area remain that of 
maintaining  a  stable  and  competitive  exchange  rate  as  well  as  diversification  of  the  export  base  in 
order to tap into alternative sources of foreign exchange. Zambia’s continued reliance on the mining 
sector as a major source of foreign exchange has contributed to volatility in the exchange rate. Hence, 
there is an urgent need to explore all possibilities of diversifying the export base. To this effect, the 
different  exchange  rate  regimes  implemented  since  independence  have  provided  us  with  good 
lessons upon which we can build our foreign exchange market and contribute to the buoyancy of our 
external sector. 
With  respect  to  the  current  stability  obtaining  in  the  macroeconomic  arena,  I  wish  to  commend  the 
Government for its commitment to fiscal discipline as shown in its implementation of the 2004 budget. 
The Government’s adherence to fiscal discipline, has, in part, contributed to macroeconomic stability 
during  2004.  To  this  end,  I  wish  to  challenge  the  private  sector  to  take  advantage  of  the  stable 
macroeconomic environment to expand their productive capacities. This would enhance the stability in 
the macroeconomic environment and facilitate higher economic growth and development. 
Finally, may I also take this opportunity to remind ourselves of the importance of staying the course. 
By this I mean, consistency and credibility of policy reform. As you maybe aware, experience the world 
over  has  clearly  shown  that  for  a  country  to  benefit  from  policy  reforms,  it  is  important  that  policy 
remains in place for a long time. This is so because a country has to convince the investor community 
that it will not change course tomorrow and this takes time to do. 
Also remember that good policies alone do not make the economy grow. It is people who make the 
economy  move.  Policies  help  those  that  are  willing  to  work.  Remember  that  even  in  very  harsh 
economic policy environments some people prosper! 
I thank you! 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 5
