Ishrat Husain: Future outlook and challenges for Pakistan’s economy 
Address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Seminar organized by the 
Pakistan Bankers Association UK, London, 17 January 2005. 
 H.E. Dr. Maleeha Lodhi, Mr. Anjum Iqbal, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be back once again in your midst this year and wish to thank you for inviting me this 
evening to share my views about Pakistan’s economic prospects with this distinguished gathering. 
I  would  like  to  address  the  following  three  questions  that  are  of  great  interest  to  every  Pakistani, 
whether living in Pakistan or abroad. (a) What has been accomplished so far? How sustainable these 
reforms and policies are? (b) What is the future outlook and prospects for Pakistani economy? and 
(c) What are the challenges and risks facing the economy? 
Accomplishments made so far: 
There  is  a  general  agreement  both  within  and  outside  Pakistan  that  there  has  been  a  remarkable 
turnaround in the economy during the last five years. What are the main accomplishments that have 
laid  the  foundations  for sustainable growth  and  poverty  reduction  in  the  future?  I  would  list  at  least 
eight such factors that have made a significant positive difference in the economic landscape of our 
country. 
1. 
in 
improved 
this  period 
to  $600 billion 
through  a  combination  of 
Fiscal  discipline:  The  major  cause  of  Pakistan’s  economic  ills  lay  in  the  imprudence  of 
fiscal  policy  where  the  governments  indulged  in  excessive  spending  in  relation  to  their 
revenues  and  incurred  deficits  in  the  range  of  6  to  7  percent  of  GDP.  These  persistent 
imbalances  led  to  accumulation  of  public  debt  that  reached  unsustainable  level  of 
100 percent of GDP by 1999-2000. The Musharraf Government has taken tough measures 
to introduce fiscal discipline in the country and has been successful in bringing fiscal deficit 
down  to  2.4  percent  last  year.  How  has  this  been  achieved?  There  are  three  ingredients 
responsible  for  this  outcome.  First,  revenue  mobilization  has  doubled  from  almost 
$300 billion 
tax 
administration, reducing the discretion of tax collector and minimizing interaction between tax 
payer and tax collector, rationalizing the tax rates and structure and widening the tax base to 
some  extent.  Universal  self  assessment  system  for  income  tax  has  increased  both  the 
number of voluntary filers as well as tax collection. 
Second, the burden of debt servicing has been radically lowered. Five years ago, more than 
50  percent  of  government  revenues  were  preempted  by  interest  rates.  But,  the  carefully 
designed strategy of debt management implemented during this period has led to decline in 
this  ratio  to  almost  25  percent  with  a  downward  moving  trend.  This  has  not  only  allowed 
lowering  of  fiscal  deficit  but  provided  fiscal  space  for  doubling  development  expenditure. 
Third, the hemorrhage caused by the losses incurred by the public sector enterprises has 
been  stopped  and  either  these  enterprises  are  being  privatized  or  their  performance  has 
improved as a result of good governance and tighter management. 
Financial sector reform and restructuring: The financial sector has become the lynchpin 
of the revival of economic growth in Pakistan. Not only that the sector has become sound 
and healthy and strong enough to withstand exogenous shocks but has played a major role 
in broadening access to the middle class and lower income groups. Average bank lending 
rates have come down to 6 percent from 15-16 percent five years ago and 21-22 percent in 
the  1990s.  This  decline  is  a  result  of  lower  demand  for  credit  by  the  public  sector  as  it 
reduced  fiscal  deficit  and  plugged  in  losses;  the  competition  between  the  private  sector 
owned and managed banks who now hold 80 percent of the banking assets; the removal of 
drag of non-performing loans by tackling them in a decisive way; the lowering of corporate 
tax rate on the banks; the assumption of affairs of banks by professional management and a 
vigilant  role  played  by  the  Central  Bank  in  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  system. 
Lowering  of  interest  rates gave  a kick start  to  the private  sector credit  that,  in  turn,  led  to 
better capacity utilization and higher output in manufacturing sector recording growth rate of 
 2. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
17 percent last year. Higher manufacturing growth contributed towards the achievement of 
6.4  percent  GDP  growth  last  year  and  is  making  similar  contribution  this  year.  Pakistan’s 
banking  system  by  opening  its  doors  for  mortgage,  automobile,  consumer,  credit  cards, 
SMEs, agriculture and microfinance has broadened the borrower base and brought in its fold 
firms, farmers and individuals who had never used bank credit for their productive activities 
or financing needs. This movement is still in its infancy and a lot of efforts have to be made 
in order to maintain this momentum. 
Macroeconomic stability: Even the worst critics of the present government do admit that 
Pakistan has been able to achieve macroeconomic stability although according to them the 
benefits  have  not  trickled  down  to  the  common  man.  Macroeconomic  stability  that  had 
eluded  us  for  a  long  period  of  ten  years  in  the  1990s  is  the  foundation  for  sustainable 
economic  growth.  All  indicators, whether  current  account  balance,  inflation,  fiscal  balance, 
exchange rate, interest rates, foreign exchange reserves, point clearly to a positive direction. 
The  challenge  for  the  economic  managers  is  to  maintain  this  stability  so  that  private 
investors can make investment decisions with full knowledge of the expected profitability in 
an environment where there is little turbulence or swings in the key prices. The continuity, 
consistency, predictability and transparency of economic policies are essential to foster this 
environment. In this complex world of interdependence and interconnections there would be 
moments of tension and uncertainty but better communication, fuller disclosure of facts and 
information to the markets and regular interaction with the economic players will keep things 
under control. 
External debt vulnerability: Along with high fiscal deficits, Pakistan was faced with rising 
and unmanageable external debt burden. By 1999/00 the external debt as a ratio of GDP 
had reached almost 52 percent. The new Government that assumed power took upon itself 
the  task  to  bring  down  this  burden  to  an  acceptable  level.  It  designed  a  strategy  of  debt 
management that consisted of a long term reprofiling of Paris Club bilateral debt, substitution 
of  non-concessional  loans  from  IFIs  by  concessional  loans,  early  repayment  of  expensive 
commercial and short-term debt and fiscal consolidation. This strategy has been successfully 
implemented and the absolute stock of external debt and liabilities has, in fact, gone down 
from $38 billion to $35 billion. The ratio of external debt to GDP in 2004-05 is likely to be 
around 33-34 percent and is on a downward trajectory. Average interest rate on the stock of 
debt  has  more  than  halved  and  external  interest  payments  as  a  proportion  of  foreign 
exchange  receipts  have  gradually  dwindled  to  less  than  25  percent  providing  a  breathing 
space and freeing the country from the undue pressures of crisis management. 
Deregulation: In a number of areas such as petroleum, natural gas and agriculture inputs 
and  outputs  the  prices  and  trade  have  been  completely  deregulated.  Market  forces 
determine the prices that are no longer controlled or administered by government decrees or 
regulations.  Although  the  mindset  of  the  administrators  has  not  changed  and  instances  of 
petty harassment and extortions by these officials are rampant, the government policy has 
been  quite  clearly  articulated.  For  example,  the  cotton  farmers  are  free  to  export  their 
produce without any taxes or duties if there is excess supply domestically and no permits or 
licences are required. Similarly, the spinners are at liberty to import cotton at the prevailing 
international  prices  without  any  duties  or  barriers  if  they  believe  that  the  domestic  crop  is 
short.  Government  no  longer  imports  petroleum  and  petroleum  products  but  the  task  has 
been  assigned  to  the  private  sector.  Nor  are  the  fortnightly  prices  of  local  POL  products 
determined  by  the  Ministry  of  Petroleum  but  by  the  distributors  themselves.  Subsidies  on 
fertilizers have been removed and most of the production, marketing and imports or exports 
are carried out by the private sector. The prices of end products rise and fall according to the 
dynamics of supply and demand. Trading Corporation of Pakistan does step in on occasions 
but its main task is to intervene in the market where shortages or excesses threaten orderly 
market conditions in essential commodities. 
The most successful experience of deregulation has taken place in the telecom sector. The 
monopoly of the state owned PTCL has been broken and new licences have been issued for 
Local Loops, Long Distance and International Lines. Cellular telephone segment has shown 
highly impressive growth during the last few years and two new international investors have 
purchased licences through open auction. The subscriber base in cellular phone has jumped 
from  3 million  to  7 million  in  the  last  one  year  and  it  is  expected  by  2005  the  number  will 
cross 15 million - an unprecedented feat. 
BIS Review 5/2005
3. 
4. 
5. 
 2 
 6. 
7. 
8. 
Privatization:  The  Government  has  made  it  clear  that  it  is  not  in  the  business  of  running 
enterprises and it is, therefore, divesting its interests in state owned enterprises by selling 
them to strategic investors in the private sector. Most of the banks, industrial companies, etc. 
have  already  been  transferred  to  the  private  sector.  The  shares  of  some  utilities  and 
infrastructure companies have been floated through stock exchanges. But now is the turn to 
sell  large  ticket  items  such  as  PTCL,  PSO,  Power  distribution  and  generation  companies, 
integrated power utility such as KESC. The calendar for future privatization is quite crowded 
and it is expected that most of these companies will be off the books of the government by 
the end of year 2005. The efficiency gains, tax revenues accruing to the government instead 
of  subsidizing  their  losses,  improved  customer  service  and  expansion  through  new 
investment are some of the direct and indirect benefits to the economy from privatization. 
Trade liberalization: Pakistan was known for its extremely high tariff rates that were used to 
raise government revenues and also to protect domestic industries. In the early 1990s the 
maximum tariff rate was more than 100 percent. These higher tariff walls, in fact, had highly 
pernicious effect as wide spread smuggling discouraged domestic production and promoted 
imported  goods.  Pakistan’s  tariff  rates  have  been  gradually  brought  down  to  the  current 
maximum rate of 25 percent. The average tariff rate is as low as 13-14 percent and should 
be further lowered. Contrary to conventional wisdom the reduction in tax rates has not only 
ended smuggling of a large number of imported goods and stimulated domestic production, 
but  has  also  raised  custom  duty  collection.  Lower  tax  rates  and  absence  of  discretionary 
measures  by  the  customs  officials  have,  in  fact,  created  disincentives  for  tax  evasion  and 
helped accurate declaration and classification of imported goods. It is seldom realized that 
high tariffs act as a tax on exports that are not able to obtain the required imports and raw 
materials for meeting their production in a cost effective manner. 
Financial  sovereignty:  Pakistan  had  lost  control  on  its  economic  management  and  thus 
virtually conceded the right to design policies to international financial institutions particularly 
the IMF. We had lost our credibility as a serious development partner because we entered 
into  successive  agreements  and  made  commitments  on  policy  reforms  and  institutional 
changes.  But,  we  were  good  at  drawing  down  the  first  tranche  of  the  loan  and  then 
abandoning  the  programme.  It  is  only  since  the  year  2000  when  Pakistan  entered  into  a 
stand-by  arrangement  with  the  IMF  (successfully  completed  in  2001)  followed  by  a  three-
year PRGF programme that the country has shown serious mindedness and a commitment 
to  fulfill  its  obligations.  By  the  end  of  2004  Pakistan  had  drawn  down  12  tranches  in 
succession  on  time  without  any  hiatus  and  decided  to  forego  the  remaining  two  tranches 
voluntarily after the review was completed by the IMF Board. Pakistan has thus been able to 
regain its financial sovereignty and is no longer dependent on the whims and caprices of the 
international  financial  institutions  or  large  bilateral  creditor  countries  who  control  these 
institutions. 
Sustainability of reforms and policies: 
How  can  one  be  sure  that  these  reforms  and  policies  will  be  sustained  in  the  coming  years?  To 
address  this  question,  let  us  first  look  at  the  history  of  economic  policies  and  reforms  pursued  by 
different political parties who come to power in the 1990s and at their party manifestos to gain some 
insight into the future direction of policies. The most comprehensive reforms aimed at liberalization, 
deregulation and privatization of the economy were initiated by the Nawaz Sharif Government in 1991 
and institutionalized under the Protection of Economic Reforms Act 1992. These same policies were 
followed  subsequently  by  Benazir  Government,  the  second  Nawaz  Sharif  Government,  the  Interim 
Governments, the Military Government of 1999-2002 and the Elected Governments since 2002. There 
has been uneven or slow implementation of these reforms, there has been economic mismanagement 
but, at no stage, these policies were rejected, derailed or abandoned. The Economic Reforms Act of 
1992 is still in force after 12 years of its inception. The manifestos of all political parties subscribe to 
the same set of policies although their priorities, sequencing, phasing, points of emphasis are different 
and more nuanced. Thus, there should be little fear in the minds of anyone about the reversal of these 
reforms and policies by any future government in Pakistan. 
There have been some irreversible changes that have set in the country’s economic landscape that 
augur  well  from  sustainability  and  continuity  perspective.  The  Parliament  is  expected  to  pass  a 
legislation called Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation law which will limit fiscal deficit and target 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
reduction in debt-ratios every year. As fiscal indiscipline has been the bane of Pakistan’s economic 
problems in the past, this particular initiative will restrain the successive governments from indulging in 
reckless spending and excessive borrowing. The Country’s Parliament rather than the IMF will act as 
the watchdog on the Government’s finances and it will be difficult for any Government to deviate from 
this path unless there are cogent reasons to do so. 
Fiscal  transparency  has  also  been  entrenched  as  the  Federal  and  Provincial  Governments  are 
obligated to publish audited quarterly statements of accounts. These statements are available to the 
public  at  large  and can  trigger questioning  of  fiscal  policy  decisions  taken by  the  Government.  The 
Auditor  General  is  an  independent  and  constitutional  position  who  submits  an  annual  report  to  the 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the National Assembly on financial irregularities and the officials 
concerned are answerable to the PAC for their actions and decisions. 
The  Central  Bank  has  been  made  autonomous  and  given  constitutional  protection.  Its  affairs  are 
supervised and controlled by an independent Board of Directors consisting of nine eminent members 
of stature drawn mainly from the private sector and having only one representative from the Ministry of 
Finance. The Ministry’s Representative does not enjoy any veto power and all decisions are taken by 
a  majority  vote.  Neither  the  Governor  nor  the  Board  Members  can  be  removed  arbitrarily  by  the 
Federal  Government.  The  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  has  acquired  core  competencies  and 
technology to perform its functions and submits Quarterly and Annual Reports to the Parliament on the 
State of Economy regularly. 
Similarly,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan  (SECP)  and  the  Central  Board  of 
Revenue  (CBR)  have  been  reformed,  strengthened  and  made  autonomous  to  promote  corporate 
governance and tax mobilization respectively. These key economic institutions will thus carry out their 
obligatory functions in a professional manner insulated from the interference of the government. 
The Nationalized Commercial Banks (NCBs) had acted as the main conduit for political favors in the 
financial sector. Most of the appointments of Chief Executives and the Boards of Directors were not 
made on considerations of merit and competence, but for their loyalty to the Prime Minister of the day. 
Consequently,  most  of  the  loans  were  approved  to  favour  individuals  and  firms  connected  with  the 
ruling party. This state of affairs had led to large accumulated losses, huge non performing loans and 
weak governance. As almost all the NCBs except one have been privatized, this linkage between the 
Government  and  the  financial  sector  has  been  severed.  Healthy  competition  among  the  banks  has 
infused  high standards  of  professionalism  in  the  banks  and  the  financial  sector  has  become  strong 
and efficient. It is unlikely that any future government will ever attempt to bring about status-quo ante 
and nationalize the banks. 
Pakistan  has  entered  international  capital  markets  which  will  also  be  watching  and  monitoring  the 
economy as the investors in Pakistani Bonds have developed stakes in economic well being of the 
country. Any wrong policy actions or poor governance will be severely and instantaneously penalized 
by the markets and Pakistan will have to bear the adverse consequences of this fall out. Governments 
will therefore have to be extremely careful and responsible in their management of the economy. 
Pakistan has also entered into a multilateral trade agreement with the WTO and committed that it will 
keep its markets open to goods and services, liberalize trade regime, remove non tariff barriers and 
provide  equal  and  nondiscriminatory  treatment  to  all  countries.  These  commitments  provide  a  solid 
assurance about the stability and transparency of trading regime in Pakistan in future. 
Finally, the media - print, as well as, electronic - in Pakistan has emerged as a fierce and independent 
watchdog  on  the  activities  of  the  government.  Poor economic  governance was  the  other  key  factor 
responsible  for  Pakistan’s  weak  economic  and  social  outcomes  in  the  1990s  but  there  is  greater 
awareness today that we cannot afford to slip into the past mode. Any wrongdoing or malpractice is 
exposed by the media and thus helping spread of good governance in the country. 
Outlook for the future: 
Pakistan’s  past  economic  history  suggests  that  rapid  economic  growth  has  been  associated  with 
poverty reduction. Once GDP growth rate persists over 6 percent per annum over a long period of time 
the incidence of poverty begins to decline. 
GDP growth rate is projected to rise to 7 percent in the current fiscal year with inflation rate hovering 
around 7 percent. The next five years plan envisages an average GDP growth of 7 percent reaching a 
level of 8 percent in 2010 and inflation contained to average 5 percent. With the population growth rate 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2005
declining to 1.5 percent, this growth rate will translate into 6.5 percent rise in per capita incomes which 
should double at this rate in the next 10 to 11 years. 
Empirical  studies  indicate  that  the  best  way  to  achieve  higher  rates  of  economic  growth  is  to  raise 
investment and to improve the quality of institutions. An increase in investment ratio by 5-6 percentage 
points  over  the  next  5  years  and  improving  the  quality  of  institutions  could  result  in  the  postulated 
increase in the per capita growth. What are the prospects for raising investment? 
The  successful  implementation  of  Debt  Management  Strategy  in  the  last  five  years  has  not  only 
brought the debt burden down to sustainable levels in the future, but also reduced interest payment 
out of the budget significantly. The public sector investment programme that was constrained due to 
these high interest payments is now expanding. As a result, development expenditure will continue to 
rise  -  both  in  absolute  terms  and  as  a  ratio  of  GDP  -  pushing  up  the  overall  investment  rate  for 
Pakistan. As the private sector is able to obtain the infrastructure services and the social services it 
needs, the cost of production will become lower for capacity expansion or investment in new areas of 
business. The recent experience suggests that investment rate will rise and productivity of investment 
will improve, making it possible to attain 6 to 7 percent GDP growth rates. 
Pakistan has committed itself to bringing the incidence of poverty down to 16 percent by 2015 under 
the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs).  Other  MDGs  for  Pakistan  are:  (i)  literacy  rate  of 
86 percent  and  gross  enrolment  ratio  of  100  percent;  (ii)  ratio  of  literate  females  to  males  reaching 
0.93; (iii) infant mortality rate down to 40 with under five mentality to 52 and more than 90 percent of 
children  fully  immunized  (iv)  100  percent  coverage  by  lady  health  workers  of  target  population 
(v) sustainable  access  to  safe  water  available  to  93  percent  of  population  with  55  percent  having 
access to sanitation. 
These goals have been incorporated in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) as well form 
part  of  the  next  five  year  plan.  The  achievement  of  per  capita  growth  targets  and  Millennium 
development  goals  will  very  much  depend  upon  political  stability,  sound  leadership  committed  to 
growth and poverty reduction and to the extent the challenges facing us are tackled successfully by 
the government, private sector and the civil society together. These challenges though formidable are 
by no means insurmountable. 
Challenges for the future: 
Despite the impressive studies made on several fronts in the recent past Pakistan has a number of 
challenges to reduce incidence of poverty to half its current level by 2015. This will require sustained 
GDP  growth  rates  of  7  to  8  percent  per  annum,  targeted  poverty  interventions  and  accelerated 
investment in human development. Some of these challenges are listed below: 
1. 
Diversification of export base: Two thirds of Pakistani exports are based on Cotton textiles 
while  in  the  world  market  textiles  are  not  a  dynamic  commodity.  Technological  base  of 
Pakistani exports is low and the share of engineering goods is almost negligible. Not only the 
share of engineering goods in the world market is almost 50 percent but is rate of growth is 
above  average.  Thus  the  need  for  diversifying  away  from  textiles  to  medium  technology 
exports is quite obvious. Greater emphases on technical and vocational education as well as 
integration into world supply chains are critical for this diversification. Reliance on a single 
commodity based exports is neither desirable nor beneficial in the long run and is prone to 
serious risks. 
Development  of  human  resources:  It  has  been  well  established  and  there  is  a  broad 
consensus that among all the factors that will make a difference to Pakistan’s economic and 
social goals is the extent to which we are able to step up investment in human development. 
Indeed this is the single most dominating factor that has kept the country below its potential. 
High  population  growth  has  given  rise  to  a  young  dependent  population  and  increased 
unemployment among the youth. The average years of schooling of labor force (3¼ years) 
remains  quite  low  making  it  difficult  to  impart  new  skills  to  the  burgeoning  labour  force. 
Raising this by 1½-2 years could have raised real per capita economic growth rate by about 
½  percentage  points  per  year.  Investment  in  higher  education,  science  and  research, 
vocational and technical education, female education thus should be the highest priority for 
the next ten years. This can only be achieved if there is a strong public-private-community 
partnership in the governance and provisioning of education and health. Investing in human 
2. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 5
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
development through better education and health care benefits the poor directly but these 
should be well targeted. 
Investment  in  infrastructure:  Higher  economic  growth  rates  can  be  sustained  on  a  long 
term time horizon only if the bottlenecks, shortages, disruptions and breakdown in supplies, 
in  power,  gas,  oil  pipelines,  ports,  railways,  and  congestion  in  roads  and  highways  are 
removed. This requires huge investment in each of these areas. Public Sector development 
program  can  finance  only  one  half  of  the  annual  requirements  of  US$ 3 billion.  The 
remaining requirements will have to be filled in by the private sector. 
Regional hub: Another reason for large investment in physical infrastructure is to exploit the 
potential of Pakistan’s strategic location as a regional hub for the Middle East, Central Asia 
and Western China and South Asia. Gwadar port is being developed to take advantage of 
this potential but developing a network of highways, warehouses and terminals, oil and gas 
pipelines, power generation plants, facilitation of cross-border trade, harmonization of tariffs 
and  duties  are  some  of  the  ingredients  that  will  pave  the  way  for  meeting  this  objective. 
Peaceful relations with the neighboring countries and greater cooperation in areas of trade 
and transit will lay the solid foundations. 
Productivity increase in agriculture and industry: Compared to the countries in East Asia 
and China that should serve as the benchmark for Pakistan’s competitiveness we lag behind 
in  total  factor  productivity  as  well  as  productivity  gains  in  commodity  producing  sectors. 
Although the yields per hectare of major crops have risen over time these are still lower than 
those in Indian Punjab and Haryana. Except for export industries the productivity levels in 
manufacturing are sub optimal. On-the-job training and injection of new skilled workers are 
some of the short term measures that can help but in the long term, emphasis on technical 
and  vocational  education  rather  then  producing  graduates  with  generalized  education  will 
yield the desired results. 
Judicial  and  legal  reforms:  It  is  believed  that  the  financial  sector  and  real  sector  of  the 
economy will benefit immensely if land titles were clear, coded, actively traded, mortgaged 
and exchanged without much hassle; if the court system is unclogged and the enforcement 
of contracts is much quicker with low transaction costs and if the poor have equal access to 
the Police and the judiciary for redressing wrongs done to them. In Pakistan, the slow and 
cumbersome legal system combined with unequal access to the poor to the system have to 
be put right both for efficiency gains as well as for attaining a just and equitable distribution. 
Widening  the  tax  base:  The  tax  administration  that  has  been  practised  in  Pakistan  has 
deployed  indirect  means,  presumptive  assessment  and  compulsory  withholding  taxes  to 
collect most of the taxes. This system has not only kept the tax-GDP ratio stagnant but also 
restricted the growth of tax base and tax payers. The recent reforms of the Central Board of 
Revenue give some hope that tax base will be widened so that tax-GDP ratio can rise and a 
more equitable incidence of burden takes place. A natural corollary of this widening of tax 
base  is  that  the  tax  rates  particularly  for  individual  income  tax  and  corporate  tax  can  be 
reduced  gradually  and  thus  discourage  the  incentives  to  evade  taxes.  Tax  collection  in 
Pakistan  has  been  much  higher  when  the  rates  are  low  supporting  the  supply  side 
hypothesis. 
Risks to the future outlook 
Several observers of Pakistan economy appear to be overly obsessed with the political risk arguing 
that  the  country  may  end  up  with  a  situation  in  which  the  Islamic  extremist  parties  or  their 
sympathizers in the Army wrest control over the country’s nuclear arms. The victory of the MMA in the 
NWFP  and  Balochistan  and  their  apparent  anti-American  stance  have  fortified  the  beliefs  of  these 
observers mostly in the western think tanks and the media. Both the main components of the Alliance - 
Jamaat-e-Islami and Jamiat Ulema Islam - have no history or links with religious extremist groups who 
have created violence in the country. This risk is also highly exaggerated as more than 88 percent of 
Pakistani population voted for the mainstream moderate political parties at the most recent elections. 
Pakistan Army is a highly disciplined, organized and modern force and the support for the extremist 
parties in the ranks of Army is almost non-existent. These western observers have very little familiarity 
with  the  strength  and  resilience  of  Pakistan’s  polity.  Pakistan’s  nuclear  assets  will  remain  safe  as 
country has developed an effective command and control system. 
6 
 BIS Review 5/2005
The  geopolitical  risks  facing  Pakistan  have  also  been  mitigated  as  a  composite  dialogue  has  been 
opened with India and the relations with the Karzai government in Afghanistan have been normalized 
and  strengthened.  The  first  democratic  elections  in  Afghanistan  took  place  peacefully  reflecting  the 
cooperation  and  support  of  Pakistan  government.  The  intensity  in  exchange  of  people,  cultural 
troupes, sporting teams, media representatives between India and Pakistan has brought about a new 
atmosphere of harmony and goodwill in the two countries. 
Although the political and geopolitical risks remain paramount in the minds of the western observes 
there  are  residual  risks  that  can  possibly  slow  down  the  trajectory  of  high  economic  growth  and 
poverty reduction. 
First, it is assumed above that the country will continue to face a benign external environment and will 
remain  free  from  major  upheavals  and  unanticipated  exogenous  shocks.  In  case  the  external 
environment becomes hostile or some other major internal disturbance takes place, it is unlikely that 
the high growth momentum can be maintained. 
Second, the implementation capacity and weakness of institutions are still major obstacles. The need 
to inculcate professionalism, expertise, competence and systems to make the civil services meet the 
realities of the 21st century is being met through reforms but will take some time. In the meanwhile, 
the  nature of  the  government  has dramatically changed;  public  expectations have  heightened while 
implementation  capacity  of  government  policies,  programs  and  projects  as  well  as  the  delivery  of 
public  services  has  been  seriously  impaired.  Sound  policies  can  see  the  light  of  day  only  if  the 
institutional capacity is strengthened and reoriented. Public-private-community partnership provides a 
way  forward  to  mitigate  this  risk.  The  reform  of  civil  service  is  on  the  agenda  but  needs  to  be 
expedited. 
Third, the legal and judicial system is out-of-sync with the requirements of modern business practices. 
Contract enforcement, sanctity of property rights and dispute resolution mechanisms leave much to be 
desired. Congestion of courts, cumbersome and time-consuming procedures, inadequate training of 
judges  in  commercial  and  banking  laws  and  physical  infrastructure  facilities  are  some  of  the 
constraints  for  the  present  state  of  affairs.  Reforms  of  laws  and  judiciary  have  to  be  given  priority 
attention by political leaders. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is assisting the government through 
its Access to Justice programme. 
Fourth, the most important missing link in Pakistan’s competitive edge and what is posing as a serious 
threat to its economic progress are the poor indicators of human development. Adult literacy and the 
skill  level  of  the  labour  force  are  low,  health  status  is  precarious  with  low  productivity,  high 
absenteeism  and  gender  disparities  are  large.  The  country  has  to  devote  more  attention  and 
resources to invest in education, health, nutrition and gender programmes to equip the labour force to 
excel in its area of specialization. 
Finally, Pakistan has embarked on a program to devolve administrative functional and financial powers 
to local tiers of government. This experiment is extremely critical for providing essential public services 
at  the  doorsteps  of  the  poor  people.  The  teething  problems  and  legal  snags  confronting  the  local 
governments if unresolved, could create a potential difficulty in reaching out to the poor. 
These risks, except those arising out of adverse or unanticipated exogenous shocks, can be mitigated 
through a series of reforms. Institutional capacity can be strengthened, judicial and legal processes 
can  be  revamped,  human  development  can  be  accelerated  and  devolution  of  powers  can  be 
expedited. The balance of risks therefore suggests that given a benign global economy and domestic 
political  stability,  Pakistan  can  move  forward  in  its  march  towards  meeting  its  economic  and  social 
goals. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 7
