Stanley Fischer: Capital market reforms in Israel 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Knesset  Finance 
Committee, Jerusalem, 5 July 2005. 
 Mr Chair of the Finance Committee MK Yakov Litzman, Members of Knesset, ladies and gentlemen: 
This is my second appearance here before you, and I am pleased that the subject concerning which 
you invited me is also one of the most important to have reached the Knesset in the recent past––the 
reform of the capital market in line with the proposals of the Bachar Committee. 
Let me clearly state at the outset that I support the reform proposed by the Bachar Committee. That is 
what I said a month and a half ago here when I first addressed you as Governor, and again last week 
to the participants in the Caesarea conference. 
When I say that I support the Bachar Committee reforms I mean the following: 
1.   I  agree  that  the  purposes  of  the  reform  have  great  impact  on  the  financial  system's  ability  to 
support growth in Israel. These purposes are: 
 
a.To  reduce  the  concentration  in  the  financial  system  and  to  increase  competition  in  the 
capital market. 
 
b.To reduce the possibility of conflict of interest in the financial system. 
c.To create significant alternatives to the banking system as sources of finance. 
2.I  favor  separating  the  provident  funds  and  the  mutual  funds  from  the  banks  as  this  is  a  way  of 
achieving all three of the above objectives. 
3.I  favor  allowing  the  banks,  after  the  above  separation,  to  give  objective  advice  about,  and  to 
distribute life insurance, pension schemes, provident funds and mutual funds, provided we find a way 
to  prevent  the  banks  from  abusing  the  power  and  dominance  they  hold  owing  to  their  extensive 
distribution network to give them an unfair advantage. In this context the proposed restrictions on bank 
fees are intended to ensure that this will not happen. 
4.I am in favor of banks known as emerging banks selling their mutual funds and provident funds as is 
proposed  for  the  big  banks  and  operating  within  the  same  framework  proposed  for  the  big  banks. 
Otherwise the present potential for conflicts of interest will remain. We have recently heard from the 
emerging banks that they need the various funds to preserve their financial robustness. I believe that 
separation will not adversely affect their robustness; on the contrary, after the implementation of the 
reform of the capital market, the developments in the financial system, and in particular in the banking 
system, will lead to the creation of incentives to the emerging banks to find ways to strengthen their 
ability to compete with the big banks, including via mergers. 
The following serious questions arise in the course of discussions of the capital market reform: 
 
a. The stability of the banking system. I think that this will not be affected by the separation of 
the provident funds and mutual funds from the banks. The stability of the system depends on 
the quality of the asset portfolios held by the banks and the manner in which they manage 
them.  I  believe  that  when  the  banks  focus  on  classic  banking  they  will  manage  their 
portfolios  even  more  efficiently  than  they  do  today.  I  am  not  saying  that  the  banks  are 
inefficient now; I am saying that they will become even more efficient. 
b. The  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  this  regard  too  I  see  a  great  advantage  in 
separating the funds from the banks. During the severe global financial crises in the 1990s 
we discovered that the broader the range of financial institutions a country had without any 
institution being dominant, the more stable was its financial system. This is the case because 
a  problem  experienced  in  one  sector  did  not  roll  over  into  other  sectors,  and  the  system 
benefited from the flexibility to act efficiently. When our financial system is more diverse, we 
can have greater confidence in it. 
c.The concentration among banks. It is true that from the customers' point of view, initially 
there will not be any great changes. Nevertheless, the reform will reduce the dominance of 
  BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
the  large  banks  in  relation  to  the  others,  and  this  will  eventually  be  reflected  in  a  more 
competitive system. 
One important aspect of the bill placed before you as part of the reform of the capital market is the 
supervisory  aspect.  It  is  clear  that  this  subject  comprises  an  important  basis  for  the  reform  of  the 
capital  market.  On  the  one  hand  we  hope  to  create  a  foundation  in  which  the  market––when  it  is 
competitive and free from conflicts of interest––will constitute an effective supervisory mechanism, but 
on the other hand we must strengthen the supervisory setup in order to ensure that the capital market 
really is more competitive and free from potential conflicts of interest. We therefore suggest that within 
the  framework  of  the  proposed  legislation  that  you  are  considering,  the  Banking  Ordinance  should 
incorporate  the  authority  of  the  Supervisor  of  Banks  to  issue  directives  on  the  proper  conduct  of 
banking business. This he would do after consultation with the Bank's Advisory Committee and with 
the approval of the Governor. With regard to the concentration in the banking system, the Supervisor 
of Banks is working to make it easier to move from one bank to another, which should have a direct 
beneficial effect on customers. 
I would like to add a few remarks from a personal angle: my standpoint on this matter is affected by 
my experience in the private sector in the last three years in Citigroup, the largest financial institution 
in the world. Five years ago Citigroup was a universal bank that encompassed commercial banking, 
investment banking, a large insurance company, pension funds etc. Originally Citigroup thought it to 
their economic advantage to own and manage a range of financial products. 
However,  in  2003  and  2004  Citigroup  decided  to  sell  the  insurance  company,  because  after  three 
years' experience they realized that a large bank such as Citigroup derived no financial benefit from 
owning and managing an insurance company. 
A few months ago Citigroup decided to sell their funds too. Charles Prince, Citigroup CEO, is quoted in 
one  of  the  leading  financial  papers  as saying  that  one  of  the reasons  for  selling  the  funds  was  the 
concern  of  the  supervisory  authorities,  and  not  just  them  but  also  investors  themselves,  regarding 
potential conflict of interest that exists when a bank, in this case Citigroup, offers funds that it owns to 
the public. This concern made it less economically worthwhile to continue to do so. Prince remarked 
that other banks that owned funds would eventually reach the same conclusion. 
In this context I would also like to tell you what an analyst in an important financial company in Boston 
said.  He  commented,  in  reference  to  the  sale  of  funds  by  Citigroup,  that  during  the  1990s  huge 
financial companies were anxious to merge financial intermediation activity with that of financial-asset 
management,  such  as  funds.  With  regard  to  the  potential  for  conflict  of  interest  in  the  new  reality 
created,  he  said  that  the  distribution  and  management  of  funds  are  two  distinct  occupations  that 
require different qualifications. Distribution is related to marketing and consultancy, and it is important 
for customers––both from the point of view of the supervisory authorities and from that of customers 
themselves––that the consultant be objective. That cannot occur, however, when the same bank holds 
the funds that it is trying to market and give advice on. 
I would say that a bank that owns funds has an economic advantage if it occupies a dominant position 
in the capital market and it faces no restrictions with regard to potential conflict of interest. But when a 
real  mechanism  exists  that  prevents  such  potential  from  arising,  the  bank  apparently  derives  no 
economic  advantage  from  such  a  situation.  In  Israel  we  tried  to  deal  with  this  problem  by  erecting 
firewalls. By the way, that is what was done also in the US. But as we were to discover eventually, 
these firewalls in Israel were not effective enough, and all attempts to shore them up and increase 
their effectiveness were unsuccessful. 
In  the  US,  because  the  banks––even  the  big  ones,  even  Citigroup––are  small  in  relation  to  the 
financial system and are not dominant in it, the firewalls worked, and market forces resulted in a bank 
like Citigroup deciding to sell its insurance company and its funds, for economic reasons. 
In  Israel  we  have  tried  various  methods  of  solving  the  problem,  including  firewalls,  but  without 
success. This is because the banks remained as dominant as they had been. That is why the Bachar 
Committee opted, and rightly so, to go in the direction of legislation. 
I hope that in time, once the reform has been carried out, when the banks in Israel are less dominant, 
market forces and economic considerations will also make the banks realize that it was not worth their 
while  to  hold  a  range  of  financial  products,  but  to  focus  on  areas  where  they  have  a  comparative 
advantage. 
Then we can claim that the reform was really successful. Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
