Jean-Claude Trichet: The success of the euro and its impact on European 
companies 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Congress  on 
Small-sized Enterprises, organised by Confindustria, Bari, 18 March 2005. 
 Signore, Signori, 
è  per  me  un  grande  piacere  contribuire  oggi  al  dibattito  sulle  sfide  poste  alle  imprese  italiane  ed 
europee dalla crescente concorrenza internazionale. 
Circa centoquaranta anni fa Italia, Francia, Belgio e Svizzera diedero vita all’Unione monetaria latina 
al fine di accrescere la concorrenza, gli scambi commerciali e, in ultima analisi, il benessere. L’unione 
si  fondava  sull’accettazione  reciproca  delle  monete  in  oro  e  in  argento  dei  rispettivi  paesi. 
L’esperimento tuttavia fallì. Dopo un lungo periodo di forti oscillazioni del valore relativo delle monete, 
accompagnate  da  elevata  instabilità  macroeconomica  nei  paesi  aderenti,  l’Unione  monetaria  latina 
venne sciolta al termine della prima guerra mondiale. 
Quale lezione possiamo trarre da questa prima esperienza? E quali sono state le carenze di questo 
progetto?  A  mio  avviso  mancavano  quattro  elementi  fondamentali:  stabilità  politica,  un  mercato 
comune,  criteri  di  convergenza  e  una  banca  centrale  comune.  Per  la  realizzazione  dell’Unione 
monetaria latina non era stato svolto alcun preparativo sul piano macroeconomico e fiscale, né era 
stata  creata  una  banca  centrale  comune  che  mettesse  in  atto  le  più  basilari  misure  di  controllo 
valutario congiunto. A ottantacinque anni dalla fine dell’unione possiamo affermare di avere imparato 
dall’esperienza passata. 
In un quadro caratterizzato da stabilità politica, quaranta anni di integrazione economica, commerciale 
e finanziaria hanno aperto la strada all’Unione monetaria europea.  
Stabilità dei prezzi e solide politiche di bilancio hanno costituito il fondamento dell’Unione monetaria 
negli ultimi sei anni e vanno pertanto preservate anche in futuro. Quest’oggi mi soffermerò in primo 
luogo su quelli che considero i principali successi dell’euro per le imprese europee e, più in generale, 
per  i  cittadini  europei.  In  estrema  sintesi,  stabilità  macroeconomica,  integrazione  finanziaria  ed 
efficienza economica rappresentano importanti conquiste dell’Unione monetaria, indispensabili al fine 
di promuovere la crescita economica e la creazione di occupazione da parte delle imprese europee.  
In  secondo  luogo,  mi  soffermerò  sulle  aree  che  necessitano  ancora  di  riforme  volte  a  migliorare  la 
competitività  e  quindi  a  favorire  una  crescita  economica  sostenibile.  La  stabilità  monetaria  e  un 
contesto  economico  più  aperto,  efficiente  e  concorrenziale  richiedono 
iniziative 
complementari da parte dei responsabili delle politiche economiche nazionali. Mi riferisco al bisogno 
urgente di completare il processo di attuazione delle riforme strutturali, principalmente nei mercati del 
lavoro, dei beni e servizi e dei capitali.  
Inizio ora a illustrare i principali successi dell’euro realizzati finora. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today in order to contribute to the debate on the challenges that Italian 
and European enterprises are currently facing with respect to increasing global competition. 
To enhance competition, trade and ultimately welfare, about 140 years ago Italy, France, Belgium and 
Switzerland gave birth to the Latin Monetary Union. This monetary union was based on the mutual 
acceptance of each other’s gold and silver coins. That experiment failed. After a long period of strong 
fluctuations  in  the  relative  values  of  gold  and  silver,  combined  with  high  macroeconomic  instability 
across the member countries, the Latin Monetary Union was finally dismantled by the end of World 
War I. 
Can we learn something from this early experience? What was missing? In my view there were four 
key missing ingredients, namely, political stability, a Common Market, the existence of convergence 
criteria and a common central bank. No macroeconomic and fiscal preparations were made before the 
start of the Latin Monetary Union, no common central bank was in place to exert even the simplest 
measures of joint monitoring over currency issues. 85 years after the end of that regime we had clearly 
learnt our lessons. 
importanti 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
In  a  framework  characterized  by  political  stability,  a  history  of  40  years  of  economic,  trade  and 
financial integration had paved the way for the European Monetary Union.  
The  stability  oriented  macroeconomic  framework,  based  on  price  stability  and  sound  fiscal  policies, 
has been the basis of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in the past six years, and we should 
keep this framework in place in the future. Today I will first discuss in some detail what I see as the 
main  successes  of  the  euro  for  European  enterprises  and  more  in  general  for  European  citizens. 
Macroeconomic stability, financial integration and economic efficiency have been key achievements of 
EMU. These achievements are of utmost importance for enhancing lasting growth and employment 
creation of European companies.  
Secondly I will reflect on the areas which still require reforms in order to raise competitiveness and 
ultimately economic growth in a sustainable manner. Monetary stability and a more open, efficient and 
competitive  economic  environment  require  important  complementary  initiatives  by  national  policy 
makers. I am referring to the urgent need to complete the process of structural reforms, chiefly in the 
labour, product and capital markets.  
Let me start with the key successes of the euro to date. 
Successes of the euro 
Six years after the start of EMU, we can already count successes on a number of fronts. 
First, the success of the euro was a technical success. The integration of money markets enabled a 
smooth implementation of the single monetary policy from early January 1999. The transformation of 
European  financial  markets  brought  about  by  the  euro  has  been  remarkable.  The  global  trend  of 
closer  financial  market  integration  witnessed  in  the  past  decade  has  received  a  distinct  additional 
boost by the introduction of the euro in EMU countries. The introduction of the euro has dismantled 
barriers  to  cross-border  trading and  enhanced risk sharing  and opportunities for  diversification.  The 
elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk  has  increased  the  depth  and  breadth  of  financial  markets  and 
boosted financial innovation. Government bond yields have become nearly perfectly correlated in the 
euro  area.  There  is  also  evidence  of  closer  integration  of  stock  markets  in  the  euro  area  than 
elsewhere1.  The  euro  had  a  particularly  significant  impact  on  the  European  market  for  corporate 
bonds, with a considerable increase in the number of medium-sized firms placing issues outside their 
home  country.  Financial  deepening  has  of  course  benefited  the  Italian  markets  as  well.  In  Italy, 
between 1999 and 2003 the volume of funds raised directly on the financial markets by firms issuing 
shares, bonds and other instruments grew from 31 billion to 65 billion euro. Over the same period the 
amount of Italian households’ financial wealth held in the form of corporate securities increased from 
22 to 36% of GDP. 
Financial integration has facilitated the consolidation of financial structures, thereby increasing cross-
border corporate linkages. In recent years, large flows of foreign direct investment among euro area 
countries have exemplified this intensification of corporate linkages.  
The second key success of the euro relates to the convergence of long-term market interest rates 
towards those of the best performers in terms of credibility and low interest rates. In most countries, 
including Italy, this convergence has meant significantly reduced financing costs, thereby providing an 
environment favourable to growth and employment. Thanks to the stability oriented macroeconomic 
policy  framework,  focusing  on  price  stability  and  on  sound  fiscal  policies,  -  that  is  the  two  missing 
elements  of  the  Latin  Monetary  Union  -  risk  premia  have  declined  and  inflation  expectations  have 
stabilized  at  low  levels.  Today,  the  euro  area  economy  benefits  from  benchmark  long-term  market 
interest rates below 4%, a level which most issuers have never seen in the last fifty years. In Italy the 
10-year  interest  rate  spread  versus  the  best  performers  fell  from  4.5  percentage  points  at  the 
beginning of 1996 to 0.3 percentage points at the beginning of 1998 and to 0.2 percentage points at 
the  end  of  2004  [see  Chart  1].  These  two  major  achievements  must  be  maintained  by  today’s  and 
future economic policy making.  
                                                      
1   Robin Brooks and Marco Del Negro (2002), “International stock returns and market integration: a regional perspective”, IMF 
Working Paper WP/02/202. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
As a third point I would like to mention the improved resilience of the euro area economies against 
financial  crises  that  the  euro  has  brought  about.  Also  in  this  respect,  European  corporations  and, 
amongst  them,  Italian  enterprises  have  largely  benefited  from  the  single  currency.  Italy  as  well  as 
many other European countries experienced several episodes of large exchange rate and interest rate 
volatility between the 1970s and the mid-1990s. Without the single currency, events in recent years - 
such  as  the  turbulence  that  followed  the  September  11  terrorist  attacks  or  the  swings  in  global 
exchange and stock markets - would have triggered major turbulences in Europe as a whole and in 
many euro area economies, including Italy. This, of course, does not mean that external factors have 
no  longer  been  an  important  driving  force  in  determining  the  economic  performance  of  the  EMU 
countries  in  recent  years.  However,  euro  area  economies  proved  to  be  more  resilient  to  external 
shocks in the 2001-2003 downturn, which were mainly caused by a correction of stock market prices 
and financial instability, than to the external shocks in the downturn of the early 1990s, which were 
mainly driven by exchange rates volatility.  
Fourth, let me highlight the convergence of inflation rates to low levels across euro area countries 
thanks to the adoption of stability-oriented macroeconomic policies. A remarkable convergence among 
euro area member states took already place over the 1990s, triggered by the preparations for EMU, 
and  this  process  has  continued  in  the  years  after  the  start  of  the  EMU.  Measured  by  the  standard 
deviation, the dispersion of inflation rates has more than halved in the period 1999-2004 with respect 
to  the  years  preceding  the  monetary  union.  Low  and  stable  inflation  has  been  a  fundamental 
achievement for the euro area as a whole as well as for Italy. Italian inflation was 4% in 1996 while in 
the countries that are now part of the euro area it was on average equal to 2.3%. In subsequent years 
Italy  saw  a  significant  reduction  in  its  inflation  gap  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area  average,  despite  many 
adverse shocks that hit both Italy and the euro area in recent years [see Chart 2]. Between 1999 and 
2004 Italy inflation averaged at 2.4% and euro area inflation at 2%.  
Between  2001  and  2003  Italy  saw  a  sizeable  increase  of  perceived  inflation  [see  Chart  3].  The 
concept of perceived inflation aims to measure changes in the inflation rate which consumers think 
that  have  occurred  in  the  recent  past.  Usually  we  can  observe  a  good  correlation  between  the 
behaviour  of  actual  and  perceived  inflation,  which  means  that  consumers  have  a  relatively  correct 
perception  about  the  changes  in  their  purchasing  power.  In  Italy  and  in  some  other  countries  the 
patterns of actual inflation and perceived inflation started to diverge after the introduction of the euro. 
While this is a feature which should not be ignored, since what consumers decide to spend depends 
on  their  perceived  real  income,  it  is  now  important  to  acknowledge  that  it  was  a  temporary 
phenomenon, and that during the last year and half the gap between actual and perceived inflation 
has narrowed significantly.  
Notwithstanding the many adverse shocks that hit the euro area in the past years, price stability has 
prevailed  in  the  euro  area.  The  success  of  the  single  currency  in  delivering  price  stability  and 
stabilizing  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  can  be  explained  by  the  European  institutional 
framework  and  the  principles  followed  by  the  European  Central  Bank.  First,  the  European  Central 
Bank is independent and has a clearly defined mandate given by the Treaty to pursue price stability. 
Second,  the  ECB  has  provided  and  made  public  an  arithmetical  definition  of  price  stability 
corresponding  to  inflation rates  below and close  to 2%.  Third,  the  medium-term  orientation  and  the 
very  nature  of  our concept  of  monetary  policy contributes  to  a solid  anchoring  of  medium and  long 
term inflation expectations, in line with our definition of price stability.  
The  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  provide  to  economic  growth  is  to  maintain  price 
stability. Price stability ensures the transparency of the relative price mechanism, thus enhancing the 
efficiency of resource allocation. Stable and low inflation supports private consumption via its positive 
impact on the real value of households’ income and wealth. Price stability reduces the borrowing costs 
for individuals and firms. As we all know, inflation erodes the purchasing power of the nominal return 
on long-term loan contracts or bonds. In case of high and uncertain inflation, savers or those who lend 
their liquid funds would require a higher rate of return from borrowers, in order to compensate for the 
higher risks related to the uncertainty about future inflation. This inflation risk premium implies that in 
an  economy  with  high  inflation,  less  investment  projects  will  be  profitable.  In  such  circumstances, 
capital  accumulation  will  be  lower  than  it  could  have  been  in  a  situation  of  price  stability  and  the 
potential output growth rate is consequently reduced.  
BIS Review 20/2005 
 3
The challenge of economic growth 
Let me now turn to some issues which still need to be addressed. The Economic and Monetary Union 
has  secured macroeconomic stability,  has  promoted  financial  integration  and led  to convergence of 
inflation and interest rates to low levels. The key question that naturally arises is the following: Why 
has economic growth, nonetheless, remained subdued? In my introduction I have already hinted at my 
answer by referring to the need for completing structural reforms. Let me now elaborate further on this 
urgency.  
The first message I would like to convey is that the need to raise economic growth in a sustainable 
manner is a common challenge for most of the euro area countries and for the euro area as a whole. 
The need to introduce supply side changes, aimed at boosting potential output growth is a common 
challenge to most European countries. Over the last decade real GDP growth has averaged just 2.1% 
in the euro area [see Table 1], significantly below the 3.4% growth rate of the US. 
The second point I would like to make is that competitiveness is a key driver of sustainable growth. In 
recent  years  euro  area  companies  have  been  facing  stronger  external  competition,  especially  from 
low-cost producers in the very dynamic Asian economies, but also from those in the new EU Member 
States. It is the reason why unit labour costs are such an important indicator, particularly in a single 
currency area. Let us look at Italy as an example but there are many others in the euro area. In Italy 
nominal unit labour costs in the total economy and especially in the manufacturing sector - the most 
export oriented sector - have grown significantly faster than in the euro area as a whole. Let me just 
mention a couple of figures. Over the last six years, in Italy the cumulated growth rate of unit labour 
cost in the manufacturing sector was equal to 15.7% against a euro area average of 3.1% [see Table 
2a].  What  has  been  driving  the  strong  rises  in  unit  labour  costs?  On  the  one  hand  the  cumulated 
growth rate of compensation per employee has been equal to 16.7%, on the other hand the cumulated 
growth rate of labour productivity has been equal to 1.1%. There seems to be something in the wage 
mechanism  that  prevents  compensation  developments  from  following  more  closely  productivity 
developments.  Besides  this  problem,  such  protracted  weak  labour  productivity  growth  needs  to  be 
related to intrinsic difficulties in using labour and capital efficiently, possibly due to a lack of innovation. 
Why  is  that  happening?  A  number  of  recent  comprehensive  reports2,  notably  by  the  Banca  d’Italia, 
ISTAT, Confindustria, and various Italian think-tanks, have emphasized a broad range of institutional 
and economic factors behind the Italian labour productivity-competitiveness problem. Some of them 
are discussed at your conference today and tomorrow. These factors include rigidities in product and 
labour markets, features of the financial system and corporate governance, low spending on research 
and development.  
All these factors have certainly worked against the efforts of Italian enterprises to increase their size 
and to improve competitiveness by renewing their products and reallocating resources towards new, 
more dynamic sectors3 [see Chart 4].  
The  lack  of  innovation  might  be  partially  related  to  the  small-size  of  firms,  which  continues  to  be  a 
predominant feature of the Italian industrial system. In that regard the business environment continues 
to  create  obstacles  to  firm-size  expansion  and  to  the  entry  of  new  and  more  efficient  firms,  thus 
hampering  productivity  growth.  The  costs  of  opening  and  closing  a  business  as  well  as  the  time 
required to complete the legal processes involved in enforcing contracts remains well-above the euro 
area average4 [see Table 3].  
These considerations bring me to my third and final point: structural rigidities have slowed European 
firms’ responses to structural changes in the production process. As a result, and in contrast to more 
flexible economies in the international sphere, many economies in Europe have not fully reaped the 
benefits of the technological advances of the last ten to fifteen years. Many European countries have 
not adapted their economic, social and legal frameworks in order to face the new challenges triggered 
by a rapidly transforming world economy. 
                                                      
2   Banca d’Italia (2004), “Relazione del Governatore sull‘esercizio 2003”, Roma, May 2004. Banca d’Italia (2005), “Bollettino 
Economico”,  n.44,  March  2005.  Pierluigi  Ciocca,  (2003),  “The  Italian  Economy:  a  Problem  of  Growth”,  Banca  d’Italia, 
Economic Bulletin, 37, 145-158, November. ISTAT (2004), “Rapporto Annuale: la situazione del Paese nel 2003”, ISTAT, 
Roma, May. 
3   Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (2001), “La competitività dell’Italia”, Speech held at the Congress on Small-sized enterprises, 
Parma, 17 March. 
4   World Bank (2004), Doing Business Indicators. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2005
A sense of urgency to implement structural reforms was transmitted to European policy-makers last 
February when the European Commission proposed a “Partnership for Growth and Jobs”5 as the core 
of a renewed Lisbon strategy, by putting forward a program of priority actions. These priority actions 
can  be  summarized  under  three  key  headings:  (1)  to  extend  and  deepen  the  Single  Market;  (2)  to 
build better infrastructure, motivate investment in research and development and facilitate innovation; 
(3) to attract more people into employment, improve the flexibility of labour markets and invest more in 
human capital through better education and skills. 
Let me further elaborate on this priority list. The objective of extending and deepening the Single 
Market would imply to eliminate market entry barriers in national regulations which continue to hamper 
competition. This objective would also require improving national and European regulations in terms of 
simplification, well shaped legislation and effort to reduce the burden of administrative costs. The need 
of fostering knowledge and innovation would require more effective public expenditure and more 
favourable  incentives  for  companies  to  engage  in  innovation  and  Research  and  Development.  The 
need of attracting more people to employment would imply in many countries a “re-thinking” about 
the current mix of tax and benefit systems, which continue to provide disincentives to take up work or 
to work longer hours. Furthermore, measures to make wage growth reflect more strongly regional and 
sectoral productivity differences would certainly be helpful. 
The European Central Bank strongly welcomes these proposals. They are fully in line with our own 
views.  Indeed,  the  drivers  of  success  are  innovation,  productivity  enhancement  and  employment 
growth and all measures should be directed to achieve these results. Some European countries that 
are ahead in the process of adopting such changes show that these reforms are able to deliver higher 
output  and  employment  growth.  Not  only  would  these  reforms  raise  potential  economic  growth,  but 
they would also make the European economies more flexible and thereby strengthen the resilience 
against economic shocks. This in turn would facilitate the pursuit of stability oriented macroeconomic 
policies. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  are  gathered  here  to  discuss  the  way  ahead  in  order  to  increase 
competitiveness and economic growth. In conclusion, let me once again stress that the maintenance 
of price stability, low medium and long term market interest rates, thanks to this stability, and financial 
integration  are  key  successes  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  as  well  as  fundamentals 
conditions  to  enhance  sustainable  economic  growth,  employment  creation  and  welfare.  In  order  to 
reap  the  full  benefits  of  the  single  currency  and  to  cope  with  global  competitive  pressures,  a  truly 
dynamic economic environment needs to be put firmly in place. Be assured that the European Central 
Bank backs the drive towards reforms that is in motion in Europe since the Lisbon consensus in 2000. 
The European Central Bank backs the renewed Lisbon strategy and the Governments of Europe that 
are embarking courageously on those structural reforms. We do not underestimate the difficulties of 
the task and the necessity to explain tirelessly to the people of Europe that all will be better off thanks 
to these reforms. We consider we have to fully participate in this pedagogic exercise.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                      
5   European Commission (2005), “Working together for growth and jobs. A new start for the Lisbon Strategy”, Communication 
to the Spring European Council, February. 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 5
6 
 BIS Review 20/2005
BIS Review 20/2005 
 7
 8 
 BIS Review 20/2005
