Wu Xiaoling: Be objective and scrupulous to promote China’s financial 
theoretic research 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, celebrating the 
publication of Professor Huang Da's books, Beijing, 3 June 2005.  
 Professor Huang Da, Distinguished guests: 
Today, experts and scholars from the financial sector, education sector and publishing sector gather at 
the Great Hall of the People celebrating the publication of the Collected Works of Huang Da as an 
effort  to  promote  China’s  financial  theory  development.  This  is  an  important  event  for  developing 
philosophical  science  and  advancing  China’s  financial  theoretic  study.  On  behalf  of  Mr.  Zhou 
Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China and the President of the China Financial Institute 
as well as the two institutions, I warmly congratulate the publication of the Collected Works of Huang 
Da and the convening of the conference. 
Professor Huang Da is a famous economist and educator, well known both at home and abroad. He is 
one of the scholars who first conducted monetary theory research in China and who established the 
discipline  of  finance  in  China.  As  early  as  when  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  was  founded, 
professor Huang Da began to conduct education and research activities on finance. With a scrupulous 
attitude,  he  has  long  conducted  research  on  theoretical  and  empirical  issues  of  China’s  money, 
banking,  price,  public  finance  and  macroeconomic  development,  etc.  His  research  work  has  been 
essential to the development of fiscal and finance research framework and the evolution of financial 
theory study in China. 
Given his outstanding contribution and position in financial research, he was a deputy to the eighth 
National People’s Congress (NPC), a member of the NPC’s Financial and Economic Committee and 
the President of the Renmin University. He was also appointed a member of the first Monetary Policy 
Committee of the People’s Bank of China and the Head of China Financial Institute. At present, he 
remains its honorary president. The Collected Works of Huang Da centralized his research work on 
financial theory. 
As we cheer for the publication of the collected Works, we shall not forget the efforts of researchers on 
financial  theory  development  in  a  time  horizon  ever  since  the  founding  of  the  People’s  Republic  of 
China, in particular from the commencement of economic reform and opening up. With these efforts, a 
solid  theoretical  foundation  has  been  laid  for  future  development  of  the  financial  discipline  and  the 
reform of China’s financial system. However, we shall be more aware that China’s financial system 
may  face  a  series  of  challenges  arising  from  financial  globalization  and  China’s  WTO  accession.  A 
great deal of topics are to be studied, giving rise to crucial tasks for scholars in the field of finance. 
Nevertheless, I would like to stress that researchers are also lucky as they are in a transition period 
and the country is undergoing unprecedented economic and financial reform, where many economic 
and financial phenomena are hard to be well explained by existing theories and experiences. China’s 
practice has provided researchers with abundant materials and room for innovation in such areas as 
sequence of financial market development, coordination of the development of money market, capital 
market and insurance market, the roadmap and institutions associated with the evolution of multi-layer 
financial  markets,  in  particular  capital  markets  and  financial  risk  management  system.  Moreover, 
Chinese  authorities  have  been  conducting  monetary  policy  management,  exchange  regime  reform, 
rural  financial  system  reform,  policy  bank  reform  and  related  legal  system  reform  under  very 
complicated circumstances. These issues unique to China also provide scholars with sufficient room 
for research. 
China’s financial researchers have been exposed to the frontier by the great time. This is not only a 
precious opportunity, but also a great challenge. Modern economic and financial theory emerged in 
the western countries after long-term observation and research by western economists. The theory is 
subject to relatively strict conditions, which may not be appropriate in China’s practice. Nevertheless, 
we  believe  that  China’s  financial  researchers  will  take  a  scrupulous  attitude  and  not  confine  to  the 
existing theories and historical experiences. With these efforts, theoretical development will be brought 
to a new stage on the basis of China’s reform practice, giving rise to financial theory development in 
the world. 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
Passion is needed in the reform, while cool mind is necessary for research. Researchers need to be 
objective, independent and scrupulous with the research work. Economic and financial performance 
involves the interaction of interests of different parties. The objective of financial theoretical research is 
to  objectively  describe  the  patter  of  interests  and  the  rule  of  its  change,  providing  guidance  to 
economic and financial policy making aimed at establishing appropriate incentive mechanisms. In this 
vein, the China Financial Institute will take measures to further mobilize research resources to conduct 
pioneering  study  on  important  theoretical  issues  with  respect  to  China’s  reform  and  development 
under  the  support  of  financial  supervisory  agencies,  commercial  banks,  securities  firms,  insurance 
companies, publishing houses, schools and financial research institutes. 
In conclusion, I wish professor Huang Da continued success in economic and financial research, and 
welcome  constructive  proposals  from  the  participants  of  the  conference  on  promoting  China’s 
economic and financial theoretic study. 
