Susan Schmidt Bies: The Basel II Accord and House Resolution 1226  
Testimony of Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Domestic  and  International  Monetary  Policy,  Trade,  and 
Technology  and  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit,  Committee  on 
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, 11 May 2005. 
 Chairman Bachus, Chairman Pryce, and members of the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and 
Consumer Credit and the Subcommittee on Domestic and International Monetary Policy, Trade, and 
Technology:  It  is  a  pleasure  to  join  my  colleagues  from  the  other  banking  agencies  to  discuss  the 
current status of Basel II in this country, as well as the Federal Reserve's views on H.R. 1226. The 
continued discussion among the Congress and the regulators - and, of course, the banking industry 
and other members of the public - is critical to the final implementation of the new capital accord. 
The focus of recent attention has been the agencies' announcement that they will delay the notice of 
proposed rulemaking (NPR) for Basel II, originally scheduled for midyear 2005. In my remarks today, I 
will discuss the reasons for the delay and the Board's views regarding the timetable for implementation 
of  Basel  II  in  this  country.  But,  first,  I  believe  it  may  be  useful  to  remind  the  members  of  the 
subcommittees why the agencies thought it wise to explore and then develop a modernization of the 
current capital accord; those factors have become, if anything, more important than they were when 
we began the process.  
Our banking system is becoming more concentrated, with a number of very large entities operating 
across multiple business lines and national boundaries, each entity with positions and exposures that 
are  both  complicated  and  difficult  for  third  parties  to  understand.  These  entities  have  outgrown  the 
current regulatory capital regime, which is still adequate for most banks. But the current rules simply 
cannot keep up with the complex business of the global banking organizations toward which Basel II 
and its infrastructure prerequisites are directed. These organizations represent significant risks to the 
financial  system  should  they  develop  substantial  problems  in  a  period  of  stress.  Basel  II  offers  the 
opportunity  to  work  with  these  large  entities  to  develop  quantitative  risk-measurement  and 
risk-management systems that can both measure their risk more accurately and become the basis for 
more risk-focused capital requirements and prudential supervision. We would also require, as part of 
the  Basel  II  approach,  more  public  disclosures  to  improve  market  discipline  and  supplement 
supervisory efforts. 
Many internationally active U.S. banks apparently agree that we should work toward Basel II. Indeed, 
we and the industry have already seen some benefits from work on Basel II implementation in that 
market  participants  and  bank  supervisors  have  developed  a  common  language  for  inputs  into 
risk-management processes. 
Earlier this year, twenty-six banking organizations provided us with internal measures of credit risk as 
part  of  the  fourth  quantitative  impact  study,  or  QIS4.  The  agencies  have  now  reviewed  the  risk 
parameter  estimates  provided  and  are  discussing  with  individual  participants  their  approaches  to 
developing  the  required  inputs.  These  discussions,  which  are  ongoing,  have  significantly  changed 
some of the data provided, and some modifications are still coming in. 
Nonetheless, even with these revisions, two conclusions are already clear. First, the dispersion among 
the  banks  in  their  estimates  of  the  key  parameters  that  would  be  used  to  calculate  Basel  II  capital 
requirements was quite wide - much wider than expected. Second, the implied reductions in minimum 
regulatory capital were often substantial - far more than previous quantitative impact studies, both here 
and  abroad,  had  suggested.  As  responsible  and  prudent  regulators,  we  believe  it  is  appropriate  to 
improve  our  understanding  of  these  results  and  to  see  whether  changes  might  be  needed  in  our 
proposals. 
From the outset of our participation in the development of Basel II, the U.S. agencies have clearly and 
consistently stated that the final adoption of the new capital rules in the United States would occur only 
after (1) we had reviewed all public comments and incorporated any needed adjustments to address 
legitimate  concerns,  and  (2)  we  were  satisfied  that  Basel  II  was  consistent  with  safe  and  sound 
banking in this country. Throughout this process we have stressed that, should we become concerned 
about the level of overall capital in the banking system or the capital results for individual portfolios, we 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 1
would  seek  to  modify  the framework,  including  possibly  recalibrating  the regulatory  capital  formulas 
that translate an individual bank's risk parameters into required capital. The agencies' current review 
and study is consistent with our historical position at Basel. 
All of the agencies want to have a better understanding of QIS4 data and results. Does the dispersion 
reflect  different  risk  profiles?  Different  model  assumptions?  Different  estimates  of  risk  for  the  same 
kind  of  asset?  Different  kinds  of  internal  rating  systems  with  some  looking  "through  the  cycle"  and 
others  being  "point  in  time"?  Different  stages  of  institutions'  implementation  efforts?  Limitations  of 
current  data  bases?  Some  other  factor?  We  hope  that  further  analysis  and  discussion  with 
respondents can provide some answers to such questions. All the agencies believed that the prudent 
approach  was  to  delay  the  NPR  to  gain  better  understanding  of  the  reasons  for  the  unexpected 
results.  
Still, this decision presents the U.S. banking agencies with a dilemma. There is good reason to delay 
the  NPR  and  related  supervisory  guidance,  but  those  very  documents  are  needed  to  provide  more 
complete  blueprints  for  what  banks  will  need  in  terms  of  the  databases  and  systems  to  implement 
Basel II. We are not saying that these large entities today have inadequate risk-management systems. 
Rather, they do not yet have the systems for producing Basel II inputs that meet the standards set 
forth in the Basel II proposal. Until the banking organizations have the NPR, many just will not be able 
to provide us the inputs we need to assess how banks would operate under Basel II. The dilemma can 
be solved only by first issuing the NPR. But, we must then have a prudent and flexible way to make 
adjustments  should  the  resultant  data  produce  results  that  we,  as  supervisors,  are  not  comfortable 
with. The plans developed before the delay in the NPR offer just such an opportunity. 
Under those plans, institutions required or planning to move to Basel II would, after the adoption of a 
final rule, decide when to start their parallel run - with the first opportunity in January 2007. During the 
required  parallel  run,  each  bank  would  continue  to  calculate  its  required  capital  under  the  current 
capital  regime  and  simultaneously  calculate  its  Basel  II  capital  statistics  for  review  by  its  primary 
supervisor. When the supervisor believes that the bank has produced four quarters of credible Basel II 
estimates,  the  bank would  be  able  to  enter  a  minimum  two-year  transition  run,  the  earliest  in  2008 
under  these  plans.  During  this  transition  run,  the  bank  would  be  under  Basel  II  capital  rules,  but  it 
could not reduce its capital below 90 percent of what the current capital rules would require in the first 
year or below 80 percent in the second year. The length of either the parallel run or the transition run 
could  be  extended  if  the  primary  supervisor  had  doubts  about  the  bank's  Basel  II  system  or  the 
prudence of the resulting minimum regulatory capital level. Only after a minimum two-year transition 
run and only if its primary supervisor had no objection could a U.S. bank operate fully under Basel II 
capital rules. 
This phase-in plan has been designed to ensure that bank inputs are reasonable and consistent with 
sound risk-management practices and that supervisors are comfortable with the safety and soundness 
of Basel II before it goes fully "live" in the United States. Please note that only when we get into the 
parallel run period will the agencies be able to accurately assess the aggregate capital effects as well 
as  the  effects  on  individual  institutions  from  the  new  accord.  Only  then  will  banks'  systems  provide 
risk-parameter inputs that comport with the operational requirements of Basel II, and only then can the 
U.S. authorities be confident that the resultant capital calculations are reliable estimates of what will 
happen when Basel II is fully implemented. Such data would be far superior to those obtained through 
the four QIS exercises that we have conducted to date, which, as I have noted, have been carried out 
by  banks  on  a  best-efforts  basis  using  systems  that  do  not  yet  meet  the  standards  required  under 
Basel II. Once we have data from the parallel run period, the agencies can then consider the need, if 
any,  for  a  recalibration  of  the  Basel  II  parameters  or  other  actions  to  ensure  more-accurate  risk 
sensitivity and a prudent level of overall capital. 
This deliberate process provides multiple safeguards to help the agencies move to the final adoption 
of the new framework in the United States only when doing so is clearly appropriate. In other words, 
our implementation strategy has been designed to be both prudent and flexible enough to move banks 
from  Basel  I  to  Basel  II  as  their  own  systems  mature  and  they  can  provide  reasonably  accurate 
assessments  of  their  credit  and  operational  risks.  The  agencies'  analysis  of  and  reaction  to  QIS4 
results  show  how  those  safeguards  work:  We  saw  results  that  gave  us  concern,  and  so  we  are 
investigating further before we go to the next stage. Additional, future safeguards - such as the NPR 
process  and  the  minimum  one-year  parallel  run  and  the  minimum  two-year  transition  period,  with 
options to extend either - will also ensure ample opportunity to recalibrate or seek other adjustments if 
necessary. 
2 
 BIS Review 34//2005
But, for now, we believe that after a certain point, further analysis of QIS4 is likely to reap little or no 
additional benefit. We should, of course, try to learn what we can from these data and particularly look 
for indications of the need to modify the Basel II proposal where necessary. However, as soon as we 
have learned what we can, we should promptly return to the development of the joint NPR and related 
supervisory guidance. These documents are essential so that core and opt-in banks can continue to 
develop the databases and systems that they would need to operate under the Basel II capital rules 
and that would provide more-accurate risk parameter estimates than those in QIS4.  
Recall that there have already been three rounds of U.S. public comments on the Basel II consultative 
papers  between  1999  and  2004;  an  advance  notice  of  proposed  rulemaking  (ANPR)  in  2003;  and 
numerous agency discussions with congressional committees, banking groups, and individual banks. 
All  have  resulted  in  significant  modifications  to  the  proposal.  Once  published,  the  NPR  and  the 
supervisory guidance will once more elicit comments that could result in further revisions. Particularly 
given its delayed issuance, the NPR must solicit feedback from core and potential opt-in banks as to 
whether the current timeline for implementing Basel II in this country needs to be delayed or can be 
retained. 
Looking forward, I agree with my colleagues at this table that it is prudent to delay the NPR in order to 
see what we can learn from further review of QIS4 data, recognizing at the outset that final answers 
will not be forthcoming because the requisite databases and risk-management systems are not yet in 
place. I hope that we can return to the NPR before midyear, present it to the Office of Management 
and Budget for its review, as our OCC and OTS colleagues must do, and release the NPR in the fall. 
With such a schedule, one might hope that the parallel running period, currently scheduled for 2007, 
need not be delayed. But, as I noted earlier, it is important for the agencies to get feedback on this 
issue during the NPR comment period. The views of banking organizations will provide critical insights 
into the feasibility of the scheduled 2008 start date for the transition run. Once we have the views of 
the  banking  organizations,  the  agencies  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  reach  a  consensus  on  the 
timeline. 
Basel II has the potential to be an important supervisory step forward. The Basel I framework is being 
arbitraged  aggressively  and  provides  us  with  less  and  less  reliable  measures  on  which  to  base  a 
regulatory  capital  requirement  for  our  largest  and  most  complex  banking  organizations.  Moreover, 
banks have spent tens of millions of dollars preparing for the U.S. implementation of Basel II and have 
contracts for further investment. They are awaiting the NPR, the guidance, and the final rules. Their 
global  competitors  are  proceeding,  and  U.S.  banks  will  be  eager  to  avoid  being  placed  at  a 
competitive disadvantage. I might add that, as supervisors, we believe that the core risk-measurement 
and  risk-management  improvements  contained  in  Basel  II  are  appropriate,  regardless  of  how  the 
future accord is finally structured and calibrated. So it is, in our view, a good idea for banks to continue 
their current trajectory of making risk-management investments. 
While  the  regulatory  capital  requirements  ultimately  produced  by  Basel  II  would  be,  we  believe, 
considerably more risk sensitive than the current capital regime, importantly this is not the only capital 
regulation under which U.S. institutions would operate. Over a decade ago, the Congress, as part of 
the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  Improvement  Act's  Prompt  Corrective  Action  (PCA) 
regime, defined a critically undercapitalized insured depository institution by reference to a minimum 
tangible-equity-to-asset  requirement,  a  leverage  ratio.  The  agencies  have  also  used  other  leverage 
ratios  to  define  other  PCA  capital  categories  because  experience  has  suggested  that  there  is  no 
substitute for an adequate equity-to-asset ratio, especially for entities that face the moral hazard that 
accompanies  the  safety  net.  The  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  responsible  to  the 
Congress for the management of the critical deposit insurance portion of the safety net, has underlined 
the importance of that minimum leverage ratio and PCA as part of a prudent supervisory regime. 
The  Federal  Reserve  concurs  in  the  FDIC's  view.  We  need,  for  reasons  I  have  given,  the 
risk-measurement and risk-management infrastructure and risk sensitivity of Basel II; but we also need 
the  supplementary  assurance  of  a  minimum  equity  base.  The  market  and  the  rating  agencies  will 
continue to require exactly that kind of base, and a regulatory minimum is prudentially desirable.  
Even though the market and the rating agencies, not to mention bank management, will still require 
banking  organizations  to  carry  capital  considerably  above  regulatory  minimums,  many  of  the 
thousands  of  depository  institutions  that  will  remain  under  the  current  capital  rules  are  concerned 
about the impact of Basel II on their businesses. This concern is often voiced as a general disquiet 
about  broad  competitive  feedbacks  but  also  about  competitive  implications  in  specific  markets.  The 
Federal  Reserve  has  published  a  series  of  research  papers  investigating  such  concerns  voiced  in 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 3
public comments on the previous ANPR on Basel II. These studies have indeed suggested that there 
are potential effects that should be addressed in the small business and residential mortgage markets. 
For  this  reason,  as  well  as  to  continue  to  modernize  the  current  capital  regime,  the  agencies  are 
developing, simultaneously with the Basel II proposal, a proposal to revise the current capital rules for 
non-Basel  II  banks  to  make  those  rules  more  risk  sensitive  and  to  blunt  any  unintended  harm  that 
Basel II might impose on non-adopters. Our intention is to keep these proposed changes simple to 
minimize any costs imposed on the many non-adopters. We plan to issue these proposals for public 
comment  concurrently  with  or  soon  after  the  NPR  on  Basel  II,  to  allow  the  banking  community  to 
comment on a combined package of proposed changes. However, these revised Basel I rules would 
not be an adequate substitute for the necessary capital reforms for the large, complex, global banks 
operating  in  this  country  because  they  would  not  provide  the  incentives  for  banks  to  adopt  the 
more-sophisticated  risk-measurement  and  risk-management  techniques  envisioned  by  the  Basel  II 
proposal. 
Chairman Bachus and Chairman Pryce, I would also like to present the Federal Reserve's views on 
H.R. 1226, a bill setting up a committee of the four banking and thrift regulators to reach a common 
U.S.  position  on  Basel  issues  and  authorizing  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  as  its  chairman,  to 
determine a common position on any issue about which the regulators could not agree. The Federal 
Reserve believes that the bill does not fully reflect the existing process used by the four agencies to 
develop and modify Basel II and we would counsel that Congress not enact it. 
Staff members of the four agencies have held frequent and comprehensive discussions about Basel II 
throughout the process. Certainly, the agencies have sometimes disagreed on specific issues, and we 
will sometimes disagree in the future. But we have in the past been able to find a common position 
that we can all support at Basel, and we will do so in the future. The salient fact is that any one of us 
has  a  veto  over  the  entire  proposal because  we  all  realize  that different rules cannot  be applied  to 
similarly situated insured depository institutions. That fact forces us to develop consensus positions on 
which all of us can agree. We have done so in the past because we understand that if the agencies 
cannot  reach  a  collective  agreement  at  Basel,  the  Basel  II  reforms  will  not  be  implemented  in  the 
United States while they go forward in the rest of the world. Communication, compromise, and comity 
are the prerequisites for agreement among the agencies. 
Further, the ability of the U.S. agencies to negotiate effectively at Basel would be severely constrained 
if our foreign counterparties knew that we had to return to a committee before we could agree. The 
formalized  "decision by  committee"  approach  of H.R.  1226 would  not  advance  U.S.  interests  in  the 
complex  and  dynamic  Basel  negotiation  process.  The  U.S.  banking  agencies  need  to  preserve  our 
current flexibility to respond to Basel issues if we are to develop a set of capital rules that are useful 
and productive for U.S. banks and thrifts. Moreover, it is possible that the agencies are more likely to 
implement effectively an agreement that they helped shape than they would be one that was imposed 
on them and for which they did not understand fully the rationale. While we urge the Congress not to 
move forward on this bill, we look forward to keeping Congress fully informed as the Basel process 
continues. 
I will be pleased to answer your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 34//2005
