Miranda S Goeltom: Indonesian macroeconomic developments and policy - 
progressing towards a sound banking system 
Keynote speech  by Dr  Miranda  S Goeltom,  Senior Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  Indonesia,  on  the 
CNBC Strategic Forum, Jakarta, 24 January 2005. 
 Distinguished guests and speakers, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At the outset, let us first of all express our gratitude to God Almighty that we are still able to gather 
here this evening in good health to attend this forum. It is a pleasure and an honour for me to be here 
in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  audience.  On  behalf  of  Indonesian  authorities,  I  would  like  also  to 
express  our  thanks and  appreciation  to  CNBC  and related  parties  for  organizing  such  an  important 
event and gathering most important policy makers and business players in Indonesia. 
We have just successfully passed the first democratic direct election and is looking forward towards a 
much  brighter  future.  It  is  also  timely  to  make  a  reflection  on  what  we  have  achieved  so  far,  what 
structural problems remain and how to make our economy stronger and more resilient in the future. 
We all also know what had happened in Aceh and in other parts of the world surrounding the Indian 
Ocean. It was one of the greatest natural disasters in living memory. Now, we should say that after the 
tragedy in Aceh, Indonesia should, and it will, regain its new spirit, a new resolution, to develop and to 
create a better life for the people. 
On this occasion, let me share the recent progress on the Indonesian economy, its challenges and 
opportunities towards a sound banking system. I will first touch the issue on the macroeconomic and 
financial developments in 2004, and discuss their outlook for 2005. In the rest of this speech I will also 
emphasis on the banking sector problems and challenges, as well as future policy directions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Macroeconomic and financial developments in 2004 
As  widely  known,  throughout  the  last  three  years  the  Indonesia’s  economy  has  been  developed 
favourably. Mutually supportive monetary and fiscal policies have helped maintaining the momentum 
of economic recovery. Through prudent macro policies, the growth in 2004 is estimated to reach 
the  upper  limit  of  4.5%-5.0%,  higher  than  in  2003.  Investment  and  exports  have  also  started  to 
rebound  since  the  mid  2004,  in  line  with  increased  public  confidence,  improved  stability  in  social 
political condition and stability in various macro fundamentals. 
Along with this conducive trend, imports also increased, particularly with regards to raw materials and 
capital  goods  in  supporting  higher  capacity  utilization.  Volume  of  imports  is  estimated  to  grow 
substantially by 21% relative to only 2.8% in 2003. Exports were also on a positive growth trend, 
albeit moderate. Oil and gas exports have increased substantially thanks to the positive impact of high 
oil prices, whereas the increase in exports was partly supported by the non oil and gas sector. As a 
result,  the  overall  exports  and  imports  is  expected  to  generate  US$5.2  billion  current  account 
surplus. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
This  conducive  developments  has  also  facilitated  the  availability  of  financing.  Credits  has  grown 
roughly by 22% throughout 2004 with higher absorption of new credits, particularly by the SMEs. This 
credit  development  has  led  to  an  improvement  in  banking  sector  performance  with  prudential 
indicators  remaining  at  sound  levels.  Banking  capital  structure  continues  to  exhibits  significant 
improvements. Recent review on each bank indicated that each bank manages to maintain a healthy 
CAR, reaching around 20% as an average for the banking sector. Key banking indicators such as total 
BIS Review 14/2005 
 1
loans, total assets and deposit funds, maintained their positive trend. Other indicators such as NIM 
and  LDR  subtantially  improved,  while  the  figures  of  NPLs  keep  setting  lower  to  reach  an  average 
banking sector of 6.7% gross, or 2.1% net. 
The  loan  expansion  was  also  favored  by  a  declining  trend  in  interest  rates.  Although  showing  a 
stable path since mid 2004 due to tight bias monetary policy, the 3 month SBI rate has declined from 
8.15%  at  the  end  of  2003  to  7.4%  by  the  end  of  2004.  This  declining  trend  in  the  central  bank 
instrument rate led to lower banks’ deposit rate, including credit rates. In line with the declining trend in 
deposit  rates,  interest  rates  for  consumption  credit,  working  capital  credit,  and  investment  credit 
continued  to  move  downward.  In  addition,  the  spread  between  deposit  and  credit  interest  rates  is 
narrowing further as a result of declining lending rates in contrast to rising deposit rates. 
The increasing optimism in the money markets was also reflected in the capital markets. The 
positive  investor  expectations  regarding  the  Indonesia’s  economic  prospects  has  been  boosted  by 
controlled  inflation,  rupiah  stability  and  positive  forecasts  for  economic  growth  which  eventually 
reflected in the increasing Jakarta stock price index, reaching its peak on December 2004. 
That higher domestic demand leading to increased imports, as well as some spill over effect due to 
external factors have also indirectly affected exchange rate fluctuations in 2004, which depreciated 
around 3.7% to reach on average Rp8.934 per USD in 2004. In line with this, inflation rate went up 
slowly since January from 4.82% (y-o-y) to 6.4% (y-o-y) at the end of 2004, which is still in the central 
bank inflation target range of 5.5% +/- 1%. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Macroeconomic outlook for 2005 
The  above  macroeconomic  conditions  inevitably  underlie  the  brighter  economic  performance  in  the 
near future. The prospect for growth in 2005 seems to be much stronger along with improvements 
in  the  components  of  GDP.  On  the  demand  side,  projected  growth  would  be  supported  by  higher 
investments while a stable trend is projected for private consumption. Export performance is predicted 
to improve slightly, despite conducive world trade conditions. This favourable development is expected 
to sustain in line with the improvement of market confidence and optimism in the implementation of the 
development  program  set  by  the  new  Government.  With  the  competitiveness  of  the  rupiah,  GDP 
growth is forecasted to be around 5.0 – 6.0%. 
Private  consumption  is  projected  to  increase  by  around  5.5%,  in  line  with  higher  expected 
disposable income. An increasing trend on both consumer confidence and household expectation is 
expected  to  generate  higher  private  expenditures  and  subsequently  higher  private  consumption.  In 
parallel,  total  investment,  including  private  investment,  is  forecasted  to  grow  substantially  to 
around 13.5%. In line with the established democratic government and a more conducive investment 
climate driven by infrastructure development programs, the private investor confidence is expected to 
increase.  The  improvement  in  risk  premium  is  also  considered  as  an  underlying  indicator  for  a 
better investment climate. In addition, the improved access to the banking sector and the positive 
trend in equity markets would be expected to play a significant role in boosting investment activities. 
Macroeconomic stability has provided Bank Indonesia some room to adjust interest rates at stable low 
levels over the last two years. In addition to increasing bank credits of 20% in 2005, the sources of 
financing investment activities are predicted to come from the stocks and bond markets. Added to this, 
FDIs are expected to increase as well. As a result, private investment is predicted to grow by 14%, 
close to pre-crisis levels, whereas ratio of investment to GDP is forecasted to rise from 19% to 23%. 
Government consumption growth is predicted to be slower, in line with government efforts to reduce 
its deficit to GDP ratio. Despite its limited ability to stimulate the economy, the government remains 
firmly  committed  to  continuously  support  investment  activities  through  the  reallocation  of  subsidy 
spending towards capital expenditures. Therefore, the total amount of funds allocated for government 
investment is estimated to reach Rp199.2 trillion in 2005, or 11.5% higher than the previous year. 
In  addition  to  domestic  financing  sources,  the  14th  Meeting  of  the  Consultative  Group  on 
Indonesia  (CGI)  held  in  Jakarta  last  week  has  pledged  to  provide  assistance  a  huge  assistance, 
higher that previously expected. On top of this, USD 1.7 billion is provided for the recovery programs 
in Aceh and North Sumatra. This assistance will support the Government of Indonesia’s medium-term 
reform  program  aimed  at  improving  the  investment  climate,  creating  jobs,  and  reducing  poverty. 
Development  partners  also  underscored  their  commitment  to  help  the  Government  response  to  the 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2005
tsunami-catastrophe in Aceh and Northern Sumatra, with recovery and rehabilitation programs. It is 
expected  that  the  commitment  from  the  CGI  will  support  the  government  budget  and  improve  the 
balance of payments condition, which in turn will support the Rupiah exchange rate. 
to  strengthen 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
With  regard  to  the  external  balance,  favorable  global  economic  activity  and  high  international 
commodity prices are predicted to strengthen the Indonesia’s balance of payments performance 
for 2005, especially exports. The surplus continues to spur positive expectation for the availability of 
foreign  currency  supply  in  the  domestic  market.  Supply  of  foreign  currency  is  also  contributed  by 
short-term capital inflows in the form of portfolio investments, which are predicted to remain strong. 
Potential capital inflows in the form of foreign direct investment are predicted to come gradually in the 
second semester of 2005, albeit still low. Moreover, non oil-gas exports are predicted to be stronger, 
consistent with the favorable conditions in the international economy, a competitive exchange rate for 
the Rupiah, and increasing access to international trade financing. 
The  good  progress  of  Indonesian  trade  financing  is  expected  to  be  better  in  2005  due  to  the 
improvements  in  macro  condition,  banking  performance,  and  higher  international  confidence.  This 
positive progress of trade financing is reflected by increasing number of credit line provided by foreign 
banks, decreasing cost of trade financing and increasing trade finance facility from domestic banks to 
private  sector.  However,  the  challenges  are  to  be  overcome  in  order  to  optimize  the  trade  finance 
facilities from the banking sector. Bank intermediation is yet to be improved in order to maximize the 
credit line utilization from international banking community. In addition, efforts should be made through 
assurance of legal certainties and diplomacy to counter the inclusion of Indonesia as country under 
the  Non  Cooperative  Countries  and  Territories  (NCCTs)  list.  These  positive  efforts  would 
eventually lower the trade financing costs. 
It  worth  noting  that  in  order  to  enhance  international  perception  on  the  more  conducive  Indonesian 
business environment, Indonesian authorities have showed the strong commitment and seriousness in 
building-up  anti-money  laundering  regime  in  Indonesia.  Some  progress  on  the  implementation 
ant-money laundering regime can be described s follows. First, issued new regulation instruments in 
order 
function,  concerning  KYC/AML  Supervision  Framework, 
assessment and imposition of sanction on the implementation of KYC, Standard Guidelines on KYC 
Principles for rural bank, and application of KYC Principles for Money Changers. Second, conducted 
Socialization and training programs continuously for Bank Indonesia supervisor and examiner, and for 
banking  industry.  Third,  completed  examination  programs  on  32  commercial  banks,  consisting  of 
5 foreign  banks,  2  state  owned  banks,  21  domestic  and  joint  venture  banks,  1  regional  bank,  and 
3 Islamic  banks.  Fourth,  conducted  seminars/  workshops/MOU  for/with  law  enforcement  agencies 
(National Police, Attorney General’s Office (AGO), Supreme Court and Judges), to promote and foster 
the  effectiveness  of  the  handling  of  banking  and  money  laundering  crime.  Fifth,  promoted  public 
campaign program on KYC/AML, in cooperation with AusAID. 
In 2005, we will continue and intensify KYC/AML program, through 2 channels, namely designing 
and budgeting an Initiative Program, as well as conducting supervision and examinations for all banks 
to  ensure  compliance  with  the  KYC/AML  regulations.  In  this  regard,  designing  and  budgeting  an 
Initiative Program will be implemented through: (a) Delivering an intensive public campaign program; 
(b)  Reviewing  and  formulating  KYC/AML  regulations  and  references;  (c)  Building  KYC/AML  core 
teams of supervisors and examiners within Bank Indonesia, both in the head office and branches; (d) 
Arranging training and seminars for the banking industries and public; and (e) Promoting cooperation 
between Bank Indonesia and other institutions. 
With  the  above  explored  conditions,  the  exchange  rate  is  estimated  to  appreciate  slightly 
compared to 2004 with some positive factors would contributed to the recovering of rupiah, including 
the  favourable  long-term  risk  indicators,  strong  economic  fundamentals,  and  adequate  foreign 
reserves. Inflationary pressures may even be higher considering the likely reduction of oil subsidies 
in the central government budget. The impact of this policy on inflation will depend on the magnitude 
of  the  prices  hike,  the  timing  of  the  implementation  and  the  magnitude  of  the  secondary  effects. 
Central bank estimates have indicated that for each 10% rise in domestic oil prices, overall inflation 
would at first increase by 0.2%, then leading to a further increase of 0.36%. Taking into account the 
likelihood of higher oil prices, inflation in 2005 is targeted to be 6% + 1%. 
its  supervision 
BIS Review 14/2005 
 3
Anticipating  pressure  on  inflation,  monetary  policy  would  be  directed  to  achieve  the  medium  term 
inflation target while maintaining the momentum of growth. To enhance the effectiveness of monetary 
policy, Bank Indonesia is planning to use interest rate as its operational target in mid of 2005. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Banking industry environment, problems and challenges ahead 
Looking  ahead,  it  is  envisaged  that  sustained  macroeconomic  stability  will  pave  the  way  for  the 
banking system to strengthen the bank intermediary function. Investment credit, which began to 
pick up in 2004, is predicted to expand further particularly as infrastructure projects get under way. As 
I  mentioned  earlier,  the  banking  system  can  play  a  key-financing  role  in  the  Government  plan  to 
accelerate the construction of infrastructure. In this regard, I call on banks to keep a close watch on 
their funding structure and experience and capacity in project financing. In the consumer sector, credit 
expansion is predicted to remain strong and will be the first choice for private banks and foreign banks 
as more banks enter into cooperation with multifinance companies. In the property sector, banks need 
to exercise greater caution in lending because of the higher risk of default on loans for purchase of 
apartments and office premises. 
In the SME and microenterprise sector, lending soared in 2004 and this trend can be expected to 
continue  in  the  years  to  come.  Going  forward,  the  banking  industry  need  to  examine  and  develop 
innovations to assist the development of SMEs. These innovation could extend the scope of financing 
to SMEs and at the same time reduce the risks of extending credits to the sector. In this connection, it 
may  be  noted  that  since  recent  time,  we  have  launched  a  pilot  project  in  cooperation  with  local 
governments  and  ASKRINDO  to  explore  the  possibility  of  creating  a  guarantee  scheme  for  credits 
extended to SMEs. It is our hope that the pilot project could be expanded to more regions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As I have mentioned, our goal is to develop a banking industry that would be strong and proactive in 
order  to  be  able  to  support  a  sustained  growth  of  our  economy.  In  the  years  ahead  despite  the 
progress we have achieved, we are fully aware that we will continue to face a series of problems and 
challenges. 
First, we observe the problem of relying excessively on short-term fund leading to the predominance 
of short term credits. 
Second, we recognize the exixting problems with information concerning the debtor soundness have 
eroded the confidence of the banking industry in the real sector, hampering the intermediary function. 
Third, we also realize that the credibility of the banking system will be contingent on the ability of the 
banking industry to strengthen good corporate governance, including management of operational risk. 
Fourth, moreover, we inderstand that the implementation of deposit insurance scheme requires banks 
to strengthen market confidence. 
Fifth, and more importantly, the banking industry is constantly challenged by competition from non-
bank products, such as mutual funds, bonds, and insurance. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Future banking policy directions 
How are we going to respond to these problems and challenges?  
Within the banking industry, we have long been aware of these problems and challenges. Responding 
to  this,  we  have  worked  together  to  map  out  actions  and  do  what  is  necessary  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of our banking system. Our desired objective is for the banking system to regain its place 
as  a  reliable,  trusted  industry  capable  of  promoting  national  economic  growth.  To  accelerate  this 
change and respond to the various problems and challenges that lie before us, we have formulated a 
number of policy directions for the banking system that we believe will set the course for the future 
dynamics of the national banking industry. These policy directions include the following: 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2005
Market driven consolidation 
Directives consolidation 
Heavy-handed consolidation 
First, accelerate the consolidation process in the banking industry; 
In  the  Indonesian  Banking  Architecture  (API),  Bank  Indonesia  has  laid  out  a  series  of  measures  to 
build  the  soundness  and  strength  of  the  national  banking  industry.  Under  this  policy,  the  banking 
industry  consolidation  program  is  a  key  initiative  that  sets  the  course  for  the  future  of  the  national 
banking industry. Within the next 10-15 years, the national banking industry must become capable of 
serving as a sound, strong, and dynamic backbone to the economy and of delivering results. However, 
as I explained earlier, the present situation and challenges and an array of unexpected events in 2004 
have compelled us to adopt a shorter time frame for consolidation of the banking industry. 
In this regard, we must realize that to create a sound, robust, strong, and efficient banking industry, 
the industry consolidation will not be achieved without first going through a process of consolidation at 
the level of the individual bank. And, it is this process of individual consolidation that we must strive to 
complete in 2005. The picture is that an industry putting its house in order and striving for growth must 
first be sterilized of potential systemic risk that could arise from problems at individual banks. 
Before  the  recent  launching  of  the  API,  Bank  Indonesia  put  together  a  range  of  scenarios  for  the 
consolidation program for the building of soundness and strengthening of the banking industry as a 
whole. These scenarios are: 
• 
• 
• 
These scenarios are in essence of a sequence of action programs that are mutually complementary, 
should one of the scenarios earlier in the sequence prove ineffective and fail to deliver the desired 
results. 
Taking into account the developments that have taken place since the introduction of the API in early 
2004,  Bank  Indonesia  is  now  readying  itself  to  apply  the  second  scenario  in  the  consolidation 
program, which in essence is an acceleration of the consolidation program scenario set out in the API. 
The  consolidation  scenario  that  we  are  considering  for  implementation  in  2005  will  begin  with  a 
process of identifying the medium and large banks that are currently in very sound shape and have 
adequate human resources to expand market share without sacrificing prudential banking principles. 
Our  expectation  is  that  these  will  become  the  anchor  banks  capable  of  stimulating  a  process  of 
strengthening among other banks whose future ability to compete is reportedly constrained by a range 
of factors. 
In conjunction with the process of determining these anchor banks, Bank Indonesia will also identify 
the  banks  that  have  or  are  thought  to  have  lost  competitiveness  because  of  their  inability  to  build 
stronger  resources  and  especially  capital.  These  banks  will  then  be  grouped  with  other  banks  in 
reasonably good condition but which lack competitiveness because of limited market share and are 
experiencing downward trends in both assets and deposit funds. Each group of banks will be offered 
3 options:  first,  acquisition  by  an  anchor  bank;  second,  merger  with  other  banks  in  the  group;  and 
third, a combination of merger between a number of banks and an anchor bank. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  addition  to  accelerating  bank  consolidation  programs,  banking  policy  directions  include  other 
measures, namely: 
Second,  reorientation  of  the  working  mechanisms  and  procedures  of  the  national  banking 
industry to more effectively accommodate the needs of the national economy; 
Parallel with the process of institutional consolidations, banks are also required to revitalize their mode 
of  operation. The  process of  allocating funds  that  is practiced  by banks have been so  far relatively 
passive. Decisions are not based on accurate research information concerning the sectors they are 
financing. In the years ahead, banks must be able to identified more clearly the various market niches 
they wish to operate in and must be proactive in seeking the potential clients in those sectors. The 
human resources in the bank cannot stand by idly, satisfied with their acquired formal education. They 
must be trained to understand the realities in the market in which they operate. 
Third, implementation of steps to strengthen the financial system infrastructure; 
BIS Review 14/2005 
 5
intermediary 
to  strengthen 
the  effectiveness  of 
A  sound,  efficient  banking  system  requires  adequate  infrastructure.  In  this  regard,  it  is  essential  to 
have an adequate Financial Safety Net (FSN). To move towards the establishment of an adequate 
FSN,  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  Government  have  jointly  completed  the  formulation  of  the  policy 
framework  for  the  FSN  that  also  encompasses  the  soon-to-be-established  Deposit  Insurance 
Agency  (LPS).  With  the  establishment  of  this  agency,  the  responsibilities  for  management  of  the 
guarantee program and resolution of insolvent problem banks will be defined more clearly. 
In  addition,  Bank  Indonesia  has  worked  untiringly  to  promote  the  application  of  Good  Corporate 
Governance  (GCG)  at  all  levels  of  bank  management.  Bank  Indonesia  is  currently  upgrading  the 
provisions  relevant  to  GCG  in  the  banking  system  and  the  new  GCG  regulations  pertaining  to  the 
functions of the board of commissioners and board of directors should be ready in the near future. At 
some  point  in  the  future,  Bank  Indonesia  will  also  consider  an  intensive  study  of  possibilities  for 
changes to the regulations governing ownership of bank shares. 
function,  supporting 
Furthermore, 
the  bank 
infrastructure is needed that will enable the lending process to operate more quickly and reduce the 
potential for problem loans. To this end, Bank Indonesia has initiated the establishment of the Credit 
Bureau set to commence operation in 2005. We have waited long for the Credit Bureau, and a great 
many have repeatedly asked me when this plan will come to fruition. 
Fourth, improvement of prudential aspects and bank intermediary function; 
On January 2005, Bank Indonesia issued the “Prudential Banking Policy Package” with 3 (three) 
key objectives that I can mention here: 
First, promote the operation of the intermediary function and consolidation of the banking system in 
productive  business  sectors,  as  reflected  in  the  Bank  Indonesia  Regulations  on  the  Legal  Lending 
Limit, the Debtor Information System, and Asset Securitization;  
Second,  promote  efforts  to  build  bank  capacity  in  credit  risk  management,  application  of  prudential 
principles,  and  sound  banking  practices  that  will  ensure  sustained  financial  system  stability.  This 
objective is clearly reflected in the regulations on Earning Assets Quality, Legal Lending Limit, Foreign 
Borrowings, and Asset Securitization;  
Third,  measures  to  improve  consumer  protection  through  certainty  in  the  application  of  standard, 
secure,  and  transparent  banking  services.  This  objective  will  be  achieved  through  the  issuance  of 
Bank Indonesia Regulations relevant to consumer protection and transparency of banking products. 
Fifth,  bringing  the  national  banking  industry  to  international  standard  of  capital  adequacy 
according to Basel II principles.  
The adoption of Basel II will commence in 2008 by applying standardized models. By adopting this 
consolidation policy, we believe that the Indonesian banking system will consist of banks with strong 
commitments and capacity to play an optimum role in the national development process. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Financial sector outlook 
In line with improving economic performance as well as a strong banking performance, bank 
loans are projected to expand about 20% in 2005 (or about Rp106.2 trillion). Based on our projection, 
banking sector will have adequate capacity to expand loans as targeted without impeding their capital 
adequacy and liquidity. With loan growth of 20%- 23% and deposit growth of 6%-7% in the next three 
years,  the  CARs  of  banks  are  projected  to  stay  at  16%  and  LDR  will  be  approaching  100%.  In 
addition, higher international commodity prices (especially primary non-oil/gas commodities) resulting 
from rising demand in export markets would have a positive impact on the domestic business climate, 
which raise demand for loans. 
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  we  have  so  far  achieved  significant  progress  in  putting  in  place  the 
foundation for economic stability and financial system more in line with challenges in the years ahead. 
However  we  are  also  aware  that  in  our  path  toward  achieving  the  objective  of  a  more  satisfactory 
financial and banking sector requires time. We are entering a crucial period in the process of transition 
toward a better future of banking system. The process of consolidating the national banking industry is 
an objective that we cannot compromise if the stability and resilience that we desire for the banking 
system is to be achieved. 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2005
We must all take note, first of all that the coming years will be no time for complacency. Before us lies 
only one choice, to work hard to fulfill the commitments and sincere intentions to restructure whatever 
needs to be put right. We should no longer feel comfortable watching as the various problems unfold 
within our banking industry. In fact, we as the banking authority see that much remains for us to do to 
be  able  to  meet  this  demand.  The  second  point  is  that  in  the  future,  the  public  will  become  more 
discerning and cautious in the selection of banks capable of serving their transaction needs. They will 
only be willing to deal with banks that provide a sense of security while also offering returns on the 
funds entrusted to their keeping. They will also select only those banks that understand their needs 
and  are  able  to  provide  a  wide  range  of  conveniences  in  their  services.  These  are  the  criteria  that 
indeed will build and strengthen public confidence. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today, Indonesia remains attractive to portfolio investors because of the combination of high yield 
offered, an improving macro-economic position, a diversified economy and stable Rupiah exchange 
rate expectations. The credit profile is gradually improving. The fiscal deficit appears relatively resilient 
to varying oil prices, although this issue remains a major question marked by international financial 
investors. Furthermore, assets sales and privatizations are proceeding forward and Government debt 
ratios continue to trend down due to the strengthening of the Rupiah and the relatively modest budget 
deficits.  Despite  positive  recent  signs  of  macroeconomic  and  political  climate  in  Indonesia,  credit 
agencies point out that the country still faces some credit challenges, namely, high Government debt 
and overall foreign debt levels, security issues and low levels of investment that limit long-term growth. 
Looking ahead, I am confident that evidence of continued and timely implementation of reforms by 
the new government and strong commitment to maintain fiscal consolidation will favourably influence 
the credit ratings on Indonesia. 
Much work remains to be done, but we must do so systematically with clear design. The years ahead 
will not be without challenges, in fact we will face many more challenges than today. In closing, it is 
my hope that this forum will be able to serve as an arena of information exchange. It takes people from 
different  skills  and  abilities;  authorities,  investors,  bankers,  academics,  and  others  to  build  a  sound 
business environment and I hope our participation here will serve as a notable step in that effort. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 14/2005 
 7
