Caleb M Fundanga: International financial reporting standards for banks and 
other financial institutions 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  official  opening  of  a 
workshop  on  “International  financial  reporting  standards  for  banks  and  other  financial  institutions”, 
organised by the Bank of Zambia in conjunction with the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants, 
Lusaka, 17 February 2005. 
 The Chief Executive, ZICA 
Distinguished Resource Persons 
Distinguished Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I wish to welcome you all to this important workshop on International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRSs) and International Auditing Standards, (ISAs) organised for finance officers and auditors from 
commercial banks, non-bank financial institutions and the Bank of Zambia. This workshop is organised 
by the Bank of Zambia in conjunction with the Zambia Institute for Chartered Accountants (ZICAs) out 
of  the  recognition  that  the  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRSs)  and  International 
Auditing Standards (ISAs) are critical not only to the integrity of our financial system, but also to the 
Bank  of  Zambia’s  efforts  of  ensuring  effective  supervision  and  regulation  of  banks  and  non-bank 
financial institutions. 
As  you  may  be  aware,  three  important  factors  have  heightened  the  relevance  of  accounting  and 
auditing standards to bank supervisors. These, include: 
• 
First, IFRS and ISAs are a set of high-quality, transparent and globally renowned accounting 
and auditing standards that the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) has included in its 12 Key 
Standards for Sound Financial Systems. The standards are, without doubt, likely to make the 
greatest  contribution  to  reducing  vulnerabilities  and  strengthening  the  resilience  of  our 
financial system; 
Second, the adoption of IFRS is expected to result in higher quality reporting of the health of 
the financial institutions in Zambia. By so doing, Zambia will benefit from quality international 
research on accounting and finance issues and also benefit from cross-border comparability 
of  financial  performance  and  condition  amongst  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions; 
and 
Third, the use of IFRS is expected to play a critical role in the implementation of risk-based 
supervision of financial institutions in Zambia.  
  Ladies and Gentlemen 
Allow me, at this juncture, to inform you that in the recent past, the Bank of Zambia has streamlined 
the supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions to make it more focused on risks. This is 
aimed at encouraging banks and non-bank financial institutions to implement sound risk management 
practices that provide for: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Further, the Bank of Zambia recognises that accounting, auditing, and disclosure play a crucial role in 
enhancing  financial  stability.  For  instance,  accounting  standards  provide  the  foundation  for  the 
production of credible financial statements and other disclosures that communicate a firm’s operating 
results, overall health, as well as raise the transparency of its various operating activities. On the other 
hand,  disclosure  of  reliable  information  facilitates  market  discipline,  engenders  confidence,  and 
active oversight by management and the Board of Directors; 
clearly defined policies, procedures, and delegation of authority; 
comprehensive risk measurement and reporting systems; and 
adequate institution of audits and other systems of internal controls. 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 1
reduces  the  possibility  of  rumours  and  misleading  information  that  could  cause  market  instability. 
Disclosure  of  information  however,  should  not  compromise  proprietary  data,  but  must  be  flexible 
enough  to  accommodate  future  advances  in  risk  management.  Such  outcomes  therefore,  have 
obvious  implications  for  the  supervisor’s  ability  to  oversee  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial 
institutions. 
The foregoing notwithstanding, the Bank of Zambia has made significant progress in strengthening the 
supervisory approaches and risk management guidance to banks and non-bank financial institutions. 
It is for this reason that the Bank will continue to attach great importance to risk-based supervision, 
accounting and auditing standards, so that the financial statements produced by banks and non-bank 
financial  institutions  convey  adequate  information  about  their  risk  management  activities  to  key 
stakeholders, such as, shareholders, creditors, depositors, and any other interested parties.  
These  are  daunting  challenges.  Nevertheless,  I  am  certain  that  as  our  accountants  and  bank 
supervisors  acquire  more  expertise,  new  ways  of  viewing  risks  and  reporting  them  in  financial 
statements  would  be  devised.  As  such,  financial  and  supervisory  reporting  will  become  even  more 
critical to the existence of efficient financial markets as well as effective supervision of banks and non-
bank financial institutions. 
As I conclude, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the support of other 
institutions during the preparation of this workshop. To this effect, I wish to thank Standard Chartered 
Bank, PriceWaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, Deloitte and Touché, Grant Thornton, the Zambia Centre for 
Accountancy Studies and ZICAB Tuition Centre, for having agreed to provide resource persons for this 
workshop. 
With these few remarks, it is now my honour and privilege to declare this workshop officially open.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2005
