Ardian Fullani: Cooperation in the field of banking supervision in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, on the occasion of the signing of the 
Agreement  on  the  field  of  Banking  Supervision  between  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  the  Banking  and 
Payments Authority of Kosova, Prishtina, 11 July 2005. 
 I would like to take the opportunity from this occasion of the signing of the Agreement on the Banking 
Supervision to say that I really feel excited for being here in Prishtina today. It is my first visit since I 
took over the position as Governor of the Bank of Albania and I would like to assure you that it will not 
be the last one.   
There are many reasons that pushed me to make this commitment today in front of you, and among 
them,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  necessity  that  our  two  institutions,  the  Banking  and  Payments 
Authority  of  Kosova  and  the  Bank  of  Albania  should  raise  the  level  of  cooperation  and  reciprocal 
assistance.  
During this last period, I have personally attended meetings not only at the central banks of our region, 
but I have also met with high representatives of the interested international institutions. I have found 
everywhere an atmosphere of understanding and support, particularly with regard to the initiative for a 
greater cooperation between the region’s central banks. 
I  would  like  to  focus  a  bit  more  on  this  point,  as  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  it  represents  one  of  the 
relevant directions to which we should pay more attention in the future. The agreement that we signed 
today  is  a  supporting  evidence  in  this  direction  and  based  on  the  conversations  I  had  with  Mr. 
Svetchine, the UNMIC officials and with Mr. Kosumi, I can say that they have shown their goodwill and 
commitment as regards cooperation in this field. 
More specifically, we have established contacts with all the central banks of the region, up to the high 
levels of representation and I have realized that in every case they have expressed their readiness to 
further  intensify  the  regional  cooperation  in  this  context.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  contacts  with 
relevant international organizations such as the European Commission, World Bank, as well as the 
European Central Bank and many of the members of the European System of Central Banks, I have 
widely discussed this issue and I have found their total support in relation to the specific problems that 
characterize  the  economic  and  financial  development  of  our  region.  At  present,  there  exist  many 
opportunities  that  we  should  use  in  a  wise  manner,  since  a  collective  action  from  our  part  would 
greatly improve the image of the region in front of the international community and it would make our 
final aspiration for EU membership easier to achieve. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  think  that  we  should  benefit  from  the  work  in  group  for  yet  another  reason. 
Regardless of the different levels of the countries’ developments and despite many other geopolitical 
factors, I hold the opinion that in the fields of economy, the banking sector, structural reforms, finance 
and markets, we show the same symptoms and to a certain degree, priorities converge. This is why I 
think that foreign assistance will be more effective. This is why I think that the several projects that 
may be prepared by the foreign donors would be more effective. I think that the region will show more 
or  less  the  same  progress  without  creating  wide  contrasts  which  –  according  to  a  long-term 
perspective – could emerge as serious problems.    
I  hope  that  the  agreement  we  signed  today  will  only  be  the  first  step  in  the  long  road  towards  the 
comprehensive cooperation between our two institutions. Personally, I consider the fields of payments, 
research, human resources and statistics as other areas of reciprocal interest. Cooperation should be 
concrete and should serve to the adoption of better standards, as well as to the exchange of opinions 
with regard to various matters related to the regulatory framework. 
As  regards  the  Agreement  of  Understanding  in  the  field  of  Banking  Supervision,  I  would  like  to 
emphasize the fact that a standard model which is in compliance with the European directives and the 
Basel  Committee  has  been  adopted.  This  is  a  concrete  and  appropriate  common  commitment  with 
regard to cooperation in the field of supervision. It is worth mentioning that both parties, among other 
things,  will  extend  their  cooperation  in  the  field  of  organizing  common  events  as  well  as  various 
training programmes of common interest. 
   1/2 
Personally,  I  think  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  already  developed  its  supervisory  and  analyzing 
capabilities to a satisfactory level, and as a consequence, I think that our assistance in this field will be 
useful.  At the same time, I think that in the Banking and Payments Authority of Kosova, as a more 
recent institution, these capabilities are being developed at a satisfactory pace and I believe that its 
staff holds many practices and findings that they could offer to their colleagues at the Bank of Albania. 
At the conclusion of this short speech please let me express once more the great pleasure that this 
visit gives to me. I avail myself of this opportunity to assure my Kosovar friends that they will always 
find  in  me  and  in  the  Bank  of  Albania  an  open  window  not  only  for  hospitality,  but  also  an  infinite 
opportunity for cooperation, assistance and devotion. 
Thank you once more. 
   2/2 
