Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland - small, but global 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Swiss Chinese Chamber of Commerce (SwissCham), Beijing, 10 June 2005. 
 I am pleased to be a guest here today at the Swiss-Chinese Chamber of Commerce and speak a few 
words to you. I am sure it is not necessary to convince any of you of the importance of globalisation 
and trade. You are living proof of our export sector’s dynamism and willingness to adapt to changing 
circumstances. By your presence in China, you contribute not only to our country’s influence abroad, 
but also to the expansion of its economy. 
As you know, economic globalisation often gets bad press in Switzerland. Some of our fellow citizens 
condemn it, hoping that barriers to delocalisation might strengthen the situation on our labour market. 
But let’s not be led astray by these scaremongers! Those who succumb to those fears fall victim to an 
illusion. A policy of inactivity is not synonymous with consolidation, but with decline. It is important to 
realise that Swiss investment abroad, particularly in low-wage countries, secures the high added value 
jobs we have at home. As a small country, we therefore have no other choice but to trade with the rest 
of the world if we want to prosper. This means that we will be continuously faced with the challenge of 
international competition. 
Nevertheless, for many observers, Switzerland remains a tiny spot on the European map, a country of 
7.5 million inhabitants completely surrounded by the European Union whose population has already 
grown to several hundred million. Our geographical position obviously puts the question of joining the 
European Union squarely in the centre of often heated debates. For our economy, however, the real 
challenge is not to become more European, but to open up further to global markets. 
Today,  Switzerland  is  more  than  merely  a  quaint  little  country  for  tourists;  it  is  not  only  home  to 
watchmakers  and  bankers  or  trains  that  run  on  time.  This  cliché is  a  thing  of the  past.  Switzerland 
today  is  a  global  production  platform  with  4  million  jobs  within  its  borders  and  1.8  million  people 
working in Swiss companies abroad. This ratio is unique for an industrialised country. It is the result of 
a long tradition of Switzerland’s presence abroad. We are all familiar with the big names in our industry 
which, as early as the beginning of the last century, courageously invested abroad with the goal of 
conquering new markets. Switzerland’s identity in the world has often been better perceived through 
the activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross and through our big companies, rather 
than through diplomacy. 
The internationalisation of the Swiss economy has not slowed down in recent years - on the contrary, 
it  has  amplified.  Let’s  look  at  the  figures:  20  years  ago,  our  current  account  surplus,  i.e.  foreign 
investment, accounted for 5% of Swiss GDP. Today, it amounts to 13%. It was also said at the time 
that one franc out of three was made abroad. Today, it is one franc in two! 
The 1990s marked the real turning point in our economy’s trend toward globalisation. Our commercial 
relations with China are exemplary in this regard. After having levelled off at approximately 900 million 
francs  a  year  in  the  late  1990s,  our  exports  to  China  grew  at  a  rapid  pace  in  more  recent  years, 
reaching 2.9 billion francs in 2004. With regard to Chinese exports to Switzerland, the trend is just as 
spectacular,  but  much  more  steady.  Sales  of  products  manufactured  in  China  in  the  Swiss  market 
have risen continuously for 20 years now, be it textiles, electronic equipment or - naturally - product 
components that are reintegrated into our domestic production. Owing to soaring exports to China, our 
trade balance  with  this  country  has  thus  flattened  out  steadily; toward  the  end  of  the  1990s,  it was 
clearly negative, in 2004 we even had a slight surplus. 
Despite  the  rapid  expansion  of  our  trade  with  China,  its  overall  significance  remains  modest, 
amounting  to  just  2%  of  total  Swiss  trade.  From  a  Chinese  perspective,  the  relative  importance  of 
trade  relations  with  Switzerland  is  even  smaller.  Switzerland  accounts  for  less  than  1%  of  Chinese 
imports and exports. 
A  similar  picture  can  be  observed  with  respect  to  Swiss  foreign  direct  investment  here.  Despite  a 
thirty-fold increase between 1993 and 2003, it still amounts to less than 0.6% of total Swiss investment 
abroad.  All  this  shows  that  there  is  enormous  potential  for  the  expansion  of  bilateral  economic 
relations between our two countries. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
Many politicians in Europe seem to forget that China, like all the other emerging economies in Asia 
and South America, has become one of the dynamic poles in the global economy in recent years. By 
contrast, Europe has trailed behind in terms of growth. 
This is precisely why globalisation makes sense for an economy open to international markets such as 
ours.  For  both  historical  and  geographical  reasons,  our  country  is  exposed  to  a  considerable 
commercial risk  in  Europe:  60%  of  our exports  are  destined  for  European  countries; accounting  for 
25%, Germany ranks first among our export markets. These European markets are no longer the most 
dynamic today, nor will they be in the future. It is essential that we step up the diversification process 
so  as  to  ensure  the  expansion  of  our  export  sector.  It  is  therefore  in  our  own  best  interests  to 
strengthen economic relations with Asia, in particular with China. 
Business relations between industrialised countries and China currently take centre stage in political 
discussions.  In  particular,  harsh  criticism  has  been  levelled  at  China  because  of  its  exchange  rate 
policy of pegging its currency to the US dollar despite the fact that it has made considerable progress 
in terms of efficiency. 
As a representative of a country that has had floating exchange rates for over thirty years now, I can 
only underscore the importance of an exchange rate regime that reflects the realities of the market. 
During the past three decades, the Swiss franc has been an essential factor in the development of the 
Swiss  economy.  However,  it  was  never  a  reason  for  our  exporters  to  sit  back  and  relax.  On  the 
contrary, the franc put pressure on them to become more efficient and to specialise in those product 
areas in which we have a real competitive edge. Consumers also profited from the strong Swiss franc 
in  that  the  prices  for  imported  goods  have  fallen  significantly.  A  currency  that  is  accurately  priced 
enables  the  economy  to  benefit  from  improvements  in  its  terms  of  trade  triggered  by  productivity 
increases. If a country’s currency is undervalued, products are sold on the market at give-away prices, 
and productive resources are inefficiently allocated. 
The functioning of a currency system, therefore, plays a pivotal role in the development of a country’s 
prosperity,  and  monetary  reform,  as  China  is  currently  expected  to  tackle,  is  a  very  delicate 
undertaking. Unless new monetary rules and mechanisms can immediately convince the market of the 
appropriateness of the new regime, a risk of speculative pressure will emerge. 
Switzerland  has  experience  in  this  regard  as  well.  We  ultimately  opted  for  flexible  exchange  rates, 
i.e. a system in which the Swiss franc’s value is continuously in line with market forces. In my view, 
floating rates are not a panacea, they can be volatile in the case of market disruption. At times, the 
Swiss  franc  was  pushed  to  levels  no  longer  compatible  with  the  economic  reality  of  our  country’s 
fundamentals. These episodes lasted for only a limited time, however. 
Another advantage of a flexible Swiss franc is that changes in the international monetary system have 
little  bearing  on  our  currency  which  is  largely  determined  by  Switzerland’s  economic  realities. 
Consequently, the launch of the euro - a major event on the monetary scene in recent years - did not 
lead to the disappearance or the destabilisation of the franc as feared by some. Though the euro - for 
all intents and purposes - is accepted as a means of payment in Switzerland, there are not more euros 
in circulation now than there were French francs or German marks prior to the monetary integration. 
Furthermore,  the  calm  that  has  characterised  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  Europe  since  the 
disappearance  of  the  national  currencies  mitigated  the  speculative  pressures  on  the  franc.  Our 
currency  is  therefore  less  volatile  than  before.  Last  but  not  least,  contrary  to  the  pessimistic 
assumption that the Swiss National Bank would have to shadow the policy of the European Central 
Bank, it was able to set its interest rates according to the needs of the Swiss economy. On the whole, 
our monetary regime passed the test imposed by the change in the European monetary system with 
flying colours. 
Even though Switzerland is a modest player on the international scene it carries more weight than one 
would imagine. The country’s edge lies in its small size, leaving it no other option than to open up to 
international  trade.  Moreover,  its  liberal  philosophy  and  sound  financial  standing  have  given  it  the 
necessary tools to conduct a policy of openness and to have a strong presence abroad. 
Having chosen the option of free trade and free movement of capital, Switzerland is, in many respects, 
better prepared than others to take advantage of the greater opening of the borders brought about by 
globalisation.  To  be  sure,  this  is  not  an  easy  ride,  as  international  competition  always  necessitates 
painful adjustments, and Switzerland is no exception in this respect. When we take stock of the last 
few years, however, the bottom line looks favourable. We would certainly be in an even better position 
now, if we had built up a stronger presence in emerging economies. As you can see, contrary to what 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2005
some people believe, globalisation is not the cause of the weak growth of the Swiss economy; indeed 
the opposite is true. Foreign trade is the engine driving our economy. It has expanded in recent years 
in step with the global economy. By contrast, our domestic market has stagnated and registered only 
limited gains in productivity. 
And that, ladies and gentlemen, is where our problem lies. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 3
