Mervyn King: The international monetary system 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  “Advancing  Enterprise  2005” 
conference, London, 4 February 2005. 
 Later  today  the  G-7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  meet  in  London.  Markets  are 
speculating  on  what  the  communiqué will  or  will  not  say  about  exchange  rates.  On  such matters  a 
private exchange of views might serve us rather better than a public statement. What is a matter for 
public discussion, however, is the mix of exchange rate regimes we see in the world today, and the 
consequences for international monetary stability. 
The current international monetary system comprises three large currency blocs: the dollar, the euro, 
and an Asian bloc of currencies that are to varying degrees fixed against the dollar. These blocs, of 
broadly comparable size, produce more than twothirds of world output in total. Given their size, the 
choice  of  exchange  rate  regime  of  one  bloc  has  a  significant  effect  on  the  options  available  to  the 
others. 
Countries  have  always  faced  constraints  in  choosing  their  exchange  rate  regime.  Any  country  can 
have only two out of the following three – an independent monetary policy, a fixed exchange rate and 
an open capital account. At various times countries have tried – and failed – to have all three. But in a 
world of large currency blocs decisions about exchange rate policies are interdependent. A monetary 
stimulus in the US will have a different effect on the euro area if, say, Asian countries have flexible 
exchange rates rather than fixed rates against the dollar. So the choice of exchange rate regime by 
any one bloc both depends on and affects the choices of the others. 
How did we end up in this position? Under the gold standard of the late 19th and early 20th century, 
exchange  rates  were  fixed  and  capital  flowed  freely  internationally.  Domestic  monetary  policy  was 
subordinated to the demands of the gold standard, except in time of extreme crisis when the need for 
flexibility overcame the desire to adhere to the standard. From the end of the Second World War until 
1971,  the  member  countries  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  had  a  formal  commitment  to  fixed  but 
adjustable exchange rates, and capital accounts were largely closed to give members the flexibility to 
operate  independent  monetary  policies.  Since  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  arrangements, 
countries  have  been  free  to  make  quite  different  choices  of  exchange  rate  regime,  and  have  not 
hesitated  to  do  so.  As  international  financial  markets  have  developed,  there  has  been  a  general 
movement  to  flexible  exchange  rates  supported  by  credible  domestic  monetary  policies.  That  is  a 
sensible use of the price mechanism to respond to complex and unpredictable shocks. 
Two  particularly  important  exceptions  have  been  the  gradual  fixing  of  the  exchange  rates  between 
members of the European Union, culminating in monetary union, and the more or less formal policies 
of  the  newly  industrialised  Asian  countries  and  Japan  to  keep  the  value  of  their  currencies  stable 
against the dollar. Moreover, the Asian central banks have been accumulating large dollar reserves. 
For most of the post-war period, the quantity of central bank reserves held by Asian central banks was 
of the same order of magnitude as the reserves held by the G-7. Over the past 15 years, both Japan 
and non-Japan Asia have rapidly increased their reserves, which are now nearly ten times as large as 
the combined reserves of the rest of the G-7. Two thirds of these reserves are in dollars, a much larger 
proportion than the US share of world output. 
The counterpart to the Asian bloc’s current account surpluses and acquisition of dollar reserves has 
been  large  current  account  deficits  in  the  US.  There  is  nothing  inherently  wrong  with  such 
‘imbalances’. In principle, they reflect the use of financial markets to allocate savings from around the 
world to the most profitable investment opportunities. But there is likely to be a limit to the amount of 
debt that one country can issue as a result of persistent deficits before investors start to worry about 
its  ability  or  willingness  to  repay.  When  the  country  in  question  is  also  the  issuer  of  the  reserve 
currency,  the  rapid  build-up  in  the  assets  denominated  in  the  reserve  currency  contributes  to  the 
potential instability of the international monetary system. That might result in nominal exchange rate 
movements that are far larger than those needed for an orderly rebalancing of asset positions. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
It is easy to see how each bloc can view this possibility as the responsibility of the others.1 But that 
misses the point: the current global imbalances are the natural result of policy decisions by all three 
blocs.  They  are,  in  the  language  of  economists,  a  general  equilibrium  outcome.  It  is  therefore 
meaningless to try to identify the culprit, and blame any one bloc’s woes on another. 
So where does this analysis leave us? Let me identify three challenges for the future. 
First,  do  we  still  need  a  reserve  currency  as  a  source  of  global  liquidity?  In  a  world  of  free  capital 
movements, and developed financial markets, there is no obvious need for an official asset to provide 
international  liquidity,  as  shown  in  the  decline  in  the  relevance  of  the  SDR.  But  since  the  Asian 
financial crisis in the late 1990s, a number of central banks in that part of the world have increased 
their dollar reserves in order to protect themselves from possible future crises by creating what I have 
termed a “DIY lender of last resort” facility in dollars. Is the dominance of the dollar in world reserves a 
reflection of historical factors that are less and less relevant today? Or are there fundamental reasons 
for the world's central banks to continue using one main currency as a source of liquidity? 
Second,  given  that  each  bloc’s  policy  choices  reflect  domestic  objectives,  what  could  be  achieved 
through international meetings? The starting point is the need to find a common analysis. Domestic 
policies should at least be based on mutually consistent assumptions. Only when there is agreement 
on  the  nature  of  the  risks  inherent  in  current  international  monetary  arrangements  will  there  be  the 
possibility of a cooperative outcome that is an improvement for all, not just for some. 
Third, how might we arrive at such a common analysis? The G-7 arose out of an earlier episode of 
concern  about  exchange  rate  movements  in  the  1980s.  Most  smaller  countries  can  choose  their 
exchange  rate  regime  without  worrying  about  its  impact  on  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  the  large 
countries – especially the three blocs I identified at the outset – cannot ignore their interdependency. 
That is why it is important to expand the group of countries that discuss these issues beyond the G-7 
to  include  those,  such  as  China  and  India,  whose  actions  increasingly  have  global  economic 
consequences. 
My  main  conclusion  is  that  the  international  monetary  system  should  be  seen  not  as  a  series  of 
bilateral relationships, but as a multilateral arrangement, albeit one where a small number of the key 
players can usefully communicate with each other. I believe that we need to rethink the role of the IMF 
in  the  international  monetary  system.  I  encourage  the  Fund  to  articulate  a  positive  vision  for  the 
management  of  the  international  monetary  system  in  its  forthcoming  strategic  review.  I  am  not 
convinced that the future of the Fund is primarily as an occasional international lender of last resort for 
middle-income countries suffering financial crises. 
At this Conference the emphasis is naturally on ways to promote productivity and enterprise. Monetary 
stability  at  home  is  now  widely  recognised  as  a  necessary  condition  for  a  successful  economy.  It 
provides, as I said at last year’s conference, a springboard for enterprise. But international monetary 
stability  is  no  less  important  if  trade  is  to  prosper.  In  The  Importance  of  Being  Earnest,  Cecily  is 
instructed  by  her  tutor,  Miss  Prism,  to  read  her  political  economy.  But  Miss  Prism  continued,  “The 
chapter on the Fall of the Rupee you may omit. It is somewhat too sensational. Even these metallic 
problems have their melodramatic side.” What would poor Cecily have made of the recent melodrama 
surrounding the values of the dollar, the euro and other paper currencies? It is clear that the aim of 
central banks to make monetary policy less exciting and more boring needs to be complemented by a 
collective effort to bring boredom to the international monetary stage. 
                                                      
1   Over the past year, senior policymakers from within the G-7 are reported to have claimed that “It’s awfully important that the 
euro zone adopt policies that will allow them to grow faster. Their slow growth is hurting our growth” (John Snow, AFX news 
24/03/04), and that “Our American friends need to put in place a determined policy to control their deficits and so that their 
currency does not distort commercial trade” (Nicolas Sarkozy, AFX news 25/11/04), or indeed that China’s exchange rate 
policy  “has  become  a  destabilizing  force  in  the  world  economy,  has  led  to  major  international  exchange  rate  and  trade 
imbalances throughout the world” (Open letter from US senators Schumer, Bunning, Durbin, Graham, Dodd and Bayh to 
Vice President Richard Cheney, 22/01/04). 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
