European Central Bank: Press conference on the chosen design for the New 
ECB Premises 
Introductory  statements  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, to the press conference on the 
chosen  design  of  the  international  urban  planning  and  architectural  design  competition  for  the  New 
ECB Premises, Frankfurt, 20 January 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
We  have  invited  you  today  for  the  presentation  of  the  chosen  design  proposal  in  the  international 
urban planning and architectural design competition for the New ECB Premises. 
In our introductory remarks we would like to do the following: first, to briefly recall the main steps that 
have led to the outcome of the competition. Second, to present the chosen design proposal in some 
detail.  And  third,  to  explain  what  happens  next.  Afterwards,  we  will  be  happy  to  answer  further 
questions, as will the chosen architect when it comes to technical questions on the design proposal. 
The decision of the Governing Council / the conclusion of the competition 
Last  Thursday,  on  13  January  2005,  “the  Governing  Council  chose  the  design  for  the  ECB’s  new 
premises  out  of  the  3  revised  design  proposals  of  the  3  prize  winners  of  the  international  urban 
planning and architectural design competition. After extensive discussion and a careful evaluation, the 
Governing Council concluded that the revised design concept of Coop Himmelb(l)au best meets the 
functional and technical requirements specified by the ECB, and has features that reflect the ECB’s 
values and transforms them into architectural language.” [Quotation of the Press Release] 
On 13 February 2004 an international jury consisting of architects, Eurosystem representatives and a 
representative of the City of Frankfurt chose three winning designs in accordance with the following 
criteria, as laid down in the Competition Rules out of the 12 design concepts submitted in the Second 
Phase of the competition: 
1. 
2. 
Overall town-planning, architecture and landscape; 
Compliance  with  the  main  features  of  the  functional  and  spatial  programme,  including 
modularity; 
Feasible  approach  to  an  energy/environmental  concept  and  compliance  with  the  main 
features of the ECB’s technical requirements; 
Compliance with the relevant rules, in particular in the field of building law and environmental 
law. 
3. 
4. 
The  first  prize  was  awarded  to  Coop  Himmelb(l)au,  Vienna;  the  second  prize  to  ASP  Schweger 
Assoziierte, Berlin; and the third prize to 54f architekten+ingenieure, Darmstadt, in cooperation with 
T.R. Hamzah & Yeang, Selangor. 
On 18 March 2004, the ECB’s Governing Council decided to invite all three prize winners to revise 
their design concepts in accordance with the Jury’s recommendations and the ECB’s requirements. 
The purpose of this Revision Phase was to remedy the remaining functional and technical deficiencies 
of the concepts. The final decision on the design concept to be implemented was made on the basis of 
the revised concepts and the criteria laid down in the Competition Rules. 
In  the  Revision  Phase  each  of  the  three  teams  has  gone  into  depth  of  research  and  development, 
reaching  a  level  of  design  for  a  new  premises  which  would  be  suitable  for  the  ECB  and  could  be 
realistically constructed. I would like to thank them for their work and have great respect for what they 
have created. Each design proposal is unique in its own way. As we will, of course, only build one 
design, we, my colleagues from the Governing Council and myself, had then the difficult/challenging 
task to choose one of the revised design proposals. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 1
We had then great pleasure to confirm the Jury’s proposal and to announce Coop Himmelb(l)au as the 
winning architect of the international urban planning and architectural design competition for the new 
ECB premises. 
I would like to ask now Mr. Papademos, as he was also the Chairperson of the international jury of the 
competition, to present the main elements of the Governing Council decision for the chosen design of 
Coop Himmelb(l)au.. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The Governing Council’s decision on the winning design concluded the international urban planning 
and  architectural  design  competition  for  the  ECB’s  new  premises.  This  means  that  a  major  step 
towards building a new, permanent home for the ECB here in Frankfurt has been completed. Over the 
past  three  years,  we  have  made  considerable  efforts  in  preparing  this  competition  and  seeing  it 
through to its successful conclusion last week. This process has involved not only our own experts, but 
also external consultants. We would like to take this opportunity to thank all of them for the quality of 
their  work  and  their  genuine  commitment  to  this  project.  We  also  very  much  appreciated  the  good 
working relations with the City of Frankfurt authorities, which were of great assistance, and we look 
forward to continuing this excellent cooperation. 
We would also like to thank again all the architects who took part in the competition and submitted 
such  a  great  variety  of  design  proposals.  We  are  especially  grateful  to  the  three  prize-winning 
architectural  offices  which  participated  in  the  revision  phase  of  the  competition.  Over  the  past 
11 months, they have gone into substantial depth to elaborate the details of their design proposals. 
The  high  quality  and  professionalism  of  the  work  done  in  the  revision  phase  was  very  much 
appreciated by the Governing Council. 
The Governing Council’s decision on the design of the ECB’s premises was reached after extensive 
discussion  and  careful  evaluation  of  the  prize-winning  designs.  As  a  public  institution,  we  are 
committed  to  performing  our  tasks  effectively  and  to  using  our  financial  resources  prudently. 
Therefore,  it  was  essential  to  have  a  thorough  and  comprehensive  assessment  -  even  if  that 
prolonged the process somewhat - so as to make the right decision on a matter of such symbolic and 
financial importance. 
Let  me  now  explain  briefly 
the  Governing  Council  chose  COOP 
HIMMELB(L)AU’s  design.  I  am  delighted  that  the  architect,  Prof.  Wolf  Prix,  and  his  colleagues, 
Mr Dreibholz and Mr Halm, have joined us for this press briefing today. 
the  main  reasons  why 
The design chosen 
The Governing Council judged the revised design concept of COOP HIMMELB(L)AU not only to be 
superior from an overall aesthetic and urban planning perspective, but also to be the one that best met 
the  functional  and  technical  requirements  specified  by  the  ECB.  It  was  felt  that  this  expressive, 
dynamic  and  appealing  design  would  serve  as  a  unique  landmark,  and  result  in  the  ECB’s  new 
premises having a strong identity. In the Governing Council’s view, this design concept had features 
that  reflected  the  ECB’s  values  -  in  particular,  unity  and  transparency  -  and  translated  them  into 
architectural language. Furthermore, the way in which the three elements of the design - the high-rise 
building of a twisted shape, the “groundscraper” and the Grossmarkthalle - formed a harmonious and 
well-proportioned ensemble was assessed very positively. We also considered that the integration of 
the Grossmarkthalle into this ensemble was addressed in an excellent way, while at the same time 
respecting the fundamental appearance of this historic building. 
The  design  concept  also  met,  in  principle,  the  ECB’s  functional  and  spatial  requirements.  The 
Governing Council appreciated especially the good connection of the different functional areas and the 
excellent workplace quality, guaranteeing natural light for all members of staff. Using the atrium as a 
large communicative zone within the two tower buildings was also welcomed. The Governing Council 
noted  that  all  requirements  for  the  energy  concept  had  basically  been  fulfilled  and  that  the  design 
complied with the relevant regulations in the fields of building and environmental law. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2005
Next steps 
So  where  do  we  go  from  here?  The  Governing  Council  decided  that  the  next  step  would  be  an 
“optimisation”  phase  in  which  the  selected  architect  would  again  review  his  design  on  the  basis  of 
further guidance from the ECB. We will reassess the ECB’s functional and spatial requirements and, 
on that basis, seek to further optimise the design with the aim of reducing costs. 
With  regard  to  the  cost,  the  estimates  available  at  present,  taking  into  account  the  optimisation 
potential, suggest that the construction costs will be about €500 million. The total investment costs, 
however,  will  be  higher,  since  they  include  additional  elements,  such  as  the cost  of  purchasing  the 
Grossmarkthalle  site,  planning  fees  and  other  infrastructural  costs.  Some  of  these  additional  cost 
items  are  related  to  the  construction  costs,  while  others  depend  on  further  deliberation  and 
specification. More precise information on the cost aspects of the project will be provided at the end of 
the detailed planning phase. 
I should like to emphasise that we will continue to work closely with the City of Frankfurt authorities in 
the  coming  phases  of  the  project,  especially  in  view  of  the  urban  development  plan  that  will  be 
adopted by Frankfurt’s City Council. 
I  am  delighted  that  the  Governing  Council’s  decision  has  been  very  well  received;  not  only  by 
representatives of the City of Frankfurt, but also by the local and international media. 
Let me conclude by stressing that the Governing Council was very pleased indeed with the way the 
competition ran, with the quality of the designs and with the outcome of the competition. Of course, 
more challenges and many further decisions lie ahead. The successful completion of the competition 
is, however, an important milestone on the way towards building a new home for our institution. I am 
convinced that the winning design chosen by the Governing Council will become not only a Frankfurt 
landmark, but also a symbol of a united Europe and its single currency, the euro. 
I would now like to invite Prof. Prix to present his design proposal. 
BIS Review 5/2005 
 3
