Jean-Pierre Roth: Prospects for the Swiss franc in the heart of the euro area 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Associazione Carlo Cattaneo, Lugano, 9 March 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The launch of the euro in January 1999 fundamentally transformed the international monetary order. 
Switzerland, a small country that strongly depends on exports and capital transactions, suddenly found 
itself surrounded by a market with almost 300 million people sharing a single currency. What were the 
monetary consequences of this development, and what are the prospects for the Swiss franc, which is 
traditionally considered a "success product"?  
The role of the Swiss franc in commercial and financial transactions has certainly diminished. Although 
the euro is only rarely used as a means of payment in the Swiss market, billing within the euro area is 
increasingly taking place in the single currency only – a fact to which Swiss companies have to adjust. 
In the financial markets, the euro now acts as a counterweight to the dollar. The Swiss franc has thus 
lost  some  of  its  significance  as  a  safe-haven  currency  and  has  performed  more  in  line  with  its 
fundamentals.  
The introduction of the euro has, however, not affected our monetary autonomy or the Swiss interest 
rate advantage. The Swiss National Bank has been able to respond with flexibility and determination 
to  the  recent  economic  slowdown.  As  a  result,  the  Swiss  economy  has  benefited  from  far  more 
favourable monetary conditions than Germany, for example, which is subject to the same interest rate 
regime  as  those  euro  area  countries  in  the  process  of  convergence.  Furthermore,  the  interest  rate 
bonus has remained, partly because of the heterogeneous economic development of the euro area.  
Even  if  the  international  significance  of  the  Swiss  franc  diminished,  its  unique  character  should 
strengthen  in  view  of  the  increasing  complexity  and  diversity  of  the  euro  area.  The  markets  have 
correctly assessed this process. The development of the euro area also presents a challenge to the 
Swiss economy. In this context, Switzerland's monetary autonomy will remain a significant asset. 
BIS Review 16/2005 
 1
