Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration and the management of 
inflation expectations by the European Central Bank 
Remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the conference “The 
euro: one currency, one financial market” organised by the European Commission, New York, 19 April 
2005. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak at this conference. 
I  would  like  to  share  with  you  today  some  thoughts  on  two  important  topics.  First,  I  would  like  to 
address  the process  of  European  financial  integration,  this  important  European  endeavour  to which 
the  ECB  contributes  in  many  different  ways.  And  then,  I  would  like  to  address  an  issue  of  mutual 
relevance for the ECB and for market participants, i.e the monitoring and the management of inflation 
expectations by the ECB. 
The process of European financial integration 
2.  
Turning to the process of European financial integration, my remarks will focus on two main issues. 
The first relates to the reasons why financial integration should be pursued, i.e. what are the economic 
benefits of financial integration. The second issue to which I would like to draw your attention concerns 
the state of play, i.e. where does the European financial system stand in the process of integration. 
Why financial integration should be pursued 
2.1 
As we all know, financial systems - composed of financial institutions, markets and the infrastructure - 
serve some basic purposes: among other things, to trade, hedge, diversify and pool risk, to allocate 
resources and to mobilise savings. 
These functions determine the economic benefits that can be derived from financial integration. Two 
widely accepted economic benefits of financial integration are: the better sharing and diversification of 
risk and the potential for higher economic growth. Let me explain this in more detail. 
Financial integration increases the opportunities to share risk and smooth consumption over time. The 
increase in the available set of financial instruments resulting from financial integration, as well as the 
increased cross-ownership of assets, offers additional possibilities to the agents to diversify portfolios 
and share idiosyncratic risk across regions.1 
As we know from theory, when risk is fully shared in an area, a co-movement in consumption results 
between agents belonging to different regions of that same area, while consumption does not co-move 
with region-specific shocks. The evidence suggests that consumption growth rates in the euro area 
are less correlated than are GDP growth rates, which means that the opportunities to share risk could 
still be further exploited in the euro area, thereby creating opportunities for further economic benefits 
from enhanced financial integration.2 
Let me now turn to the second economic benefit of financial integration. Financial integration increases 
the potential for higher economic growth. To explain this, I need to introduce the concept of financial 
development. 
                                                      
1  See, for example, Kalemli-Ozcan, S., B. Sorensen and O. Yosha (2003), Risk sharing and industrial specialization: regional 
and international evidence, American Economic Review, 93, pp. 903-918. 
2  See, for example, Adjaouté, K. and J.-P Danthine (2003), European Financial Integration and Equity Returns: A Theory-
Based Assessment, in V. Gaspar, P. Hartmann and O. Sleijpen Eds., The transformation of the European financial system, 
ECB, Frankfurt. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
The link between financial integration and economic growth is typically derived by first establishing the 
link  between  financial  development  and  economic  growth,  and  then  the  link  between  financial 
integration and financial development. If we were to describe it with the picture of a chain reaction, the 
sequence would be: financial integration positively impacts on financial development that in turn has a 
positive impact on economic growth. But let us look at each individual element separately. 
There  is  strong  evidence  to  suggest  that  financial  development,  i.e.  the  level  at  which  the  financial 
system  fulfils  its  respective  functions,  which  I  mentioned  earlier,  is  positively  linked  with  economic 
growth.3  This  link  is  established  via  two  main  channels:  financial  development  can  lead  to  a  more 
efficient allocation of capital and it can reduce the cost of capital. 
Let  me  give  just  one  example  for  each  of  the  two  channels.  As  regards  the  efficient  allocation  of 
capital,  economic  growth  is  spurred  by  the  fact  that  in  a  more  developed  financial  system,  the 
intermediaries are more effective in dealing with problems of asymmetric information, so more funds 
will  be  allocated  to  more  profitable  projects  and  the  productivity  of  the  economy  will  increase.  As 
regards the reduction in the cost of capital, more developed financial systems can raise the fraction of 
savings channelled to investment. 
So I now turn to the link between financial integration and financial development. 
The  economies  of  scale  involved  in  financial  intermediation  can  foster  the  expansion  of  the 
established intermediaries and markets of the financially developed regions, thereby leading to further 
financial development. 
Financial integration will increase the supply of funds for investment opportunities in less financially 
developed regions of the integrating area. The integration process will increase competitive pressure, 
and thereby increase the efficiency of the financial system of less developed regions; it will reduce the 
cost of financial services, and thus expand the size of the local financial markets. In some cases, the 
additional  supply  of  financial  services  may  be  provided  by  intermediaries  entering  the  local  market 
either by acquiring local banks or by merging with them. 
Given that greater efficiency stimulates the demand for both funds and financial services, this should 
also result in financial markets increasing in size. 
Let me conclude this review of the benefits of financial integration with an empirical result regarding 
the  link  between  financial  integration  and  economic  growth.  While  acknowledging  the  difficulty  of 
measuring  empirically  the  effect  of  financial  integration  on  financial  development  and  growth,  the 
overall conclusion of such studies is that the effects are significant. Let me mention here a study that 
estimated  additional  growth  -  resulting  from  financial  integration  of  the  European  bond  and  equity 
markets - of 1.1% over a period of ten years.4 Despite all caveats that apply to the model underlying 
the simulations, this result is impressive. 
Having laid down the general economic benefits of financial integration, I would now like to discuss the 
reasons  for  fostering  financial  integration  which  are  specific  to  the  ECB  and  which  explain  why  we 
attach the highest importance to this process. 
First, financial integration has implications for monetary policy. Since monetary policy is implemented 
through the financial system, this system should be as efficient as possible in order to guarantee the 
smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area.  The  degree  of 
financial integration is therefore important in determining how effectively this transmission will work in 
practice. In this regard, I also mention the ECB’s task of promoting the effective operation of payment 
systems, as well as its interest in the smooth running of securities settlement systems. 
As  to  the  contribution  to  financial  stability,  the  interconnection  between  financial  integration  and 
financial  stability  has  to  be  addressed.  I  will  not  discuss  in  detail  here  the  link  between  financial 
integration and financial stability: this fascinating issue deserves a speech of its own! 
Let me just highlight the following. 
                                                      
3  See, for example, Pagano, M. (1993), Financial markets and growth: an overview, European Economic Review, 84, pp. 613-
622,  and  Levine,  R.  (1997),  Financial  development  and  economic  growth:  views  and  agenda,  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature, 37(2), pp. 571-608. 
London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
4 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
There  is  no  simple,  clear-cut  answer  to  the  question  on  the  link  between  integration  and  stability. 
There  are  complex  interrelations,  the  net  impact  of  which  is  difficult  to  gauge.  Deeper  financial 
integration, on the one hand, widens the possibilities for financial institutions to manage their relevant 
risks. On the other hand, it can change the interplay of vulnerabilities and the way in which systemic 
risk stemming from contagion or moral hazard problems spreads in the financial system. 
Clearly, competition emerges as a relevant intermediary in the link between financial integration and 
financial stability. On one side, financial integration brings about the unleashing of competitive forces. 
On  the  other  side,  too  fierce  competition  can  also  lead  to  less  prudent  risk-taking  behaviour  by 
financial institutions. 
As you may know, in 2004, the ECB started to publish its financial stability review. In this report, we 
summarise our monitoring and assessment of the stability of the euro area financial system. 
So, to conclude on the process of financial integration, it is generally agreed that deepening financial 
integration is beneficial on the whole. Given the overall economic benefits, as well as the additional 
reasons specific to the euro area, the ECB and the Eurosystem as a whole support and complement 
the private actors’ and public authorities’ actions in the process of financial integration, and I will give 
you a number of specific examples in this respect. 
Given the economic benefits that result from financial integration, but also given its implications for and 
interaction with financial stability, it is of the utmost importance that we monitor the process of financial 
integration closely and understand what is happening. And this is what the ECB does. As one of our 
main  contributions,  we  invest  resources,  on  the  theoretical  side,  in  research  on  all  aspects  of 
European  financial  integration,  and  we  invest  resources,  on  the  empirical  side,  in  monitoring  the 
process of European financial integration. 
Integration of the European financial system 
2.2 
Let me turn now to the second issue, namely where do we stand in the process of European financial 
integration. 
In addition to the research, monitoring and measuring I have already mentioned, there are three other 
kinds of possible actions on our side: first, we contribute to financial integration by providing specific 
central  banking  services;  second,  we  give  advice  on  shaping  of  the  legislative  and  regulatory 
framework of the financial system and we act as a rule-maker by issuing regulations; and, third, we 
can act as a catalyst for private-sector activities. 
These are the multi facets contribution of the ECB to European financial integration. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  giving  you  my  summary  assessment  of  the  process  of  European  financial 
integration.  I  would  say  that  quite  considerable  progress  has  been  made  over  the  recent  years 
although a lot of works remains to be done. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  this by  reviewing the  process of  integration  for  the  various components  of  the 
financial  system:  financial  markets  and  related  infrastructures  on  the  one  hand,  and  financial 
institutions and the regulatory framework on the other hand. 
Financial markets and related infrastructures 
2.2.1 
Assessing  the  state  of  integration  is  probably  rather  straightforward  for  the  financial  markets 
component  of  the  financial  system.  Normally,  a  price  exists  for  a  financial  instrument  or  financial 
service, so one can also use quantitative indicators, based on the law of one price, to measure the 
degree of integration. I should like to mention here that ECB staff is doing substantial research and 
statistical work in this area. 
Indeed, the euro has acted as a catalyst for financial integration. The degree of integration distinctly 
differs  between  the  market  segments,  with  integration  being  more  advanced  the  closer  the  market 
segment is to the single monetary policy. As we all know, the unsecured interbank deposit market was 
almost completely integrated right at the start of Monetary Union. A good example of the ECB acting 
as a catalyst for private sector action is its calculation and publication of the EONIA rate. 
And  I  would  also  like  to  mention  the  related  infrastructure,  i.e.  the  TARGET  system,  which  now 
represents around 90% of the total traffic in large-value payments in euro. With EUR 1.7 trillion settled 
every  day,  TARGET  is  already  one  of  the  two  largest  wholesale  payment  systems  in  the  world, 
alongside Fedwire in the United States. TARGET is a good example of where we have taken direct 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
action  by  providing  central  banking  services  that  foster  European  financial  integration.  We  are 
currently  building  TARGET2,  which  is  due  to  go  live  in  2007  and  which  will  replace  the  current 
decentralised system with a single technical platform. With the functionalities that will be introduced in 
TARGET2, we also expect it to be one of the most sophisticated payment systems in the world. 
TARGET2 will also further improve financial integration. It will increase cost effectiveness. It will allow 
for the provision of a harmonised level of services across Europe, supported by the implementation of 
a  single  price  structure  for  domestic  and  cross-border  payments.  And  finally,  it  will  offer  new 
functionalities enabling banks to better integrate their euro liquidity management. 
Moreover, to also mention a retail aspect, the ECB, and the Eurosystem as a whole, fully support the 
establishment of a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) from 1 January 2008. This means that citizens 
and enterprises will be able to make payments throughout the euro area from a single bank account 
using a single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely as today in the national systems. In 
addition,  national  infrastructures  should  progressively  migrate  towards  a  pan-European  payments 
infrastructure with a view to achieving it by the end of 2010. Consequently, decisions related to the 
next  generation  of  national  systems  should  be  made  from  a  pan-European  perspective  to  ensure 
compliance with the SEPA. The ECB is in a regular contact with the banking industry to seek market 
participants’  support  for  these  objectives.  So,  this  is  another  example  of  where  we  are  acting  as  a 
catalyst for private sector action to foster financial integration. 
Let us now review the money market. The growing repo market is still somewhat less integrated than 
the  unsecured  segment  which  is  fully  integrated,  but  integration  progresses.  The  creation  of  the 
EUREPO index - the benchmark for secured money market transactions in the euro area - three years 
ago was an important market initiative for promoting the repo market’s integration. Anecdotal evidence 
collected via market survey from counterparties active in the repo market suggests that the share of 
euro area cross-border transactions increased further to around 30% in December 2004. 
The least integrated segment of the money market is the short-term paper market. Indeed, this market 
is  not  only  much  smaller  than  its  counterpart  in  the  United  States,  but  it  is  also  segmented  along 
national borders in the EU. In the United States, there is a single and very well developed market for 
commercial paper, with an outstanding volume of almost USD 1.5 trillion. In the EU, the market for 
comparable instruments is amounting to around EUR 750 billion. Fragmentation of short-term paper 
market  reduces  its  depth  and  liquidity  as  well  as  the  diversification  opportunities  for  issuers  and 
investors. 
But I can also give you an example of the ECB’s approach to fostering financial integration by acting 
as  a  catalyst  for  private  sector  initiatives.  The  Short-Term  European  Paper  -  the  so-called  STEP  - 
initiative was set up by the ACI Financial Markets Association. It aims to promote the convergence of 
the  practices  through  market  players’  voluntary  compliance  with  the  standards  set  out  in  the  STEP 
Market  Convention.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  decided  to  support  in  principle  the 
activities pertaining to the introduction of a STEP label for the first two years after its launch and to 
produce and publish related statistics. 
After the money market, the market segment closer to the implementation of monetary policy is the 
bond market. As regards government securities, a high degree of integration has also been achieved. 
Yields are driven by common news - euro area-wide shocks - and only a very small fraction can still be 
explained by local risk factors, although this also varies between the maturity segments. Local shocks 
play  the  smallest  role  in  the  highly  liquid  ten-year  maturity  segment,  but  there  is  scope  for  further 
integration, particularly in shorter maturity segments. 
As  regards  the  euro  corporate  bond  market,  despite  the  exceptional  growth  it  has  witnessed  since 
1999. In terms of new issuing, the gap with the United States as regards the outstanding volume is still 
large.  For  example,  the  outstanding  volume  of  bonds  issued  by  non-financial  corporations,  for 
example, is now around USD 2.9 trillion in the United States, compared with EUR 600 billion in the 
euro area. The degree of integration of the corporate bond market is, however, fairly high. The yield 
differential  between  corporate  bonds  is  explained  predominantly  by  the  rating  and  by  common, 
maturity and coupon effects, whereby the yield variance explained by the country of issuance is close 
to zero. 
One measure for the integration of equity markets is the cross-sectional dispersion of the country and 
sector returns. For the euro area, the dispersion of country-specific returns remains non-negligible, but 
it has become relatively less important in recent years, suggesting a higher degree of integration. This 
development is also supported by the increasing share of investment funds applying a euro area-wide 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2004
investment  strategy  -  or,  in  other  words,  we  are  observing  a  decreasing  “home  bias”  in  their 
investment strategy. This share stayed at the still moderate level of 29% at the end of 2003 and there 
is still considerable room for it to increase. 
I mentioned earlier the money market and its payment systems. Full integration of financial markets 
will  call  for  appropriate  integration  of  securities  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures.  A 
significant process of consolidation has taken place since the introduction of the euro, although the 
European securities infrastructure remains fragmented. 
The  ECB  has  a  particular  interest  in  an  integrated  securities  infrastructure  because  it  uses  it  for 
collateralisation in the context of its monetary policy implementation and for intraday credit operations 
for payment system purposes. In addition, a major disruption in a securities settlement system could 
undermine the stability of the financial markets. 
Let me give you an example of the contribution of the ECB, and the ESCB as a whole, to financial 
integration in the field of securities infrastructure. This time, I will refer to our responsibility of giving 
advice to the shaping of the legislative and regulatory framework of the financial system. 
The ESCB and the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) have jointly drawn up the 
“Standards  for  Securities  Clearing  and  Settlement  in  the  European  Union”.  Should  a  framework 
directive  on  clearing  and  settlement  be  adopted,  which  we  support  in  principle,  this  directive  would 
stipulate high-level principles to be further developed by implementing measures. We agree with the 
European  Commission  that  the  ESCB/CESR  standards  might  form  the  basis  of  such  implementing 
measures.  In  this  respect,  we  also  invite  the  Commission  to  explicitly  recognise  the  overall 
responsibilities and tasks of the ECB, together with the national central banks, and in particular their 
role in the oversight of the securities clearing and settlement infrastructure. 
Let me now address financial integration from the stand point of financial institutions. 
Financial institutions and the regulatory and supervisory framework 
2.2.2 
Given its pivotal role in channelling funds into the EU economy, a well-integrated banking sector is a 
prerequisite  for  achieving  a  truly  single  financial  market.  I  would  like  to  describe  the  degree  of 
integration in the euro area banking sector along three dimensions: first, cross-border consolidation or 
ownership; second, magnitude of cross-border activities; and, third, cross-border competition (i.e. the 
price component), where I would like to look at aspects of retail banking. 
As regards the integration in ownership of euro area banks, banking consolidation has mainly taken 
place at the domestic level, and it witnessed peaks in the late 1990s when around 80% of all M&As in 
the EU banking sector involved domestic banks only. However, between 1999 and 2001 in particular, 
cross-border banking consolidation increased in both absolute and relative terms. 
As  regards  cross-border  activity  of  banks  in  the  euro  area,  cross-border  holdings  of  securities  and 
inter-bank loans have experienced substantial growth. For example, at the end of 2003, around 45% 
of  the  securities  issued  by  non-banks  were  held  cross-border,  twice  as  many  as  five  years  earlier. 
Around 25% of all interbank loans were granted cross-border, also up from around 20% in 1998. In 
contrast, cross-border loans to non-banks remained unchanged and low at less than 5% of all loans to 
non-banks. 
This brings me to a third indicator of banking integration, cross-border competition and, in particular, 
the pricing of retail bank products. Of course, I fully acknowledge that the process of integrating retail 
markets  is  bound  by  some  persistent  home  biases  in  lending  to  and  borrowing  from  non-financial 
corporations  and  households.  I  also  see  some  similarities  to  the  observed  lack  of  full  cross-state 
penetration in the United States, after restrictions on cross-state banking were removed in the 1970s 
and 1980s. 
The research findings are widely known: in the euro area, retail banking markets remain predominantly 
local. Apart from geographical barriers, there are many other reasons for cross-country interest rate 
differentials, such as economic, structural and institutional factors. These factors relate, for example, 
to differences in regulation, competition, bank-customer relationships and the overall development of 
the financial system. 
Let  me  give  a  specific  example  of  a  retail  banking  market:  the  mortgage  market.  There  is  some 
evidence that mortgage rates are less correlated in the euro area than in the United States. Taking 
into account the size of the mortgage credit market, which in the EU represents an outstanding volume 
of around EUR 4 trillion, the costs incurred, through incomplete integration, cannot be ignored. In this 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 5
regard,  the  ECB  supports  initiatives  from  both  the  private  sector  and  the  European  Commission  to 
encourage further integration. 
So what we need to do is to remove the remaining obstacles to effective cross-border banking in order 
to foster cross-border competition and further banking integration. Let me mention a few examples. 
In  the  area  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  a  key  objective  is  to  achieve  a  high  degree  of 
regulatory  and  supervisory  convergence  across  countries.  This  will  help  to  reduce  the  compliance 
burden on financial institutions, thus addressing one of the largest remaining obstacles to enhanced 
cross-border activities. 
The  extension  of  the  Lamfalussy  approach  to  the  banking  sector  and  the  establishment  of  the 
Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) are milestones in this respect. The work of the 
CEBS is crucial to develop common benchmarks and best practices for the consistent implementation 
of EU Banking Directives as well as principles for cooperation between home and host supervisors. In 
addition,  the  forthcoming  revision  of  the  Codified  Banking  Directive  will  enhance  cross-border 
co-ordination between supervisors and, in particular, it will provide an enhanced role for the authority 
responsible for consolidated supervision. Such an enhanced role will encompass co-ordination in the 
information  exchange  and  a  decision-making  process  for  approving  advanced  approaches  at  group 
level under the Basel II framework. 
More  generally,  the  ECB  welcomed  the  extension  of  the  Lamfalussy  approach  to  regulation  and 
supervision to all financial sectors.5 
The ECB Governing Council also provided its view on the European Commission’s recent review of 
the  Lamfalussy  process.6  These  are  further  important  examples  of  where  we  have  contributed  to 
financial integration by giving advice to the shaping of the legislative and regulatory framework of the 
financial system. 
And  here  I  come  to  the  preparation  of  the  “post-FSAP  strategy”  that  will  soon  be  formally  initiated 
when the European Commission issues its Green Paper for public consultation. 
A promising framework has been established through the completed FSAP measures. And I clearly 
see the post-FSAP period as a “window of opportunity” for further enhancing financial integration. The 
ECB will certainly make its contribution in this respect. Let me already now mention three important 
elements. 
First, the focus of the post-FSAP strategy should be on the effective and consistent implementation of 
the  FSAP  measures  at  the  national  level,  with  new  legislation  being  kept  to  the  strictly  necessary 
minimum.  In  this  respect,  the  implementation  of  the  Lamfalussy  framework  represents  a  unique 
opportunity  to  achieve  a  consistent  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  financial  services. 
Second, the policies relating to the regulatory and supervisory framework should be complemented by 
and  closely  coordinated  with  other  relevant  policies  for  financial  services,  for  instance  competition 
policy. And, third, incentives should be provided for the private sector to play its role in exploiting the 
opportunities offered by the public action. 
The role of inflation expectations in the ECB monetary policy strategy 
3. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  topic  I  would  like  to  address  today,  namely  the  role  of  inflation 
expectations in the ECB monetary policy strategy. 
Why do central banks care about inflation expectations? 
3.1 
The notion lying at the core of modern economics is that the expectations held by private agents or 
market participants about the future economic developments may have an immediate and eventually 
significant  impact  on  actual  economic  outcomes.  For  example,  focussing  on  inflation,  which  is  the 
primary  concern  of  a  modern  central  banker,  in  many  standard  models  used  for  quantitative  policy 
analysis there is a direct impact of inflation expectations on the dynamics of actual inflation. It is easy 
                                                      
5  See the ECB Opinion on a new EU financial services committee organisational structure, extending the Lamfalussy process 
to all financial sectors (CON/2004/7) OJ C 58, 6.3.2004, p. 23. 
6  See the ECB press release of 18 February 2005. 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2004
to rationalise this mechanism by thinking about the effect of, say, higher expected inflation on workers’ 
wage claims, which will be increased today in order to compensate for the expected loss of purchasing 
power tomorrow. More generally, one may also think of the effect of higher expected inflation on firms’ 
current pricing decisions: these will tend to push up the price of their output in order to compensate for 
the expected increase in marginal costs of production. In both examples, the outcome is that when 
inflation is expected to increase in the future, it may immediately put upward pressure on prices. 
Hence,  a  modern  central  bank  with  a  public  mandate  of  maintaining  price  stability  must  take  into 
account,  among  other  indicators,  those  related  to  inflation  expectations  in  order  to  evaluate  at  any 
point in time the overall risks surrounding the attainment of its objective. 
This implies assessing the possible effect of inflation expectations on actual inflation and measuring 
the degree to which the public regards the central bank’s commitment to attain price stability credible 
and  worthy  of  trust.  Unstable  inflation  expectations  dynamics  might  emerge  because  market 
participants do not believe that the central bank is truly committed to maintain price stability or that its 
assessment of the current, and most likely, development of the economy is not consistent with that 
objective. In such a situation, the task of monetary policy becomes very difficult. Reigning in inflation 
expectations will demand a tighter monetary policy stance than it would have been deemed necessary 
in case of full central bank credibility. In the end, in those circumstances, social welfare will suffer. 
Monitoring a wide range of expectation indicators 
3.2 
The  ECB  does  not  rely  on  a  single  indicator  when  monitoring  expectations  but  rather  takes  a 
comprehensive and pragmatic approach that balances off the information provided by various sources. 
By their very nature, inflation expectations are not directly observable or measurable. Furthermore, the 
way private agents form and update their view on the likely developments of an economic variable, 
including  inflation,  is  likely  to  be  different  in  important  dimensions  across  different  types  of  agents. 
From  this  perspective,  relying  on  a  single  measure  of  expected  inflation  in  the  context  of  its 
assessment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  may  mislead  the  central  bank,  even  if  that  measure  is 
constructed on the basis of the central bank’s own internal analysis. 
It is for those reasons that the ECB makes constant use of several measures of inflation expectations 
that  are  either  based  on  surveys,  thus  providing  a  direct  measure  of  agents’  expectations,  or  are 
based on the analysis of information contained in asset prices, which provide an indirect gauge of the 
inflation path expected by market participants. 
To be sure, both measures only represent an imperfect gauge of inflation expectations thus requiring 
careful  analysis  and  full  awareness  of  the  limitations  inherent  in  the  information  they  convey.  The 
survey  measures  that  are  typically  analysed  by  the  ECB,  like  the  ECB  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters,  the  Consensus  Economics  forecast  or  the  European  Commission’s  monthly  Business 
and  Consumer  Survey,  suffer,  like  all  survey  measures  from  the  inherent  limitation  that  they  are 
constructed  on  a  restricted  and  heterogeneous  sample  of  respondents  and  from  the  uncertainties 
linked to the design and the implementation of the survey. 
Furthermore, also those indirect measures of inflation expectations extracted from asset prices, like 
the  “break-even”  inflation  rates  that  are  calculated  from  the  yields  offered  by  nominal  and  inflation-
protected bonds with the same maturity present some limitations. In particular, several premia, like an 
“inflation  risk  premium”  but  also  a  “liquidity  premium,”  are  potentially  embodied  in  their  calculation. 
Changes  in  break-even  inflation  rates  over  time  could  therefore  reflect  changes  in  the  level  of 
expected  inflation,  but  also  changes  in  the  perceived  degree  of  uncertainty  about  future  inflation, 
changes in the perception of the liquidity risk, or a combination of the three. 
The information that we gather from these diverse sources at present is consistent with a picture of 
stability. 
For what concerns the survey evidence, it has been extremely stable at the level consistent with the 
ECB’s definition of price stability since 1999. In the most recent survey, conducted in the 1st quarter of 
2005  the  mean  point  estimate  for  HICP  inflation  indicated  by  the  respondents  to  the  ECB  survey 
remained close to and below 2%, in line with the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability and with 
the Survey results for the previous quarter. This holds true for the expectations relating to the years 
2005 and 2006, but also for the five-year period up to 2009. The comparison with the results of the 
Survey for the last quarter of 2004 confirms that the uncertainty surrounding these forecasts remains 
contained, and for the longer horizon has even slightly decreased recently. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 7
Inflation expectations as embodied in asset prices have also been quite stable. The “ten-year” break-
even inflation rate calculated from the index-linked both with maturity 2012 and issued by the French 
Treasury  in  2001  has  averaged  approximately  1.9%  since  its  issuing.  This  reflects  a  fairly  sound 
anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area around levels consistent with the ECB’s definition 
of  price  stability.  We  nevertheless  observed  an  episode  of  transient  instability  occurring  during  the 
Spring and the Summer 2004, when the dynamics in oil prices caused global inflation expectations to 
increase. As a consequence, in the euro area, the break-even inflation rate peaked at 2.4%. Those 
movements proved to be short-lived and the break-even inflation rate has since returned to levels that 
are closer to our definition of price stability, albeit marginally above 2%, possibly owing to the recent 
renewed  upward  pressures  on  oil  price,  which  have  increased  beyond  the  50  US  Dollar  threshold 
since February 2005. 
The slight discrepancy between break-even inflation rates and survey expectations does not suggest 
at  the  moment,  that  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  not  correctly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
definition  of  price  stability:  We  must  take  into  account,  in  particular,  the  “inflation  risk  premium” 
embedded  in  the  break-even  inflation  -  given  the  uncertainties  prevailing  in  oil  markets  -  and  the 
tendency of that discrepancy to diminish over the last months. However, these evolutions of break-
even inflations rates command continuous monitoring. 
3.3 
Concluding remarks: The role of the ECB monetary policy strategy in anchoring 
inflation expectations 
Let me conclude my intervention with some remarks on the link between the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy and inflation expectations over the few years since the launch of the euro. 
It remains absolutely remarkable that the real progress made in reducing inflation expectations in the 
core currency area in the few months leading up to the final decision over EMU participation in May 
1998 was fully preserved at the moment of the transition and afterwards. It is my opinion that much of 
this success is owed to the monetary policy strategy adopted by the ECB in October 1998. This is not 
to  deny  that  since  the  mid-1990s  inflation  and  its  volatility  have  declined  significantly  worldwide. 
However, it would be very hard to overlook the fact that our strategy allowed us to materialise what 
few observers at the time had considered possible: that the new currency could inherit, from day one 
of its existence, the best anchoring properties that were available in Europe’s most revered monetary 
tradition.  And  that  the  solid  anchoring  of  expectations  which  had  been  brought  about  by  the 
completion of the transition to monetary union could be fully preserved all along the past six years. 
The  founding  principles  which  I  view  as  the  distinctive  necessary  conditions  to  such  a  remarkable 
achievement can be summarised in some decisive factors of the institutional framework of EMU on the 
one hand and of the ECB’s monetary strategy on the other hand. 
First  of  all,  the  Treaty  clearly  establishes  that  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  is  conducted  by  an 
independent  central  bank.  The  Treaty  itself  guarantees  for  the  independence  of  the  ECB  thereby 
ensuring  that  the  ECB  will  have  no  impediment  in  pursuing  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability. 
Market  participants  in  the  euro  area  as  well  as  social  partners  and  the  public  at  large  know  with 
certainty that the maintenance of price stability over time will not depend on short-term considerations 
of  any  nature.  This  is  certainly  a  necessary  pre-condition  for  the  anchoring  of  long  term  inflation 
expectations. 
Turning to the elements of the strategy that are more directly instrumental in helping long term inflation 
expectations to be firmly anchored to the ECB’s definition of price stability, I shall list first the clarity of 
the ECB’s objective. The ECB’s Governing Council aims at maintaining the euro area inflation rate at 
“below  and  close  to  2%”.  The  wording  is  precise  enough  to  provide  a  reference  point  for  those 
individuals,  social  partners  and  market  participants  who  need  to  take  decisions  based  on  the  price 
outlook.  At  the  same  time,  the  definition  of  the  inflation  objective  takes  into  account  both  the 
uncertainty  that  monetary  policy  has  to  face  and  the  limits  to  its  own  actions.  It  is  my  opinion  that 
inflation expectations in the euro area have proved to be consistently anchored in the medium term 
because  everybody  has  appreciated  the  ECB’s  honesty  and  transparency  as  well  as  its  firm 
commitment  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  people  have  recognised  in  the 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  complete  continuity  with  the  definition  existing  before  in  the 
national currency areas that had crystallized the highest level of confidence. 
The  second  element  of  the  strategy  that,  I  think,  provides  a  solid  conceptual  anchoring  to  inflation 
expectations is the comprehensiveness that characterises the macroeconomic analysis leading up to 
8 
 BIS Review 26/2004
the  Governing  Council’s  policy  decisions.  The  ECB  has  always  explained  that  its  approach  to 
organising,  evaluating  and  crosschecking  the  information  relevant  for  assessing  the  risks  to  price 
stability  is  based  on  two  analytical  perspectives,  referred  to  as  the  “two  pillars”.  The  two-pillar 
approach is a way of conveying to the public the notion of a diversified analysis and of ensuring robust 
decision-making based on different analytical perspectives. In particular, by taking into account the two 
different,  real  and  monetary,  perspectives,  the  ECB  is  best  equipped  to  assess  the  risk  to  price 
stability over the short-to-medium term and the long term, respectively. 
It is my belief that our careful monitoring of monetary phenomena and our continuous vigilance upon 
to  the  developments  in  monetary  aggregates  is  reflected  in  the  stability  of  long  term  inflation 
expectations. 
Finally,  let  me  stress  the  importance  of  the  medium  term  orientation  of  the  strategy  in  anchoring 
inflation expectations. The ECB has always refused to give any specific definition of what it intends as 
“medium  term”.  This  reflects  the  awareness  that  monetary  policy  affects  price  developments  with 
variable and uncertain time lags. And it rests on the notion that the optimal monetary policy response 
to shocks with a view to ensuring price stability always depends on the specific nature and size of the 
shocks  affecting  the  economy.  Hence,  the  medium-term  orientation  gives  the  ECB  the  flexibility 
required  to  respond  in  an  appropriate  manner  to  avoid  that  unnecessary  volatility  may,  over  the 
medium term, be detrimental to its own objective of price stability and, ultimately, to social welfare. The 
two  pillar  framework,  in  conjunction  with  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
conduct  has  become  a  distinguishing  feature  of  the  strategy.  The  public’s  understanding  of  this 
approach  has  significantly  improved  over  time  and  has  contributed  to  preserve  the  high  level  of 
credibility that the ECB has been enjoying since its inception. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 9
