Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Continuity in a time of change 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  at  the 
12th Anniversary of the BSP, Manila, 4 July 2005. 
 Introduction 
MB Member Valdepeñas, MBM Boncan, MBM Amatong, MBM Villafuerte, Outgoing MBMs 
Mr. Alindogan and Mr.  Salazar, our esteemed former  Central Bank Governors, our friends 
from the banking community and the business sector, distinguished guests, my family, our 
friends  from  media,  my  co-workers  in  the  BSP,  M.O.,  SPC  and  our  regional  offices  and 
branches, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.   
Today we celebrate the twelfth year of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and I wish everyone a 
Happy Anniversary!   
This  celebration  is  particularly  significant  for  us.  Governor  Buenaventura,  MBMs  Quintos, 
Salazar  and  Alindogan are  closing six  years  of  outstanding  work  in  central  banking  today.  
We salute them for their very important contributions to the relentless pursuit of the goals and 
objectives of this institution.  I have been fortunate to participate in and personally witness 
the major changes made to advance monetary policy making and banking supervision during 
their watch.  They, together with the MBMs who are staying behind, are one of a kind, a bold 
bunch of policymakers who were alien to the fear factor in introducing innovations to make 
the  financial  system  and  the  BSP  as  an  institution  attuned  to  the  new  standards  and 
requirements of a fast changing world.   
Governor Buenaventura cannot join us in today’s celebration, but the BSP is so close to his 
heart that he sent his taped message, so that even in spirit we shall all be complete. As he 
finishes his term, he leaves a legacy that, while towering, is at the same time edifying and 
inspiring for us to continue the tradition of excellence and hard work in the BSP.   
As we bid farewell to our outgoing MBMs, we also extend a warm welcome to our incoming 
Board members:  Mrs. Amatong and Mrs. Villafuerte who are not new to the Monetary Board.  
We all look forward to working with them in the period ahead.   
This  afternoon,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  thoughts  about  the  two  main  pillars  of 
central banking:  monetary policy and banking supervision. I will also identify the challenges 
faced by a modern central bank and what they mean to the BSP in terms of our organization.   
Sustaining the shift in monetary policy regime 
The  first  pillar  of  price  stability  represents  our  contract  with  the  Filipino  people.    When 
consumer prices are stable, we serve the cause of economic growth.  Today, the issue of 
inflation  strikes  even  closer  to  the  hearts,  or  perhaps  the  guts  of  the  public.    Surveys  by 
independent  research  organizations  have,  for  example,  consistently  ranked  high  prices  as 
the foremost concern of the lower income classes.  A low and stable inflation preserves the 
purchasing  power  of  the  people’s  incomes.  There  is  more  food  on  the  table  and  more 
services to buy.   
In my earlier interviews with the media, I have stressed one important point that will be the 
hallmark of my stewardship.  We will not try to reinvent the wheel.  Instead, we shall strive to 
continually improve it and keep it running more efficiently.  Our vision is to see that it brings 
us to where we want to go.    
We  shall  therefore  continue  to  adhere  to  inflation  targeting  as  our  monetary  framework. 
Inflation targeting emerged at that point where monetary targeting started to fade.  Since the 
implementation of inflation targeting in January 2002, we have seen how rigorous economic 
   1/4 
analysis, discipline in the conduct of monetary policy and greater transparency in the thinking 
of the monetary authorities have contributed to reduced gyrations in consumer prices. The 
dynamics of inflation expectations has been largely anchored in the market’s appreciation of 
the  BSP’s  explanation  of  the  factors  driving  inflation  and  what  the  BSP  intends  to  do  to 
address them. This is the face of continuity.   
But you will agree with me that perhaps there is scope for change.  We shall soup up the 
inflation  targeting  framework.    We  will  not  only  reassess  the  various  components  of  our 
forecasting models and the integrity of our databases, but we will also intensify our capacity 
to anticipate possible shocks in the system.  The first is to make sure we have the right tools 
to  deal  with  shocks;  the  second  will  give  us  the  comfort  that  we  will  not  be  ossified  by 
surprises.  We have completed our early warning systems for various areas like currency, 
business cycles and the banking system, and we shall increasingly make use of them in our 
monthly  review  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.    The  results  of  our  periodic  environmental 
scanning exercises will be used in an attempt to more effectively incorporate political factors 
in assessing the risks to the inflation outlook.  We are also reviewing our monetary tools that 
include the reserve requirement, open market operations and credit policy.  If we may add, 
finally, the market can expect greater transparency in the conduct of monetary policy and this 
should reduce the gray areas in anchoring public expectation about inflation and enhance the 
functioning of the markets.  
Strengthening the financial system 
In the financial sector, the main challenges emerged from the overhang of the Asian financial 
crisis  and  the  greater  integration  of  the  Philippines  into  the  global  financial  system.    In 
response,  we  have  addressed  these  challenges  precisely  by  strengthening  the  financial 
sector.  Focus has been given to maintaining a sound and viable banking system and the 
development of the domestic capital market.   
Efforts in this area have begun to show positive results.  Banks’ balance sheets are gradually 
recovering from the large burden of bad loans while the local bond market has received the 
initial  shot  from  the  reforms  that  include  the  now  operational  fixed  income  exchange.    We 
shall  sustain  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  reform  strategy  on  cleaning  up  banks’  balance  sheets, 
addressing  remaining  weaknesses  in  managing  risks,  and  ensuring  that  our  prudential 
regulatory  standards  are  elevated  to  international  benchmarks.    We  shall  also  continue  to 
coordinate with other government agencies and the private sector in installing the remaining 
infrastructural  requirements  of  a  well-functioning  capital  market  that  would  diversify  our 
sources of funds and reduce our vulnerability to various shocks.   
But  we  need  to  enhance  a  few  things  even  as  we  have  started  to  launch  them.    We  are 
moving into consolidated supervision and risk-based approach to bank examination that are 
aligned with international best practices.  Such innovations are necessary to allow regulators 
to effectively manage challenges posed by conglomerate structures and cross-border issues.   
We  are  improving  corporate  governance  and  market  discipline.    A  crucial  element  for 
effective  oversight  of  the  banking  system  is  for  the  regulator  to  have  stronger  supervisory 
and regulatory authority and this can only be done with the support of Congress in amending 
the  BSP  Charter.    Finally,  we  realize  that  the  BSP  can  enhance  its  effectiveness  by 
establishing  teamwork  with  the  other  financial  regulators.    Thus  was  born  the  Financial 
Sector Forum (FSF) that has elevated the cooperation among the regulators to pioneering 
levels.    The  FSF  will  help  harmonize  supervisory  and  regulatory  efforts,  improve  the 
exchange of information among regulators and promote better consumer protection.   
In the area of promoting the domestic capital market, the changes we would like to see are 
the fruits of the steps that have already been started in close collaboration with the private 
sector.  We shall be pleased to see more robust trading of government and subsequently, 
private, debt securities at the Fixed Income Exchange, improved market confidence from the 
use of independent custodians, migration by the banks from the common trust fund to unit 
   2/4 
investment trust fund, and lower borrowing cost with the installation of a credit information 
bureau, currently being discussed by Congress.  We are excited to see the day when we are 
able  to  reduce  our  reliance  on  foreign  borrowing  because  the  domestic  capital  market  is 
efficient enough to provide the critical mass to fund sustained economic growth.   
Promotion of microfinance and literacy program-the social dimension of BSP policy 
We shall also intensify the social dimensions of BSP policy.  Foremost in this is our advocacy 
for microfinance.  This program is the most effective tool for democratizing the access of the 
public  to  a  portion  of  the  nation’s  wealth,  for  empowering  the  poor  and  the  economically- 
challenged group of small entrepreneurs and for scoring a dent on poverty alleviation.  We 
shall  also  pursue  economic  and  financial  literacy  program  to  reach  out  to  our  consumers, 
investors,  overseas  Filipino  workers  and  their  beneficiaries  to  help  expand  their  options  of 
where to put their money and ensure their economic future.   
BSP organization    
My fellow workers at the BSP, central banks have often been described as the most powerful 
institution  in  the  economic  sphere:    the  monetary  policy  decisions  made  by  the  monetary 
authorities  “can  lift  markets  overnight,  bring  people  out  of  unemployment,  keep  growth  on 
track and hold inflation in check.”1Yet what central banks can do is ostensibly limited by a 
host  of  factors  notably  increasing  globalization.    Globalization  has  integrated  international 
capital  markets  and  with  this,  deregulation  and  technological  progress  have  rendered 
traditional  control-based  approaches  virtually 
forces  drive 
globalization, it has also increased the propagation of shocks in the world economy.  
  As  market 
ineffective. 
What then is the challenge for us?   
It is important for us at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas to be able to row with the current and 
if  necessary  at  some  point,  to  row  against  it.    What  is  imperative  is  that  the  BSP  is 
appropriately structured and equipped.  Our commitment to building a more effective central 
banking organization is captured by our new vision and mission statements and they should 
serve  as  our  guide  for  the  next  steps.    We  owe  a  great  deal  to  the  work  in  the  past  to 
instituting  best  practices,  enhancing  the  bank’s  corporate  image,  and  strengthening 
corporate governance within the BSP itself.   
I  know  that  we  can  always  count  on  you  my  fellow  BSPers,  for  our  committed  and 
professional men and women have been the strength of our organization through the years. 
Moving forward, let us continue to give our best to this institution, which has always looked 
after our welfare.  We see this in the better facilities, comprehensive adjustment in pay scale 
and  expanded  opportunities  through  improved  training  programs  and  scholarships.    These 
are elements that we should review from time to time to ensure they remain adequate and 
appropriate.    As  a  great  inventor  once  said:  “…if  we  did  all  the  things  we  are  capable  of 
doing, we would literally astonish ourselves.”2
                                                 
1  Meyer, Laurence H. (2002) “A Term at the Fed, An Insider’s View,” Harper Business. 
2   Thomas Alba Edison. 
   3/4 
The way forward 
The BSP story of the last six years is ending today with a considerable amount of success.  
We are moving into the story of the next six years, complete with the template of new ideas 
and bold reforms.  If we are to chart the roadmap in a “T” account, we will see that along the 
way, there are pluses and minuses, opportunities and challenges. The success of the last six 
years  is  punctuated  by  some  unfinished  agenda  that  needs  to  be  pursued  to  achieve 
continuity  in  a  period  where  change  is  the  only  constant.    I  recall  what  that  celebrated 
columnist  of  the  New  York  Times  once  suggested:    it  looks  like  some  central  banks  find 
themselves with much less ability to move the economy than anyone expected.3  The reason 
is that some of them somehow cultivated the mystique of their invincibility that now turns out 
to be a handicap.  In our case, while we deliver bold strokes to the market, we shall not throw 
caution to the wind.  We shall be fully accountable for our efforts to keep prices stable and 
the banking system sound, but we shall also continue to inform the markets as necessary 
about the boundaries of what we can do.  With this, the nation can be assured the BSP shall 
keep its end of the contract.   
Thank you and good afternoon. 
 
                                                 
3   Krugman, Paul (2003), “The Great Unravelling,”, Allen Lane, -.72. 
   4/4 
