Süreyya Serdengeçti: Financial stability and implications of Basel II 
Opening speech by Mr Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at the conference on “Financial stability and implications of Basel II”, Istanbul, 16 May 2005. 
 Financial stability 
Minister, Governors, Academicians, Guests etc., 
I would like to welcome you to Istanbul today and thank you all for your participation in this conference. 
It is an honor for me to host such distinguished speakers and participants in Istanbul.  
One  of  the  features  of  the  world  economy  back  in  the  90’s  was  the  financial  liberalization  of 
economies.  The  ambitious  macroeconomic  policies  of  many  countries  aiming  at  liberalizing  capital 
accounts, started in fact with developed countries in the late 70’s and spread to developing countries 
in the late 80’s and 90’s. 
Another feature of the world economy in the 90’s was the acceleration of capital movements around 
the  world,  which  I  would  say  is  also  an  outcome  of  the  financial  liberalization  policies.  The 
comprehensive  technological  progress  in  areas  of  information,  communication  and  computing  also 
highly promoted this active movement of capital across national borders. 
This impressive change in the global economic environment since the 80s has resulted in important 
changes in global financial markets. As the figures indicated, during this period, the global financial 
sector in general and the banking sector in particular developed much more than the real sector did. 
New financial instruments that were designed for firms’ financing needs provided new opportunities for 
companies.  Hedging  markets  developed  rapidly.  All  in  all,  financial  engineering  emerged  as  a  new 
area of knowledge. 
Dear Guests,  
The aggressive capital movements among countries and developments in financial markets generated 
a number of economic benefits at the global level. When borders between countries have disappeared 
in favor of capital flows, funds flew to regions where capital had the highest return. So, it has been 
observed that competitiveness and productivity of capital in global scale increased considerably in the 
90s. There has been also a substantial rise in the volume of global merchandise trade.  
However, all developments that I mentioned now represent only the front side of the medallion.  
The back of the medallion has not been as bright as the front. In the 90’s, not only the scope, timing 
and  speed  of  the  financial  liberalization  varied  across  countries,  but  also  the  consequences  of 
economic policies had various effects on national economies, depending on the initial conditions and 
country specific factors. Hence, the rapid increase in capital movements among countries shook the 
financial markets from time to time, led to financial and banking crises in many countries and, even 
more importantly, caused the crisis in one country to spread to others.  
In 2003, Caprio and Klingebiel reported 117 episodes of systemic and highly costly financial crises in 
developed and emerging market countries since the late 1970’s1. The resulting costs for economies in 
terms of fall in GDP have reached even double digits and had a significant impact on the welfare of 
societies, especially in developing countries, and again especially when banking crises coincided with 
currency crises.  
In  addition  to  high  incidence  of  “traditional”  banking  crises,  the  period  also  saw  certain  unusual 
episodes of financial distress with potentially damaging consequences for the real economy operating 
essentially  through  capital  markets.  This  has  been  most  evident  in  the  United  States,  where 
non-banking intermediation has developed furthest2. Starting in the late 80’s, examples included the 
banking crises in Nordic countries, Japan, some Latin countries and East Asia.  
                                                      
1   Caprio G. and Klingebiel, D. (2003). Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises. World Bank Database.  
2   Borio and White. (February 2004). Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The Implicaitons of Evolving Policy Regimes. 
BIS Working Papers. No. 147. 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
Along  with  excessive  capital  flows,  economic  research  in  recent  years  has  identified  a  variety  of 
market  imperfections  such  as  moral  hazard  and  asymmetric  information  that,  if  widespread  and 
significant, can threaten the smooth functioning of financial systems and lead to panic behavior, bank 
runs, asset price bubbles, excessive leverage, and inadequate risk management.  
As  Mr.  Aninat  (Former  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  IMF)  said  once,  and  I’ll  quote  his  own  words, 
“Historical experience shows that financial crises are here to stay; and dealing with unfolding crises in 
real time poses perhaps the most demanding and certainly the most stressful challenge to any central 
banker”3.  
As a result, it is widely accepted that financial stability is an important issue for policy makers that they 
basically cannot ignore.  
Furthermore,  economic  literature  and  experiences  of  countries  also  showed  that  in  order  to  reach 
sustainable growth and sustainable increase in employment, the key components of the economy are, 
in  addition  to  indispensable  price  stability,  a  sound  financial  system  and  a  financially  stable 
environment. 
Dear Guests, 
For the efficient allocation of resources in an economy, financial intermediation should also function 
efficiently so that firms can find sources to produce more. As we keep dwelling on the banking sector 
particularly,  banks  play  a  vital  role  in  the  economy,  matching  supply  of  capital  with  demand,  so 
knowing how a downturn affects these institutions is important in understanding national economies’ 
dynamics4. 
Developments  in  financial  markets  have  two  important  implications  on  the  global  economy  and 
economic  policies:  Firstly,  stronger  a  country’s  fundamentals  are,  less  vulnerable  it  is  to  distortions 
caused by intensive capital movements. Hence, the importance of macroeconomic stability and strong 
fundamentals. 
However,  contrary  to  the  general  belief,  turmoil  in  global  markets  in  the  90’s  also  showed  that 
macroeconomic  stability  in  general  or  price  stability  in  particular  does  not  necessarily  guarantee 
financial  stability.  As  historical  evidence  suggests,  it  is  possible  for  financial  imbalances  to  develop 
even in an environment of stable and low inflation. 
Therefore  as  the  second  implication,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  crises  without  discipline  in  financial 
markets. Then it naturally follows that the risk management developed as a distinct banking discipline 
in  the  1990s.  New  tools  and  methods  to  manage  the  market  and  credit  risk  were  developed,  and 
brought  about  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  volume  of  capital  movements  in  the  financial  sector  and 
variety of instruments. Efficient supervision became the vital part of this internal discipline.  
I  should  also  admit  that,  as  financial  engineering  contributes  to  development  of  new  and  complex 
instruments, such instruments also create obstacles to supervisory authorities given their sophisticated 
structures. 
As  a  result,  a  long  debate  started  among  both  academics  and  policy  makers  as  to  whether  the 
objective of price stability or financial stability should take priority for a central bank. I do not want to 
take  sides  in  this  debate.  We,  central  bankers,  are  responsible  for  providing  a  stable  economic 
environment, in which the economy operates efficiently in the long run. And prerequisites for a stable 
economic  environment  are  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  So,  there  is  always  a  strong 
reason for keeping financial stability in the central banks’ reaction functions.  
Therefore,  these  two  objectives  are  not  in  conflict  in  the  long  run,  but  are  complementary  to  each 
other. Accordingly, financial stability has increasingly become an auxiliary objective of central banks to 
pursue. 
In fact, central banks’ role in times of financial instability is not a new issue for the economic literature. 
The  term  “lender  of  last  resort”  originated  in  the  writing  of  Sir  Francis  Baring  in  1797.  In  his  book, 
“Observations  on  the  Establishment  of  the  Bank  of  England”,  Sir  Baring  referred  to  the  Bank  of 
                                                      
3   Aninat, Eduardo. (2003). Foreword. Challenges to Central Banking from Globalized Financial Systems. IMF.  
4   Schuerman  T.  (2004).  Why  Were  Banks  Better  off  in  the  2001  Recession?  Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance. 
FEDNY. Vol. 10. No: 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2005
England as “the dernier resort” from which all banks could obtain liquidity in times of crises. But the 
concept of lender of last resort had been described and used in a more comprehensive manner by 
both Henry Thornton in 1802 and Walter Bagehot in 1873.  
Distinguished Guests,  
I will add a point to the discussion that the benefit of having a strong financial system in an economy 
eliminates  the  ground  for  conflict  in  policies  between  financial  stability  and  price  stability.  Since  a 
strong  financial  system  increases  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  on  one  side,  it  also  provides 
elasticity  for  the  economy  to  overcome  external  shocks  easier  on  another.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  attain  financial  stability  in  the  long  run  without  maintaining  price  stability. 
Furthermore,  price  stability  attained  through  credible  monetary  policies  is  an  advantage  in  times  of 
increasing uncertainty in the financial system and financial imbalances.  
I  should  also  mention  that  policies  for  financial  stability  not  only  mean  measures  taken  in  times  of 
crises,  but  also  consist  of  rules  for  maintaining  financial  stability  in  the  long  run.  In  the  area  of 
prevention of financial instability, perhaps the single most important thing a central bank can do is to 
foster a macroeconomic environment of low and stable inflation and sustainable economic growth.  
Providing  price  stability  is  therefore  a  must  but  it  is  definitely  not  enough  in  itself  to  keep  financial 
markets on track. Either central banks or other authorities in charge have to take measures and put 
harmonized policies into practice to maintain financial stability.  
Within  this  framework,  it  is  possible  to  mention  three  main  functions  for  central  banks  to  maintain 
financial  stability:  The  first  one  is  monitoring  the  financial  system.  The  second  one  is  running  the 
country’s  payments  system.  And  the  third  one  is  taking  necessary  measures  for  crisis  resolution. 
Central banks also publish regular financial stability reports based on innovative in-depth analysis of 
financial vulnerability. 
Dear Participants, 
Before  proceeding  with  the  Turkish  case,  I  want  to  address  some  issues  about  international 
cooperation  in  favor  of  sustaining  financial  stability  and  particularly  a  strong  financial  system  on  a 
global  level.  I  will,  however,  not  go  into  so  much  detail  of  evolution  of  the  international  efforts  and 
criteria formed by international institutions, since many of you here today are not only well informed 
about the issue, but also largely contributed to these efforts. 
The most important result of international efforts aiming at sound financial markets was the approval of 
modern risk management techniques as a part of regular financial intermediation process. 
In this context the Basel II, the new capital adequacy framework, is a very important outcome of the 
action taken in the international arena. Although, the main aim of the original Basel Accord, which was 
applying institutionalized and international standards to the global financial system, has not changed in 
the Basel II Accord, the Basel II puts more emphasis on the risk management aspect of the financial 
intermediation  process.  It  is  expected  that  a  sound  and  resilient  risk  management  in  the  banking 
sector would also lead to more efficient risk management in the real sector. Therefore, in this way, as 
the  financial  system  becomes  more  stable,  less  pro-cyclical  and  reinforced  against  shocks,  more 
sources will be available for the real sector. 
However, it should also be considered that healthy and efficient risk management requires more than 
the  three  main  pillars  of  the  Basel  II  Accord.  A  good  understanding  of  the  risks  that  a  financial 
institution  might  encounter,  a  clear  definition  of  risk  taking  procedures,  compliance  of  risk  taking 
decisions with the strategic goals of the institution, ensuring the risks are within the limits that were set 
by the management and adequate capital for given risk structure are other essential elements for a 
more significant advance in risk management in financial institutions. 
Additionally,  the  Basel  II  is  also  significant  due  to  its  effect  on  the  increase  in  transparency  of  the 
banking  sector.  As  you  may  agree,  the  more  transparency  there  is  in  the  banking  sector,  the  less 
probable systemic risk will be.  
All these steps will certainly provide a mechanism that is designed to allocate resources effectively, 
initially financial resources but ultimately real resources. Hence this will contribute to the strength and 
efficiency of the economy as a whole. 
Dear Guests, 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 3
Having touched on the notion of financial stability, financial markets and banking sector in the world 
economy, what I intend to do now is to familiarize you to some extent with the Turkish experience in 
this area. First of all, I will concentrate on developments in the financial system in Turkey in the 90’s. 
Secondly, I will talk about the 2000-2001 crises. Finally, I will describe the implementation, in terms of 
financial stability, of the Central Bank of Turkey’s monetary policy. 
In  order  to  give  the  appropriate  point  of  view  about  the  development  of  the  Turkish  economy  and 
especially the financial sector in the 90s, I’ll have to highlight the basic structure of that period in the 
Turkish economy.  
The financial liberalization process that started in the 80s was one of the cornerstones of the Turkish 
economy. A set of reforms for developing a functioning market economy was put into practice. Interest 
rates were more and more determined in the markets, and some measures were taken regarding the 
supervision of the banking sector. However, before taking the necessary actions for strengthening the 
domestic financial markets, such as measures for more transparent balance sheets and more careful 
risk management in the intermediation process, the capital account was liberalized at the end of the 
1980s.  The  Turkish  economy  with  an  inefficient  banking  sector  became  open  to  intensive  capital 
movements.  
In my view, the Turkish economy turned into an open one before it became strong enough to cope 
with  capital  movements  that  would  occur  in  the  90s.  The  sequencing  of  reforms  for  the  Turkish 
economy in general and its financial system in particular should have been set differently. 
What went wrong in the Turkish economy in the 90s? Policies did not concentrate on ensuring and 
maintaining  macroeconomic  stability;  different  priorities,  delayed  reforms,  loose  fiscal  policy  and 
accommodative monetary policy led to dynamic instability throughout these years. As a result, inflation 
climbed to 79 percent on average, budget deficit widened so much that the public sector borrowing 
requirement reached 15.5 percent of the GNP by 1999, the output growth was very low on average 
and volatile compared to other emerging markets.  
So,  poor  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  a  fully  liberalized  capital  account  brought  about 
vulnerability of the economy to external shocks and the Turkish economy faced severe financial crises 
and turbulences in the 90s.  
Such an environment had also important implications on the financial system. Having suffered from 
the  reckless  and  unstable  macroeconomic  management  together  with  inefficient  supervision,  the 
system deteriorated severely and faced a serious moral hazard problem. 
Dear participants, 
A  closer  look  at  the  Turkish  financial  system  would  be  helpful  to  characterize  its  weaknesses  and 
structural  problems  during  that  period.  First  of  all,  because  of  the  high  public  sector  borrowing 
requirement,  fiscal  dominance  increased  considerably  in  the  financial  markets  and  led  the  public 
sector to crowd out the private sector. Hence, the relationship between the banking sector and real 
sector could not develop as it should have done. Instead, the relationship between the banking sector 
and the public sector strengthened year after year. 
Secondly,  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole  failed  to  exercise  good  risk  management  in  its  credit 
allocation. Since financing the public sector budget deficits with high real interest rates was an easy 
way to make profits, banks did not pay much attention to basic principles of risk management, such as 
maturity and currency mismatches. Some banks also created considerable amount of connected-loans 
in  their  balance  sheets.  On  the  public banks side, more specifically,  which  had  a  high share  in  the 
overall  sector,  banks  were  heavily  used  to  support  government  policies  and  credits  were  allocated 
inefficiently, which resulted in big losses and weakened their capital structure. 
Lastly, in the 90s, regulatory and supervisory measures and changes in the structure of the financial 
system in the Turkish economy were not designed for strengthening the system in the long term, by 
incorporating elements such as prudent supervision, institutionalization of regulation, etc. Instead, the 
measures mostly sought daily solutions to the problems. As you know well and the research in the 
area suggests, “Actions to deal with crisis can clearly lead to future moral hazard. If any protection 
provided to banks in a crisis is greater than they expected, this could increase their risk taking and [the 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2005
possibility of another] crisis in the future.”5 As Bagehot also put it, “any aid to a present bad bank is the 
surest mode of preventing the establishment of a future good bank.”  
In my opinion, the 100 percent blanket guarantee that was brought as a part of crisis resolution during 
the 1994 crisis, but kept in effect until very recently is a good example of this. The measures taken 
during  the  1994  crisis  unfortunately  paved  the  way  for  the  moral  hazard  behavior  in  the  banking 
sector.  
All of these distortions in the banking sector and institutional structure of the financial system led to 
important systemic risks in the Turkish economy. As the 1990s were over, it was impossible for the 
Turkish economy to operate without reforming its financial sector.  
Therefore,  the  restructuring  program  for  the  financial  sector  was  launched  as  a  component  of  the 
exchange rate based disinflation program in 2000. The Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency 
(BRSA)  became  operational  in  August  2000  as  an  autonomous  body  in  order  to  strengthen  the 
prudential regulations and to improve the quality of banking supervision. The Banks Act was amended 
to simplify and bring the supervision standards in line with the EU directives, international practices 
and the core principles stated by the BIS.  
However, the reform process was not continued in line with the pre-determined schedule and broke 
down during the 2000 and the 2001 crises. The process could only be restarted again after the 2001 
crisis. 
Dear Guests, 
If I have to describe the crisis in the Turkish economy in 2000- 2001, I would prefer to describe it as 
the result of accumulated structural distortions in the economy. These distortions in the economy put 
pressure on the pegged exchange rate regime and, along with the credibility problem due to the bad 
track record of policies, resulted in first banking and then currency crises. In other words, the 2001 
crisis started as a banking crisis, then it turned into both banking and currency crisis.  
Dear Guests, 
As I have mentioned several times in my speeches, in Chinese the word crisis also means opportunity. 
The  Turkish  economy  nowadays  is  showing  signs  that,  after  all  those  hectic  years,  opportunity  to 
stabilize it was finally seized. 
Policies  and  measures  that  were  put  into  practice  after  the  2001  crisis  were  not  limited  to  simply 
practices of crisis management in the short term. Steps were taken in order to remove distortions in 
the Turkish economy, to renew the financial system and to change the dynamics of the economy with 
the purpose of achieving price stability, sustainable public finances and sustainable growth in the long 
run.  
First of all, right after the 2001 crisis, economic policies aimed, in the short run, at maintaining financial 
stability  and  convincing  market  participants  that  sound  macroeconomic  policies  would  be  put  into 
practice with determination in order to solve the problems of the economy. 
In  my  opinion,  the  most  critical  change  that  came  after  the  2001  crisis  was  the  amendment  to  the 
Central  Bank  Law.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  been  given  independence  after  a  period  of 
30 years of high and chronic inflation. The primary objective of the Bank is now defined as achieving 
and  maintaining  price  stability.  It  was  a  turning  point  in  the  economy  and  highly  contributed  to  the 
changing dynamics in the Turkish financial system. 
In addition, it is now explicitly indicated in its law that financial stability is the Central Bank’s auxiliary 
objective, and the Bank gives utmost importance to maintain it.  
In  the  fourth  article  of  the  Law,  the  Bank’s  responsibility  of  financial  stability  is  defined  within  the 
framework of the functions of central banks that I mentioned before. The fourth article of the Central 
Bank Law states that the Bank is responsible “ to monitor the financial markets; to regulate the volume 
and circulation of the Lira, to establish payment and securities transfer and settlement systems and to 
set forth regulations to ensure the uninterrupted operation and supervision of the existing and future 
systems  and  to  determine  the  procedures  and  conditions  of  reserve  requirements  and  liquidity 
                                                      
5   Hoggarth, G. Reidhill, J. Sinclair, P. (2004). On the Resolution of Banking Crises: Theory and Evidence. Bank of England 
Working Paper. No.229. 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 5
requirements  by  taking  into  consideration  the  liabilities  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  as 
deemed appropriate by the Bank.”  
In  this  article  it  is  also  stated  that  the  Bank  will  take  measures  for  enhancing  the  stability  in  the 
financial system and take regulatory measures with respect to money and foreign exchange markets 
as well. Hence, The Bank is equipped to take necessary measures in times of external shocks and in 
fact proved that during the 9/11 event and also the Iraqi War in 2003.  
Distinguished Participants, 
After the 2001 crisis, besides amendments in the Central Bank Law, many steps were immediately 
taken to strengthen the financial sector. At first, the “Banking Sector Restructuring Program” was put 
into  practice  in  May  2001.  The  main  goal  of  the  program  was  to  eliminate  the  distortions  in  the 
financial  sector,  improving  its  intermediary  function  and  thus  enhancing  its  competitiveness  by 
international standards.  
Within this framework, restructuring public banks, strengthening private banks, solving the problems of 
the  troubled  banks  taken  over  by  “Savings  and  Deposit  Insurance  Fund”  and  strengthening  the 
regulation and supervision of the banking sector were among the priorities of the program. And, for 
improving the asset quality of the system, a debt restructuring process was put into practice, named as 
the  “Istanbul  Approach".  The  sector  increased  its  capital  and  decreased  foreign  exchange  open 
positions to a great extent.  
Hence, right after the 2001 crisis, the authorities intervened into the system in order to prevent a total 
collapse of the system. This operation had cost around 21.7 billions in New Turkish Lira – more than 
12 billion Euros at current rates- or in other words, 12.1 percent of GNP. Firstly, the Treasury and the 
Central  Bank  have  injected  liquidity  to  public  banks.  Secondly,  the  Central  Bank  started  foreign 
exchange sale auctions on a daily basis to provide foreign exchange liquidity in exchange for some of 
the  excess  domestic  liquidity  to  the  system  so  that  they  could  close  their  open  positions  in  foreign 
exchange.  The  Central  Bank  also  used  open  market  operations  to  withdraw  the  remaining  still 
excessive  liquidity  from  the  system  to  prevent  hyperinflation.  Thirdly,  to  provide  more  room  to  the 
banking sector for liquidity management, measures were taken regarding the reserve requirements of 
the banking sector. The Central Bank started paying interest to banks’ required reserves.  
The stability of the banking sector has been further strengthened by the ongoing reforms and boosted 
both mergers and acquisitions and foreign bank participation to the sector. The volume of the banking 
sectors’ credits  to  non-financial sector  rose by  more  than  70 percent  in real  terms  and  the  sectors’ 
profits increased by a considerable amount since 2002; capital adequacy and loan quality of the sector 
also improved. 
As of today, efforts towards increasing the consistency of the legal framework with the EU, completion 
of the restructuring process and then privatization of the public banks and development of modern risk 
management are on the agenda. 
Distinguished Participants, 
Today we not only have a stronger banking sector, which forms a basis for macroeconomic stability, 
but  we  also  see  remarkable  progress  in  the  Turkish  economy  in  general.  With  the  stabilization 
program that was launched in May 2001, great progress toward macroeconomic stability was made, 
especially in the disinflation process and recovery in growth.  
As the inflation rate is regarded as a signal of the quality of economic management, the achievement 
in the inflation front in the Turkish economy is among the most significant examples of progress toward 
better  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  Single  digit  inflation  was  reached  after  a  period  of  more  than 
thirty years of high and chronic inflation.  
Additionally,  as  inflation  targets  were  attained  in  2002,  2003  and  2004,  and  thanks  to  a  sound 
communication policy, the public in general now believes in the determination of the policy makers to 
fight against inflation. As a result, policies have gained credibility and the inflation target has become a 
more  credible  nominal  anchor  for  economic  agents.  This  in  turn  has  strengthened  the  disinflation 
policy and ensured its continuity.  
As  another  development,  the  Turkish  economy  has  been  enjoying  high  rates  of  growth  for  three 
consecutive years in the falling inflation environment. The GNP growth rate was 9.9 percent in 2004. 
Accordingly, the real growth rate compared to 2001 was 25.5 percent. 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2005
However,  even  more  important  than  achieving  high  growth  rates  is  that  dynamics  of  growth  in  the 
Turkish economy are now changing. Now, growth is mainly driven by the productivity increase, comes 
from  the  private  sector  and  increase  in  exports.  This  provides  confidence  regarding  achieving 
sustainable growth rates in the future. 
I want to emphasize that, not only recent developments in macroeconomic fundamentals but also the 
commitment to prudent policies in the medium-term economic program, prospects of EU membership 
and the new standby agreement with the IMF help the Turkish economy to operate in an equilibrium of 
good expectations.  
Dear Participants, 
I want to mention that the Central Bank’s commitment to start full fledged inflation targeting in 2006 will 
deliver  extra  confidence  to  economic  agents  in  terms  of  prudent  policies.  The  full  fledged  inflation 
targeting  regime  will  bring  more  transparency  to  the  actions  of  the  Bank  and  also  enhance  the 
communication policy that the Central Bank put at the center of its policies since the 2001 crisis. As 
the transparency and institutionalization are critical qualifications of prudent policies to attain a sound 
macroeconomic environment, the implementation of full fledged inflation targeting will certainly support 
further macroeconomic and financial stability in the Turkish economy.  
Dear Guests, 
As  a  central  banker  I  must  confess  that  conducting  monetary  policy  in  an  uncertain  economic 
environment is not an easy task and never will be. Distortions in the financial system further increase 
the uncertainty in the functioning of the economy, and the reform process in the financial system is in 
fact never-ending to sweep away these uncertainties. Therefore, there will always be steps to be taken 
toward  attaining  more  transparent  and  efficient  financial  markets.  And  policy  coordination  between 
institutions  on  international  and  national  levels  will  certainly  be  the  most  important  aspect  of  this 
dynamic process.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 7
