Ian Plenderleith: Five big issues in the economic field 
Speech by Mr Ian Plenderleith, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the ACTSA 
(Action for Southern Africa) Corporate and Professional Dinner, Johannesburg, 2 June 2005. 
 Visitors to South Africa are encouraged to go on safari and see “the Big Five”. The big five are, indeed, 
awesome in the wild and a memorable sight. But I have always regarded the notion that visitors can 
see just the big five, and then go home feeling they have covered the ground, as distinctly sub-optimal 
marketing. Any score card that leaves out, for example, the mute grace of the giraffe, or the sheer 
brute force of the hippopotamus, or - my personal favourite- the nimble elegance of the warthog, does 
not begin to do justice to the diversity of wildlife in South Africa; and if we also add a few of the rarer 
sights, like perhaps wild dogs and cheetah, we would encourage visitors to stay longer and add yet 
more to our tourist earnings. 
The big five are not, however, only to be found in the bush. In the economic field, too, we have for the 
past decade been determinedly and assiduously tracking a different sort of big five, representing the 
key  elements  we  need  to  nurture  to  enable  our  economy  to  achieve  higher  and  rising  levels  of 
sustainable  growth  in  output  and  in  employment  and  hence  in  living  standards  for  all  the  people of 
South Africa. I want tonight briefly to point out these economic big five to you and to suggest that, after 
years of carefully stalking the spoor, we are now on track and in sight of the big five and well placed to 
enjoy the continuing benefit of their company. 
What are these big five, in the economic field? 
First, the economy as a whole continues to demonstrate vigorous and sustained growth. We have in 
fact achieved continuous positive growth in output for the past 26 consecutive quarters - some six and 
half  years.  That  is  a  remarkable  track  record  of  cumulative  growth.  More  recently,  we  have  seen 
growth  accelerate,  from  3  percent  or  just  over  in  the  past  few  years  to  3.7  percent  last  year  and 
continuing  to  run  close  to  that  level  on  the  first  quarter  GDP  data  released  just  this  week.  The 
economy appears to have moved up in the past two years onto a higher growth trajectory which, if it 
can be sustained, is extremely good news. 
Secondly, there are good reasons for believing that this move to a higher growth trajectory is not a 
passing phase, but is sustainable and can continue. The reasons are that disciplined fiscal policy has 
kept the public finances strong, with the budget deficit and public debt kept to prudently manageable 
levels; and that monetary policy - the particularly responsibility of the Reserve Bank - has succeeded 
in bringing down inflation and holding it down, so that inflation has been within our target range of 3-6 
percent  continuously  since  the  latter  part  of  2003.  Importantly,  this  track  record  of  low  inflation  has 
helped  to  bring  down  inflation  expectations,  and  our  projection  looking  forward  is  that  inflation  will 
remain within our target range. It is this encouraging outlook for inflation that enabled us to reduce 
interest rates in April, and it is this platform of stability achieved by fiscal and monetary policy working 
together that gives encouragement that the higher growth trajectory we are experiencing will indeed 
be sustainable, even though there will inevitably be ups and downs along the way as we experience, 
for example, vagaries in the global economy and normal business cycle effects. 
Thirdly, our external position has been strengthened. Helped by the recovery in the rand from a sharp 
temporary fall in 2001, we have been able to make good progress in rebuilding our foreign exchange 
reserves, working towards more normal levels. Moreover, although the general weakening in the dollar 
has at times been a source of strain on externally-competing sectors of our economy, we have over 
the past 18 months seen the rand tend to trade on a more settled basis within a broad trading range, 
with  less  volatility.  The  signs  we  are  seeing  of  a  stable  and  competitive  exchange  rate  will  help  to 
sustain the higher growth trajectory of the economy as a whole. 
Fourthly,  we  have  in  South  Africa  a  strong  economic  policy  framework  that  has  been  exemplary  in 
focusing on the development needs of the country in a considered and co-ordinated way, and as such 
is widely admired internationally. Alongside the disciplined approach to fiscal policy, and the monetary 
stability  our  inflation  targeting  framework  has  achieved,  well-constructed  supply-side  policies  are 
directed  at  increasing  the  growth  capacity  of  the  economy,  particularly  with  the  current  focus  on 
education,  training  and  skills  development  and  on  improving  the  physical  infrastructure.  Alongside, 
truly impressive progress has been made in addressing the backlog of social neglect, as is evident 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
from  the  impressive  statistics  and  the  visible  evidence  all  around  the  country  of  low-cost  house 
building, water supply, sanitation, health and education facilities and essential social support. All these 
elements of economic policy are working together to increase growth in output and employment and 
living standards on a sustainable basis. 
Fifthly, there has in the past year or two been a perceptible improvement in international confidence in 
the  South  African  story.  The  recent  evidence  of  this  can  be  seen  in  the  upgrade  in  South  Africa’s 
international  rating  earlier  this  year  by  one  of  the  major  rating  agencies,  and  in  the  decision  by  a 
leading international bank that it wishes to enter our domestic retail banking market as a full-service 
participant. 
Stalking  these  big  five  and  staying  on  track  to  keep  them  in  sight  has  been  a  major  effort  and  a 
considerable achievement in such a short period of years. Nor are they the only objectives we as a 
society need to pursue. We cannot, of course, relax and we need to keep on track. As for the wild life 
in  our  national  parks  and  game  reserves,  we  need  to  keep  the  big  economic  five  in  sight  and  to 
nurture  the  right  environment  for  them  to  flourish.  In  so  doing  we  will,  like  any  good  game  ranger, 
ensure that the benefits are sustainable and that they are enjoyed by the whole community. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
