Donald L Kohn: Monetary policy perspectives on risk premiums in financial 
markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Financial Market Risk Premiums Conference, Federal Reserve Board, Washington DC, 
21 July 2005. 
 I  am  pleased  to  have  an  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  conference  on  the  time  variation  and 
macroeconomic links of financial market risk premiums. Steven Sharpe, Paul Harrison, and Hao Zhou 
are  to  be  congratulated  for  putting  together  an  interesting  program  that  should  advance  our 
understanding  of  this  important  topic.  Although  your  papers  concentrate  on  the  equity  premium,  I 
would like to take a few minutes today to broaden the discussion to encompass risk premiums in other 
markets and to highlight the connections between risk premiums and monetary policy. My goal is not 
to  draw  conclusions  on  recent  movements  in  risk  premiums  but  rather  to  give  you  a  sense  of  how 
estimates of risk premiums may influence our policy decisionmaking, to note some of the difficulties 
that we face in interpreting their movements, and, I hope, to stimulate further research in this already 
fertile field.1  
At  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  pay  a  lot  of  attention  to  financial  market  prices  in  the  formulation  of 
monetary policy. Financial markets are the channel through which our policy affects the economy, and 
asset  prices  contain  valuable  information  about  investors'  expectations  for  the  course  of  policy, 
economic activity, and inflation, as well as about the risks around those expectations. 
An important element in interpreting financial market prices is the identification of the risk premiums 
they contain. To be clear, when I say "risk premium" I mean the additional compensation required by 
investors for holding a risky security--that is, one with uncertain returns--above the compensation that 
would  be  demanded  by  risk-neutral  investors  who  care  only  about  expected  returns.  For  example, 
while a risk-neutral investor would demand a certain spread on a junk bond over a risk-free rate of the 
same  maturity  as  compensation  for  expected  losses,  a  risk-averse  investor  likely  requires  an  even 
wider spread depending on the covariance characteristics of the bond's total return. In the Treasury 
market,  risk--or  term--premiums  are  generally  evident  as  maturities  extend  and  reflect  mostly  the 
interaction  of  risk  aversion  and  uncertainty  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  When  applied  to 
credit  markets,  the  term  "risk  premium"  is  sometimes  used  in  a  broader  sense  to  include  expected 
losses,  but  I  am  thinking  of  risk  premiums  as  the  extra  compensation  for  the  uncertainty  around 
anticipated economic and financial outcomes. This compensation is determined by both perception of 
risks and investor preferences, or risk aversion. 
Among  the  risk  premiums  that  we  monitor  regularly  at  the  Federal  Reserve  are  those  on  equity 
returns, equity volatility, corporate bonds, and Treasury securities. Each contains information about a 
different risk around a different expected outcome. Clearly, the separation of market prices into distinct 
pieces  reflecting  expected  values  and  risk  is  a  difficult  task  that  relies  heavily  on  modeling 
assumptions about underlying processes and investor behavior. Indeed, think of all the constituents of, 
say,  a  long-term  corporate  bond  yield.  Such  a  yield  encompasses  compensation  for  expected  real 
rates, for expected inflation, for expected default, and for the expected liquidity in the instrument, and it 
contains conceptually separate risk premiums for uncertainty about each of these underlying factors. 
In  principle,  an  ideal  model  would  account  for  each  of  those  components  separately.  In  practice, 
however,  we  have  yet  to  achieve  such  a  fine  breakdown,  and  the  estimate  of  any  one  or  group  of 
those  components  is  likely  to  be  highly  dependent  on  the  estimates  of  the  others.  Although  some 
promising research on modeling these components--jointly or individually--is under way, we need to be 
especially  aware  of  our  theoretical  and  empirical  limitations  when  interpreting  market  price 
movements. But these qualifications do not diminish the point that risk premiums are certainly relevant 
for monetary policy deliberations, and we do pay attention to our best estimates of them.  
We,  as  policymakers,  form  our  own  independent  view  of  the  expected  path  of  a  number  of 
macroeconomic  and  financial  variables,  but  we  are  also  obviously  interested  in  gauging  investors' 
                                                      
1   Roberto Perli and Paul Harrison, of the Board's staff, made important contributions to this talk. 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
expectations about the future paths of those same variables. Investor expectations shape the market 
reaction to new economic data and to our policy actions, and when those expectations differ from our 
own,  they  could  embed  information  that  we  might  wish  to  factor  into  our  own  analysis.  Investors' 
expectations  are  reflected  in  asset  prices,  but  so  are  risk  premiums,  and  inferences  about  future 
economic  conditions  obtained  from  market  prices  are  conditional  on  estimates  of  those  premiums. 
Neglecting or grossly misestimating risk premiums will lead to misperceptions of the market's outlook 
and thus potentially to market moves that we did not anticipate. Nothing better illustrates the need to 
properly account for risk premiums than the current interest rate environment: To what extent are long-
term interest rates low because investors expect short-term rates to be low in the future due to some 
underlying softness in aggregate demand, and to what extent do low long rates reflect narrow term 
premiums, perhaps induced by well-anchored inflation expectations or low macroeconomic volatility? 
Clearly, the policy implications of these two alternative explanations are very different. 
While judging investors' expectations is important when setting monetary policy, so is understanding 
investors'  sense  of  the  distribution  of  possible  outcomes  around  those  expectations.  Market  risk 
premiums may well be an input into our own perceptions of the range of possible economic outcomes, 
and our policy actions can be influenced by those perceptions. For example, our reaction to a scenario 
in which inflation is low and is expected to vary within a narrow band would presumably be different 
than our reaction to an alternative scenario in which inflation uncertainty was high and there was a 
significant  chance  of  entering  a  deflationary  environment.  Thus,  we  are  also  interested  in  risk 
premiums  as  indicators  of  uncertainty  and  not  solely  as  inputs  into  accurate  readings  of  investors' 
mean economic outlook. 
So far I have largely considered risk premiums as indicators of economic conditions, but they can also 
directly  affect  real  economic  activity.  For  example,  the  decline  in  term  premiums  in  the  Treasury 
market  of  late  may  have  contributed  to  keeping  long-term  interest  rates  relatively  low  and, 
consequently, may have supported the housing sector and consumer spending more generally. Also, 
risk premiums may be, in part, a manifestation of investor sentiment, which in turn may be correlated 
with  consumer  and  business  sentiment.  Accordingly,  it  is  possible  that  risk  premiums  may  reflect 
broader "animal spirits" in a Keynesian sense, and thus they could be a marker for shifts in underlying 
business and consumer spending trends. Consider the dramatic example of the turnaround in equity 
markets  from  2000  to  2003:  The  pullback  of  both  real  and  financial  risk-taking  that  accompanied  it 
surely was a significant drag on the economy. Risk premiums may even have a role in credit cycles: 
Some research here at the Board has shown that corporate bonds issued when risk premiums are low 
default at a higher rate than bonds issued when risk premiums are high, even when conditioning on 
their observable risk.2 Other research has drawn similar underperformance conclusions about stock 
returns following initial public offerings.3
Finally,  risk  premiums  are  also  important  tools  for  monitoring  financial  stability.  A  strong,  stable 
financial  system  is  of  vital  importance  both  for  a  robust  economy  and  as  a  support  for  an  effective 
monetary policy. Information that  bears on investors' attitudes toward risk and on the functioning of 
financial markets and financial institutions is thus undoubtedly valuable. It certainly was, for example, 
in the fall of 1998, when virtually every risk premium measure that we monitor appeared to indicate a 
sharp withdrawal from risk-taking on the part of investors. That withdrawal threatened financial stability 
and, as a consequence, real activity; the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) risk-management 
approach to policy dictated that the target rate be eased enough to substantially reduce the odds on a 
very adverse outcome. 
As you can see, we read risk premiums in a variety of ways and for a variety of purposes. Because we 
conduct policy in real time, our attention is often drawn to movements in risk premiums as they occur, 
especially if they appear to deviate from long-established patterns. Thus, we try first of all to develop a 
good understanding of the historical behavior of risk premiums. The top panel of the exhibit that I have 
passed around shows crude estimates, put together by the Board's staff, of the risk premium on both 
equities  and  corporate  bonds  going  back  to  1920.  The  equity  risk  premium  is  constructed  by 
subtracting  the  real  Aaa  corporate  yield  from  the  ratio  of  trend  earnings  to  prices  as  a  measure  of 
expected equity returns. The corporate bond risk premium is constructed as the expected excess rate 
                                                      
2   See  Paul  Harrison  (2004),  "Issuance  and  Default  Waves in Junk  Bonds:  The  Role  of  Cyclical  Factors  and  Easy  Credit," 
unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
3   See Tim Loughlin and Jay R. Ritter (1995), "The New Issues Puzzle," Journal of Finance, vol. 50 (March), pp. 23-51. 
of  return  of  Baa  over  Aaa  corporate  bonds  using  expected  default  rates  from  a  simple  regression 
model. The configuration of risk premiums in the 1950s presents both similarities and contrasts to the 
behavior of risk premiums in current times. That earlier decade, like the present, was a time of low 
interest rates and low inflation, and the corporate bond risk premium was low, just as it is today. But 
our estimates suggest that the equity premium for that period was substantially higher than it appears 
to be today. To an extent, that may have been a manifestation of a lingering reluctance to hold equity 
for a generation that had been chastened by the Great Depression; asset preferences apparently were 
skewed in ways that could not be readily attributed to objective differences in the risks of holding credit 
and equity claims on businesses. 
The other aspect of the chart that stands out is the apparent decline in risk measures since the late 
1970s and early 1980s. The moderation in real output volatility, along with the decline in inflation and 
its stabilization around low levels, probably reduced perceptions of how much economic and financial 
variables would possibly deviate from expectations and may thus account for part of the explanation 
for the decline in risk premiums. I know part of this has already been discussed this morning, and will, 
no doubt, also be featured during the remainder of the conference, given its fundamental nature and 
potential to explain declines in risk premiums across markets. But I am intrigued by efforts to separate 
the extent to which the decline in risk premiums in recent decades is due to a reduction in inflation 
versus  a  reduction  in  real  output  volatility.  In  that  regard,  does  the  fact  that  most  of  the  decline 
occurred by the end of the 1980s suggest that inflation control played a more important role than the 
damping of business cycles, which might reveal itself more gradually over time?  
However, even if we think we understand the trends, the challenges become more pressing when we 
look at movements in, and relationships among, risk premiums as they happen. Our first challenge is 
to  determine  when  a  movement  is  not  just  noise  that  will  quickly  reverse,  but  rather  a  signal  of 
something  important  that  we  need  to  understand  as  we  formulate  policy.  For  example,  does  the 
backup in the equity risk premium over the past year arise from some deep-seated and long-lasting 
macroeconomic  cause  that  we  need  to  consider  for  our  policy  decisions,  or  is  it  a  mere  blip?  To 
separate signal from noise, we try to look not only at the persistence of movements but also at their 
correlation across markets. Is there a widespread increase or decrease in risk aversion or in perceived 
risk that suggests a shift in underlying attitudes and expectations? If there is, the monetary authority 
may well need to adjust the stance of policy as the FOMC did in the fall of 1998.  
Disparate  movements  in  risk  premiums,  such  as  those  we  witnessed  in  equity  and  fixed  income 
markets recently and that are highlighted in the bottom panel of the exhibit, are not unusual and can 
occur for a number of reasons. For one, we are  measuring premiums in various markets that have 
different risk exposures. Securities with different pay-off structures naturally may react differently to a 
given  shock.  For  example,  a  relatively  modest  downward  revision  to  expected  spending  may  raise 
more questions about returns on equity than on corporate debt. Alternatively, markets may be reacting 
to different shocks, or to changes to the capital structure of firms; over the last few years, lengthening 
debt  maturities  and  increases  in  liquid  asset  holdings  may  have  supported  debt  holders  at  the 
expense  of  equity  holders.  Or,  as  in  the  1950s,  perceptions  may  shift  as  a  consequence  of  recent 
events.  From  time  to  time,  risk  premiums  also  may  be  affected  by  changes  in  demand  and  supply 
driven by legal or regulatory requirements, by exogenous changes in issuance patterns, or by shifting 
asset preferences for reasons unrelated to changing expectations or attitudes toward risk.  
To  repeat,  divergences  in  risk  premiums  are  not  necessarily  unusual  if  looked  at  from  a  historical 
perspective. And surely different co-movements can reflect different risks--or risk shifts--and different 
preferences--or preference shifts--which can change the equilibrium relation across markets. But an 
understanding  of  what  caused  the  divergent  movements  could  be  important  for  policymakers.  For 
example,  changes  in  perceived  risk  in  some  specific  markets  might  point  to  certain  economic 
weaknesses  that  policy  may  need  to  address.  On  the  other  hand,  a  shift  in  asset  preferences  that 
raised premiums in some markets but lowered them in others could potentially leave overall financial 
conditions,  and  their  implications  for  spending,  not  much  changed.  Thus,  it  is  important  for 
 policymakers to look at risk premiums in their entirety, rather than in isolation, before reaching policy 
conclusions.  
Today I have mostly characterized policymakers as avid readers of risk perceptions across markets, 
but our actions could affect risk premiums as well. For instance, an effective monetary policy may well 
have been one factor in the great moderation of inflation and business cycles that I mentioned earlier. 
And our efforts in recent years to make the policymaking process more transparent may, almost by 
definition, have reduced uncertainty and thus compressed risk premiums. We have emphasized the 
conditional  nature  of  our  discussions  of  future  policy  to  help  market  participants  calibrate  their 
assessments and price risk. To the extent that the decline in risk premiums induced by clearer policy 
communication  has  accurately  reflected  the  decrease  in  uncertainty,  assets  will  be  better  priced. 
Finally, some have asserted that our accommodative policy stance in recent years, made necessary 
by the macroeconomic situation, itself has tended to drive down risk premiums as investors "reached 
for  yield."  Notably,  however,  most  risk  spreads  have  remained  narrow  even  as  we  have  been 
removing policy accommodation.  
My purpose today has not been to interpret or forecast risk premiums or the specific way in which they 
will affect the future path of monetary policy. Rather, I have taken advantage of a captive audience of 
researchers on this topic to try to impress on you the importance to the central bank of research along 
these  lines.  By  outlining  how  we  use  estimates  of  risk  premiums  and  the  complications  we  have 
encountered, I hope I have given you a sense that we are a ready market for work that improves our 
understanding of the topic. Any such improvement will help us interpret financial developments as we 
conduct monetary policy in pursuit of our goals of economic growth and price stability. 
