Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Bank’s Annual General Meeting, Berne, 29 April 2005.  
Dear shareholders 
Dear guests  
 2004: the economic upswing continues  
The economic upswing that began in summer 2003 continued last year. Economic growth moved into 
the positive zone and came close to its potential level once again. While growth was slightly negative 
in 2003, it reached 1.7% for 2004 as a whole.  
The  recovery  in  Switzerland  is  due  in  large  part  to  the  rebound  in  global  economic  growth,  which 
reached its highest level since 1976. Swiss companies have benefited from this situation: last year, 
exports rose by 6.7% – a significant increase compared with the 2003 figure. This figure reflects our 
exporters' continuing wish to adapt to changes in demand, as well as the untiring efforts to streamline 
Swiss industry and maintain Switzerland's appeal as a location for business.  
The Swiss economy's strong presence on the international markets has been a reality for a long time. 
As our direct investments abroad have grown, however, it has taken on a new dimension in recent 
years.  Not  everyone  is  aware  that  while  Switzerland  is  a  champion  in  savings,  it  also  boasts  a 
performance in the area of foreign investments that is unrivalled. In 2003, we invested some CHF 20 
billion abroad – a sum equivalent to almost 20% of national savings. Roughly half of these investments 
were concentrated in the European continent. Over the years, and given Switzerland's trade surplus, 
our companies have thus developed an extremely dense international network of production facilities. 
In addition to the 4 million jobs within the domestic economy, Swiss companies employ a further 1.8 or 
so million people abroad. Of these, 1 million work in European countries.  
These figures show that Switzerland has by no means resigned itself to low growth, but has seized the 
opportunities created by the opening-up of borders and markets. These days, a lot of people worry 
about competition from low-wage countries and the resulting relocations. However, they overlook the 
fact that our country is a major beneficiary from the more pronounced international division of labour 
brought about by globalisation. The relocation of certain production stages is inevitable. It allows our 
companies  to  stay  competitive  in  the  face  of  high  Swiss  labour  costs.  In  some  respects,  the  jobs 
created abroad secure those at home with more added value.  
"One  out  of  every  two  francs  is  earned  abroad"  is  the  phrase  that  comes  to  mind  when  the 
performance of our exporters is being discussed. This also means, however, that one out of every two 
francs is still earned in Switzerland. Put another way, the domestic economy plays a crucial role in our 
country's economic development both on a demand and production level. In 2004, domestic turnover 
grew more slowly than sales abroad. The growth figure of 1.8%, however, was still higher than in the 
previous year.  
Household consumption played a central role in this respect: this began to recover towards the end of 
2003 in the wake of the general economic upturn and the rise in earnings. A good showing by the 
construction sector also contributed to higher demand for household equipment. In contrast to their 
counterparts in Germany, Swiss consumers remained relatively optimistic in 2004, and this helped to 
sustain the level of business activity.  
Where public-sector demand is concerned, the financial constraints imposed by the Confederation and 
cantons put a brake on the growth in spending in 2004. For the first time in several years, public-sector 
demand rose less quickly than the other components of domestic demand. 
In  this  initial  phase  in  the  economic  cycle,  the  return  of  confidence  would  normally  have  triggered 
growth  in  investments  aimed  at  adapting  the  means  of  production  to  future  needs.  But  such  an 
upsurge has so far been largely absent, both in Switzerland and in other European countries. Although 
the profitability of companies has improved, they have given priority to raising the utilisation of existing 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
capacity  rather  than expansion  or  modernisation,  as  the  latter  are  considered  to  entail  substantially 
more risks. As a result, growth in capital spending was modest in 2004.  
This cautious approach by companies also affected the development of the labour market: contrary to 
expectations, unemployment fell only slightly in the past year. This can be ascribed, on the one hand, 
to  weak  growth  and  large  productivity  gains  and,  on  the  other,  to  a  lack  of  confidence  in  the 
soundness of the recovery.  
Monetary situation starts to normalise  
Thus, 2004 saw the economic situation starting to return to normal. Our aim was therefore to modify 
our policies so as to gradually bring the monetary framework into line with the new environment. A 
normalisation  of  the  monetary  situation  should  go  hand  in  hand  with  an  economic  normalisation  in 
order to ensure that price stability is maintained in the medium term.  
We waited until June – when the signs of a recovery became manifest – for an initial quarter-point rise 
in the target range for the three-month Libor. This decision did not really come as a surprise. In fact, 
the  markets  were  expecting  corrective  action  to  be  taken  during  the  year.  We  proceeded  to  adjust 
rates again in September, but decided to leave them unchanged in December 2004 and March 2005 
when  it  became  increasingly  clear  that  the  economy  was  slowing  down.  Our  three-month  rate  is 
0.75%. Meanwhile, long rates fell during 2004, but have risen slightly since.  
The current interest rate reflects the fact that we are still pursuing an expansionary monetary policy: in 
view  of  the  prospects  for  growth  and  inflation,  our  rates  are  relatively  low.  However,  this  phase  of 
normalisation of monetary policy is not yet over. It will be continued according to the requirements for 
maintaining price stability in the medium term.  
Where prices are concerned, 2004 was another year of stability despite the spectacular price rise of oil 
products. Inflation rose to 0.8% over the year as a whole, and peaked at 1.5% in November. The low 
inflation rate gave Swiss companies a further competitive advantage on the international marketplace.  
The dollar and the oil price as disruptive elements  
The  foreign  exchange  and  commodity  markets  experienced  the  most  turbulence  in  2004.  The  US 
dollar, which had been falling since 2001, accelerated towards the end of the year, when it hit a record 
low  against  the  euro.  Switzerland  was  affected  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  other  European 
countries:  the  Swiss  franc  appreciated  by  about  7%  against  the  US  currency  during  the  last  three 
months of the year. This development has since improved somewhat.  
Despite the dollar's sharp drop over the last few months, its current exchange rate is still higher in real 
terms than it was in the mid-1990s. The current situation is particularly difficult, however, as a whole 
series of Asian currencies, including the Chinese renminbi, are pegged to the dollar. The greenback's 
fall  has  thus  reinforced  the  competitiveness  of  numerous  emerging  markets  versus  the  European 
economies. For us here in Switzerland it has been positive to note that the nose-diving dollar has not 
unleashed  any  speculation  on  the  Swiss  franc.  The  Swiss  franc-euro  exchange  rate  has  remained 
remarkably stable at around CHF 1.55 per euro. Since the single European currency was introduced 
on 1 January 1999, the Swiss franc's nominal appreciation has been more than offset by the inflation 
differential between Switzerland and the euro area. The competitive position of our exporters has thus 
improved against their European counterparts.  
The dynamism of the Asian economies has boosted demand for commodities, notably oil. The soaring 
price  of  this  "black  gold"  continues  to  pose  a  serious  threat  to  the  recovery  of  the  industrialised 
economies.  
Guardedly optimistic outlook for 2005  
As it is benefiting from price stability, low interest rates and a strong competitive position, the Swiss 
economy is well placed to profit from the world economic upturn. However, the outlook for the global 
economy in 2005 is not quite as good as it was in the past year: growth is put at around 4%, down 
from  5%  in  2004.  Growth  will  continue  to  be  driven  by  Asia  and  America.  Europe  –  and  especially 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
Germany, our biggest market – will continue to chug along with a growth rate of between 1.5% and 
2%.  
In  this  slightly  less  dynamic  environment,  the  Swiss  economy  is unlikely  to  exceed  its  2004  growth 
figure.  Business  activity  has  fallen  off  slightly  since  the  autumn  but  should  slowly  gain  momentum 
again  in  the  next  few  months.  Overall,  we  are  expecting  GDP  to  grow  by  about  1.5%.  The  labour 
market should see a gradual decline in the number of jobseekers in the second half of the year as 
companies gradually use up the resources currently available.  
A  much-debated  question is  the extent  to  which  monetary  policy  contributes  to  long-term growth.  It 
would appear that the growth of an economy depends  first and foremost on the development of its 
resources and then on their productivity. Monetary policy cannot change this situation; it can only be 
vigilant in maintaining a stable framework that is conducive to the efficient development of productive 
activities.  
The  National  Bank  succeeded  in  doing  this  in  2004.  Moreover,  our  forecasts  suggest  that  price 
stability should continue in 2005 and 2006, with inflation averaging around 1%.  
Completion of the gold sales  
On 31 March, we completed our sales of the 1,300 tonnes of gold no longer required for monetary 
policy purposes. These sales had begun on 1 May 2000. The fears expressed in some quarters that 
our gold sales would destabilise the market have proven to be unfounded. By selling the gold in small 
instalments and according to a fully transparent schedule, we succeeded in assuaging the market's 
fears.  Moreover,  our  sales  strategy  and  risk  hedging  also  proved  effective  in  financial  terms:  the 
1,300 tonnes of gold were sold at an average price of CHF 16,241 per kilo. This was CHF 700 more 
than  the  average  market  price  during  the  same  sales  period.  An  additional  profit  of  more  than 
CHF 900 million was therefore realised.  
At the end of the sales programme, the National Bank still held 1,290 tonnes of gold, corresponding to 
one third of the value of its currency reserves.  
Even though it has been demonetised, the yellow metal still plays an important role in our reserves. It 
is  an  asset  category  that  traditionally  affords  good  protection  in  times  of  crises  in  the  international 
monetary  system.  It  also  allows  us  to  hold  part  of  our  reserves  on  our  own  country,  which  is  not 
possible  with  financial  assets.  Moreover,  as  expressly  requested  by  Parliament,  Article  99  of  the 
Federal  Constitution  requires  the  National  Bank  to  hold  part  of  its  currency  reserves  in  gold.  The 
Governing  Board  considers  that  the  holdings  of  1,290  tonnes  are  appropriate  to  the  current 
international environment. It does not intend to proceed with further sales of gold.  
Distribution of profit  
This General Meeting of Shareholders will find a special place in the National Bank's annals, as you 
are  going  to  decide  on  how  the  proceeds  of  the  gold  sales  are  to  be  distributed.  This  will  close  a 
chapter first opened in 1997, when a group of experts came to the conclusion that the SNB's currency 
reserves  were  larger  than  required  for  the  execution  of  its  mandate  and  that  it  could  thus  consider 
selling half its gold holdings, once the Swiss franc's gold parity was discontinued.  
As  you  know,  the  Governing  Board  adopted  the  expert  group's  conclusions  and  indicated  to  the 
Federal Council that, based on the profit figure following revaluation, an amount corresponding to half 
the gold holdings could be earmarked for purposes other than monetary policy.  
The possible uses for the sales proceeds have been the subject of much political debate. None of the 
proposed solutions have succeeded in attracting a consensus among the population or in the Federal 
Parliament. On 16 December, the parliamentary debate was concluded without an agreement being 
reached. Thus, a sum of CHF 21.1 billion, corresponding to the proceeds of the gold sales, has been 
included in the usual profit distribution procedure.  
Some people fear that, following this transfer, the National Bank will no longer have sufficient currency 
reserves.  I  have  a  word  of  reassurance  for  them.  This  issue  has  been  examined  in  depth  and  has 
been discussed by our Bank Council. Our currency reserves total CHF 60 billion – an amount which 
may be considered appropriate by comparison with other industrialised countries.  
BIS Review 30/2005 
 3
But nor are these reserves excessive. Furthermore, it is important that the currency reserves evolve 
over time, in tandem with the size of our economy. This is why, in accordance with Article 99 of the 
Constitution and Article 30 of the National Bank Act, the SNB has adopted a provisioning policy that 
provides for gradual growth in its currency reserves. This year, CHF 885 million have been reserved 
for this purpose, and similar sums will have to be set aside in the future.  
The  closing  of  our  accounts  for  2004  thus  brings  with  it  an  extraordinary  allocation  of  profit  to  the 
Confederation and the cantons. It is important to emphasise that – paradoxically – the distribution of 
the CHF 21.1 billion accruing from the gold sales does not actually make them any richer. Up to now, 
the public sector received the income earned on this capital: a sum of CHF 400 million will also be 
allocated  to  them  from  this  source  this  year.  As  of  the  beginning  of  next  year,  this  income  will  no 
longer be distributed. As a result, the Confederation and the cantons will gain in terms of capital, but 
will lose in terms of transfers of interest income. If they use the proceeds of the gold sales to repay 
their debts, the reduction in financing charges will correspond approximately to the reduction in the 
profits paid to them by the SNB. In net terms, there will be few – if any – additional funds available for 
new  expenditures.  It  is  therefore  important  that  decision-makers  at  all  levels  maintain  a  rational 
approach.  
The COSA initiative  
The  distribution  of  the  gold  sale  proceeds  will  not  put  an  end  to  the  political  debate  about  the 
distribution of the National Bank's profits. Next year, the Swiss electorate will probably be asked to 
vote  on  the  "COSA  initiative",  which  proposes  allocating  the  first  billion  Swiss  francs  of  our  current 
profit to the cantons, with the balance going to the state Old Age and Survivors' Insurance scheme 
(AHV/AVS).  
The  National  Bank  has  consistently  taken  the  line  of  not  intervening  in  domestic  political  debates 
unless the fulfilment of its constitutional mandate is in jeopardy. Two years ago, I mentioned to you 
that the COSA initiative threatened to undermine our autonomy. Linking the National Bank's profits to 
the financing of a key element in our country's social security system would create a mechanism that 
would force the SNB to manage its reserves for the purpose of generating the highest possible returns 
rather than for performing its monetary mandate. This would weaken our international credibility and 
hence also the credibility of our policies. No other central bank of an industrialised country is faced 
with a similar situation. All of these banks deliver their profits to the state, and the SNB is no exception.  
Our main argument against the COSA initiative, however, is that it rests on an illusion – namely, that a 
central bank is able to transfer profits of over CHF 1 billion every year. Once this illusion has been 
dispelled, it will become clear that the initiative makes no sense, as nothing would remain for the state 
pension scheme.  
And, as we have often stated in the past, the current disposable profit of CHF 2.5 billion Swiss cannot 
be sustained. As the President of the Bank Council pointed out just now, our annual disposable profit 
averages about CHF 1 billion. As this year's negative result shows, it is subject to sharp fluctuations.  
The fact that we are now distributing more than this amount is because we are gradually releasing the 
provision for future profit distributions. This provision amounted to CHF 13.4 billion in 2001, but had 
dropped to CHF 6.9 billion by the close of our 2004 accounts. This development does not come as a 
complete  surprise.  A  progressive  fall  in  the  provision  had  been  predicted,  though  the  speed  of  the 
decline – a result of the current low interest rates – had not been expected. Our profit distribution may 
already  have  to  be  reduced  in  2007,  when  the  agreement  we  concluded  in  2002  with  the  Federal 
Department  of  Finance  on  the  distribution  of  profits  is  revised.  Our  profit  distributions  will  gradually 
decrease towards the CHF 1 billion level.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear shareholders, 
dear guests,  
2004 was a relatively favourable year for the Swiss economy. A few clouds have recently appeared on 
the horizon. The recovery has unfortunately weakened, so a fall in unemployment is not imminent. We 
will continue to pursue a monetary policy aimed at maintaining the level of economic activity, though 
we will keep a careful watch on the general level of prices.  
With prices remaining stable, interest rates low and a good level of competitiveness, our economy is 
well equipped to resume a brisker growth trajectory in line with the global economy.  
4 
 BIS Review 30/2005
As  in  the  past,  however,  the  international  environment  remains  fraught  with  uncertainty  at  both  the 
economic  and  monetary  level.  The  independent  course  steered  by  the  National  Bank  has  made  it 
possible to create a monetary framework conducive to the development of our economy. This success 
hinges not only on the correct interest rate decisions, but also on the credibility conferred upon us by 
our autonomy of action and by sufficient resources for intervening in the markets. It is in the nation's 
interest to preserve this achievement.  
Thank you for your attention, and for your interest in the Swiss National Bank and its activities. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 5
