T T Mboweni: G-20 seminar on economic growth 
Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the cocktail reception 
for delegates to the G-20 seminar, Pretoria, 3 August 2005.  
 Ministers, deputy ministers, governor, deputy governors and esteemed delegates 
Let  me  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  the  delegates  from  the  G-20  countries  to  the  G-20  Seminar  on 
Economic Growth, which is jointly hosted by the South African Reserve Bank, the People’s Bank of 
China and Banco de Mexico. It is indeed an honour for me to welcome representatives from various 
leading countries for discussions on a topic that is of great importance not only to the members of the 
G-20 but to every country. 
Permit me also to briefly remind you of the important principles that are set out in the G-20 Accord for 
Sustained  Growth  that  was  discussed  at  the  sixth  meeting  of  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors of the G-20 held in Berlin in November 2004. 
Our  Accord  for  Sustained  Growth  is  all  about  mobilising  economic  forces  for  satisfactory  long-term 
growth by focusing domestic policy on three tasks in particular: establishing and maintaining monetary 
and financial stability; enhancing domestic and international competition; and empowering people to 
participate. While appropriate and credible policies are the basis for economic growth, they need to be 
backed  by  high-quality  institutions,  including  ethical  standards  in  corporate  governance.  However, 
given  the  diversity  of  institutional  settings  and  the  success  of  different  economic  strategies  among 
G-20  countries,  it  is  acknowledged  that  there  is  no  single  template  for  strong  long-term  growth. 
Policies need to be shaped to the special circumstances in individual countries. 
The Accord deems price stability as being indispensable for sustainable economic growth as it fosters 
investment and saving. High inflation is destabilising and has a strong negative impact on the poor, 
while deflation squeezes profits, discourages investment and leads people to postpone spending. The 
Accord acknowledges the importance of central bank independence in helping to achieve the goal of 
price  stability  in  the  long  run.  Fiscal  discipline  is  seen  to  be  equally  important  by,  and  fiscal  policy 
should  ensure  that  public  expenditures  and  debt  remain  at  reasonable  levels  in  relation  to  national 
aggregates in order to prevent economic growth being restrained by crowding-out, anticipated future 
tax increases and inflationary pressures. 
The  Accord  states  that  the  domestic  financial  sector  must  be  able  to  withstand  economic  shocks 
without  giving  rise  to  systemic  problems  which  impair  the  allocation  of  savings  to  investment 
opportunities  and  the  processing  of  payments  in  the  economy.  Currency  mismatches  could  be 
diminished by strengthening domestic banking systems and capital markets. Strong domestic financial 
sectors  can  reduce  the  need  for  foreign  currency  borrowing  and  become  an  alternative  channel  of 
external funding by attracting foreign investors into domestic currency instruments. High priority must 
be given to implementing the relevant internationally recognised standards and codes. 
The liberalisation of the capital account yields essential efficiencies and benefits for economic growth 
but  the  Accord  stresses  that  the  elimination  of  restrictions  on  capital  movements  should  be 
appropriately sequenced and that countries seeking domestic monetary autonomy while substantially 
liberalising their capital account should increase the degree of exchange rate flexibility accordingly. 
The Accord regards competition as the driving force of economic growth because it fosters efficiency 
and  is  essential  for  innovation  and  strong  investment  activity.  Carefully  designed  policies  of 
deregulation,  privatisation,  and  liberalisation  of  international  transactions  are  important  means  of 
strengthening  competition.  Policymakers  are  encouraged  to  aim  at  strengthening  and  enforcing 
intellectual and other property rights, contract law, bankruptcy procedures and anti-trust regulations. 
Also, efforts will be required to promote good governance and combat corruption. 
Global  trade  liberalisation  is  deemed  an  essential  instrument  to  promote  growth  by  channelling 
resources  to  their  most  productive  use.  Policymakers  worldwide  are  encouraged  to  move  ahead 
vigorously  on  the  basis  of  multilateral  commitments  giving  due  consideration  to  adjustment  costs. 
Multilaterally consistent bilateral and regional agreements can also contribute to trade liberalisation. 
Labour market conditions are also crucial cornerstones in achieving high employment levels and broad 
participation  of  the  labour  force  and  both  wage  levels  and  working  hours  need  to  be  responsive  to 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
including  adequate 
investment  climate, 
market requirements and reflect national circumstances. The Accord also emphasises the importance 
of  policies  to  provide  opportunities  and  incentives  to  gain  and  improve  skills,  foster  labour  mobility, 
strengthen incentives to work in the formal sector and reduce information asymmetries. A favourable 
overall 
infrastructure,  will  support  domestic  capital 
accumulation and also be attractive for foreign direct investment. 
The  Accord  states  clearly  that  mobilising  all  productive  forces  of  a  society  requires  empowering 
individuals  and  enhancing  economic  participation.  Education  and  training  are  key  requirements  as 
they improve people’s chances of finding jobs and contribute to higher productivity. The broadly-based 
provision of high-quality education should be a responsibility of governments. An educated population 
is better placed to demand the provision of good governance and sound institutions. Broadly-based 
access to a wide range of financial services and reducing impediments to small businesses, such as 
the  time  to  start  a  business,  is  of  crucial  importance  as  it  fosters  entrepreneurial  capacities  and 
facilitates the integration of people into the formal economy. While employment is the first and best 
safeguard  against  social  exclusion,  social  safety-nets  are  needed  to  cushion  the  effects  of 
unemployment. Moreover, the elements of social infrastructures such as clean water, sanitation and 
basic health services are public goods whose provision has a positive impact on welfare and potential 
growth.  It  is  important  to  design  social  policies  so  as  to  permit  market  mechanisms  to  function 
effectively. 
As to the agreed actions to implement the G-20 Accord for Sustained Growth, the Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors adopted the reform agenda that translates our G-20 Accord for Sustained 
Growth into concrete policy measures for our countries. Progress in this regard will be reviewed at the 
meeting in Beijing in October 2005, which this seminar will feed into. 
As to progress by South Africa, I am particularly pleased to report that the Reserve Bank has been 
making an important contribution to macroeconomic stability, thereby creating a stable framework for 
growth. CPIX inflation has remained in the 3-to-6-per-cent target range since September 2003, i.e. for 
22 successive months. Gross domestic product growth measured 3,7 per cent in 2004 and is expected 
to grow at similar levels this year, and the government’s objective is to implement policies to raise the 
growth rate to even higher levels. To promote growth and employment, the South African government 
has continued along the path of fiscal discipline and has been focusing on enhancing the efficiency of 
the  public service and  on infrastructure  investment,  increasing  savings and skills  development.  The 
deliberations of the next two days will help shape the strategies in this regard. 
I wish to conclude by referring to the often quoted inspirational words from Robert Lucas in 1988 “ Is 
there some action a government of India could take that would lead the Indian economy to grow like 
Indonesia’s or Egypt’s? If so, what exactly? If not, what is it about the “nature of India” that makes it 
so?  The  consequences  for  human  welfare  involved  in  questions  like  these  are  simply  staggering: 
Once  one  starts  to  think  about  them  it  is  hard  to  think  about  anything  else.”1  Clearly  the  Indian 
government seems to have met Lucas’s challenge and so there are surely lessons to be learned from 
each and every country’s experience. We look forward to the presentations by the various delegates 
as set out in the programme during the course of the next two days and to discussions on economic 
growth and issues of common interest and relevance to our various countries. Meanwhile, welcome 
once again and may this important seminar achieve all its objectives. 
Thank you.  
Zhou Xiaochuan: Improve corporate governance and develop capital market 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High-level Forum on 
China’s Reform, Beijing, 13 July 2005. 
Dear friends, ladies and gentlemen, 
                                                       
1   Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1988). “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22, July, 3-42. 
Good morning. It’s my pleasure to attend this High-level Forum on China’s Reform. 
The theme of this forum, which is “Promoting Institutional Innovation by Emphasizing the Reform of 
Government Administration System”, implies that discussions will be made on the performance of the 
government and the steps it needs to take in the future. Having a well-established tradition of criticism 
and self-criticism, the Chinese government has always attached importance to promoting the reforms 
by deepening its understanding of various issues. In this context, I would like to speak on the roles of 
the government in promoting the reform of the financial institutions.  
First,  the  government  needs  to  further  clarify  the  objectives  of  the  reform  and  restructuring  of  the 
financial  institutions.  Why  should  we  spend  resources  on  financial  sector  reform  and  restructuring? 
There  are  two  answers  to  this  question.  Some  people  think  that  financial  sector  reform  aims  at 
preventing  risks,  crisis  and  instability,  thereby  avoiding  causing  trouble  on  the  government.  People 
holding  such  a  view  believe  that  since  risks  are  concentrated  in  the  financial  sector,  some  risky 
financial  institutions  should  be  closed  to  eliminate  the  risks.  While  some  people  think  that  the 
sustainable, steady and healthy development of the national economy depends on a robust financial 
sector that provides good financial services. Therefore, we need to carry out the reforms to make most 
financial institutions strong and healthy, so that they will be able to operate with lower risks and at the 
same time provide good services, thus contributing to the development of the national economy. 
The  first  view  is  somewhat  narrow  and  short-term  based.  Risk  is  not  the  only  factor  we  need  to 
consider. Inadequate financial services will hamper economic development. One example is related to 
the rural financial institutions. After we closed some financial institutions because of their unhealthy 
development, financial services in the rural area became insufficient, hindering the development of the 
rural  economy.  The  second  view  emphasizes  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  allocation  of 
resources. With inadequate financial services, the savings will not be effectively allocated, resulting in 
a waste of resources and significant negative impact on the long-term growth efficiency. Although the 
financial sector will give rise to risks, it can also absorb risks. In fact, the financial sector absorbs some 
of the risks produced by the real sector, and plays the role of price-discovery for the real economy. If 
performing well, the financial market can serve to absorb, buffer and resolve risks.  
If  we  hold  the  view  that  the  objective  of  financial  sector  reform  is  to  make  the  financial  institutions 
stronger  and  healthier,  measures  need  to  be  taken  in  many  areas.  First,  the  government  should 
properly handle the burden of non-performing assets of the financial institutions left over from the past 
or during the transition period. Second, sound financial, accounting, loss provisioning and tax systems 
need to be set up to create a favorable institutional environment to enable the financial institutions to 
develop  soundly  and  provide  good  financial  services.  Third,  the  government  should  remove 
unwarranted  controls  and  establish  effective  incentives  to  encourage  the  financial  institutions  to 
improve their services and contribute to better allocation of resources. Fourth, steps need to be taken 
to promote competition-based market mechanisms and eliminate unnecessary price control to enable 
prices  to  play  a  larger  role  in  the  economy.  Fifth,  measures  should  be  taken  to  help  the  financial 
institutions to improve their ability to properly set the prices, including on the money market and capital 
market. Sixth, we also need to take active and steady steps to develop various instruments including 
the  financial  derivatives  that  can  help  form  an  effective  pricing  mechanism  in  the  market.  Seventh, 
clear strategies on the intermediate services, including accounting, evaluation and credit rating, need 
to be formulated taking into account both the current need and long tem development of the market.  
Second, principles and guidelines of corporate governance need to be further clarified. Many people 
have  realized  that  improving  corporate  governance  is  of  crucial  importance  to  the  entire  reform. 
Nevertheless, the concept and content of corporate governance have yet to be clarified.  
The basic requirements of corporate governance are set in the Company Law, which needs further 
improvement in China. On the other hand, the Company Law does not encompass every aspect of 
corporate  governance.  Corporate  governance  involves  the  agreements  or  practices  outside  the 
stipulations  of  laws  and  regulations  and  those  of  the  self-disciplinary  organizations  as  well  as  the 
cultural traditions. In China, different departments or institutions have different understanding for the 
requirements of corporate governance. We can see that these requirements have major omissions, 
and  no  guidelines  have  been  given  to  resolve  the  main  practical  issues.  No  official  view  has  been 
clearly  expressed  regarding  the  OECD  Principles  of  Corporate  Governance  (both  the  1999  version 
and the 2004 revised version). Therefore, the reform of corporate governance is likely to be a reform 
without  clear  definitions.  I’m  going  to  give  several  examples  in  this  regard.  First,  preserving 
shareholders’ rights is one of the core elements of corporate governance. Nevertheless, violating the 
rights  of  the  shareholders  is  not  a  rare  phenomenon  in  China,  and  there  is  explicit  solution  to  this 
problem. For instance, in the debt-equity-swaps, no effective measures are in place to safeguard the 
rights and interests of the shareholders, and in many cases, the assets they were holding turned out to 
be neither a loan nor an equity. Second, the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance emphasizes 
the role of stakeholders. So far, there has not been an accurate and widely accepted translation in 
Chinese for the word  “stakeholder”, nor do we have principles or guidelines concerning the role of 
stakeholders in corporate governance. Third, the respective roles of the Party organizations and of the 
board of directors and the management need to be clarified. This is an issue unique in China. In most 
cases, the Party organizations play a positive role in supporting the operation of the board of directors 
and  the  management.  However,  there  are  some  occasions  where  the  Party  organizations  and  the 
board of directors or management hold different opinions on certain issues, calling for principles and 
guidelines  to  resolve  such  issues.  Fourth,  the  relationship  between  corporate  governance  and  the 
authority’s  regulation  and  supervision  need  to  be  properly  handled.  In  the  planned  economy  and 
during the early transition period, government acted as both the owner and the supervisory authority of 
the enterprises. Despite the fact that enterprise management and government supervision have been 
basically separated, there are often cases where these two become mixed together. Clear principles 
and guidelines are needed in this area. 
Improving corporate governance is a reform on which the public has placed great hopes. We must not 
let the public disappointed because of unclear principles and guidelines in pursuing the reform. The 
government should play an important role in setting up clear principles and guidelines on corporate 
governance  by  drawing  upon  the  international  and  historical  experiences  as  well  as  taking  into 
account China’s current specific situation.  
Third, the operations and policies of asset management companies need to be improved. During the 
several  years  of  development  since  they  were  established  in  1999,  some  problems  have  emerged, 
which are reflected in the prices at which the non-performing assets are disposed, the abuse of power 
for personal gains, and the undue transfer of benefits. Several issues are yet to be clarified. First, if 
and only if the objective of the reforms is to make the financial institutions stronger so that they can 
provide  better  financial services  does  it  make  sense  to  dispose  the  non-performing  assets  left  over 
from  the  past,  particularly  during  the  period  when  the  management  of  the  enterprises  were  not 
separated from government administration. Otherwise the disposal of non-performing assets would be 
nothing but transferring the risks from the “left pocket” to the “right pocket” of the government, which 
will invite criticism from the public. Second, the asset management companies have been established 
to handle the non-performing assets in a professional way. It should be noted that the assets they are 
dealing  with  are  not  good  assets,  but  those  classified  as  doubtful  or  loss.  In  terms  of  value 
preservation and enhancement, different methods are required for handling the non-performing assets 
and the good assets. When seeking to recover the bad assets, we need to strike a proper balance 
between quantity and speed. Although the value of some assets will go up after they have been held 
for a considerable period of time, in most cases, the longer the assets have been held, the less their 
value will become. In this sense, the so-called “ice cream effect” does exist. On the other hand, the 
asset  management  companies  seeking  to  dispose  the  non-performing  assets  very  rapidly  will  likely 
face criticism, since people think that more will be recovered if the assets are disposed less rapidly. 
Third, against the background of market-oriented reform, the disposal of non-performing assets will be 
done through the market. Therefore, measures should be taken to develop the market and enable the 
assets  to  be  disposed  at  the  prices  formed  through  market  competition.  This  requires  that  market 
participants  be  under  hard  budget  constraints,  having  sound  financial  system,  clearly  defined 
ownership and well established incentive structure. Regarding incentives, the government should set a 
clear  baseline  for  the  recovery  of  the  non-performing  assets,  and  establish  an  effective  incentives 
system  that  will  encourage  the  asset  management  companies  to  make  the  greatest  efforts  in 
recovering the assets. Problems will occur in the market-based disposal of non-performing assets if 
any of the above-mentioned measures are not taken properly.      
What can the government do? First, steps should be taken to improve the legal framework. Although 
we  have  in  place  a  regulation  on  asset  management  companies,  there  are  weaknesses  in  the 
formulation,  administration  and  enforcement  of  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  disposal  of  non-
performing  assets.  International  comparison  shows  that  China  needs  to  make  improvement  in  this 
area.  Second,  apart  from  the  four  state-owned  asset  management  companies,  private  and  foreign 
participants should be encouraged to enter this market to promote competition. Third, internal reforms 
should  be  carried  out  in  the  four  state-owned  asset  management  companies  to  enable  them  to 
operate on real commercial basis with hard budget constraints. Fourth, when the market has not been 
fully  developed,  it  is  desirable  to  let  the  institutions  with  rich  market  experiences  to  make  price 
evaluation so as to avoid soft constraints and set up internal incentives. Fifth, efforts should be made 
to  establish  proper  incentives.  Without  incentives  or  with  very  weak  incentives,  it  is  not  possible  to 
preserve  and  enhance  the  value  of  the  assets  and  make  maximum  recovery.  Without  effective 
incentives,  people  may  also  tend  to  seek  personal  gains  from  the  disposal  of  assets.  Sixth,  it  is 
important to have appropriate procedures and prevent any improper practices so that the assets are 
disposed  through  market  competition.  However,  if  the  market  is  not  strong  enough  –  for  example, 
market  participants  are  under  soft  constraints  or  there  are  adverse  internal  incentives,  improper 
behaviors  may  arise  even  with  sound  procedures,  and  the  procedures  themselves  may  become  a 
shelter  disguising  those  improper  activities.  Seventh,  it  is  crucial  to  develop  market  intermediaries, 
since  the  disposal  of  assets  relies  importantly  on  the  integrity  and  services  of  the  intermediaries. 
Eighth, the objectives of setting up asset management companies are not only to dispose the non-
performing assets in a professional way, but also to make the commercial banks stronger so that they 
will be able to provide better financial services. So the government needs to consider how to handle 
the relationship between the asset management companies and the commercial banks.  
The asset management companies will not operate satisfactorily and there will be much criticism from 
the public if the above are not handled properly. 
The  State  Council  attaches  great  importance  to  the  issues  concerning  the  asset  management 
companies.  Premier  Wen  Jiabao  has  said  that  “the  asset  management  companies  have  had  five 
years’ experiences in disposing the non-performing assets, and it is time for them to carefully review 
the experiences and lessons and try to resolve the long-term problems”. Apart from promoting more 
effective  internal  management  of  the  asset  management  companies  and  strengthening  external 
regulation and supervision on them, the government has much more to do. From the longer-term point 
of view, China will need a well-functioning capital market to enable its economy to develop soundly. 
