Wu Xiaoling: Relax control on informal financing to promote resource 
allocation 
Speech  by  Ms  Wu  Xiaoling,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  “Forum  of 
50 Chinese Economists”, Beijing, 17 February 2005. 
 At the end of 2004, outstanding RMB deposits in China’s financial institutions amounted to RMB 24.5 
trillion  yuan,  with  the  ratio  of  M2  to  GDP  reaching  189  percent,  the  highest  in  the  world.  However, 
some enterprises still complain about difficult access to credit and have to resort to informal channels 
for  financing  needs.  We  must  admit  that  the  development  of  China’s  financial  sector  is  not  flexible 
enough  to  accommodate  the relatively fast  and strong  growth of  China’s  economy.  In  my view,  the 
main reason lies in the excessive financial restrictions, which has dampened the development of direct 
financing, distorted social financing structure, and increased the credit risks of the banking system. 
In the transitional period of China’s economy, due to factors such as weak self-discipline of market 
participants,  public  low  awareness  of  risks  and  the  underdevelopment  of  social  credit  culture,  it  is 
necessary for a country to strengthen its control on financial sector in a given period of time. However, 
with  the  principle  of  market  economy  being  established,  excessive  financial  control  will  hinder 
economic development and distort the normal functioning of financial system. 
The  rights  to  own  property  and  freely  enter  into  contract  constitute  the  cornerstone  for  the  market 
economy.  The  Constitution  amended  by  the  Tenth  National  People’s  Congress  stipulates  that 
legitimate  private  property  should  be  protected.  An  impartial  protection  of  public  and  private  legal 
properties also serves as a solid foundation for the development of the socialist market economy. 
To  protect  property  right,  rigorous  supervision  should  be  exercised  on  deposit-taking  financial 
business. For instance, criteria of market entry and risk control are usually applied to all depository 
institutions, and requirement and regulation of information disclosure are enforced on public placement 
funds, bond issuers, and listed companies, so as to protect the interests of depositors and investors. 
Financing activities in violation of laws and regulations should be resolutely cracked down. 
To respect property right, fund owners should leave the liberty to use their possessed capital. While 
strengthening information disclosure and discouraging information misreporting, the sate should at the 
same  time  relax  control  on  direct  financing  and  allow  the  borrowers  and  investors  to  make 
independent decisions. For this purpose, a multi-layer capital market should be developed to facilitate 
direct  financing  of  various  forms.  In  particular,  we  should  pay  attention  to  the  development  of  the 
informal financing market. 
The informal financing market here refers to financing activities of the individuals and the enterprises. 
Currently,  there  is  no  legal  prohibition  for  financing  between  individuals,  except  for  usury,  which  is 
strictly prohibited in China; as for corporate lending to unspecified customers, such business should be 
strictly subject to financial supervision as it relates to public interests. However, in my view, we may 
need  to  give  a  second  thought  to  the  current  strict  control  over  financing  activities  among  the 
enterprises and those to the individuals. 
Nowadays, due to low deposit interest rate, high risks involved in stock market investment, and risks in 
investing in the much fluctuating mutual fund, trust and other collective investment products, many rich 
people are willing to lend directly, or through a joint-owned company. As the People’s Bank of China 
has  already  removed  the  upper  limit  of  lending  rates  for  financial  institutions,  this  type  of  financing 
activities has a greater potential to develop. At present, some small enterprises and individuals often 
have difficult access to bank loans, but due to some factors such as the regional advantages, some 
people or their companies are able to control loan risks in a way that could not be done by banks. Why 
shouldn’t we take necessary measures to normalize these financing activities? So long as the sources 
of  funds  of  these  lenders,  either  individuals  or  companies,  are  specified,  the  existence  of  these 
non-deposit taking lending entities should help to standardize the informal financing activities. On such 
a count, we should newly establish a specific type of financial institutions, which could be either called 
investment  companies  if  their  business  are  confined  to  equity  investment,  credit  investment  and 
securities  investment,  or  called  loan  companies  that  specialize  in  micro  credit  business.    Many 
countries and regions such as the United States, Hongkong and South Africa have established their 
respective  unique  supervisory  system  for  these  loan  institutions.  In  this  regard,  we  should  also 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
promote the legislation of investment company, regulate private fund placement, and advance micro 
credit business development so as to satisfy the financing needs of the small enterprises and natural 
persons. 
In many countries, rules have been formulated to regulate and supervise the above mentioned lending 
institutions.  These  rules  allow  individuals  and  companies  to  issue  loans  with  a  license  (such  as  in 
Hongkong  and  the  NewYork  State  of  the  United  States),  or  require  the  lenders  to  register  every 
transaction and pay relevant fees (such as in South Africa). Any violations of the supervisory rules will 
be  punished.  We  should  learn  from  the  experience  of  these  market  economies  in  dealing  with  the 
informal financing activities, guide commercial banks to establish micro credit business departments or 
license some micro credit institutions to promote the development of micro credit market. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
