Janet L Yellen: Views on the economy and implications for monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Janet L Yellen, President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, at 
the Portland Community Leaders’ Luncheon, Portland, Oregon, 29 July 2005.  
 Thank you for that very kind introduction. It’s a pleasure to be here with you in this beautiful “City of 
Roses.” As a monetary policymaker, my main concern is the national economy, and that will be the 
chief focus of my remarks today. But as President of the San Francisco Fed, I also pay close attention 
to developments here in the Twelfth District, which, in many respects, mirror those of the nation. 
Looking  at  the  big  picture  elements—growth,  employment,  and  inflation—I’d  say  things  are  in 
reasonably good shape. Over the past two years, the nation’s output growth has been pretty steady, 
averaging just over four percent; this is solidly above trend, which, by most estimates, is around three 
and a quarter to three and a half percent. This growth has been amply in evidence here in the Pacific 
Northwest. While unemployment rates in Oregon and Washington remain above the nation’s rate, your 
region has largely recovered from the severe hit you took during the 2001 recession and its aftermath. 
As a result of sustained growth at the national level, slack in labor and product markets has trended 
down. At 5.0 percent, the national unemployment rate now stands near conventional estimates of the 
natural rate consistent with “full employment.” When it comes to inflation, I focus on core measures, 
which exclude the volatile food and energy components, to assess underlying trends. Two different 
measures of core inflation have given slightly different signals in recent months: one—the core CPI—is 
well within my comfort zone; the other—the core PCE—is at the upper end. However, I expect to see 
some moderation in inflation going forward. Similarly, most forecasters expect the pace of economic 
activity also to moderate toward trend-like growth. Given all this, it seems to me that the economy is 
on track to achieve price stability and “maximum employment”—the dual goals assigned to monetary 
policy by the Federal Reserve Act—and that we’ll likely continue to move in a positive direction over 
the next couple of years. 
This sounds like a rosy scenario and I realize that it ignores all of the things that could go wrong. You 
might  well  ask,  “What  about  oil  prices?”  “What  about  the  record  trade  deficit?”  “What  about  the 
possibility of a housing bubble?” “What about the ‘conundrum’ of surprisingly low long-term interest 
rates?”  Well,  indeed—what  about  them?  You  would  be  right  to  ask.  These  questions  touch  on 
important  economic  developments  that  create  risks  for  the  positive  scenario  I  just  described.  They 
therefore receive serious attention at the policy table. From my perspective, trying to assess such risks 
is what makes the conduct of monetary policy both interesting and challenging. 
Inflation risks 
Let me start by looking at some of the factors that create risks for the inflation outlook and explain why 
I’m  nevertheless  fairly  optimistic  that  inflation  will  moderate  over  the  next  few  years.  Of  course,  oil 
prices do pose an inflation risk. The price of oil has just about doubled over the past two years, from 
the low $30 range to around $60 per barrel recently. Higher oil prices are reflected in higher “headline” 
inflation. And they have been passed through to some extent to core inflation as well, but, unless they 
rise further, the effect on core inflation should begin to dissipate next year. Another risk relates to labor 
compensation,  which  is  the  single  largest  component  of  business  costs.  Recently,  one  measure  of 
compensation per hour jumped abruptly. Here, too, though, I am not terribly worried because a good 
part  of  the  jump  is  probably  accounted  for  by  one-time  events,  such  as  bonus  payments  and  the 
exercising of stock options. This interpretation is supported by readings from an alternative measure of 
labor compensation, the Employment Cost Index, which excludes these items and has recorded only 
modest increases. 
I’m  also  quite  encouraged  by  several  developments  that  portend  a  moderation  in  inflation  going 
forward.  For  example,  even  with  the  recent  revaluation  of  the  Chinese  renminbi,  the  dollar  has 
increased  by  7½  percent  against  major  currencies  so  far  this  year,  which  should  take  some  of  the 
pressure  off  of  import  prices.  In  addition,  inflation  expectations,  which  may  affect  wage  and  price 
setting, appear to be edging lower: We see this both in survey results and in the financial markets—
through  noticeable  declines  in  “inflation  compensation”,  measured  by  the  difference  between  the 
yields  on  Treasury  bonds  with  and  without  inflation  protection.  A  third  factor  is  productivity  growth. 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
There have been concerns that a structural productivity slowdown was in the offing, which could put 
upward  pressure  on  inflation;  the  good  news  is  that  structural  productivity  growth  apparently  still 
remains above the levels reached during the second half of the 1990s, although it may have edged 
down just a bit over the last few years. 
A final factor impacting the inflation outlook is the degree of slack in the labor market. Right now, the 
unemployment rate is relatively low: at 5 percent it’s near most estimates of the so-called natural rate. 
But other measures—such as the employment-population ratio, a survey of job market perceptions, 
and industrial capacity utilization—suggest that some slack still remains. 
Risks to economic growth and employment 
Now let me turn to the real side of the economy—growth and employment—and highlight some of the 
risks that affect my optimistic baseline projection. Even though overall growth has been respectable, 
economic activity has been burdened by some major drags over the past year or so. Three major ones 
result from the oil price shock, the deterioration of the trade balance, and a still relatively low level of 
business investment spending. 
As I mentioned, the price of oil has just about doubled over the past two years. Typically, the markets 
view  oil  price  jumps  as  temporary.  But  this  time  around,  far-dated  oil  futures  prices  also  have 
increased  sharply,  suggesting  that  the  high  prices  may  be  here  to  stay.  This  is  a  highly  unusual 
development. Most likely, it reflects the perception that there is little excess supply of oil available in 
the world and that global demand is likely to remain strong. The perception that the oil price shock is 
more permanent tends to intensify its negative effect on spending. Estimates suggest that the oil price 
shock has noticeably restrained real GDP growth—by about three quarters of a percentage point in 
2005. This impact is certainly nontrivial. However, it is worth emphasizing that the recent price change 
and spending impacts are far smaller than those of the oil shocks in the 1970s. 
The U.S. trade deficit, as we all know very well, has been growing rapidly for years. By the end of last 
year,  it  topped  five  and  three-quarters  percent  of  GDP,  a  new  record.  Two  of  the  major  factors 
contributing to the sizable imbalance between our imports and our exports are the strength of the U.S. 
economy  relative  to  our  major  trading  partners  and  the  relative  strength  of  the  dollar.  In  2004,  the 
increase in the trade deficit—by itself—subtracted almost one percentage point from real GDP growth, 
representing a significant drag on overall activity. 
Finally,  while  business  investment  in  equipment  and  software  rose  strongly  last  year,  by  almost  14 
percent,  the  level  of  investment  is  still not  as  high  relative  to  GDP  as  we’d  expect,  given  favorable 
economic  conditions  and  firms’  healthy  balance  sheets.  Economic  growth  has  been  solid  for  a  few 
years  now.  And,  with  the  very  low  level  of  interest  rates,  borrowing  costs  can’t  be  the  problem. 
Moreover, profit margins have been high for some time, so firms are certainly not strapped for cash. 
The  shortfall  might  be  due  to  business  caution,  perhaps  related  to  reverberations  from  9/11  and 
subsequent  terrorist  threats  and  actions  or  perhaps  to  the  corporate  governance  scandals  and  the 
adjustments required by the legislation that followed them. Alternatively, the investment shortfall might 
reflect the perception by businesses that productivity gains can be realized at this stage that do not 
require major new investments in equipment and software. 
Whatever the explanation, the consequence of these drags is that the Fed had to keep interest rates 
exceptionally low for a long time just to get respectable, but not stellar, economic growth. In fact, the 
federal funds rate was lowered all the way to 1 percent and held there until the middle of last year. 
Since  then,  the  FOMC  has  raised  the  funds  rate  nine  times  to  3¼  percent,  but  it  still  remains  in  a 
range normally considered stimulative. 
Bond rate conundrum 
Increases in the federal funds rate typically lead to increases in longer-term interest rates. But, as we 
all know, long-term rates have actually fallen as the FOMC has raised short-term rates. For example, 
the benchmark ten-year Treasury rate is down by more than ½ percentage point since the funds rate 
started  heading  up  in  the  middle  of  last  year.  This  is  the  basis  for  what  Chairman  Greenspan  has 
called the bond rate “conundrum” that has commanded so much attention recently. 
There is a debate about how to interpret the decline in longer term yields and it essentially boils down 
to  whether  the  surprising  behavior  of  long  rates  is  due  to  various  “special  factors”  operating 
independently of the current business cycle or instead augurs bad economic news on the horizon. If 
special factors are holding down long term yields, then the total amount of stimulus to spending from 
interest rates is currently greater than would be surmised on the basis of the current federal funds rate. 
In  effect,  unusually  low  long-term  bond  rates  are  now  providing  extra  stimulus  to  offset  the  drags  I 
described. A number of “special factors” might be at work to flatten the yield curve. One possibility is 
that low bond rates reflect a drop in risk premiums because inflation has become better anchored and 
the volatility of the real economy has fallen. But let me also note that other factors would seem to work 
in  the  opposite  direction—for  example,  our  large  and  growing  federal  budget  and  trade  imbalances 
could be raising risk premiums. 
Another possibility is that low long-term rates reflect unusually strong demand for long-term securities, 
for example, by pension funds seeking to improve the match between the durations of their assets and 
liabilities,  by  holders  of  mortgage-backed  securities  seeking  to  maintain  the  durations  of  their 
portfolios, or by foreign central banks that have been acquiring dollars. China may have been playing 
an especially large role, as its central bank has intervened in foreign exchange markets to peg the 
renminbi at a low level against the dollar. Of course, last week the People’s Bank of China announced 
that  it  had  revalued  the  renminbi  against  the  dollar  by  2.1  percent,  with  the  stated  intention  of 
managing the renminbi’s exchange value against an unspecified currency basket. This is not a large 
revaluation, but some observers think that it is the beginning of a much bigger move over time. If this 
is  the  case,  we  may  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  impact,  if  any,  that  Chinese  exchange  rate 
policy has had on U.S. bond rates. 
An  alternative  to  “special  factors”  as  an  explanation  for  the  low  level  of  long-term  yields  is  the 
possibility that the flat yield curve reflects the market’s assessment that bad news is on the horizon. In 
other words, investors may expect only modest increases in the funds rate in the future because they 
think that the drags I’ve described will keep demand on the weak side for some time to come. 
We probably won’t know the most important sources of this “conundrum” until more time passes, but 
the causes of the conundrum do matter to monetary policy. If the first class of explanations turns out to 
be  correct,  the  federal  funds  rate  probably  needs  to  be  somewhat  higher  than  would  otherwise  be 
appropriate to offset the additional stimulus due to the flat yield curve. If the latter explanation fits the 
bill, and the market is correct that the drags going forward will be unusually strong, a somewhat easier 
policy may be appropriate. 
Housing 
Whatever the source of the conundrum, clearly low long-term rates have contributed to the continuing 
boom in the housing market. The share of residential investment in GDP is now at its highest level in 
decades.  The  question  on  everyone’s  mind,  of  course,  is  whether  this  source  of  strength  in  the 
economy could reverse course and become instead a source of weakness. Put more bluntly: Is there a 
housing “bubble” that might collapse, and if so, what would that mean for the economy? To begin to 
answer this question, we need to know what we mean by the term “bubble.” A bubble does not just 
mean that prices are rising rapidly—it’s more complicated than that. Instead, a bubble means that the 
price of an asset—in this case, housing—is significantly higher than its fundamental value. 
One common way of thinking about housing’s fundamental value is to consider the ratio of housing 
prices to rents. The price-to-rent ratio is equivalent to the price-to-dividend ratio for stocks. In the case 
of housing, rents reflect the flow of benefits obtained from housing assets—either the monetary return 
from  rental  property,  or  the  value  of  living  in  owner-occupied  housing.  Historically,  the  ratio  for  the 
nation as a whole has had many ups and downs, but over time it has tended to return to its long-run 
average. Thus, when the price-to-rent ratio is high, housing prices tend to grow more slowly or fall for 
a time, and when the ratio is low, prices tend to rise more rapidly. I want to emphasize, though, that 
this  is  a  loose  relationship  that  can  be  counted  on  only  for  rough  guidance  rather  than  a  precise 
reading. 
Currently, the ratio for the country is higher than at any time since data became available in 1970—
about 25 percent above its long-run average. Of course, the results vary widely from place to place. 
For Los Angeles and San Francisco, the price-to-rent ratio is about 40 percent higher than the normal 
level, while for Cleveland the ratio is very near its historical average. 
Closer to home, the figure for Seattle is just over 35. For Portland, it turns out that the price-to-rent 
ratio  is  a  bit  anomalous.  Unlike  the  ratio  for  the  nation  and  many  of  the  cities  I’ve  mentioned, 
Portland’s ratio has been trending up, and this pattern has been going on since the late 1980s. This 
means that there’s not a stable long-run average ratio to use as a comparison for today’s ratio, so the 
analysis we did for the other cities wouldn’t be that meaningful for Portland. What we do know is that 
the pace of home price appreciation in Portland has been close to the national pace over the past few 
years, lagging behind somewhat in 2003 as the state struggled to recover from the 2001 recession, 
but mostly catching up in 2004 and early 2005 as economic growth picked up noticeably in the state. 
As of early this year, home prices in the Portland area were up 12 percent over a year earlier, only a 
bit below the national pace of 12½ percent. More recently, I’ve heard reports that upscale homes in 
the  Portland  area  are  increasingly  being  sold  at  above-asking  price—a  phenomenon  we’re  all  too 
familiar with in the Bay Area! So it’s clear that Portland’s housing market has been hot, but I’m sure 
that’s no surprise to you. 
In any event, as I said before, the fact that the ratios for the nation and many areas of the country are 
higher  than  normal  doesn’t  necessarily  prove  that  there’s  a  bubble.  House  prices  could  be  high  for 
some good reasons that affect their fundamental value. The most obvious reason is the low level of 
mortgage  rates.  This  stems  both  from  very  stimulative  monetary  policy  and  from  the  conundrum  I 
discussed earlier. Conventional mortgage rates have dropped from around 6 percent in early 2004 to 
around 5 percent recently. 
Other factors could also be raising housing’s fundamental value. For example, recent changes in tax 
laws may be having an effect. In 1998, tax rates on capital gains were lowered and the exemption 
from capital gains taxation for housing was raised to $500,000. Both of these changes would reduce 
the potential tax bite from selling one home and buying another. Another development, which may be 
making  housing  more  like  an  investment  vehicle,  is  that  it’s  now  easier  and  cheaper  to  get  at  the 
equity—either through refinancing, which has become a less costly process, or through an equity line 
of  credit.  Both  of  these  innovations  in  mortgage  markets  make  the  funds  invested  in  houses  more 
liquid. 
So there are good reasons to think that fundamental factors have played a role in the unusually high 
price-to-rent ratio. But the bottom line here is fuzzy. It’s very hard to say how big a role these factors 
have  played,  so  we  don’t  know  how  much  remains  unexplained.  Frankly,  even  the  best  available 
estimates are imprecise, and they don’t definitively answer the question: Is there a bubble, and if there 
is, how large is it? 
Given this uncertainty, my focus as a monetary policymaker is on trying to understand what kind of 
risks a drop in house prices would pose for the economy. One of the classic ways to do this is to ask 
“What  if…?”—in  other  words,  to  pose  a  purely  hypothetical  question.  In  this  case,  the  “what  if” 
question might be, “What’s the likely effect if national house prices did fall by 25 percent, enough to 
bring  the  price-to-rent  ratio  back  to  its  historical  average?”  Before  going  any  further,  I  want  to 
emphasize  that  I’m  not  making  any  predictions  about  house  price  movements,  but  instead,  simply 
discussing how a prudent monetary policymaker could assess the risk. 
First, there would be an effect on consumers’ wealth. With housing wealth nearing $18 trillion today, 
such a drop in house prices would extinguish about $4½ trillion of household wealth—equal to about 
38 percent of GDP. Standard estimates suggest that for each dollar of wealth lost, households tend to 
cut  back  on  spending  by  around  3½  cents.  This  amounts  to  a  decrease  in  consumer  spending  of 
about  1¼  percent  of  GDP.  To  get  some  perspective  on  how  big  the  effect  would  be,  it’s  worth 
comparing it with the stock market decline that began in early 2000. In that episode, the extinction of 
wealth  was  much  greater—stock  market  wealth  fell  by  $8½  trillion  from  March  2000  to  the  end  of 
2002. This suggests that if house prices were to drop by 25 percent, the impact on the economy might 
be about half what it was when the stock market turned down a few years ago. 
Moreover,  the  spending  pullback  wouldn’t  happen  all  of  a  sudden.  Wealth  effects—positive  or 
negative—tend to affect spending with fairly long lags. So, a drop in house prices probably would lead 
to a gradual cutback in spending, giving the Fed time to respond by lowering short-term interest rates 
and keeping the economy steady. 
Now let’s complicate things. Suppose house prices started falling because bond and mortgage interest 
rates started rising as the conundrum was resolved, say, because the risk premium in bonds rose due 
to concerns about federal budget deficits or other factors. Then we’d have the cutback in spending 
because of the wealth effect, plus there’d likely be further spending cutbacks, as borrowing costs for 
households rose. Furthermore, a rise in long-term rates would have effects beyond just households—it 
also would dampen business investment in capital goods through a higher cost of capital. 
How  manageable  would  this  scenario  be?  Like  the  wealth  effect,  these  added  interest-rate  effects 
operate with a lag, so, again, there probably would be time for monetary policy to respond by lowering 
short-term  interest  rates.  This  obviously  would  not  be  a  “slam  dunk,”  but  in  many  circumstances  it 
would seem manageable. 
A matter of more concern is whether this scenario would lead to financial disruptions that could cause 
spending to slow sharply and quickly. One issue that receives a lot of attention is the increasing use of 
potentially riskier types of loans, like variable rate and interest-only loans that may make borrowers 
and lenders vulnerable to a fall in house prices or increase in interest rates. I believe that the odds of 
widespread  financial  disruption  on  this  count  are  fairly  slim,  although,  clearly,  some  borrowers  are 
vulnerable.  First,  the  shift  to  these  new  instruments  appears  relatively  modest  overall.  Second,  the 
equity  cushions  available  to  both  borrowers  and  lenders  still  seem,  on  average,  to  be  pretty 
substantial. This is evident in looking at loan-to-value ratios, which have fallen, on average, as home 
valuations  have  risen  faster  than  mortgage  debt.  In  addition,  most  financial  institutions  enjoy 
comfortable  capital  positions,  so  they’re  better  able  to  weather  any  problems  with  their  mortgage 
portfolios.  Finally,  some  of  the  risk  associated  with  mortgages  has  been  transferred  from  banks  to 
investors, as banks have sold off securitized bundles of mortgage debt. These investors may be in a 
better position to handle the associated risk. So, while there undoubtedly would be some fallout from a 
substantial drop in house prices, the financial system and consumers appear to be in reasonably good 
shape to handle the situation. 
Monetary policy 
I’d  like  to  close  my  remarks  by  taking  a  step  back  from  the  home  price  story  and  putting  it  in  the 
broader  context  of  the  economy’s  overall  performance—which,  after  all,  is  the  chief  concern  of 
monetary  policymakers.  As  I’ve  emphasized,  economic  activity  has  been  burdened  by  some  major 
drags over the past several years. As a result, the Fed has had to keep interest rates exceptionally low 
for  a  long  time  just  to  get  respectable  economic  growth.  In  fact,  respectable  growth  is  all  we  have 
gotten—even with exceptionally low long-term yields and unexpectedly rapid gains in house prices. 
This growth has had to rest on the backs of just a few interest-sensitive sectors—business investment, 
consumer  durables,  and  housing.  From  this  perspective,  it’s  not  all  that  surprising  that  housing 
markets have  been hot.  My  point  is  that  to  offset  the  “drags”  we’ve  needed  to  give  the  economy  a 
strong dose of stimulus—which inevitably boosted the housing sector. 
As  I’ve  discussed,  if  a  sizable  reversal  in  house  prices  were  to  occur,  it  probably  would  affect  the 
economy mainly through the lagged effects of declines in wealth and increases in interest rates, rather 
than through widespread financial disruptions. This would give monetary policy time to react to any 
resulting  economic  weakness  by  lowering  interest  rates.  In  addition,  the  magnitude  of  the  potential 
house price overvaluation may be only around half that of the earlier stock market overvaluation. 
In  conclusion,  policy  still  appears  to  be  somewhat  accommodative,  and  given  the  recent  inflation 
performance  and  the  dwindling  of  slack,  it  makes  sense  to  continue  the  process  of  removing  that 
accommodation. 
I hope I’ve provided you with some insight on the issues that I think are important to focus on as the 
Fed goes through this process. I look forward to taking your questions. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
