Toshihiko Fukui: On stabilisation policies - a central banker’s reflection 
Remarks by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at The Bank of Korea International 
Conference 2005, Seoul, 27 May 2005.  
 Introduction  
1.  
Good  morning,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  my  privilege  to  speak  at  the  beginning  of  the  Bank  of 
Korea's international conference.  
At  the  outset,  please  allow  me  to  strike  a  personal  note.  I  meet  with  BOK  Governor  Park  rather 
frequently, maybe four or five times a year. At the end of each of our conversations, I am impatient for 
our next meeting. Therefore, it is a tremendous pleasure to see him again this morning, although it is 
only a month since we had lunch together on a southern Japanese island.  
Like  our  personal  relationship,  official  ties  between  our  two  central  banks  are  also  close.  To  avoid 
using up the time accorded to me, I just point out the fact that, for the first time in many years, the 
Bank of Japan posted one official at the Japanese embassy in Seoul to cultivate better communication 
with the Bank of Korea and other contacts here.  
Today's symposium covers a broad range of aspects of macro-economic stabilization policies - that is, 
monetary and fiscal policies. While the phrase "stabilization policies" has been popular for nearly half a 
century,  we  can  interpret  this  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Believing  that  the  profundity  of  this  topic  will  be 
revealed  in  the  sessions  today,  I  would  rather  like  to  present  my  personal  reflections  on  Japan's 
economic policy management over the past two decades when we struggled to stabilize our economy.  
Japan's success and failure  
2.  
Let me begin with a brief sketch of what Japan's economy went through after World War II.  
We began the post-war reconstruction by creating a uniquely Japanese system. It was built on a tight 
nexus of the social, political and economic apparatus, with top priority given to attaining high economic 
growth.  Among  the  striking  features  of  this  system  were  political  stability,  strong  bureaucracy,  and 
lifetime  employment.  The  so-called  "iron  triangle"  between  politicians,  bureaucrats,  and  business 
people was very powerful in promoting growth-oriented business models and building an export-led 
industrial structure. As it turned out, this was a marvelous success.  
Unfortunately, success creates inertia - an intrinsic resistance to change, even when the old system 
begins to falter. From the early 1980s, globalization and technological innovation began transforming 
the  world  economy,  posing  new  challenges  for  Japan's  economy.  External  imbalances  and  trade 
friction led to the currency re-alignment of the Plaza Accord in 1985. This put deflationary pressures 
on Japan's economy, while making traditional segments of our economy obsolete.  
In  order  to  fend  off  the  deflationary  forces,  Japan  made  full  use  of  macro-economic  policies.  The 
government stepped up fiscal spending to boost domestic demand. The Bank of Japan (BOJ) eased 
monetary policy for an extended period of time, consequently fuelling the rapid boom in the economy.  
Together with various structural factors, these expansionary policies spawned distortions in Japan's 
economy. To name just a few examples, we saw a nation-wide surge in resort area development at 
the expense of our green environment. We embarked on the re-development of metropolitan Tokyo to 
make it an international financial hub, but with little coherent strategy in hindsight. Fiscal profligacy by 
the government, which I referred to just a few seconds ago, resulted in the building of local roads and 
ports barely used by travelers - a classical faux pas of pork-barrel politics.  
Such  economic  frenzy  generated  irrational  growth  expectations,  further  prompting  excessive 
investment in both real and financial assets. As you know, the upshot of this euphoria was the asset 
bubbles and their subsequent bursting.  
All these episodes point to one thing: despite the substantial changes in its external circumstances, 
Japan was not able to depart from the development model it cherished during the economic catch-up 
period. We had many discussions about how to reform our system in the face of the headwind against 
Japan's economy after the Plaza Accord, but we did not follow our words with action. Put differently, it 
was a reform by word, not in deed.  
After the collapse of the economic bubbles in the early 1990s, we finally learned that every boom must 
evaporate some time. An aging population and declining birth rate also forced us to acknowledge the 
need  to  revamp  our  modus  operandi  so  that  we  could  remain  viable  in  global  competition.  This 
perception shift marked the beginning of the long adjustment phase from the mid-1990s - a harrowing 
decade when Japan's private and public sectors tried to reinvent themselves.  
The corporate sector tried hard to get rid of the negative legacies of the bubble era - that is, excesses 
in  production  capacity,  labor,  and  debt.  Although  hard  hit  by  falling  employment  and  wages,  the 
household sector endured relatively well during this painful adjustment.  
As the old financial system suffered setbacks amid the bubble burst, Japanese financial institutions 
faced  a  mountain  of  non-performing  assets.  In  the  process  of  cleaning  them  up,  banks  not  only 
exhausted the wealth they had accumulated during the high-growth years, but also had to rely upon 
government bailouts.  
In the 1990s, the Japanese government provided large fiscal stimuli to prevent economic stagnation 
from  worsening.  But  it  also  pursued  deregulation,  as  a  supply-side  measure,  to  foster  business 
formation and innovation.  
What did the Bank of Japan do in this adjustment process? We began to ease monetary policy in July 
1991, when the consumer price index still registered an increase of around 3%. In September 1995, 
the official discount rate dropped to 0.5%, the lowest ever recorded in the history of central banks in 
the world. In February 1999, the BOJ adopted the zero interest rate policy, followed eventually by the 
quantitative easing policy - again unprecedented in central bank history - that has been in place since 
March 2001.  
Monetary easing in this unprecedented fashion cushioned depressive ramifications from the structural 
adjustment in the corporate and personal sectors. Also, the ample provision of funds by the BOJ was 
effective  in  reducing  liquidity  squeeze  in  financial  markets  at  a  time  when  systemic  instability  and 
credit crunch were the real threats to the Japanese financial system.  
After  13  years  of  policy  struggles,  progress  has  begun  to  materialize  in  unwinding  past  excesses. 
Major  Japanese  banks  are  now  in  much  better  shape.  Corporations  are  posting  brighter  earnings 
outcomes than ever, and household incomes have begun to improve.  
Against this backdrop, we removed the blanket deposit insurance on April 1st, 2005. Considering that 
the  blanket  guarantee  was  maintained  as  a  financial  emergency  measure,  Japan's  economy  has 
passed a critical milestone. The next milestone will be passed when Japan brings its economy back on 
a sustainable growth path.  
From  the  medium-term  perspective,  Japan  needs  to  carry  out  the  structural  overhaul  of  its  public 
sector, too. For instance, the legacy of an activist fiscal policy throughout the 1990s is still with us, as 
shown  by  the  huge  public  debt  nearing  160%  of  our  GDP.  This  leads  us  to  conclude  that  fiscal 
consolidation  should  be  examined  in  a  well  thought-out  manner.  Re-designing  our  social  security 
system in the context of demographic adversity is another policy imperative. No doubt, these are large 
challenges.  
Policy lessons from Japan's experience  
3.  
At this juncture when Japan's structural adjustment has come quite a distance, it might be informative 
to take stock of some monetary policy implications from our decade-long struggle.  
First,  in  connection  with  the  leitmotif  of  today's  conference,  we  should  not  restrict  central  banks' 
stabilization policy to a narrow domain of macroeconomic management. There could be circumstances 
where a central bank needs to play a critical role in safeguarding the stability of the financial system.  
In addition, the effectiveness of monetary policy hinges crucially on the proper functioning of financial 
markets  and  the  financial  system.  This  is  because  monetary  policy  is  implemented  through  central 
banks'  lending,  deposit-taking,  money-market  operations,  and  other activities in  financial markets.  If 
financial stability is at risk, central banks' policy would be severely constrained.  
Throughout the 1990s, the BOJ conducted its policy while paying close attention to the condition of the 
financial  markets  and  the  financial  system.  This  was  especially  true  in  the  late  1990s  when  the 
systemic dysfunction of our banking system was apparent.  
Second,  central  banks  need  to  tackle  two  elusive  but  inter-related  questions:  how  do  asset  price 
fluctuations affect economic stability; and how should a central bank respond to big swings in asset 
prices?  
A de-coupling of asset prices and general prices is not necessarily rare. Besides Japan's anomalous 
experience in the bubble period, recent examples of this sort have been seen in the United States, 
Britain, and Australia. In many advanced economies, asset prices tend to rise in sync with a cyclical 
economic upturn, while general price indices are becoming less responsive due to productivity growth 
and firms' cost retrenchment amid global competition.  
However, Japan's painful experience tells us that central banks should keep a close watch on asset 
prices, for they could have a material impact on the economy and inflation in the medium to long run. 
Central  banks  should  also  be  alert  to  the  excessive  growth  in  money  and  credit  which  often 
accompanies  asset  bubbles.  I  presume  such  vigilance  should  somehow  be  blended  into  our 
conventional wisdom that central banks contribute to economic stabilization by ensuring price stability.  
Concluding remarks  
4.  
Now, let me conclude.  
As I said earlier, the most pressing task for the Bank of Japan at this moment is to achieve sustainable 
growth on the basis of price stability. Towards that goal, the BOJ is firmly committed to maintaining the 
current easing policy.  
I am impressed at how Korea has pushed forward structural reform in a wide range of areas following 
the economic crisis in 1997. I am sure the Bank of Korea has made a significant contribution to this 
economic revival, and will continue to build more on its success. I would like to express my respect for 
the decisive leadership of Governor Park.  
This conference brings together many eminent scholars and central bankers. I am sure that, based on 
analysis  of  the  bitter  experiences  of  both  Japan  and  Korea,  the  confluence  of  their  expertise  and 
insights will provide a thought-provoking discussion of this complex issue of stabilization policies.  
Thank you for your attention.  
