Stanley  Fischer:  The  Economic  Stabilisation  Program  and  its  effect  on  the 
Israeli economy today 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Israel  Democracy 
Institute Conference on Economic Policy (“Caesarea 2005”), Jerusalem, 30 June 2005. 
  The Minister of Finance, the President of the Israel Democracy Institute, the Academic Director of the 
Caesarea Conference, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen: 
I  am  happy  to  be  here  today,  at  the  Caesarea  conference,  surrounded  by  so  many  friends  and 
colleagues.  It  gives  me  special  pleasure  to  have  been  given  the  opportunity,  for  the  first  time,  of 
participating  in  this  celebratory  "barmitzvah"  conference  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel.  As  you 
know, the conference organizers thought it appropriate to hold a special event two days ago to mark 
twenty years since the Economic Stabilization Program of 1985 (the ESP). 
The  older  ones  among  us  surely  remember  that  twenty  years  ago,  in  the  mid-1980s,  Israel  was 
wallowing in the throes of a deep economic crisis. Annual inflation had soared to three-digit figures, 
and everyone in the country-householders, businesses, factory owners-was engaged principally in the 
day-to-day search for ways to avoid the damages caused by hyper-inflation. Economic and financial 
instability  did  not  simply  occur  by  chance.  It  occurred  against  the  background  of  an  oversized 
government with a large, nay huge, deficit. Alongside the government acted a central bank which was 
far from being independent, as it was obliged to print money to finance the government's large deficits. 
The stabilization program introduced in 1985 was a turning point for the economy. Among those who 
formulated the program and propelled it forward were the then Prime Minister Mr Shimon Peres, the 
then  Finance  Minister  the  late  Yitzhak  Modai,  my  friends  the  late  Professors  Michael  Bruno,  who 
became  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  Eitan  Berglas  and  Herbert  Stein,  and  Emmanuel  Sharon, 
Professor Nissan Liviatan and many others. 
For  me,  marking  twenty  years  since  the  ESP  closes  an  important  circle,  not  only  because  since  I 
participated in it I have become the Governor of the Bank of Israel. It is because the reality in which 
Israel's  economy  operates  today  is  the  outcome  of  the  macroeconomic  strategy  that  was  launched 
then and that has been developing constantly, not without difficulties and occasional disagreements, 
right  until  the  present.  The  Bank  of  Israel  participated  fully  in  the  strategy,  and  more  than  once 
provided  the  main  motive  force  behind  it,  particularly  in  the  1990s  when  we  moved  from  foreign-
exchange control to free capital flows, from a fixed exchange rate to an exchange rate determined by 
market forces, and from inflation at a level of 15 percent to 20 percent a year to price stability. For 
these achievements we owe thanks to the previous Governors, Professor Jacob Frenkel and Dr David 
Klein. 
The government operates within a framework of long-term fiscal discipline the purpose of which is to 
reduce the burden on the economy of debt, taxation and government expenditure. The public in Israel-
households and the business sector-benefit from complete freedom in regard to foreign currency; the 
economy is an open one in the areas of trade and capital movements; the capital market is developing 
constantly,  and  the  government  has  severely  curtailed  its  involvement  in  it  and  in  the  economy  in 
general;  and  the  Bank  of  Israel  pursues  an  independent  monetary  policy-mainly  due  to  the  Non-
Money-Printing  Law  of  1985  which  simply  forbade  the  Bank  to  print  money  for  the  government's 
budgetary requirements. 
It  is  important  to  observe  at  this  early  point  that  the  main  target  of  that  long-term  strategy  is  the 
achievement  of  sustained  growth  which  we  all  wish  for.  It  is  the  basis  for  improved  welfare  of  the 
whole population and for welfare policy that will deal with its weaker strata. 
And indeed, Israel's economy achieved a growth rate of over 4 percent in 2004, and although the data 
relating to real activity in 2005 are not unequivocal, it seems to us that growth for the year as a whole 
will be between 3.5 percent and 4 percent. Employment data so far show an impressive improvement, 
at least in the first four months of the year. 
Are  these  accomplishments  enough,  and  can  we  now  take  it  easy?  Obviously  that  is  a  rhetorical 
question, the answer to which is a resounding "No!" 
Many important challenges still confront us: 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
The main challenge is to continue to maintain the achievements that have been attained. Much work 
has  been  put  into  reaching  this  situation  and  much  energy  invested  in  it  over  many  years. 
Relinquishing the accomplishments would soon take us back to where we were and make us start the 
whole  procedure  over  again.  That  is  too  dangerous  a  game  to  play,  and  we  should  not  consider 
playing it. One of the lessons I learned while at the IMF was that one can destroy in less than a year 
an economic achievement for which one worked for more than a decade-a lesson applicable not only 
in the field of economics. Now in particular, when the economy is stable and on a path of growth, we 
must constantly examine what potential situations could harm or weaken it, and what we must do to 
deal with them. 
Underlying all the above is the continuation of the macroeconomic policy based on the one hand on 
long-term fiscal policy, and on the other hand on monetary policy that acts directly to underpin price 
stability and support financial stability. 
The  long-term  path  that  the  government  decided  upon-within  the  framework  of  the  legislation  that 
determines the maximum real increase in government expenditure (1 percent a year) and the budget 
deficit  (up  to  3  percent  of  GDP)-serves,  together  with  the  privatization  policy,  as  bellwether  to  the 
required  fiscal  policy.  In  this  context,  the  tax  program  recently  adopted  by  the  government  also 
incorporates a component that supports a reduction of government debt. This fiscal arm of policy will 
contribute to economic growth. 
In  the  monetary  area,  it  is  essential  that  the  Bank  of  Israel  be  able  to  continue  acting,  like  other 
modern central banks, to preserve price stability in the long run, in line with the government's decision. 
Obviously I am referring to a new, up-to-date Bank of Israel Law. This is a vital issue to the Bank, and I 
will revert to it in greater detail further on. 
In  addition  to  the  macroeconomic  strategy  that  I  have  described,  the  microeconomic  sphere  offers 
challenges too, of no less importance. I will refer specifically to an area currently on the agenda of the 
Knesset,  and  that  is  the  reform  of  the  financial  markets,  or  the  recommendations  of  the  Bachar 
Committee. The reform is aimed at a) reducing the concentration in the financial system and boosting 
competition in the capital market, and b) lowering the chances of conflict of interests in the system. 
The Bank of Israel supports this reform. It comes together with several other structural reforms and 
instances  of  privatization  that  have  taken  place  with  the  intention  of  giving  households  and  the 
business sector greater freedom and flexibility. 
Alongside all  the  above,  it  is  very  important  that  we  give  attention  to  welfare policy.  In  the  last  few 
years  the  Research  Department  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  invested  considerable  resources  to 
formulate recommendations in this field, and I intend this to continue. There is close cooperation with 
the Prime Minister's Office and with the Ministry of Finance, but not only with them. It is clear to us all 
that  we  must  make  a  concentrated  effort  in  the  social  area.  Welfare  policy  must  be  focused,  and 
should act along two channels: 
The first is to encourage people to go out to work, in other words, to raise the rate of participation in 
the labor force, a rate which is lower in Israel than in the OECD countries, and to help those who are 
working but earning too little to climb out of the poverty trap. The recommendation of the Bank of Israel 
in this regard is a negative income tax, or what is known in the US as an Earned Income Tax Credit 
(EITC). 
The second is to give assistance to those in the population who are unable to participate in the labor 
force, such as the elderly and the disabled. 
The  social  issue  leads  us  naturally  to  the  question  of  education  including  technological  education. 
Education,  which  is  available  to  all  sections  of  the  population,  is  important  both  from  the  aspect  of 
growth  and  from  the  aspect  of  welfare  problems.  With  regard  to  growth,  education  is  important 
because a large part of growth must be based on increased productivity, on technological advance, 
and on a rise in the human capital of labor force participants-an area in which Israel has a tremendous 
advantage.  It  might  be  natural  for  an  economist  to  speak  of  education  in  terms  of  productivity,  but 
education has an extra importance in that it offers equal opportunity to all sections of the population, 
according to the individuals' abilities, to acquire skills that will help them to improve their situation. 
Finally, I said that I would revert to the question of the Bank of Israel Law. Twenty years ago I thought 
that the legal framework for central banks is not of such great importance. But after what happened 
until the mid-1980s I understood just how important it was to enact the Non-Money-Printing Law as 
part of the stabilization program. The fact is that a central-bank law affects the bank's ability to achieve 
the objectives of monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
In essence, that is the reason why a new, modern Bank of Israel Law is of interest to each and every 
one of us as citizens of this country. 
In a spirit of mutual understanding, the Bank of Israel is actively cooperating with the Prime Minister, 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and  their  offices  to  promote  the  legislation,  and  to  close  another  circle  that 
started twenty years ago and that has taken long enough; it is clear that the time has come to bring 
this matter to an end-we must remember that 8 years have passed since the excellent report of the 
Levin Committee. 
The following are the most important aspects: 
First, the new law that we in the Bank of Israel propose clearly defines the independence required for 
a  central  bank,  similar  to  the  situation  in  other  developed  countries,  but  it  is  apparent  to  us  that 
independence must go hand-in-hand with responsibility. The new law that we propose therefore also 
incorporates a  clear system  of  decision-making  mechanisms, of  internal and  public  controls,  and  of 
reports to the government, the Knesset and the public. 
Second,  on  the  side  of  its  responsibility,  the  proposed  law  clearly  defines  the  Bank's  objectives:  1) 
maintaining  price  stability,  according  to  the  target  set  by  the  government,  as  the  prime  target;  2) 
supporting  the  government's  other  economic  goals,  including  growth  and  employment,  without 
harming price stability and the proper functioning of the financial system. This replaces the vagueness 
in the current Law. The economic literature states that the central bank will not have independence in 
its objectives, in other words, the law and the government determine the central bank's objectives. 
Third, the proposed law grants the Bank full independence to use the instruments needed to achieve 
its objectives. In the literature this is referred to as instrument independence. 
Fourth, with regard to decision making, two new bodies are proposed-a monetary committee and an 
administrative  council.  The  monetary  committee  will  make  decisions  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy, 
and  will  report  accordingly  to  the  public.  It  is  proposed  that  the  Governor  will  chair  the  committee, 
which will have a majority of members from outside the Bank, who will be selected according to their 
qualifications in the relevant economic area and free of conflict of interests. 
The  administrative  council  will  authorize  administrative  issues  such  as  the  Bank's  budget  and  staff 
salaries, and will report accordingly to the public. In this council too members from outside the Bank 
will  constitute  the  majority;  one  of  them  will  be  the  chairperson  (not  the  Governor,  who  will  be  an 
ordinary member). The members from outside the Bank of Israel will be selected according to their 
qualifications in the business and administrative sphere, and will be free of conflict of interests. 
Fifth, the proposed law defines a system of periodic reports to the government, the Knesset and the 
public-annual, biannual, and quarterly-as well as a special report which the Governor will submit if the 
Bank consistently deviates from the price-stability target defined by the government. 
The question of the law, as I said above, is vital for the Bank of Israel so that it can operate in the 
future, in the near future I hope, in a legal framework that will describe precisely the goals of monetary 
policy,  the  areas  of  the  Bank's  responsibility,  and  the  meaning  of  its  independence.  This  is  also 
important as part of the integration of Israel's economy into the family of advance economies. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 3
