Jürgen Stark: Some new trends in financial markets 
Keynote address by Dr Jürgen Stark, Vice President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the symposium 
on building the financial system of the 21st century - an agenda for Europe and the United States, 
Eltville, 23 April 2005. 
 1. 
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to address this distinguished audience at Harvard Law School’s “Program 
on  International  Financial  Systems”.  Of  course  we  should  not  misunderstand  the  title  “building  the 
financial  system  of  the  21st  century”.  Financial  systems  don’t  need  to  be  actively  built  for  they  are 
great at evolving on their own, as can be seen in trends both past and present. What needs to be built, 
however, is a sound and proper framework, where evolution can safely take place. By “safely” I mean 
without  compromising  financial  stability.  The  architects  responsible  for  designing  and  adapting  the 
framework need to monitor closely the permanent change in financial systems.  
In this vein, I would like to comment today on two trends in financial systems: the phenomenon of risk 
transfer to private households and the recent strong growth in unregulated financial business.  
Some reflections on financial stability 
2. 
First, however, I would like to set the general backdrop of financial stability. Financial stability now is a 
very  topical  issue.  A  growing  number  of  international  committees  regularly  debate  financial  stability 
issues.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum  that  met  last  month  in  Tokyo  is  a  good  example.  A growing 
number  of  central  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have  taken  to  publishing  financial  stability 
reviews.  This  is  no  different  at  the  Bundesbank;  we  published  our  first  financial  stability  review  in 
December 2003. 
The increasing preoccupation with financial stability is by no means just a fashion or due to central 
bankers’ “search for new tasks”. It is based on the recognition that financial stability is an important 
precondition for our economic well-being. 
So,  what  exactly  is  financial  stability?  Up  to  now  no  generally  agreed  definition  exists.  Thus,  many 
attempts  have  been  made  by  describing  its  opposite,  financial  instability.  But  then,  no  definition  of 
financial instability exists either. Financial instability comes in various shapes. Charles P Kindleberger 
in  his  modern  classic  “Manias,  panics  and  crashes”  described  financial  crises  as  being  “like  pretty 
women:  hard  to  define  but  recognizable  when  encountered”.  That’s  nicely  put,  but  not  quite 
operational.  
The  Bundesbank  favours  an  eclectic  approach  to  describing  financial  stability.  Financial  stability 
basically means that the financial system properly performs its functions of allocating capital and risk, 
even if put under pressure. Thus, robust financial institutions are one cornerstone of financial stability. 
A resilient  market  infrastructure,  incorporating  payment  and  securities  trading  systems,  is  another 
cornerstone of financial stability. And last but not least, there are transparency and market integrity. 
Thus, the three panels of this symposium - Basle II, market structure and IFRS - neatly cover three 
major facets of financial stability.  
Why has financial stability attracted so much attention recently? During the second half of the 1990s a 
series  of  international  financial  crises  set  the  spotlight  on  financial  stability  and  its  significance  for 
steady economic growth. Financial instability comes at a great economic cost.  
Monetary policy makes use of the financial system to transmit changes in official interest rates into the 
real economy. In a stable financial system, monetary policy signals are read and acted upon fast and 
reliably, thereby facilitating the pursuit of price stability. 
Financial stability is a necessity. A modern necessity, yes, but not at all a new one. Financial stability 
in part is a new catch-all phrase for a set of tasks that have been conducted by central banks for a 
long time. In many respects, financial stability is little more than just the same old thing in a new guise. 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 1
It is just a new way of looking at old things. This is not to ridicule financial stability. Quite the contrary. 
I regard  this  concept  as  very  useful  to  describe  the  second  leg  of  central  banking  -  the  first  leg,  of 
course, being price stability.  
If  financial  stability  is  so  crucial  to  our  economic  well-being,  then  how  can  it  be  maintained?  In  a 
nutshell,  it’s  the  framework  for  the  financial  system  that  counts.  A  suitable  framework  for  financial 
stability boils down to sound institutions and a proper set of incentives. Key institutions in this regard 
are  
• 
• 
the  strength  of 
that  ensures 
financial 
first, central banks that deliver price stability  
second,  a  system  of 
financial  supervision 
intermediaries, as far as supervision can do that  
third, safe and efficient state-of-the-art market infrastructure  
and, finally, a trustworthy legal system. 
• 
• 
As  regards  the  incentive  structure,  financial  stability  can  benefit  tremendously  if  market  forces  are 
strengthened. Furthermore, this approach is the one that is most compatible with a market economy. 
Ideally,  financial  market  participants  foster  financial  stability  as  a  by-product  of  their  pursuit  of  their 
own best interests. If, for example, financial institutions expect to be bailed out, it might be optimal for 
them to divert some resources from risk management, a phenomenon known as moral hazard. If no 
bail-out  can  be  expected,  risk  management  must  be  conducted  thoroughly.  Then,  risk  pricing  in 
financial markets would correctly reflect the risks entrenched in financial instruments: market forces at 
work to underpin financial stability. 
lead 
in  other 
financial  markets  and 
Some new trends to be watched 
3. 
Global  imbalances  have  taken  centre  stage  in  the  debate  on  the  international  financial  system 
recently.  These  may  cause  major  disruptions  if  they  are  unwound  in  a  disorderly  way.  Sharp  and 
unexpected  movements  in  exchange  rates  and  interest  rates  would  affect  financial  intermediaries 
directly  and  detrimentally  -  and  all  the  more  so  if  these  were  highly  leveraged.  Such  turmoil  would 
most  probably  produce  spill-over  effects 
to  adverse 
macroeconomic  developments  that  would  seep  back  into  the  financial  system.  The  fact  that  these 
imbalances  have  been  around  for  quite  some  time  without  spelling  trouble  must  not  lull  us  into 
complacency. Potential triggers - diminished expectations as to growth and inflation performance or 
reserve policy in Asia, to name but a few - are real, and they warrant attention.  
Beyond  these  topical  issues,  however,  more  fundamental  and  longer-term  trends  are  arising  in  the 
international financial system. They are driven by financial innovation and technological progress, and 
they challenge financial stability on an ongoing basis. Central banks, supervisors and regulators must 
therefore watch out for new trends and monitor them carefully. Potentially relevant changes need to be 
assessed  at  an  early  stage  to  ascertain  their  possible  impact  on  financial  systems  and  their 
implications for stability. Complacency never pays.  
The two trends which I want to highlight today are both rather new, quite fundamental, and they share 
the key feature of reducing transparency.  
In a market economy, transparency is a key tool for preserving financial stability. If a high degree of 
transparency  prevails,  market  discipline  can  largely  replace  regulatory  intrusion.  Transparency 
enables market participants to monitor their counterparties and to manage their risks effectively. As 
long as incentives are undistorted, transparency can do its job. 
Transparency  also  facilitates  the  supervisors’  job  of  identifying  possible  weaknesses  early  on. 
Supervisors need to have a clear picture of where risks are allocated and whether and where undue 
risk  concentrations  might  be  growing.  Hence,  developments  in  the  financial  system  that  impair 
transparency warrant scrutiny. 
Risk transfer “to” the household sector  
3.1 
New techniques of risk transfer have greatly enhanced one of the core functions of the international 
financial  system:  the  process  of  risk  allocation  and  risk  reallocation.  A  vast  array  of  formerly 
non-tradable  risks  have  become  tradable.  Financial  institutions  can  now  shed  risks  that  used  to  be 
2 
 BIS Review 34//2005
stuck in their balance sheets. Institutional as well as retail investors can much more easily diversify 
their portfolios. Risks can be transferred without difficulty to those who are best placed to bear them. 
Overall  financial  stability  -  and  also  economic  efficiency  -  should  benefit  from  such  improved  risk 
allocation.  
Credit risk, for example, is no longer the domain of commercial banking. Insurance corporations and 
pension funds acquire credit risk both for portfolio diversification purposes and as a stable source of 
income.  Beyond  conventional  asset-backed  securities,  financial  intermediaries  now  have  additional 
derivative instruments for credit risk transfer at their disposal: plain vanilla credit derivatives such as 
single name credit default swaps or, at the other end of the spectrum, complex structured products 
such as CDOs of CDOs. In some countries, even retail investors now have direct access to credit risk.  
The  prospect  of  new  and  increasingly  risk-based  capital  requirements  for  banks  and  insurance 
corporations - Basel II and Solvency II - coming into effect over the next few years is reinforcing the 
financial industry trend of shifting risks. Mark to market accounting sharpens the awareness of risks, 
thereby also setting incentives to adjust risk portfolios.  
The flip side of the constant risk reallocation is a certain reduction in transparency. More and more 
often, risks end up in portfolios where you wouldn’t expect them in the first place. Tracking the flow 
and  the  location  of  risks  has  become  trickier  for  market  participants  as  well  as  for  supervisory 
authorities. The question is whether today’s statistics are keeping up with this dynamic development 
and  whether  they  accurately  reflect  reality,  ie  the  overall  risk  allocation  and  risk  concentration  in 
financial systems.  
At  the  end  of  the  day,  all  financial  risk  is  borne  by  private  households.  All  the  risks  that  financial 
institutions carry in their balance sheets are effectively held by their shareholders. These shareholders 
are ultimately private households, even if a chain of ownership relations may conceal this fact. The 
same holds true for risks assumed by the government or its institutions. The taxpayer, ie again private 
households, is the true holder of governments’ financial risk. 
Thus, talking of a “risk transfer to the household sector” is slightly incorrect. But the phenomenon of 
changing  risk  profiles  within  in  the  household  sector  is  real.  This  subject  is  still  under-researched, 
though.  
Changes in an individual household’s risk profile may be the result of active choice. However, even in 
the  case  of  intended  portfolio  restructuring,  we  cannot  be  entirely  sure  that  households  fully 
understand all the risk which they take on, for example, when buying structured products. Given the 
low  level  of  financial  literacy  revealed  in  some  recent  studies,  unintentional  risk  acquisition  is  a 
possibility not to be underrated. Inadvertent changes in risk profiles may also occur via institutionalised 
investing,  when  financial  intermediaries  modify  their  investment  habits.  During  the  last  decade, 
German life insurance companies had increasingly taken to riskier assets in order to bolster returns. 
Most probably, life insurance policy holders were not fully aware of these alterations in their individual 
risk profiles [that more recently have been partially reversed].  
Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  pension  reforms  have  been  a  key  driver  of  risk  transfer.  In  recent 
reforms  of  pay-as-you-go  public  pension  systems,  benefits  have  been  cut.  Such  reforms  effectively 
shift  a  higher  portion  of  the  longevity  risk  that  was  previously  borne  by  (payroll)  taxpayers  back  to 
households. To the extent that households try to cushion their prospective loss of retirement income 
with  private  provisioning,  they  have  to  assume  additional  investment  and  market  risk.  Corporate 
pension plans migrating from defined benefits to defined contributions also burden households directly 
with market risk.  
As ultimate bearers of all financial risk, private households also feature as the ultimate absorbers of 
shocks to the financial system. Solvency, liquidity, ability and willingness to ride out losses determine 
the  shock  absorbing  capacity  of  the  household  sector.  Therefore,  striving  to  assess  the  scope  and 
direction of risk reallocation among different groups of households is of the essence. Income, wealth 
and  age  have  significant  influence  on  the  readiness  to  bear  risk  and  tolerate  possible  losses. 
Knowledge of the nature of risks, how to measure and how to mitigate them becomes crucial for those 
households that have to assume more risk.  
What is the upshot of all this risk redistribution?  
Up to now little is known [for sure] about the macroeconomic consequences of altered risk profiles in 
the  household  sector.  Macroeconomic  dynamics  might  change.  For  example,  in  the  wake  of  risk 
transfer from relatively wealthy households to those less well-off, consumption and saving levels might 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 3
become more volatile. This appears to be a reasonable guess, if financial institutions, ie their rather 
wealthy owners, shed risk, while the man in the street is being switched from a defined benefit to a 
defined contribution pension plan. In the course of such risk transfer and due to uncertainty as to their 
future income, households will tend to increase their savings rate, at least during a transition phase. 
As  to  financial  stability,  the  jury  is  still  out  on  whether  large-  scale  risk  reallocation  has  rendered 
financial  systems  more  stable.  Initial  evidence  seems  to  point  in  this  direction  because  financial 
institutions on the whole proved quite resilient during the market downturn and recession following the 
new economy boom.  
Instabilities  typically  arise  when  financial  intermediaries  run  into  trouble  -  irrespective  of  who  the 
ultimate  bearers  of  risks  are.  Financial  intermediaries’  risk  management  techniques  are  deemed  to 
have  been  greatly  refined and  improved.  State-of-the-art  risk  management  systems,  however,  have 
not  yet  been  tested  in  adverse  market  developments.  We  must  beware  both  overconfidence  and 
outright complacency.  
Unregulated financial business  
3.2 
Over the past couple of years, financial intermediation that is not subject to prudential regulation and 
reporting has experienced rapid growth. In an environment of low interest rates and abundant liquidity 
the  inevitable  search  for  yield  has  tempted  many  investors  to  take  on  more  risk  than  they  used  to. 
Large  amounts  of  money  were  channelled  into  risky  and  scarcely  regulated  asset  classes.  Hedge 
funds and private equity recorded sizeable inflows.  
The growth of the hedge fund industry has drawn particular attention and controversy. As this industry 
is not subject to official reporting, we can only guess its true size. Commercial hedge fund databases 
tend to provide only partial coverage of the industry. Therefore, we cannot preclude that this industry is 
considerably  larger  than  the  well-known  ballpark  figures  of  8,800  hedge  funds  with  USD 1 trillion 
assets under management [IMF GFSR Sept 2004] suggest. The fact that these investment entities are 
often domiciled in off-shore locations does not help their transparency either. 
But  let  me  make  it  clear  about  one  thing:  the  existence  of  the  hedge  fund  industry  benefits  the 
international financial system.  
• 
As active traders hedge funds provide liquidity to financial markets. Thus, they contribute to 
the breadth and depth of markets and promote the price discovery process.  
Hedge funds are constantly on the spot to find and thereby eliminate arbitrage opportunities. 
Thus, they strengthen market efficiency.  
Hedge funds acquire risks unwanted elsewhere. Thus, they can contribute to a more efficient 
overall risk allocation and expand opportunities for portfolio diversification.  
  The flip side of this coin are financial stability concerns arising predominantly from the substantial lack 
of  transparency.  Even  if  comprehensive  data  on  hedge  funds’  assets  under  management  were 
available,  we  would  still  have  a  hard  time  assessing  the  true  economic  risk  they  carry.  For  they 
typically  make  extensive  use  of  derivatives  and  hold  leveraged  positions,  not  least  in  rather  illiquid 
markets. A partial industry survey conducted by the FSA in the UK found out that hedge fund equity of 
USD 250 billion translated into gross counterparty positions in the range of USD 860 billion.1  
The opaqueness of risk profiles is an issue in at least three respects. First, with their high leverage and 
active trading, hedge funds now wield considerable clout in some financial market segments. Second, 
hedge  funds  are  important  counterparties  to  systemically  relevant  financial  intermediaries,  for 
example, to their prime broker banks. And, third, institutional investors such as pension funds have 
turned to hedge fund investing, a trend that is expected to continue.  
What does all this mean for the international financial system? 
• 
• 
There are some blind spots in the system.  
These blind spots have recently grown in size and number. 
                                                      
1   Dan Waters, FSA, ”Regulation and the Hedge Fund Industry: An Ongoing Dialogue”, 8 February 2005, Speech at Hedge 
Funds Blueprint Europe Conference. 
4 
 BIS Review 34//2005
And more and more often, these blind spots are related to systemic players.  
• 
Owing to the lack of transparency, the overall risk allocation in the international financial system and 
the  potential  for  disturbances  have  become  harder  to  gauge.  Possible  systemic  risk  has  become 
harder to spot. The lack of transparency hampers market discipline and, as a logical consequence, its 
use as an important pillar of financial stability. 
However,  direct  regulation  of  the  hedge  fund  industry  is  hardly  feasible,  if  not  impossible,  and  the 
efficiency  of  indirect  regulation  via  the  regulation  of  counterparties  is  limited.  This  means  that 
authorities responsible for safeguarding financial stability have to rely on banks monitoring their hedge 
fund credit clients. However, aggregating their total hedge fund exposure and assessing their hedge 
fund clients’ total risk profile have become more difficult for lending institutions since hedge funds are 
being served by multiple prime brokers.  
When looking at new trends in the financial system, we need to consider both sides of these coins. 
Shining 
the  darker  side  of 
stability-impairing  features.  The  challenge  is  to  harness  the  benefits  of  new  financial  trends  while 
minimising their potential costs. Unfortunately, there is no instant recipe for safeguarding the stability 
of evolving financial systems. Case by case assessments are required.  
financial  stability  must  be  weighed  against 
improvements 
to 
Concluding remarks  
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The financial industry is one of the most globalised industries in the world. Supervisors cannot limit 
their attention to what is going on within their national boundaries. If they don’t see beyond the ends of 
their noses, they will not be up to dealing with financial stability issues. The appropriate response is 
cooperation  of  supervisors  on  an  international  scale.  As  financial  globalisation  progresses,  new 
challenges will arise providing not least plenty of topical issues for future seminars on the international 
financial system. International co-operation is essential, and symposia such as today’s help to deepen 
the mutual understanding that is so indispensable for effective co-operation.  
BIS Review 34/2005 
 5
