Savenaca Narube: Working in close collaboration with the Asian Development 
Bank 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Regional 
Workshop  on  the  Asian  Development  Bank’s  Performance  Based  Allocation  of  Asian  Development 
Fund Resources, Suva, 12 April 2005. 
 Salutation 
Mr Robert Siy, Officer in Charge of the Pacific Department in the ADB 
The Director of the Suva Sub Regional Office, Ms Jarvenpa 
Mr Harrigan 
Distinguished Participants: 
Welcome 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this three-day Regional Workshop. 
I  specially  welcome  to  our  shores  all  the  participants  from  our  neighbouring  Pacific  Developing 
Member  Countries  (PDMCs).  I  hope  you  will  enjoy  your  stay  in  Suva  during  the  course  of  the 
workshop. 
I would like to thank the Asian Development Bank and the Sub Regional Office in Suva for organising 
this  workshop.  As  you  know,  the  former  President  Chino  of  the  ADB  officially  opened  this  Sub 
Regional Office in Fiji last year and I must say that we are already seeing the benefits of this office 
already in our closer collaboration with ADB. 
As you know, the ADB is the most active of multilateral lenders in Fiji and I believe also in the region. It 
is therefore very important that we exploit what ADB can offer to us and a workshop such as this goes 
a long way in meeting this objective. 
We all know that resources are not limitless. They are scarce. On the national level, our government 
budgets are an important tool for allocating these resources. On the global level, we look to donors 
and multilateral institutions such as ADB to assist us achieve our development goals. Their resources 
too are limited. Hence, while, as borrowers, we would like to have access to all resources that we want 
and the cheaper the better, the reality is that this will not be possible. We must therefore ensure that 
we use the resources that are available to us wisely. Otherwise, the opportunity costs are high and 
nobody gains. It becomes a loose-loose situation. To turn this partnership into a win-win situation the 
lenders must align its assistance to the priorities of the borrowers and for the borrowers to use this 
assistance as effectively as possible. 
Objective of workshop 
I am told the objective of this workshop is to examine the rationale and scope of the ADB’s Policy on 
the Performance-Based Allocation (PBA) of Asian Development Fund (ADF) Resources. This policy is 
an  important  graduation  from  the  ADB’s  past  practices  on  resource  allocation  to  a  new  approach 
based on results that tries to create incentives for better performance. This policy is an important tool 
to strengthen the effectiveness of the use of ADF through a more focused policy dialogue, improved 
country planning processes and better operations. Holding this regional workshop was an important 
resolution of the Review undertaken last year to examine the sufficiency of the Bank’s PBA Policy and 
looking at ways to improve and strengthen it. 
What is the role of the ADF in the region? 
The ADB in partnership with donor organisations, the international community, and member countries, 
is committed to designing and implementing a set of actions, which will eradicate policy, institutional 
and  technical  constraints  to  equitable  development.  The  overarching  objective  is  the  reduction  of 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 1
poverty  and  improvement  in  the  quality  of  life  of  our  peoples.  In  this  regard,  the  ADF  is  a  key 
instrument in the pursuit to reducing poverty in the region. 
Poverty in the region may not be the same as the abject poverty of some countries in Asia. We lack 
proper measurement of poverty. But nevertheless I have a sense that indicators at least in Fiji point to 
increasing poverty. Therefore, the overarching poverty reduction strategy of the ADB is increasingly 
becoming relevant to the region. 
I  again  wish  to  emphasise  that  the  ADF  operations  and  indeed  any  program  in  the  region  should 
continue to reflect the priorities of our individual economies. Let me say that while Fiji does not qualify 
for ADF, the region is fortunate and grateful that the ADB has been successful in replenishing this pool 
of  concessional  funds.  The  commitment  by  donors  last  year  to  a  total  replenishment  of  the  ADF  of 
US$7 billion, and the decision to introduce grants, is a symbol of the Bank’s commitment and support 
towards  the  mission  of  fighting  poverty  in  our  region.  This  financial  assistance  has  gone  and  will 
continue to go a long way, in helping us realise sustained improvements in our nations’ economic and 
social welfare. 
Projects  funded  from  the  ADF  have  included  the  reform  and  improvement  of  education,  health  and 
sanitation.  They  also  include  projects  designed  to  improve  the  status  of  women,  micro-finance, 
environment  protection,  and  capacity  building,  as  well  as  the  rehabilitation  and  building  of  physical 
infrastructure. Moreover, the ADF is also directed towards regional cooperation for the promotion of 
further social and economic development. 
What are some recent issues and developments relating to ADF operations? 
The increasingly vital role played by the ADF in the development of PDMCs has brought to the fore 
important issues such as the need to raise the development effectiveness of ADF operations. While 
making  a  firm  commitment  in  the  fight  against  poverty,  donors,  in  their  meeting  last  year  stressed 
some key requirements for stakeholders. 
In  particular,  against  the  uncertainty  in  achieving  the  Millennium  Development  Goal  of  reducing 
non-income  poverty  in  the  region,  ADF  operations  and  assistance  need  to  focus  sharply  on 
sustainable economic growth, inclusive social development, and good governance. This means there 
is a need to firmly focus on results and development effectiveness. 
The establishment of the ADB’s new Results Management Unit (RMU) provides a monitoring device, 
which  will  focus  closely  on  results,  at  the  project,  sector,  country  and  regional  levels.  Paying  close 
attention to results under this framework is expected to bring benefits including greater accountability, 
and  more  effective  resource  use.  Results-based  country  strategies  are  also  expected  to  align 
themselves to national priorities for poverty reduction. I must stress again that it is in our own interest 
that results are achieved. 
May I deviate a little here to share what Fiji is doing in terms of a resultsbased monitoring system at 
the  sector  level.  The  Fiji  Government  in  November  last  year,  endorsed  the  outcome  of  a  mid-term 
review of it’s Strategic Development Plan (SDP) 2003-2005, the Government’s plan to achieving the 
vision of a “Peaceful and Prosperous Fiji”. 
This  review  was  aimed  at  assessing  the  progress  made  in  implementing  the  Plan’s  policies  and 
identifying  implementation  constraints,  as  well  as  re-examining  the  Plan’s  Policy  Objectives  and  its 
Key  Performance  Indicators  (KPIs).  Wide  consultations  and  regular  discussions  between  the 
government and representatives of the private sector and civil society, revealed that while some KPIs 
have been achieved – through timely implementation of SDP policies – other KPIs need to be modified 
based  on  the  new  challenges  we  now  face.  The  review  also  emphasised  the  need  to  move  ahead 
quickly  in  areas  such  as  public  sector  reform,  to  lift  productivity  and  thus  improve  efficiency  and 
effectiveness  in  service  provision,  while  raising  investment  quality  as  well  as  growth  potential. 
Moreover, the review highlighted the inadequacy of resources to meet Fiji’s development needs. With 
Fiji’s commitment to the achievement of the MDGs, and I’m sure the same goes for the rest of the 
PDMCs,  the  determined  efforts  between  us  and  our  development  partners  is  essential  if  we  will 
achieve our goals. 
I believe it is commendable that good governance carries a bigger weight in country performance in 
the  consideration  for  ADF  allocation  under  the  PBA  system.  Further  enhancements  to  the  PBA 
scheme include the allocation of grants and future disclosure on country performance ratings in the 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2005
interest of greater transparency. However, a word of caution. Governance is such a broad subject that 
we must try to specifically define its measurement under a case-by-case approach. 
from 
international  markets  are 
from  each  other  and  our  remoteness 
How have our countries performed and what are some development challenges we face? 
The mixed performances of PDMCs poses special challenges to our development partners such as 
the ADB. 
The  vulnerabilities  in  our  small  island  states  due  to  reasons  such  our  smallness  in  size,  our  large 
distances 
important 
considerations in our development efforts. Our islands often also suffer from natural disasters, which 
can have large adverse impacts on the economy as in the recent cases of the Cook Islands, Samoa 
and Tokelau. 
Economic performances in our PDMCs over the past decade have been varied with some countries 
recording  positive  growth  rates  and  some  contracting  or  even  sharply  declining.  Moreover,  social 
indicators  also  show  the  major  variances  in  our  progress  towards  achieving  the  Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). 
An additional challenge for us is to keep a more balanced and sustainable growth while grappling with 
the  issue  of  globalisation.  The  role  of  the  public  sector  to  build  a  supportive  policy  and  regulatory 
framework for infrastructure investments is essential, irrespective of the source of financing. 
Investment is another hurdle for us. It is extremely difficult to attract investment to our small islands in 
the vast blue Pacific Ocean. The global competition for this investment dollar is intense. It may be true 
that even with the right economic policies, foreign direct investment may still be elusive. But essentially 
we do not have a choice. In light of the declining trend of foreign direct investment to our region, it is 
imperative that our countries promote institutions and policies that would attract new business flows 
into our economies. For a few of us who have a large private sector, we may be able to get domestic 
investors to do more. 
But  we  cannot  afford  to  totally  rely  on  others.  We  must  do  what  we  need  to  do  ourselves.  With 
increasing  regional  economic  integration,  we  need  to  promote  more  regional  cooperation  to  ease 
capacity  constraints  and  other  problems  that  we  face.  The  decision  by  Pacific  Leaders  recently  to 
develop a “Pacific Plan” may help with bolstering regional cooperation. 
The  effective  and  efficient  use  of  official  development  aid  and  private  sector  investments  for 
development  calls  for  the  establishment  strong  domestic  institutions.  We  must  eliminate  corruption 
from  our  society.  We  must  build  up  our  human  resources  and  improve  administrative  capacity  and 
governance.  Corruption  does  not  necessarily  mean  more  regulations.  It  means  a  more  transparent 
way of doing business under an agreed accountability structure. We must cultivate a culture of zero 
tolerance for corruption amongst our societies. 
What can the ADB do better towards achieving our common goals? 
Given the challenges faced by our countries, we must continue to highlight our special needs in the 
international arena. I urge the ADB to continue to strengthen its capacity to respond to the region’s 
needs in a flexible and timely manner. 
An  important  focus  for  the  ADB  in  relation  to  vulnerabilities  of  small  island  states  is  disaster 
management. In this regard, ADB assistance towards putting in place the needed infrastructure to help 
preparedness for disasters in countries would be helpful. An associated need is financial support to 
help rebuild the economies of disaster- stricken countries. I am of the view that in general, multilateral 
organisations, can do more to help finance our economic reconstruction following a disaster. 
In such a situation, the provision of loans may simply burden us further when our position is already 
weak. In this regard, the grants facility now available under ADF IX is an encouraging development. 
I understand the reasons why countries in the region are treated collectively by multilateral institutions 
like ADB. But I see a few dangers of over extending this collective treatment. While we may be small 
and our vulnerabilities are similar, our needs may be very divergent and our priorities different. In fact 
in some cases our diversity may be the same as comparing New Zealand with say Fiji. In this light, I 
urge the ADB to focus on formulating country-specific development strategies that is tailor made to the 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 3
needs of each PDMC. As the leading lender in this area, a catalytic role by the ADB in raising regional 
integration and improving regional cooperation is also desirable. 
I was pleased to note the positive suggestions and comments expressed by the new ADB President, 
Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, in his address to the ADB institution in February this year, on how the Bank can 
move forward to meet the challenges of our developing countries. I thought his statement augur well 
for us in the Pacific during his leadership. 
It may be relevant to highlight a few issues that the new President alluded to in his address. 
• 
He referred to a client-oriented strategy to help the ADB respond appropriately and efficiently 
to the diverse needs of the region; 
Putting in place a results-based system would facilitate better performance and improve the 
effectiveness of ADB operations; 
As our lead development partner, the ADB needs to be proactive as well as strengthen its 
coordination with other donor organisations and agencies; 
A  more  effective  external  relations  strategy  is  needed  to  ensure  better  dissemination  of 
information on the ADB’s activities to external stakeholders; 
Other propositions include a strengthening of the ADB’s financial risk management system 
and better utilisation of the latest information and technologies; and 
Consistent with the extensive and widening scope of its role in the region, the ADB must lift 
its knowledge base and strengthen its position as the information leader in our region. 
     Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, we need to work at realising our full economic potential and raise the standard of living 
of  everyone.  Sustainable  economic  development  is  an  essential  prerequisite  to  reducing  poverty 
everywhere.  The  ADB  is  the  leading  international  partner  in  our  region.  Its  role  in  assisting  our 
countries  achieve  our  goals,  is  critical.  Equally  important  is  the  supportive  efforts  of  donor 
organisations  and  the  international community.  Needless  to say,  we  must  ourselves  put  in  our own 
efforts to secure a brighter future by ensuring that we reap the maximum benefits from this assistance. 
Today’s workshop provides an opportunity to examine a new way of thinking aimed at gaining better 
results in the use of ADF resources. I hope you will find the course useful and perhaps take home you 
practical solutions that may be of help to you. 
I wish you the very best in your deliberations. 
I have much pleasure in declaring open this ADB workshop open. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2005
