Ishrat Husain: The health challenge in Pakistan - prognosis and prescription  
Chief guest address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the launch of the 
Human  Development  Report  of  South  Asia,  organised  by  Mahbubul  Haq  Center  for  Human 
Development, Islamabad, 30 May 2005. 
 There is a strong theoretical and empirical evidence that Economic growth causes improvements in 
human development which, in turn, increases economic growth. The improvement in health results in 
enhancement  of  basic  capabilities  that  adds  value  to  human  life.  The  transmission  to  growth  takes 
place through impact on worker productivity, through demography and through trade and investment. 
Health has a positive effect on poverty reduction too. Poor households are hit by major illness and fall 
into poverty trap. Lower earnings due to withdrawal from full time employment increases the risk of 
illness for the rest of the households. Risk of falling below poverty becomes acute in case of death of 
the  bread  winner  of  the  family.  Thus,  investment  in  health,  particularly  preventive  health  such  as 
availability  of  clean  drinking  water  and  sanitation  can  contribute  to  growth  and  minimize  the  risk  of 
falling below the poverty line. 
There is no doubt that Pakistan’s social indicators are not something we can feel proud of. Pakistan’s 
competitiveness in the future knowledge based economy of the world will critically depend upon how 
well we are able to harness and increase the productivity of labor force for meeting future challenges. 
It is no longer a cliché that those lag behind in human development are going to become marginalized. 
It is all the more surprising to note this poor state of affairs at a time that there is almost unanimity on 
the  intellectual  front  and  broad  consensus  on  the  political  front  on  the  importance  of  human 
development  in  attaining  national  prosperity.  Both  the  economists  and  non-economists  have 
converged their views on the critical role education and training, health and nutrition play in economic 
development.  Those  on  the  left,  those  in  the  center  and  conservatives  also  have  identical  views 
though due to different reasons. All political parties in Pakistan are committed to human development 
as a policy objective. Why is it then that the progress in this area has been so unsatisfactory and what 
can be done to remedy this situation? 
In my view there are four cogent reasons for lack of progress in human development in Pakistan. First, 
there is a structural ambiguity in the allocation of responsibilities between the Federal, Provincial and 
local governments in the whole endeavour of human development. The overlap and duplication in the 
policy  making  and  implementation have  created  a  lot  of  confusion,  waste of  efforts and  inadequate 
outcomes.  There  are  too  many  players  moving  in  different  directions.  There  is  a  need  for  clear 
definition  and  delineation  of  responsibilities  between  the  various  tiers  of  the  government  and 
accountability of results. At the same time there are areas such as regulation of private institutions in 
education and health that are begging for action by the government and there is nobody in charge. 
These gaps, ambiguities and lack of defined responsibilities have given rise to weak governance in 
this sector. 
Second, at each tier of government there is a bundling of policy, executing and regulatory functions 
within the Education and Health Ministries and Departments. This concentration of powers impairs the 
capacity  of  the  departments  to  deliver  the  services.  There  is  an  urgent  need  to  entrust  the  policy 
making  functions  to  the  Ministries  and  departments,  executing  and  implementing  responsibilities  to 
fully empowered agencies and the regulatory duties to independent regulatory bodies located outside 
the  ministries  and  departments.  This  unbundling  of  functions  will  help  strengthen  the  capacity  of 
government to deliver these social services in an effective manner. 
Third, the management of education, health and other human development policies, programmes and 
projects is far from being satisfactory. We assume that technical experts and specialists in their areas, 
such as education and health, can fit in very easily in the managerial positions. Little do we realize that 
all successful institutions in the world have properly trained and experienced hospital administrators, 
educational  administrators,  financial  managers,  supply  chain  and  logistics  specialists.  On  the  other 
hand,  here  in  Pakistan  we  have  unqualified  and  inexperienced  persons  aspiring  and  competing  for 
these positions simply because they carry privileges, perks and power. Why should highly qualified 
surgeons  fight  with  each  other  to  become  Medical  Superintendents  or  hospital  administrators? 
Administrative positions carry a lot of prestige and power which the professional positions do not and 
hence  we  have  serious  misallocation  of  resources.  We  lose  first  rate  surgeons  and  doctors  end-up 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
with  third  rate  administrators  who  rely  upon  the  office  clerks,  superintendents  and  accountants  for 
advice and decision making. No wonder we have such an awful record on delivery of services. 
Fourth, there is too much bureaucratic strangulation in the business processes and at the same time 
too  little  accountability.  The  plethora  of  rules,  regulations,  reports  etc.  stifle  initiative  and  innovation 
and encourage apathy and inaction among those who wish to play by the book. But those who are 
dare devils use the opaqueness of the same rules and regulations and diffused nature of supervision 
to appropriate resources for their own enrichment. The rules have become a block against collective 
good but an easy path for individual good. That is why the medicines for the hospitals are procured at 
highly inflated prices and resold in the open market through a network of connected medical stores 
while  the  poor  who  are  entitled  to  these  medicines  free  of  cost  have  either  to  pay  for  them  or  go 
without them. The paradox is that those who are well to do and highly influential or capable of doing 
damage get the services at no cost to themselves but the poor who cannot afford these services and 
for whom the allocation are made by the government are deprived. Access to services is rationed not 
by price but by the status.  
What can be done to remedy this situation? Human development expenditures should be allocated in 
an  integrated  and  holistic  manner.  Safe  drinking  water,  more  literate  women  and  cleanliness  in  the 
neighborhoods will have high pay-off and avoid increased expenditures on curative health, population 
and  nutrition  programs.  Under  the  present  fragmented  and  compartmentalized  system  the  cost 
effectiveness  of  each  rupee spent  out  of  the  budget  on  vertical  programs  is  quite  low.  Professional 
managers and administrators should be appointed to run the health and education programmes and 
institutions. 
Second, devolution of financial and administrative powers to the lower tiers of government should be 
made a priority in the real operational sense. The present situation where the doctors and other staff 
are appointed and transferred by the Provincial governments while the health facilities are managed 
and operated by the local governments has to be resolved immediately. The resource allocation, both 
human  and  financial,  should  be  made  commensurate  with  the  responsibilities  and  accountability 
clearly defined. Linkages between different human development components and the synergies from 
implementing vertical programmes in the health sector can be achieved only at the local level. 
Third, it is not necessary that the government should be both financier as well as provider of services. 
Not-for-profit organizations, community and civil society organizations and private sector have proved 
to be more adept at managing and delivering the services. Competition should be encouraged among 
the  most  efficient  service  providers  by  linking  government  per capita  grants  for  the  poor  population 
with  the  effective  outreach  and  delivery  of  services  to  the  poor.  This  system  will  automatically 
overcome the problem of rationing that favors the elite over the poor and also ensure that only the 
target  population  is  subsidized  by  the  government.  Government  will  continue  to  formulate  policies, 
develop health  infrastructure  and  health  personnel  and  oversee  and  regulate  the  non-governmental 
providers.  
Finally,  the  elected  representatives  of  an  area  should  assume  an  active  role  as  watchdog  to  make 
sure that the poor segments of the population are treated well at the government facilities. Instead of 
focusing their attention on the postings and transfers of individual officials they will win popular support 
if  they  redress  the  grievances  of  their  electorate  in  accessing  basic  services  provided  by  the 
government.  This  vigilance  will  keep  the  officials  on  the  right  track  while  endear  the  elected 
representatives to their electorate. Monitoring and evaluation of various programmes and projects will 
have to be carried out separately in a systematic way. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
