Savenaca Narube: Productivity and national development in Fiji 
Presentation  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  on  “Productivity  and 
National Development”, Productivity Awareness Campaign, Productivity Week, Suva, 20 April 2005. 
 Introduction 
Why should we be concerned about productivity? We are dedicating a whole week to this issue. Why 
are we sacrificing our evening to discuss this topic? Is it worth our valuable time and effort? I certainly 
believe so otherwise I would not be here myself and I am sure that you would also agree. I accepted 
the  invitation  to  this  function  because  I  firmly  believe  that  our  economic  fortunes  and  that  of  our 
generations  to  come  will  be  worse  off  if  we  do  not  embrace  this  vision  on  productivity.  And  that  is 
certainly not the legacy that we would like to leave them. 
This evening I have been asked to speak on the topic of “Productivity and National Development”. 
While this is an interesting topic it is also a very wide one. At the end of the day, we must, as a nation, 
move forward. And one of the keys that will open the door to progress is productivity. 
I should say this upfront - productivity is not an end in itself. It is simply a means to an end. And what 
is that end? That end must be prosperity at the individual and household levels. And one of the good 
things about productivity is that it would not cost too much to raise it. Initially, it may only require a 
different mindset. But we know that evolving the mind is not the easiest of things to do. So, while it 
may not cost too much, it however can be the most difficult thing to change. 
What do we imagine when we hear the word “productivity”? Some of us may conjure up images of 
hard  labour,  low  wages  and  slave  drivers.  These  are  certainly  the  images  that  we  do  not  like 
associated with productivity. 
We must therefore promote the right national vision. To help shift this mindset, we must get our people 
motivated to increase productivity in every thing that we do. The only way that we can motivate these 
days is through the pockets. And this is exactly what productivity can bring. My underlying message 
this evening is that - “productivity means more money in the pocket”. More money for whom? It 
will raise our take home pay for the lucky ones who already have work and create income to those that 
will find jobs. Profits will rise. Consumers will save. So it’s more money for everyone. Of course, a lot 
of things will have to happen before these are realised and I will talk about this later. But we need to 
get people excited by saying that productivity equals more incomes and this translates to issues that 
everyone understands like more food on the table, a shelter over our families head and education for 
our children. 
Do we have a national vision on productivity? If we do, it is well hidden. Let us proclaim this vision 
from  the  rooftops  so  everyone  can  hear.  This  week,  dedicated  to  productivity,  will  help  in  the 
understanding of the national vision. 
Let  me  begin  this  presentation  on  a  global  level.  We  live  in  an  increasingly  globalised  world. 
Globalisation  and  all  its  side  effects  is  unstoppable.  The  barriers  to  trade,  capital  flows  and  labour 
migration are coming down. Preferential treatments are being dismantled. 
In this turbulent world, the nice tradition of love thy neighbour if there was ever one, is now out of the 
window.  You  either  swim  or  you  sink.  And  when  you  sink,  the  rescue  operation  will  be  extremely 
painful.  But  do  we  have  a  say  in  these  world  trends?  The  answer  is  no.  Well,  no  for  small  island 
nations  like  Fiji.  Not  only  that  we  cannot  change  the  direction  of  these  global  developments,  the 
platform is not level and the goal post can shift. The rules of the game are influenced by those that 
possess power and they can change these rules. That unfortunately is the reality of the world. 
But  we  must  take  our  place  in  the  sun.  We  must  compete.  We  must  be  quick  to  market  and  be  a 
reliable  source  of  supply  of  quality  products.  In  summary,  we  must  do  more  with  what  we  have. 
Productivity is essential for our future survival in this difficult world. 
Before  we  can  measure  productivity  we  need  to  know  what  it  is.  A  basic  issue  to  many  but  an 
important one nevertheless. There are technical definitions of productivity which I do not want to bore 
you  with  today.  Very  broadly,  productivity  captures  our  ability  to  transform  our  physical  and  human 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 1
resources to generate the desired outputs. In layman’s terms, productivity refers to working “smarter” 
and not necessarily “harder”. 
How can we measure productivity? Productivity can be measured at various levels - individual, firm 
and national. TPAF identifies several ways to measure productivity. 
The traditional way is through profitability and liquidity. The other is value added. 
Measuring productivity at the individual and firm level may be easy. But it is not so easy on a national 
level. There is an obvious need to collect more data on productivity in Fiji. 
Let me turn to development. How does one measure development? Development can be defined as 
an improvement in the standard of living. How does one measure living standards? Remember that 
only human beings enjoy a living standard and not corporations and government. Every person’s living 
standards is of course different and that is capitalism for you. One crude way of gauging an average 
standard of living is to look at the country’s per capita income. 
How do we fare on this measurement? This chart shows Fiji’s GDP per head and as you can see it 
has been growing very slowly and in some years it has been stagnant or even declined. The average 
growth rate since 1996 is only 1.6 percent. 
How do we fare against other developing countries? This international comparison shows that in 1978 
Fiji’s GDP per capita was higher than Mauritius but lower than Trinidad and Tobago. However, inside 
eight years, Mauritius had smartly zipped passed Fiji and continues and it is now nearly four times 
higher than us. The growth in GDP per capita for Trinidad is also impressive. In the Pacific, Fiji had a 
GDP per capita higher than Western Samoa’s and most other countries in the region. 
At  a  national  level,  the  country’s  economic  growth  rate  can  be  used  as  another  indicator  of 
development. Looking at our economic performance, in this chart, Fiji’s GDP growth since 1996 has 
generally been positive with the exception of 1997 and 2000. However, our average growth rate since 
1996 is only 2.4 percent. 
This  next  slide  compares  Fiji’s  growth  rates  with  some  selected  countries.  As  you  can  see,  Fiji’s 
growth trend has generally been stable, although it fell below the growth rates of Mauritius, Samoa 
and Trinidad & Tobago in 2001. 
Let me show you another indicator of development - The UN’s Human Development Index. The higher 
you  are  on  this  ladder  the  better.  You  will  note  that  Fiji  was  ranked  at  the  81st  position  of  all  the 
countries on the world in 2002. This is about half way against all countries in the world. We are doing 
better than the average of all the developing countries and some neighbours like PNG, Vanuatu and 
the  Solomon  Islands.  Samoa  is  however  higher  than  us.  But  we  also  have  lost  grounds  under  this 
ranking over the years. For instance, in 1996 we were ranked 66th so we have slid down 15 positions. 
Very clearly from these pictures we can conclude the following: 
1. 
Our standard of living measured by per capita income is growing very slowly. It may even be 
stagnant. 
Our standard of living is not that high compared to some developing countries. Some have 
passed us by. 
The rate of national development is very low whatever measurement one uses. 
In summary, our development performance is poor. 
The  rate  of  development  is  much  less  that  the  target  of  8  percent  set  by  the  Hon.  Prime 
Minister for the next five years. 
Clearly we must raise this rate of development. 
6. 
We are a small country. Not only that, we do not have too many natural resources. We rely on a few 
commodities for exports. We compete with bigger countries with very low cost structures and higher 
productivity.  We  suffer  from  natural  disaster  that  can  easily  wipe  out  a  big  chunk  of  our  economy 
overnight. We face the yearly migration of many of our skill workers to Australia, New Zealand and 
Canada. How can we be expected to survive in this tough world? 
In economic theory, a country’s long term growth depends only on its level of education, technology, 
innovation  and  productivity.  In  Fiji,  our  long  term  growth  is  around  two  percent.  We  can  push  this 
growth rate upwards in the short term but over time, the economic constraints of debt and the balance 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2005
of payments will pull us back to our long term average. And this is what is happening in Fiji now. Our 
growth rate has been rising since 2001 as we kicked started the economy with expansionary policies. 
But is now falling back to its long term growth level of around 1.5 percent this year and even lower 
growth is forecast for next year. Our expansionary policy package, while it has brought the country out 
of our 2000 crisis very quickly, will not be sustainable in the long term unless we introduce structural 
changes. And productivity is one of these changes. 
We must of course also work on other issues that will raise long term growth such as education and 
technology. But as I said, we can achieve results with productivity very quickly compared to the others. 
Productivity  means  that  the  firm  is  producing  more  from  the  same  resources.  Unit  prices  fall.  In  a 
competitive  market,  the  firm  passes  these  gains  to  the  consumers.  Sales  rise.  Profits  are  better. 
Higher  profits  means  that  the  firm  can  afford  to  raise  wages  or  hire  more  workers.  In  this  manner 
productivity  contributes  directly  to  more  pay  and  more  jobs.  National  prosperity  improves  and  the 
standard of life rises. GDP per capita improves and everyone is happy. 
There  are  a  few  generalizations  in  that  transmission  mechanism.  There  are  assumptions  about 
competition, the capital to labour mix and that taxes remain the same. But in general, the relationship 
will hold in principle and perhaps vary in degree. 
Let me introduce poverty to the discussion. Poverty reduction is a daunting global challenge. While 
poverty reduction seems to be the overarching policy objective of many world bodies, the fight against 
poverty is losing ground. An increasing proportion of the world population continues to live in abject 
poverty.  There  is  universal  recognition  that  poverty  will  only  be  eliminated  by  economic  growth. 
Without growth, we will never have a chance to reduce poverty. I do not have any recent statistics on 
poverty in Fiji but we saw how the Fiji economy has historically underperformed. The pie is too small to 
go  around.  With  more  economic  growth  from  higher  productivity,  accompanied  by  good  policies  for 
development and distribution of wealth, poverty will be reduced. Productivity helps reduce poverty. 
Let me move on to employment. Employment must be our number one development objective. We 
cannot  find  enough  jobs  for  our  school  leavers  every  year.  There  are  many  graduates  from  our 
university and medical school walking our streets. Statistical evidence suggests a strong link between 
national productivity and the level of employment. 
Based on empirical research, in the long run, a 1 percent increase in real GDP leads to a 1.12 percent 
increase in employment. 
In economics, there is a cost for everything. Someone somewhere will pay up. There is nothing free in 
the economy. If there is, entrepreneurship quickly plugs the gap. Hence, when workers demand more 
wages,  something  will  have  to  give.  Either  the  capitalist  will  be  out  of  pocket  or  most  likely,  the 
consumers will pay. The only exception is when wage increases are based on productivity. The higher 
wages  are  offset  by  the  lower  unit  cost.  There  is  a  win-win  situation.  The  workers  are  happy,  the 
owners of firms do not have to reduce profit and very importantly, the consumers do not face higher 
prices. 
Next  is  inflation.  Inflation  is  a  killer  of  entrepreneurship  as  it  erodes  wealth  and  asset  values.  It 
discourages effort. Statistical evidence shows that a more productive national economy means higher 
personal  incomes  for workers  and  a  lower  rate  of  inflation  in  the  long  term. Rising  income  and  low 
inflation  is  music  to  everyone’s  ears.  The  purchasing  power  of  our  take-home  envelope  rises.  This 
leads to more savings and investment. 
Fiji’s low inflation experience is a positive factor for productivity, economic growth and stability. The 
latest 10-year average for the inflation rate stands at 2.9 percent. At this particular time the world is 
reeling from the high oil prices. No one was able to predict current levels and we do not know where 
the  prices  will  stabilize.  Assuming  that  oil  prices  to  average  around  47  US  Dollars  per  barrel,  Fiji’s 
inflation is expected to rise to 4.5 percent with the possible hikes in bus & taxi fares. 
Let us now look at the how we have fared on productivity in Fiji. 
We have tried to take a macroeconomic measure of productivity by taking the total output produced by 
each worker. This is a very high level measure and has many shortcomings. But for our purpose, the 
broad message is what we want. This graph shows productivity growth in Fiji since 1989. It has grown 
by an average of around one percent in the last 10 years. Is this good enough? Let us compare this 
with other countries. 
When  compared  with  trends  of  our  neighbours  Australia  as  well  as  a  similar  developing  country 
Mauritius, Fiji’s productivity growth is more volatile. It is also somewhere towards the bottom of the 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 3
Productivity growth in Fiji is very poor; 
We are far below the level in some countries like Mauritius and Asia; and. 
We can and must do better. 
pile. Fiji’s one percent average over the past decade is less than half of that of Australia. Mauritius’ 
productivity growth is four times higher than ours. I am sure that if we can compare with South East 
Asian  countries  like  Singapore  the  gap  will  be  even  wider.  Does  it  therefore  surprise  us  that  our 
longterm growth level is only 2 percent? 
From these comparisons the conclusions are that: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Our task is therefore clear. We must raise our productivity. How can we do that? For the answers, we 
have to look at the factors that make our productivity low. 
There are many factors, which account for our low productivity growth. These factors are well known 
to us. 
The  work  culture  prevalent  in  the  Pacific  is  an  important  factor,  which  contributes  to  our  low 
productivity. In the Pacific, we are relatively laid back in our approach to many things, including work. I 
don’t know if this “malua fever” is the result of the South Pacific climate that we enjoy, but we must 
recognise  that  this  cannot  be  translated  to  the  work  environment.  It  is  absolutely  crucial  that  we 
revolutionalise  our  work  culture  to  align  it  with  the  high  standards  demanded  by  the  international 
community. 
The lack of proper tools is another reason for our low productivity. Given the oversupply of labour in 
our economy, we tend to be labour intensive in our industries. Our ratio of capital to labour is quite low. 
Unfortunately, this equates to low productivity. It does not necessarily be so. We can still have labour 
intensive industries but higher productivity. This means that productivity must be internally driven by 
organisations or firms themselves. The introduction of performance contracts in the civil service is a 
classical example. 
Another problem faced by us is the lack of up-to-date and appropriate technology. We still find some 
industry with outdated or inappropriate technologies. Our sugar mills are an example. There are some 
industries  that  have  taken  advantage  of  the  latest  technologies  and  adopted  international  best 
practices, such as Fiji Water. Of course, adopting new technologies cost money and a business case 
needs to be made. But those that have been able to adopt new technology have reaped good results 
whereas the others have lagged behind. 
In this regard the rationalization of telecommunications charges. They will help lower our cost of doing 
business and catalyze innovation to the industries. 
Another factor is the skills in our workforce. Education and retention of skills are important. Because of 
our size, we have a limited pool of skill people. But to make it worse, we are losing them all the time. 
This  is  a  graph  of  our  emigration  trend.  They  average  around  5000  people  a  year.  Developed 
countries like Australia, New Zealand and Canada reap the benefits of our training. Its aid in reverse. 
But  it  is  a  free  world!  These  countries  themselves  loose  labour  to  other  countries.  Global  labour 
movement is intensifying and the global war on talents is fierce. The world is now the market place. Fiji 
therefore must look elsewhere to fulfill its short-term skills requirements. This will add to our costs. But 
we cannot afford to wait around until we have the right skills. 
On  the  flip side,  we are  just  beginning see  the  positive  side of  labour  transfers  with our  soldiers  in 
Kuwait, care givers in the United States and rugby players in Japan. One of the direct results of this 
export is the phenomenal rise in the remittances that we now receive from our workers and families 
abroad. Last year it rose to about $315 million and counting. This blessing has come at the right time 
with our exports performing well below potential. 
How can we raise productivity? Who should do what? Let me highlight a few suggestions. 
I suggest that our national leaders adopt productivity as a national goal. They could also take a lead 
role to promote productivity. 
Needless  to  say  government’s  contribution  towards  raising  national  productivity  is  vital.  Excessive 
regulation  and  rigid  rules  must  be  eliminated  to  allow  for  the  transformation  of  innovations  into  the 
market. Removing barriers to competition and innovation will encourage a more efficient economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2005
Government should create an enabling environment by putting in place proper policies and support 
services as necessary. 
The  government  needs  to  strongly  support  education  and  training.  To  bridge  the  skills  gap  in  the 
country, we need a strong and widely accessible system of higher education which will help build up 
skills of our workforce. In this regard, the strengthening of existing learning institutions is vital. 
Building  up  institutions  dedicated  to  the  promotion  of  productivity  in  the  country,  as  well  as  to 
undertake training and work in partnership with both the private and public sectors is a prerequisite. 
Our  Training  and  Productivity  Authority  of  Fiji  (TPAF),  whose  vision  is  to  become  the  Centre  of 
Excellence  in  Training  and  Productivity,  should  be  commended  for  much  progress  in  the  area  of 
education and training. 
It  is  good  to  be  told  that  TPAF  and  government  are  revising  the  Productivity  Charter  for  Fiji.  The 
Charter is important in setting out Action Programmes to be followed in order to promote and facilitate 
productivity. 
The government can also promote public awareness on productivity, setting up national awards and 
recognition programmes and building up the needed institutional infrastructure. 
The  adoption  of  a  Service  Excellence  Framework  by  the  government  to  address  productivity  and 
customer quality problems in its ministries and departments is a very positive development. 
Finally  on  the  government’s  list,  speeding  up  reforms  will  support  higher  productivity  and  raise  our 
long-term growth potential. I am very encouraged by the statement delivered in January this year by 
the Honorable Minister of Finance and National Planning, Ratu Jone Kubuabola where he announced 
the  Government’s  intention  to  streamline  certain  economic  structural  reforms.  Alluding  to  the 
difficulties  faced,  the  Minister  said  that  sensitive  issues  such  as  the  way  people  do  things  in  the 
organization, need to be dealt with in a practical sense. On the significance of reforms, he said that: 
• 
• 
• 
While reforms are difficult, they are absolutely critical to the future of our nation. 
Reforms are the key that will open the door to higher growth. 
Reforms  will  allow  us  to  raise  productivity  and  maximize  the  benefits  from  the  use  of  our 
limited resources. 
They will also free up resources to be channeled to productive investments. 
These reforms will provide incomes to our rural communities. 
Reforms will provide our grandchildren with more employment opportunities when they leave 
school. 
And improve the standards of living of all our people. 
On the whole, these reforms will provide the basis for “Growing a sustainable economy for 
our future”. 
  I fully share these views of the Minister for Finance. 
For  the  private  sector,  reforms  is  not  only  a  word  for  the  public  sector.  Undertaking  organizational 
reforms at the micro or firm level is necessary. Learning new and more efficient ways of using existing 
technology can result in lower unit costs. Better working conditions and training are essential. 
Considering the significant influence of industrial relations in the productivity of the work force, I am 
hopeful  that  all  tripartite  parties  including  the  trade  unions  will  realise  the  win-win  potential  of 
promoting productivity in the work place. While I agree that industrial action is the right of workers, the 
cost  of  such  actions  to  everyone  including  the  workers  themselves  must  be  clearly  identified  and 
factored  into  people’s  choices.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  partnership  between  government, 
employers and workers is strengthened further in Fiji bearing in mind that at the end of the day our 
goals are mutual. 
What if we do not raise productivity? On a macro level, we will fail to realize our GDP growth potential 
let  alone  reach  our  growth  target.  This  means  there  will  be  fewer  jobs  available  for  many  of  our 
children  and  grandchildren.  This  means  more  unemployment,  and  less  income.  Poverty  will  rise 
leading to social problems. 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 5
Eventually,  everyone  pays  for  the  low  productivity  as  we  are  already  doing.  But  unfortunately,  the 
burden of that cost will be borne more by low-income earners and the poor in our communities. They 
are the most vulnerable. They are the first to go in a job redundancy situation and the little asset they 
have  are  not  usually  protected  from  inflation.  In  addition,  as  consumers  they  will  again  face  higher 
prices. 
Concluding comments 
Is  higher  productivity  going  to  solve  all  our  problems?  Definitely  not.  But  it  will  go  a  long  way  in 
removing  efficiencies  in  all  levels  of  the  economy.  This  efficiency  will  have  significant  favourable 
ramifications  throughout  the  economy.  And  in  Fijis  case  of  low  long-term  growth  potential,  higher 
productivity will launch us to a high growth orbit. 
My guess is that if we raise productivity growth by one percent, our growth potential will rise by two 
percent. That will make a lot of difference to everyone. 
Raising  productivity  is  not  the  responsibility  of  TPAF  or  government  only.  It  is  the  responsibility  of 
everyone.  If  we  are  to  improve  our  quality  of  life,  then  each  one  of  us,  every  worker,  business, 
industry, and government must be committed to the same common goal. 
Thank You. 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2005
