Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro - successes and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  European 
American Press Club, Paris, 14 January 2005. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here today to share with you some thoughts on the successes and challenges of 
the  euro.  European  integration  has  moved  steadily  forward  over  the  past  decades,  witnessing 
considerable success and triggering fundamental change. The euro, which is probably the most visible 
and  tangible  symbol  of  this  integration  process,  is  this  year  entering  its  seventh  year,  with  a  single 
currency  and  a  single  monetary  policy  for  more  than  300  million  citizens.  All  in  all,  the  European 
Monetary  Union  has  managed  very  well  in  not  always  so  easy  conditions,  despite  some  critiques, 
doubts and fears that were voiced earlier on. Of course, the euro also has brought about significant 
challenges.  I  would  today  like  to  discuss  in  more  detail  what  I  see  as  the  main  successes  and 
challenges of the euro. I would also like to reflect on the need to accept change and reform in order to 
move forward. Let me start with the successes to date. 
Successes 
The first success I would like to stress is a technical success which enabled a smooth implementation 
of  the  single  monetary  policy  from  day  one,  namely  the  integration  of  money  markets  in  early 
January  1999.  Thanks  to  careful  technical  preparations  of  connecting  national  payment  systems, 
smooth interbank transactions with small spreads were made possible. Looking at European financial 
markets  more  in  general,  while  there  has  been  a  continued  process  of  integration  over  the  last 
decades, the arrival of the euro certainly accelerated this process by removing barriers to cross-border 
trading  and  creating  more  scope  for  risk  sharing  and  diversification.  In  particular,  the  depth  and 
breadth of financial markets have increased as a consequence of the elimination of exchange rate risk 
and  the  rapid  growth  of  new  market  segments,  such  as  the  corporate  bond  market,  allowing  more 
investors to access the various financial markets in the euro area. This in turn has led to more efficient 
financial markets which have contributed to economic growth. 
Second,  euro  cash changeover  stands  out  as  a  major  milestone  in  European  monetary  history.  It 
was  also  a  particularly  successful  event  in  terms  of  logistics.  Changing  the  currency  for  more  than 
300 million people in a few weeks was truly daunting. The efficiency and enthusiasm with which this 
changeover  took  place  was  exemplary.  This  success  can  be  attributed  to  the  quality  of  the 
preparations made by all players involved and at all levels, not to mention the enthusiastic reception of 
the general public. In fact, in all countries, the changeover period was much swifter that anticipated. 
Sharing a single currency implies a need of a feeling of community and trust among all the users of the 
currency. After all, a currency is backed by the mutual trust placed in it by its users. The relative ease 
with  which  euro  cash  was  introduced  and  accepted  by  people  shows  that  there  may  be  stronger 
feelings of community in Europe than many would have thought. 
Third,  another  important,  but  sometimes  grossly  underestimated  success  of  the  euro  relates  to  the 
convergence of long-term market interest rates towards the best performers in terms of credibility 
and  low  interest  rates.  The  stability  oriented  macroeconomic  policy  framework,  focusing  on  price 
stability  and  sound  fiscal  policies,  has  resulted  in  significantly  reduced  financing  costs  in  most 
countries.  Today,  the  European  economy  benefits  from  benchmark  long-term  market  interest  rates 
well below 4%, a level which most issuers have never seen in the last fifty years. The reduction in risk 
premia and the stabilisation in inflation expectations at low levels is a major achievement which must 
be maintained by today’s and future economic policy making. 
Fourth, a related success of the euro has been an improved resilience against crises in financial 
markets.  For  those  who  experienced  the  many  episodes  of  exchange  and  interest  rate  volatility 
between the 1970s and the mid-1990s, it is clear that, without the single currency, events in recent 
years  such  as  the  financial  crisis  of  autumn  1998,  the  turbulence  that  followed  the  September  11 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 1
terrorist  attacks  or  the  past  swings  in  global  exchange  markets  would  have  triggered  major 
turbulences in European countries. 
Last  but  not  least,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  single  monetary  policy,  which  has  preserved  price 
stability  and  credibility  in  a  transparent  manner.  With  a  clearly  defined  mandate  to  pursue  price 
stability in the Treaty and a strong focus on independence, the European Central Bank, together with 
the participating national central banks, has implemented the single monetary policy in the euro area 
since 1999. As you know, the ECB defines price stability as inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the medium term. Looking back at the period since the introduction of the euro, actual inflation rates 
were not always in line with price stability, due to exceptional shocks such as the rise in oil prices in 
recent years. However, these shocks did not undermine the credibility of our promise to ensure price 
stability over the medium term and therefore did not derail inflation expectations. This was due to our 
medium-term orientation of monetary policy which is aimed at providing a stable anchor for economic 
agents.  Indeed,  the  best  contribution  of  monetary  policy  to  economic  growth  is  when  inflation  and 
inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored  at  price  stability.  One  way  of  measuring  our  success  in 
providing  this  long-term  anchor  is  to  study  long-term  market  expectations  for  inflation.  Taken  all 
measures together, from financial markets or from survey data, the information indicates that we have 
been  successful  in  stabilising  inflation  expectations  at  below  2%.  But  these  measures  also  indicate 
that we need to remain vigilant as regards any upside risks to price stability over the medium term. 
The understanding of how a central bank reacts to data and indicators is crucial for the anchoring of 
inflation  expectations  and  for  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy.  The  overall  success  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy also reflects, in my view, a success in terms of transparency and communication. 
As  a  public  institution  providing  a  public  good  with  full  independence,  we  are  responsible  and 
accountable  to  the  people  of  Europe.  Consequently,  a  significant  part  of  our  job  is  devoted  to 
explaining  and  discussing  our  actions  and  our  goals  to  the  public.  From  the  start,  the  Governing 
Council has decided to communicate its assessment of the economic situation and of the risks to price 
stability in a new and exceptionally transparent fashion. Monetary policy decisions are explained at the 
press  conference  which  takes  place  immediately  after  the  first  Governing  Council  meeting  of  the 
month; the ECB was the first major central bank to embark on such concept of transparency, and it 
was then followed by other important central banks. Further explanations of our policy are presented in 
the  ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin,  in  speeches  given  by  members  of  the  Governing  Council  and  in  the 
testimonies of the President before the European Parliament. 
Challenges 
Let me now turn to two of the most important challenges we are currently facing and which need to be 
addressed in order to fully reap the benefits of the euro, namely raising potential economic growth and 
the enlargement of the euro area. 
Let  me  start  with  the  first  challenge  I  want  to  discuss  today,  namely  the  need  to  raise  economic 
growth in a sustainable manner. We all know that the growth performance of a number of euro area 
countries has been disappointing during the past years, both in a historical perspective and compared 
with  other  economies.  This  is  also  true  since  the  start  of  the  euro,  despite  the  improved  financing 
conditions  I  mentioned  earlier.  This  reflects  both  international  and  domestic  factors:  The  world 
economy  is  transforming  rapidly,  external  competition  has  become  stronger,  knowledge  is  easily 
transferable and  the  ability  to  adjust  to  changing  economic circumstances  is  increasingly  important. 
Many European countries have not been adapting their economic, social and legal frameworks - set 
up under very different conditions - rapidly enough to face these challenges. At the same time, the age 
structure  of  Europe  is  getting  increasingly  unfavourable.  In  facing  this  challenge,  the  options  are 
limited; we need to adjust our regulatory frameworks in product, labour and financial markets in a way 
that competitiveness and economic dynamism are maintained. Some countries in the euro area, which 
have done well in terms of maintaining high output and employment growth, demonstrate that such 
changes are possible not only outside Europe but also within. 
At the EU level, the Lisbon Agenda constitute the main driver in this field. It aims at enhancing the 
knowledge-based economy and thereby productivity, increase labour participation and foster financial 
integration. Recently, the report prepared by the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok provided an 
assessment of the Lisbon Strategy and stated that there had been a “disappointing delivery” on the 
agreed measures. The report expressed an urgent need for renewed impetus, stronger commitment of 
national  governments  and  a  sharpening  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy’s  focus  on  the  acceleration  of 
employment  and  productivity  growth.  It  also  regards  the  role  of  benchmarking  as  crucial.  The  ECB 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2005
strongly welcomes these proposals, as they are well in line with our own views. Indeed, what matters 
for  our  future  success  is  innovation,  productivity  enhancement  and  employment  growth  and  all 
measures should be directed to achieve these results. 
Let me further elaborate on a few areas in urgent need of reform. Most observers agree that further 
reforms in labour markets in many euro area countries are absolutely crucial in order to improve the 
quality, incentives and flexibility of labour supply. The current mix of tax and benefit systems continue 
to provide a disincentive to take up work or to work longer hours in many countries. Measures to make 
wage  growth  reflect  more  strongly  regional  and  sectoral  productivity  differences  would  certainly  be 
helpful.  In  addition,  efforts  by  Governments  to  improve  education  and  training  systems  to  improve 
skills are to be supported. In product markets, substantial progress has been made during the 1990s 
with important effects on productivity, prices and employment. This is an encouragement to do more in 
terms  of  fully  implementing  the  Single  Market  and  reducing  market  entry  barriers  in  national 
regulations which continue to hamper competition. Especially in the services sector, where most new 
jobs are created, sometimes excessive regulation still persists. Finally, I believe that further integration 
in  euro  area  financial  markets  is  possible,  especially  as  regards  the  integration  of  equity  markets, 
continued efforts to harmonise legal and regulatory frameworks, and the consolidation of the banking 
sector. Not only would these reforms raise potential economic growth, but they would also make the 
economies  more  flexible  and  thereby  strengthen  the  resilience  against  shocks.  This  in  turn  would 
facilitate the pursuit of stability oriented macroeconomic policies. 
Let me now turn to a second major challenge I see, namely enlarging the euro area. The historic 
EU enlargement with ten countries on the 1st of May last year was only a first step in the process of 
economic and monetary integration of the new Member States. None of the 10 new Member States 
have a special status as regards the introduction of the euro, implying that they are all expected to 
strive to fulfil the convergence criteria and subsequently to adopt the euro. 
An important step in this process is to join the exchange rate mechanism ERM II, for which at least a 
two year membership is foreseen in order to comply with the exchange rate criterion. Although there 
are no formal criteria to be met for entry into ERM II, successful participation will benefit from having 
major  policy  adjustments  -  for  example  relating  to  fiscal  consolidation  and  price  liberalisation  - 
undertaken before joining the mechanism. Otherwise, significant pressures on the exchange rate may 
arise which may jeopardise the convergence process. Having proceeded with the necessary structural 
adjustments,  participation  in  ERM  II  can  be  an  important  means  of  anchoring  exchange  rate  and 
inflation  expectations  and  of  promoting  discipline.  It  can  help  orient  macroeconomic  policies  to 
stability,  while  at  the  same  time  allowing  for  a  degree  of  flexibility  if  needed,  through  the  standard 
fluctuation band and the possibility of adjusting the central parity. This period can also be seen as a 
realistic  experience  of  the  capacity  of  Member  States  to  respect  the  requirements  of  the  Monetary 
Union, in which the exchange rate will no longer be available in order to adjust to changing economic 
conditions. 
Before adopting the euro, all convergence criteria, relating not only to exchange rate developments 
but also to inflation, public deficit and debt, and long-term interest rates, as well as legal convergence, 
will need to be achieved in a sustainable manner. Only when all the criteria are met on a sustainable 
basis, will a country be eligible for adopting the euro. As it is an irreversible decision, joining the euro 
area is a very important step requiring careful preparation. Every country will be assessed on its own 
merits  and  its  own  particular  situation.  Whether  this  process  will  go  swiftly  or  be  more  prolonged 
depends largely on countries’ starting position, remaining needs for structural change and integration, 
and how successful they are in maintaining sound economic policies. While the criteria for sound and 
sustainable macroeconomic policies are crucial for the well functioning of the Monetary Union, they 
also make good economic sense for individual countries, both before and after joining the euro area. 
Ultimately, I am convinced that EU and euro area enlargement will contribute positively to economic 
growth and welfare in the whole EU. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, let me once again stress my firm belief that the Economic and 
Monetary Union has seen a number of successes in a very short period of time: the introduction a new 
currency  for  more  than  300  million  Europeans,  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  and  low  market 
interest  rates  and  the  promotion  of  financial  integration.  These  successes,  which  are  indispensable 
conditions for sustainable economic growth and employment, needs however to be complemented by 
further progress  in  other parts  of  the economy.  I  am  referring  in  particular  to  the  implementation  of 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 3
structural reform. In order to reap the full benefits of the EMU and to cope with the global competitive 
pressures,  a  truly  dynamic  economic  environment  will  need  to  be  put  firmly  in  place.  These  issues 
have been identified and solutions have been drawn up, in particular in the Lisbon agenda. Now, the 
challenge is to implement these commitments. In this endeavour, the new Member States of the EU 
will  undoubtedly  make  constructive  contributions,  benefiting  from  their  recent  experiences  in 
restructuring their economies to the EU framework. 
To some extent, all changes and new challenges impose feelings of fear and hesitation - most likely 
due to the simple fact that most human beings fear the unknown. We know what we got but we do not 
know what we will get, and this inhibits our actions. Such hesitation is natural but the success of the 
euro itself shows that a combination of insights, leadership, technical capacity and preparation can be 
channelled into a general enthusiasm to succeed and to rise to the challenge. While the euro is still a 
young currency, it draws on the cumulated wisdom of its legacy currencies. This combination of youth 
and experience is unique. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2005
