David Dodge: The evolution and resolution of global imbalances 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Spruce Meadows Roundtable, 
Calgary, 9 September 2005. 
 Good morning. I am happy to be back at Spruce Meadows, and to have the opportunity to join my 
friends,  Governors  Zhou  and  Noyer,  at  this  round-table  discussion:  "Changing  Fortunes-World 
Monetary Policy." 
Our host, Ron Southern, has asked us to be at once "integrative, comprehensive, anticipatory, and 
apolitical." This is a tall order, but I will do my best to oblige. Today, I will talk about two types of global 
economic imbalances. The first relates to the way that savings and investment are being distributed 
across  countries  in  an  increasingly  uneven  way.  The  second  is  the  possibility  that,  over  the  next 
couple  of  decades,  the  global  economy  might  face  a  protracted  period  in  which  desired  savings 
exceed planned investment, partly because of demographic trends. If economic policy-makers do not 
take  appropriate  measures  quickly  enough,  there  is  even  a  risk-albeit  a  small  one-that  the  world 
economy  could  end  up  with  the  classic  dilemma-first  spelled  out  by  John  Maynard  Keynes-of 
widespread demand deficiency and a persistent deflationary gap.  
But before talking about this longer-term risk, let me focus on the savings-investment imbalances that 
currently exist across different regions of the global economy. The United States faces a large and 
growing current account deficit, which reflects an excess of investment spending relative to domestic 
savings. This is matched by growing current account surpluses in Asia, in oil-exporting nations, and in 
some other economies around the world. 
Geographical  imbalances  are  not  necessarily  a  bad  thing,  nor  are  the  large  capital  flows  that  they 
generate.  Indeed,  there  should  be  a  process  that  works  through  world  financial  markets  to  allow 
savers in one country to lend to borrowers in another. Such a process leads to higher global growth, 
since countries with surplus savings can invest them in countries that do not generate enough savings 
internally. However, when imbalances grow at an unsustainable pace, as appears to be the case at 
present,  some  form  of  correction  must  take  place.  If  markets  are  allowed  to  operate  without 
interference, imbalances can resolve themselves in a reasonably smooth manner. But in the absence 
of  appropriately  functioning  market  mechanisms,  there  is  a  greater  risk  that  the  correction  will  be 
abrupt and disorderly. Beyond disruption to financial markets, a disorderly correction might also lead 
governments  to  adopt  wrong-headed  protectionist  measures,  which  would  then  exacerbate  the 
damage to the global economy. 
But regardless of how these imbalances are resolved, it is clear that the resolution will require greater 
net national savings in the United States. Investment in the U.S. economy will need more financing 
from  domestic  sources-be  it  from  the  household,  business,  or  government  sectors-and  less  from 
foreign sources. This implies an increase in net U.S. exports and a decrease in net exports elsewhere 
in the world, as well as an increase in domestic demand in other countries. 
Exchange  rate  movements  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  this  regard,  because  they  can  help 
redirect international trade and investment flows. In this context, efforts by some countries to slow or 
prevent required adjustments by pegging exchange rates are, in the end, counterproductive. I know 
that Governors Zhou and Noyer fully understand that, by frustrating market mechanisms, such policies 
raise the risk of a much larger and more disorderly correction in the future, as well as an outbreak of 
protectionism. 
But we should not look to exchange rate movements alone to resolve the existing global imbalances. 
Within  the  United  States,  higher  interest  rates  can  be  expected  to  lead  to  increased  savings. 
Authorities could also encourage greater national savings with a tighter fiscal policy. And they could 
implement  structural  reforms  to  encourage  national  savings  through  taxation,  social  security 
premiums, and other measures.  
But  if  the  United  States  alone  were  to  act  to  resolve  its  imbalance  by  taking  the  steps  I've  just 
described, it would leave the global economy with much weaker aggregate demand. And so a number 
of other countries must focus on stimulating domestic demand. This task is made more urgent by the 
fact that the global economy is currently operating somewhat below capacity. The fact that inflationary 
pressures are absent globally is evidence of this.  
   1/3 
So, how can we stimulate domestic demand outside the United States? Clearly, monetary authorities 
bear most of the responsibility for stabilizing domestic output in the short run and moving their own 
economies towards full production capacity. But monetary policy may not be as effective as it could 
be, if there are problems with an economy's structural or fiscal policies. Thus, the appropriate policy 
prescription depends on each country's circumstances. Structural reforms to remove market rigidities 
are important for most of us. Many need to improve or develop their financial system so that savings 
can  be  more  effectively  channeled  into  investment  and  households  can  have  improved  access  to 
credit.  For  some,  the  development  of  social  safety  nets  would  be  helpful,  so  citizens  don't  feel  the 
need to hold excessive precautionary savings. And for a few, more stimulative fiscal policy would be 
helpful. 
I'll have more to say about these policies in a few minutes, since they are also critical for the good 
performance  of  the  global  economy  in  the  long  run.  But  first,  I  want  to  discuss  the  second  type  of 
imbalance that I mentioned at the beginning: the challenges that will be posed by evolving economic 
and demographic realities. As I see it, if countries do not have the appropriate structural policies in 
place, there is a risk of a prolonged deficiency in global demand in the future. Let me now expand on 
this risk by highlighting two trends that will be important over the next decade or two. 
First, we can expect that Asia's share of the world economy will continue to grow. For various reasons, 
Asian nations have traditionally had a higher rate of savings than other economies. And so, all other 
things  being  equal,  we  can  expect  that  global  desired  savings  will  rise.  But  all  other  things  are  not 
equal. The second trend that we can expect is higher desired savings in most OECD economies as 
the baby-boom generation prepares for retirement. Taken together, these two trends can certainly be 
expected to lead to a higher level of global desired savings. So it is critical for policy-makers to act 
now,  so  there  can  be  an  increase  in  demand  and  investment  to  compensate  for  the  increase  in 
desired savings.  
How policy-makers handle the events of the next 10 to 20 years will be critical in preparing the global 
economy for the period from roughly 2020 on, when the proportion of the working-age population will 
start  to  decline  in  many  countries.  Canada  will  likely  be  in  this  position  within  15  years.  While 
demographic trends in the United States will likely be less challenging, in many OECD countries, the 
old-age dependency ratio is poised to rise sharply. According to a study by the European Commission, 
by 2025 the European Union will go from a ratio of roughly four working-age persons for every senior 
citizen  to  a  ratio  of  3  to  1.  Indeed,  without  radical  changes  in  fertility  rates,  life  expectancies,  or 
migration patterns, populations in many parts of the world will start declining, even as the world's total 
population continues to climb. According to the United Nations, the population of the EU could start to 
decline by 2025, with China expected to follow by 2050. Indeed, just this year, Japan reported a drop 
in its male population, and the number of deaths in that country began to exceed the number of births. 
But for most OECD countries, the era of declining labour forces and population is still at least a couple 
of decades away. Before we get there, we will first go through a period when desired savings are likely 
to rise. Workers in many countries can be expected to try to increase their savings for retirement. This 
can be accomplished for a short period through rising prices of assets, such as houses. But over the 
next couple of decades, this increased saving will have to come out of current income, and this means 
slower growth in consumer spending. At the same time, governments-faced with the need to prepare 
for  future  increases  in  public  spending  on  an  aging  population-will  also  have  to  slow  the  rate  of 
increase in current spending. 
To  deal  with this  expected  slower  growth  in  domestic  demand,  we  would  typically  expect  monetary 
policy in an open economy to encourage or "crowd in" foreign demand with higher exports. But the 
world as a whole is one large closed economy-we can't export to another planet! If savings increase in 
one  part  of  the  world,  offsetting  increases  in  domestic  demand  will  be  needed  elsewhere  to  keep 
global demand in line with global supply. 
So, since we can't export to another planet, what can policy-makers do to support the three remaining 
components of demand-private consumption, government spending, and investment? 
In terms of investment, a key point to remember is that investment requires an expectation that future 
profits will more than compensate for the cost of capital. Of course, changes in financial conditions 
play  an  important  role  in  spurring  investment,  since  real  interest  rates  should  decline  to  the  point 
where desired investment matches desired savings. But, if the desire to save is too strong, and if it is 
spread throughout the global economy, it could happen that real interest rates would not be able to fall 
sufficiently to match desired savings with investment. With global inflation and interest rates already 
low, it could be argued that, when the expected increase in desired savings materializes, there will be 
   2/3 
a risk that global nominal interest rates would hit zero before real interest rates had fallen sufficiently 
to restore the balance between desired investment and savings. 
Let me stress that this is not a prediction on my part. I am only saying that, if there is no increase in 
global  demand  to  offset  the  expected  increase  in  desired  savings,  it  may  be  difficult  for  monetary 
policy to effectively fulfill its role as the main short-run economic stabilizer in the years ahead.  
So,  what  should  policy-makers  be  doing  now  to  help  us  avoid  a  Keynesian  deflationary  gap  in  the 
future? As it turns out, most of the policy prescriptions that I spoke about earlier in the context of the 
resolution  of  today's  imbalances  would  also  address  potential  problems  further  ahead.  Let  me  now 
return to those policies and talk about them in a bit more detail. 
First,  one  might  look  to  governments  to  provide  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy.  In  a  few  economies, 
there  is  clearly  room  for  fiscal  policy  to  become  more  stimulative  in  order  to  boost  investment  and 
demand.  Certainly,  the  economies  of  emerging  Asia  have  the  scope  to  support  demand  with  fiscal 
policy. But in North America, Europe, and Japan the scope for fiscal policy to spur demand appears to 
be very limited, given current debt levels in most of these countries and the increasing demands that 
aging  populations  will  place  on  the  government  sector.  The  strain  on  the  public  purse  to  meet  the 
needs of our aging populations will be enormous. The situation will be more serious in those countries 
that have not yet taken steps to ensure that their public pension systems will be able to handle the 
retirement of the baby-boom generation. Unless the ratios of public debt-to-GDP are reduced before 
this  strain  is  felt,  governments  in  many  countries  will  face  the  difficult  task  of  reducing  services  or 
raising taxes, or both. 
In any event, public debt in some countries may have already become so large that additional fiscal 
stimulus  might  actually  be  counterproductive.  Households,  anxious  about  future  tax  liabilities  or  the 
viability of public pensions, might cut back on consumption. This could offset the positive effects of the 
easier policy stance. But if there is any scope at all for effective fiscal action, I would argue that the 
emphasis should be on improving the economic infrastructure in a way that can support the production 
capacity of the economy while, at the same time, helping to meet rising social needs as the working 
population begins to decline. This might include additional money for education and training, which by 
adding to human capital, would help maintain the production capacity of the world economy.  
But if there is one thing that all governments can do to stimulate demand, it is to have appropriate 
structural  policies,  and  I  stress  the  word  "appropriate."  Structural  policies  that  promote  economic 
flexibility are important in all circumstances. We all need to take steps to improve the flexibility of our 
labour markets and, in particular, to make sure that older workers who want to remain in the workforce 
are not discouraged from doing so. We also need to recognize that well-functioning credit markets are 
extremely important, so that households can borrow against future income, and businesses are able to 
make investments for the future. 
The  improvement  of  labour  and  financial  market  policies  is  particularly  important  in  Europe.  In 
emerging  Asia,  improving  income-security  policies  is  essential  in  order  to  reduce  the  need  for 
households  to  build  up  large  amounts  of  precautionary  savings.  As  well,  stronger,  more  efficient 
domestic financial systems could go a long way towards raising confidence and promoting increased 
spending. By effectively pooling resources, stronger financial institutions and markets in Asia would 
help individuals become less risk-averse. Households would be more readily able to borrow against 
future  income,  and  businesses  would  have  more  appropriate  access  to  credit  in  order  to  finance 
investments. 
In  closing,  let  me  stress  a  few  key  points.  I'm  not  saying  that  a  disorderly  correction  to  global 
imbalances is certain to happen. Nor am I saying that the global economy is inevitably headed for a 
deflationary shortfall in demand. What I am saying is that, as prudent policy-makers, we must not rely 
on good fortune to help us muddle through. We need to get going on these policy issues now, before it 
is too late to take remedial action. 
In  particular,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  our  structural  policies  encourage  maximum  economic 
flexibility and that they do not impede investment and growth. We need to make sure that we will have 
the  fiscal  flexibility  to  handle  the  demographic  challenges  of  the  future.  And  we  must  continue  to 
conduct monetary policy with the aim of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable, to maximize the 
chances that our economies will operate at full capacity. We must act now to meet the challenges of 
today, and of the future, for the benefit of all our citizens. 
 
   3/3 
