Axel A Weber: The IMF in a changing world (concluding remarks)  
Concluding remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Joint 
IMF-Bundesbank Symposium “The IMF in a changing world”, Frankfurt, 8 June 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
Delivering  the  concluding  remarks  at  a  symposium  with  such  outstanding  participants  and  lively 
discussions is a challenging task.  
George  Bernhard  Shaw  once  remarked  ironically  that  “if  all  economists  were  laid  end  to  end  they 
would not reach a conclusion”. It is not too difficult to imagine that he would have acknowledged his 
proposition as applying to policymakers, too.  
In  his  opening  remarks,  Vice  President  Stark  posed  a  list  of  questions  for  consideration  at  this 
symposium. It was not to be expected, of course, that at the end of the day we could easily resolve all 
of the issues at hand and provide universally accepted answers.  
However, given the inherent difficulties of some of the issues discussed here today, symposiums like 
today’s are also valuable in shaping our understanding of the problems at hand and providing new 
perspectives on feasible solutions.  
Measured against this yardstick, the symposium has more than met my expectations.  
The current global economic environment and the IMF  
1  
There  has  been  widespread  consensus  about  the  driving  forces  behind  the  changes  in  the  world 
economy and the role of the IMF. The IMF was founded over 60 years ago to meet the needs of an 
international monetary system with fixed exchange rates and restricted capital mobility.  
The current environment, however, is a very different one. Its defining characteristics are large scale 
capital mobility and a growing importance of more flexible exchange rate arrangements.  
Some have therefore felt inclined to pose the provocative question of whether we still need the IMF at 
all.  One  affirmative  answer  to  these  sceptics  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  transformation  of  the  global 
economy  into  the  current  situation  has  been  all  but  smooth  and  cannot  safely  be  assumed  to  be 
smooth in the future.  
The  1980’s  witnessed  the  Latin  American  debt  crisis,  the  1990’s  were  fraught  with  several  severe 
financial crises following abrupt reversals in capital flows to emerging markets.  
In the aftermath of these experiences, fundamental questions arose concerning the appropriate role of 
the IMF. The same questions which have played a distinct role in today’s discussions, too.  
Before I briefly touch on some of these issues, it is worth mentioning, however, that in certain aspects 
the current global economy has been portrait as not being completely different from that in the days of 
Bretton  Woods.  The  debates  on  global  imbalances  are  clear  evidence  that  traditional  issues  of 
misaligned fixed exchange rates and current account imbalances continue to be highly relevant.  
In some camps it is even argued that the current macroeconomic imbalances are a kind of return of 
Bretton  Woods.  Reserve  accumulation  in  Asia  can  be  interpreted  as  a  hedge  or  “self-insurance” 
against  potential  currency  crises  which  are  mirrored  in  the  current  account  surpluses  of  these 
countries.  
But there is more to it than that: The extent to which the US deficit is being financed by Asian central 
banks is larger than indicated by the surpluses of the creditor countries. This in fact implies that, de 
facto, Asia is intermediating global savings.  
However,  there  are  several  compelling  reasons  to  be  deeply  sceptical  about  the  Bretton  Woods  II 
hypothesis. I do not want to delve into the various aspects of this issue, but I would like to say that the 
current  state  of  affairs  merits  special  attention  and  warrants  a  stance  to  be  articulated  by  an 
international institution such as the IMF which from its experience also understands the domestic side 
of international economic interaction.  
BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
Crisis prevention and crisis resolution  
2  
Bilateral and multilateral surveillance as well as policy advice on macroeconomic issues should be the 
Fund’s  primary  instruments  more  than  ever.  Both  are  also  important  vehicles  for  preventing  crises. 
Hence, the growing relevance of financial surveillance in the form of FSAP exercises is in my eyes a 
highly welcome development.  
There was also broad consensus about what contributions national policies should make: Sound fiscal 
and  monetary  policies,  a  well-functioning  legal  system  and  stable  domestic  financial  systems  are 
regarded as prerequisites for countries to prosper and to avoid economic turmoil.  
It  came  as  no  surprise  that  the  discussion  regarding  other  aspects  of  crisis  prevention  and  crisis 
resolution was much more contentious. Please allow me to make a few brief remarks.  
Pre-crisis liquidity support, contingent credit lines or precautionary exceptional excess arrangements 
are all means which are thought to help prevent financial crises.  
However  appealing  this  kind  of  reasoning  seems  to  be  at  first  sight,  such  instruments  could  be 
problematic  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  They  could  push  the  IMF  into  the  role  of  a  case-by  case  risk 
assessor comparable to an insurance company assessing applications, which may be viewed as being 
incompatible with the IMF’s assignment of offering undiscriminating support to its global membership 
on a revolving basis at intentionally not fully risk-equivalent terms. It could also lead to an unfair tying-
up of Fund resources at the expense of members who feel strong enough not to seek pro-active Fund 
insurance, but would nevertheless prefer Fund resources to remain available for emergency situations.  
With regard to crisis resolution and IMF lending, a recurring theme today was the growing relevance of 
private sector participation in debt work-outs. The increased use of collective action clauses in bond 
contracts is an indication of this development.  
One does not need to go so far as to negate the potential future role of official assistance in the crisis 
resolution  process.  But,  as  was  also  correctly  stated,  the  Fund  has  considerable  influence  to 
determine  the  outcome  of  debt  negotiations,  including  lending-into-arrears  decisions  in  a  debt 
restructuring situation. But it is also clear to me that the Fund’s role has to respect the prerogative of 
private solution schemes to safeguard the Fund’s systemically important “diplomatic immunity”.  
Ex  ante  moral  hazard  can  best  be  avoided  on  the  basis  of  a  rules-based  lending  policy.  Defining 
elements should be the consistent application of the regular access limits and a clear-cut framework 
for exceptional access. Furthermore, it would certainly be helpful if IMF programmes were designed in 
such a way that improvements in a country’s capacity to repay would at a minimum be commensurate 
with its repayment obligations vis-à-vis the Fund itself, without paralyzing the country in a “debt trap” in 
which the country’s repayment obligations to the Fund would need to be rolled-over repeatedly.  
Of  course,  there  is  no  perfect  solution  to  the  Fund’s  moral  hazard  or  “roll-over”  problem.  But 
rules-based  lending  focused  on  truly  exceptional  emergency  cases  and  on  balance  of  payments 
problems would at least send a signal in the right direction.  
The  theme  of  one  of  today’s  sessions,  “The  IMF – panacea  for every  illness”  brings  me  to  my  last 
point, namely the role of the IMF in low-income countries and in development financing.  
Focusing the IMF’s objectives necessitates a clear distinction between its work and that of multilateral 
development  organisations.  Undoubtedly,  the  IMF  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  developing 
countries. Surveillance, policy advice, technical assistance and PRGF funding, which pursue the goal 
of  macroeconomic  stability  and  sound  policies,  are  important  instruments  to  help  improve  the 
perspectives for long-term growth in low-income countries.  
The current debate on further debt relief, however, is a more controversial issue. Above all, one might 
question if further debt relief rightly deserves such a prominent place on the international development 
agenda as opposed to resetting incentives in accordance with recent historical experience. The IMF 
itself seems to be quite sceptical about this. Net flows, not debt relief, matter. But that, of course, is a 
political decision about which central banks have no a priori view as long as no monetary financing is 
involved.  
3  
Conclusion  
Ladies and gentlemen  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
This morning my colleague, Dr Jürgen Stark, ended his remarks by recognising the excellent job the 
IMF has so far performed.  
After a day of intense debate about the future role of the IMF in a changing world, there is the danger 
that this key message will get buried somewhere under the weight of discussions on distinct aspects of 
the Fund’s work.  
And for the rare instances where some criticism of the Fund was articulated today, it was certainly in 
the spirit of the famous German poet, Heinrich Heine, who once remarked that only “he profits from 
praise, who values criticism”.  
So  let  me  clearly  reiterate  that  the  IMF  in  our  view  is  an  indispensable  engine  to  improve  the 
functioning and stability of the international monetary system.  
I have very much enjoyed listening and talking to you. And I would like to thank all of you. I wish to 
particularly  extend  my  thanks  to  the  Managing Director  of  the  IMF,  Rodrigo de Rato,  and  to  all  the 
panellists and moderators.  
Special  thanks  go  to  our  conference  staff  and  to  the  Bundesbank’s  International  Monetary  Affairs 
Division.  
BIS Review 43/2005 
 3
