Jaime Caruana: Basel II - a review of ongoing work 
Keynote address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  20th  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  ISDA  (International 
Swaps and Derivatives Association), Barcelona, 16 March 2005. 
 Mr Moulds, Mr Pickel, Ms. Sebton, distinguished guests, 
It is an honour for me to be invited to join your meetings today and it is furthermore my pleasure to 
welcome you and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association to Spain.  
It appears to me that you have all of the ingredients for a stimulating and memorable conference. The 
agenda  is  ambitious  and  addresses  the  latest  topics  in  the  ever-evolving  derivatives  markets.  The 
speakers  are  distinguished,  deeply  experienced,  and  represent  a  wide  range  of  perspectives  and 
institutions at the forefront of financial services.  
And,  of  course,  I  must  commend  you  on  your  selection  of  a  marvellous  location  for  your  annual 
meeting. Barcelona has undergone a fantastic transformation, is a gateway for the world and a city 
that celebrates the ancient and the innovative. 
I hope that you take some time outside of your sessions to explore its blending of the old and the new. 
A walk through the “Gothic” quarter serves as a window into our past. A visit to any of the creations of 
Antoni Gaudì – after whom this conference hall was named – offers a vision of Catalan modernism 
through architecture. 
Selecting Barcelona as the venue for ISDA’s discussions offers us a chance as well to celebrate the 
ancient and the innovative, the old and the new, in financial services. This conference, for example, 
will address some of the most sophisticated products in banking and finance and the risk management 
practices,  legal  developments,  and  technological advances  that  are  emerging  to  support  these new 
businesses.  At  the  same  time,  our  discussions  here  in  Barcelona  will  remind  us  that  we  must  all 
always monitor and control the fundamental – and traditional – risks involved in our activities.  
Credit risk, market risk, and operational risk have always been with us in various forms, although they 
have  increased  in  complexity  over  recent  years.  What  has  changed  dramatically,  however,  is  our 
ability to measure and monitor those risks more comprehensively than our predecessors ever could. 
We have, moreover, improved our ability to manage or transfer those risks, and I would like to share 
with you today some thoughts on work underway in the financial community in this regard. 
There are three topics that I would like to address in my intervention.  I will begin by sharing first, in my 
personal capacity, some thoughts regarding the need for standards to evolve and keep pace with the 
times, whilst ensuring that new standards are not unduly burdensome and do not hinder firms’ abilities 
to innovate. 
In this respect, I’d like to look forward and address some of the work we are doing to ensure that the 
new international capital standard - Basel II - remains flexible and able to adapt to emerging practices 
and  risks.  Many  of  you  have  a  very  strong  interest  in  the  efforts  the  Committee  is  undertaking  to 
consider how best to apply Basel II to certain trading-related exposures using the latest tools being 
developed by the industry. While this work is still ongoing, I would like to share a status report with you 
on that effort. 
Finally, I will highlight some of the work that we are undertaking to promote a smooth and consistent 
transition to Basel II, including our plans to conduct a review of the calibration of the framework, as 
well as our efforts in the field of supervisory co-operation and validation, and the key messages that 
are coming out of these initiatives.  
The evolution of standards and regulatory burden 
Allow  me  to begin by  sharing some  personal  thoughts  on  a  topic  that  has captured  some attention 
recently: The view, held by at least some in the financial services sector, that the tide of regulation has 
risen to a high water mark. In my own conversations around the world, I have heard similar concerns 
from  some  bankers.  Some  point  to  the  long  debates  that  have  taken  place  in  the  accounting 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 1
profession. Others point to regulatory reforms underway, such as those to transpose and implement 
the Committee’s own work on Basel II, the new capital framework.  
It  should  be  said  that  the  industry  itself  recognises  that  there  is  work  to  be  done  in  these  areas.  
However, I do have sympathy for the sense that much is changing today. I understand that keeping 
pace with these changes can absorb resources and require attention. In this sense, and especially in 
relation to our work on Basel II, I see some merit in concentrating, at least for a while, on completing 
current regulatory work, and on ensuring the quality and consistency of its implementation. 
Let me expand a little on this point. Financial service providers often compete on their ability to create 
value  by  offering  new  products  and  services  to  customers.  As  just  one  example,  ISDA  represents 
institutions that are among the most active in the private negotiation of derivative instruments. These 
instruments are initially tailored to unique sets of circumstances and may involve novel features of risk-
taking or risk mitigation.  
The challenge, therefore, is to ensure that the rules support and encourage  firms in their efforts to 
improve their ability to manage their businesses while pursuing new opportunities. That is a constant 
responsibility for legislators, for standards-setters, and for supervisors, but also for the industry. We 
must all review and ensure that our rules are implemented fairly and in line with our intentions.  
Some reforms underway represent efforts to ensure that our rules keep pace with the achievements 
that the industry has already made. On this note, I would argue that Basel II is just as much about 
aligning supervisory practices more closely with the industry’s latest advances as it is about promoting 
improvements in the management of risk within the industry itself. 
But  I  sympathise  with  the  sense  that  the  wide  range  of  standards  that  are  evolving  in  parallel 
represents a drain on the limited resources that firms have to keep pace with those changes. I agree 
that  we  must  find  a  way  to  balance  the  dangers  we  are  trying  to  ward  off  against  the  time  and 
resources it takes to adapt to new circumstances and new rules. And I want to work with you to make 
sure that the labours you undertake are not merely exercises in compliance with new rules, but rather 
will represent honest efforts to strengthen your practices and your long-term prospects for growth and 
innovation. 
From my perspective as chairman of the Basel Committee, I can say that the Committee’s main focus 
in  the  near  future will  be on  completing  the  current  work and  on  implementing  Basel  II  in a  sound, 
consistent,  and  effective  manner.  This  will  allow  us  all  a  period  to  digest  the  framework  we  have 
designed. 
At the same time, we have always said that Basel II should be an evolutionary approach.  This does 
not mean a moving target.  We have designed a stable framework that we believe will stand the test of 
time.  But we have always been clear that some of the details may need to change over time to ensure 
that they remain relevant to the ongoing evolution in banking markets and risk management practices.  
Indeed,  in  the  text  of  the  Basel  II  framework  that  was  published  in  June  2004,  the  Committee  re-
iterated its intention to maintain an active dialogue with the industry to ensure that the new framework 
keeps pace with, and can be applied to, ongoing developments in the financial services sector. The 
framework itself already provides banks with a great degree of latitude in developing new measures of 
exposures  to  risk  and  new  means  for  addressing  them.  But  supervisors  –  and  banks  –  are  still 
responsible for evaluating whether the framework addresses risk exposures in a sensible manner and 
in line with our sense of sound and best practices that are being developed. 
Status of work on the trading book 
There  are  two  areas  where  both  banks  and  supervisors  recognised  that  this  work  could  already 
commence. One was to find a prudentially sound treatment under Basel II for exposures to “double 
default,” where the risk of both a borrower and a guarantor defaulting on the same obligation may be 
substantially  lower  than  the  risk  of  only  one  of  the  parties  defaulting.  The  other  area  concerns  the 
applying Basel II to certain exposures arising from trading activities.  This brings me on to my second 
topic. 
As you know, we have already spent close to three-quarters of a year studying both sets of issues in 
depth. Because both banks and securities firms have a great interest in the potential solutions to these 
particular  issues,  the  Basel  Committee  has  worked  jointly  with  the  International  Organization  of 
Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  to  consult  with  industry  representatives  and  other  supervisors  on 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2005
these matters. I must say that this co-operation with IOSCO in areas of mutual interest has been a 
very  fruitful  and  beneficial  experience,  and    the  work  has  been  conducted  in  a  very  positive  and 
collaborative spirit.  Also in this regard, I must extend my thanks to ISDA and its members for being 
faithful and active participants in these discussions. ISDA and its members have volunteered again 
considerable data, time, and energy to the work at hand.  
As you may already know, there are five specific areas of focus, namely  
First,  the  treatment  of  counterparty  credit  risk  for  over-the-counter  derivatives,  repo-style  and 
securities financing transactions;  
Second, the treatment of double-default effects for hedged transactions, in relation with trading book, 
but also banking book, exposures;  
Third, the short-term maturity adjustment, under the internal ratings-based approach, for some trading 
book-related items; 
Fourth, a limited number of improvements to the current trading book regime, especially with respect 
to the treatment of specific risk; and  
Fifth, the design of a specific capital treatment for unsettled and failed transactions. 
I  can  report  informally  that  I  personally  am  highly  satisfied  with  the  progress  that  the  joint  Basel 
Committee  and  IOSCO  working  groups  have  achieved  to  date,  which  reflects  in  no  small  way  the 
cooperation  of  the  industry  in  preparing  data  and  responses  for  the  discussions.  I  expect  that  the 
Committee will release a proposal for a six-week period of public comment next month such that the 
proposals can be released in final form this summer. However, intensive work will continue prior to the 
discussions  at  the  meetings  of  the  Basel  Committee  and  IOSCO’s  Technical  Steering  Committee 
toward the end of March and the beginning of April.  
So I cannot yet comment on the solutions that may be proposed or approved by the Committee and 
IOSCO. I can tell you that we set, as a guiding principle, a goal to apply Basel II to these exposures in 
a  manner  that  reflects  as  best  as  possible  sound  practices  already  in  use  when  those  practices 
appeared to be both prudent and broadly acceptable to many kinds of banks and markets.  
Some industry representatives have raised concerns that finding ways to apply Basel II to trading book 
exposures might lead to a revision of the existing “Market Risk Amendment” to the capital framework 
that  was  approved  in 1995.  Understandably,  those  industry  representatives  expressed  concern  that 
this might disrupt banks’ efforts to prepare for Basel II, which addresses mainly credit and operational 
risk. The members of the Committee shared this concern when we decided to undertake work on the 
prudential treatment of certain trading-related exposures under Basel II. We do not intend to overhaul 
the capital rules for trading book exposures, but rather seek to address narrowly a handful of concerns 
that relate either to potential inconsistencies that could arise with the new treatment for banking book 
assets or that relate to a limited number of issues that have arisen since the adoption of the Market 
Risk Amendment.  
The implementation of Basel II 
With that, I would like to turn now to my third topic and report on our efforts to smooth the path from 
the existing capital standards to the new Basel II framework.  
On the regulatory side, supervisors are working with national authorities to transform the framework 
into enforceable rules and regulations, within the context of each jurisdiction’s process. This work is 
well underway in all of the Basel Committee member jurisdictions, but also in many other countries as 
well. 
On the supervisory side, let me mention three areas in particular where we are devoting resources to 
promote a seamless transition to the new framework. 
Calibration 
First, we are verifying that Basel II has been calibrated appropriately. The Committee has long stated 
its  intention  to  conduct  work  to  re-confirm  that  the  new  framework  meets  our  objective  to  broadly 
maintain  the  aggregate  level  of  capital  requirements,  while  keeping  incentives  to  adopt  the  more 
advanced approaches that are offered.  
BIS Review 17/2005 
 3
In order to establish a common data set on which to base this review, the Committee has decided to 
begin a recalibration exercise in autumn this year. In addition, national field tests are already underway 
in some jurisdictions, while there will be a period of time during which banks will calculate their capital 
requirements in parallel under the 1988 Accord and under Basel II.  
We recognise that these tests and reviews will demand resources from both banks and supervisors. 
Yet I must emphasise that neither banks nor supervisors will be able to evaluate the calibration of the 
new framework – and hence its effectiveness – if banks do not participate fully and seriously in these 
initiatives. Only you can provide the data that all of us will need to ensure that Basel II functions as we 
intend and that it does not create unintended side effects. 
Consistent and co-ordinated implementation 
Second, supervisors are working to avoid unexpected outcomes by developing, in advance, a better 
understanding of how various jurisdictions will apply Basel II. This is also helpful to developing a more 
consistent  set  of  expectations  across  countries.  In  a  world  where  the  business  of  banking  is 
increasingly  international,  the  need  for  supervisors  to  cooperate  and  to  strive  for  more  consistent 
principles would exist even if Basel II did not. But under Basel II, this need is even more pronounced, 
especially for internationally active banks that wish to adopt one of the advanced approaches to credit 
or operational risk provided under Basel II.   In fact, in many ways, Basel II is acting as a catalyst for 
enhanced co-operation. 
The Committee is finding ways to avoid the need for those firms to endure redundant or uncoordinated 
reviews  of  the  systems  and  processes  they  develop  to  benefit  from  Basel  II.  The  Accord 
Implementation  Group,  which  is  chaired  by  Nick  Le  Pan,  the  Canadian  Superintendent  of  Financial 
Institutions and Vice-Chair of the Committee, has already undertaken a number of practical exercises 
to  encourage  supervisors  from  many  countries  inside  and  outside  the  Committee’s  membership  to 
consider how they will review those systems and processes for firms that operate across borders. 
The AIG, as this group is known, identified two key lessons for banks to consider that may help to 
ease the transition to Basel II. One lesson is that the more detailed, comprehensive, and clear a firm’s 
plans are for moving to one of the more advanced approaches to risk management, the better able 
supervisors will be to assess and evaluate those plans in a less intrusive manner. But a second lesson 
takes  this  one  step  further:  it  is  also  important  for  banks  to  share  those  plans  broadly  with  their 
branches and subsidiaries worldwide. Already some host supervisors have found that local managers 
may be unfamiliar with the parent organisation’s plans for Basel II: this understandably tends to make 
host  supervisors  less  confident  about  the  quality  of  an  organisation’s  planning  and  its  readiness  to 
move  to  Basel  II.  Moreover,  it  increases  their  need  to  ask  more  questions,  some  of  which  may 
duplicate the questions that the home supervisor or other host supervisors are asking. 
If a bank has already developed sufficiently detailed and transparent plans for its application of Basel 
II, a substantial portion of the hard work has already been done. Sharing those plans with home and 
host  supervisors,  and  with  managers  throughout  the  bank’s  operations  and  locations,  should  not 
require  too  much  more  effort.  Instead,  the  bank  should  be  in  an  even  better  position  to  focus  on 
running its business confidently while still implementing its plans carefully for the future.  
Validation 
One of the greatest challenges – for both banks and supervisors – of the Basel II framework is the 
need to validate the systems and processes used to generate the parameters that serve as inputs into 
the IRB approach to credit risk. Although validation is foremost the responsibility of banks, supervisors 
must  have  a  thorough  understanding  of  validation  in  order  to  ensure  overall  integrity  of  bank’s 
activities in this area. 
In  recognition  of  the  importance  of  validation  the  Committee  recently  published  six  principles  on 
validation that will guide our future work.  We also published a working paper called: “Studies on the 
Validation of Internal Rating Systems” Let me mention these principles briefly. 
Firstly, we set out our understanding that validation is fundamentally about assessing the predictive 
ability  of  risk  estimates  and  the  use  of  ratings  in  credit  processes.    Secondly,  we  stress  that  the 
primary responsibility for validation lies with the bank itself, while the supervisor’s responsibility is to 
review the bank’s processes and outcomes – a point which I think we all agree is very important.   
4 
 BIS Review 17/2005
The remaining principles relate more to the process itself.  We note that validation is a likely to be an 
ongoing,  iterative  process  which  will  require  an  ongoing,  iterative  dialogue  between  banks  and 
supervisors.  Then our fourth principle reflects that there is no single validation method, or universal 
tool  for  validation,  even  though  techniques  may  converge  over  time.    We  also  highlight,  in  our  fifth 
principle, that validation should encompass both quantitative and qualitative elements – validation is 
not  a  purely technical or mathematical  exercise,  but  should  also  include an  assessment  of  controls 
and  other  qualitative  factors.    Finally,  we  stress  our  view  that  validation  processes  and  outcomes 
should  be  subject  to  review  within  the  bank,  by  parties  which  are  independent  of  those  who  are 
responsible for the design and implementation of the processes.   
I think these principles set out clearly what supervisory expectations are, and should provide a useful 
steer  to  the  industry.    Our  work on  validation will  accelerate  over  the  coming months, although  our 
focus  will  be  more  on  sharing  and  cataloguing  information  and  approaches,  and  not  on  trying  to 
develop  a  prescriptive  method.    As  we  have  stated  in  our  principles,  the  primary  responsibility  for 
validation lies with the banks themselves.  Close dialogue with the industry in our work will, of course, 
be of great importance. 
In turning to my conclusions, I would like to use this opportunity to make a brief comment from my 
perspective as Governor of the Banco de España.  Although I have talked about the work underway in 
the AIG on implementation, you are probably also aware of similar work being conducted in Europe, 
by  the  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors,  which  is  seeking  to  promote  consistency  and 
convergence in the application of Basel II in the EU.  As I have said on other occasions, I believe that 
Basel  II  represents  a  great  opportunity  for  the  EU  –  as  a  single  market  -  to  lead  the  way  on 
international  convergence,  and  I  hope  that  we  can  seize  this  opportunity.    Certainly,  the  progress 
made by CEBS so far is encouraging in this respect. 
Conclusion 
Coming  back  to  the  points  I  made  earlier,  even  considering  the  ongoing  work  on  trading  activities 
under Basel II, I believe that the vast majority of efforts being undertaken by banks and supervisors 
alike today related to Basel II are focused on implementing the very good rules that have already been 
developed. I believe that this should be the Committee’s main focus for the near term. 
It is important as well to remember that Basel II is not meant to be an exercise in compliance. Its goals 
are to improve the quality of risk management across the banking sector; to strengthen the resilience 
of  the  financial  system;  and  to  promote  more  sustainable  economic  growth  for  the  good  of  both 
consumers and businesses alike. 
I  look  forward  to  continuing  to  work  with  you  as  we  all  enhance  our  efforts  to  make  those  goals  a 
reality. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 5
