Christian Noyer: The euro, a stabilising factor at home and abroad 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  “Paris  Europlace"  a  financial 
meeting in Hong Kong, 21 March 2005. 
 Introduction 
• 
  The  legal  basis  for  the  single  monetary  policy  is  the  Treaty  on  the  European  Community, 
whose  Article  105  states  that  “the  primary  objective  of  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks shall be to maintain price stability”. 
Price  stability,  combined  with  the  convergence  of  euro  area  economies,  is  the  key  issue 
enabling the euro to become a stable international currency. 
Thanks  to  a  strong  macroeconomic  framework  and  to  the  convergence  of  euro  area 
economies, the introduction of the euro has limited the risks of disequilibrium inside the euro 
area  (Part  1).  Furthermore,  the  international  role  of  the  euro  as  a  vector  of  stability  has 
increased (Part 2). 
Part 1: The euro has been a key factor for maintaining stability inside the euro area 
The  efficient  macroeconomic  framework  of  the  euro  area  (A)  has  made  the  economies  of  the  euro 
area more homogeneous and reduced the risks of macroeconomic disequilibrium (B). As a result, the 
euro area is characterized by strong economic fundamentals (C). 
A 
• 
 The macroeconomic framework of the euro area is an efficient framework 
For the past six years, the Eurosystem has been responsible for defining and implementing 
the  single  monetary  policy.  The  primary  objective  of  the  Eurosystem  is  to  maintain  price 
stability,  which  has  been  defined  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2% in the medium-term. In May 2003, 
the ECB Governing Council confirmed this definition and specified that, in the pursuit of price 
stability, it will aim to maintain inflation rates close to, but below, 2% over the medium-term. 
The monetary policy conducted by the Eurosystem has led to a low level of inflation, which 
averaged 2% between 1999 and 2004, and to very favorable financing conditions as both 
short-term and long-term interest rates have reached very low levels. 
Moreover, in principle, fiscal policies cannot undermine the objective of price stability as the 
Treaty prohibits monetary financing and as Member States are committed to implementing 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  However,  the  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  in  some  euro  area 
countries  and  the  recent  debate  at  the  EU  level  have  illustrated  the  fact  that  it  is  still 
necessary to enhance the efficiency of the European fiscal framework and, especially, to 
strengthen  the  preventive  arm  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  deals  with  the 
surveillance  of  budgetary  positions.  The  fiscal  framework  enshrined  in  the  Treaty  on 
European  Union  and  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  a  cornerstone  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union and, thus, of central importance to the cohesion of Monetary Union itself. 
B 
The introduction of the euro has increased the homogeneity of European economies 
and limited the risks of macroeconomic disequilibrium inside the euro area 
The convergence process, the homogeneity of European economies and the synchronization of 
business cycles have increased since the introduction of the euro 
• 
Regarding business cycles, some recent work presented by a working group joining the 
CEPR  (Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research)  and  the  Eurosystem  shows  that  the 
correlation  between  business  cycles  as  a  whole  and  also  consumption  and  investment  in 
most euro area countries has increased since 1999. A common European component seems 
to  play  a  more  important  role  in  these  economies  than  the  national  components  do.  The 
  degree  of  correlation  between  national  cycles  and  the  euro  area  aggregated  cycle  varies 
between 0.70 and 0.92. 
Concerning inflation, the research conducted by the Eurosystem shows that the degree of 
dispersion of inflation rates inside the euro area is not significantly superior to that observed 
in  the  USA,  where  the  federal  budget  and  the  much  more  unified  market  of  goods  and 
services constitute additional room for manoeuvre. The standard error of the annual growth 
of  prices  in  the  12  euro  area  countries  is  in  the  vicinity  of  1.1,  compared  with  0.8  in  the 
14 regions of the USA. 
Finally, the updating of the vast work on monetary transmission mechanisms led by the 
Eurosystem shows that Member States’ economies are more homogeneous as regards the 
transmission of monetary impulses since the introduction of the euro. 
The EMU has limited the risks of exchange rate crises and catalyzed the financial integration of the 
euro area economy 
• 
The euro has put an end to the potential effects of exchange rate crises and favoured 
the emergence of a stable environment characterized by historically low interest rates. 
Thanks  to  these  developments,  the  euro  area  countries  have  not  been  confronted  with 
difficulties stemming from the uncertainties due to recent geopolitical troubles. 
The introduction of the euro has catalyzed the financial integration of the European 
economy,  which  is  totally  complete  as  regards  the  money  market.  In  the  first  weeks 
following the introduction of the euro, price differences on national interbank money markets 
decreased  very  quickly  to  stand  at  less  than  5  bp.  This  level  corresponds  to  the  spread 
bid-ask currently observed on the market. 
A comparable movement has occurred on European bond markets, where returns on 
government yields have converged. 
The euro area, and more broadly the European Union, now have a consistent financial 
architecture.  The  implementation  of  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  defined  at  the 
Lisbon  European  Council  is  on  the  way  to  completion.  Subsequently,  the  Lamfalussy 
process should provide a new institutional architecture in the fields of financial supervision 
and regulation and develop flexible and uniform technical rules. 
   Part 2: The euro plays the role of an international currency and a nominal anchor 
The available data bear out the increase in the international role of the euro. At the regional level, it 
plays a significant role as an anchor and is the vector of a culture of stability. The increasing role of the 
euro at the international level is due to the development of its use as a financial instrument and as a 
medium of exchange (A) and of its role as an anchor for exchange rate regimes (B). 
A 
• 
  The euro is an essential financial instrument and a key medium of exchange ·  
The use of the euro as a financing and an investment currency on the capital markets 
has  increased.  In  the  first  half  of  2004,  the  euro  accounted  for  almost  36%  of  the  gross 
issuance of long-term international debt securities, compared with 24% in 2002. The share of 
the US dollar was down from almost 50% in 2002 to 39%. 
Another  significant  development  is  the  emergence  of  a  corporate  bond  market  in  the 
euro area, whose volume has increased significantly in the last few years. The outstanding 
amount of quoted shares issued by euro area residents was EUR 4,035 billion in 2004 as 
against EUR 3,118 billion in 2002. 
As a settlement currency, the role of the euro is expanding. In 2003, between 50% and 
60% of goods and services traded between the euro area countries and the rest of the world 
were settled in euro. This is true for both exports and imports. In countries where the use of 
the  euro  as  a  medium  of  exchange  is  highly  significant,  such  as  the  Central  and  Eastern 
European Countries, 60% to 80% of exports and imports were settled in euro. 
B 
The euro contributes to the stabilization of exchange rate regimes and financial 
systems 
The euro is an instrument for the diversification of foreign exchange reserves 
• 
According to the latest available data from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the 
euro is the second reserve currency after the US dollar (19.7% of the total amount in 
2003  compared  with  63.8%  for  the  dollar)  but  the  share  of  the  euro  has  increased 
significantly (it stood at 12.6% in 1999). This is an important factor of protection for many 
countries with regard to strong exchange rate fluctuations because it allows public investors 
to  diversify  their  reserves  assets.  Moreover,  it  constitutes  a  stabilizing  factor  for  the 
international monetary and financial system as a whole. 
The euro is a factor of stability for exchange rate regimes 
• 
In 52 countries or territories, the euro serves as the anchor of exchange rate policies or 
as the sole reference currency or as part of a currency basket. This mainly concerns the 
countries  that  have  trade  or  institutional  arrangements  with  the  euro  area  (acceding 
countries,  accession  countries,  the  Balkans,  North  Africa  and  the  Franc  zone).  These 
exchange  rate  regimes  are  the  result  of  unilateral  decisions  that  do  not  involve  the 
Eurosystem. Nevertheless, these strong links could import credibility into these countries, so 
long as they pursue appropriate policies at the same time. 
Conclusion 
• 
 In contrast to the domestic role of a currency, which is strongly determined by institutions, 
the international role of a currency is market driven. This explains why the different uses of 
money proceed at different speeds. 
The  fact  that  many  countries  outside  the  euro  area  have  rapidly  decided  to  link  their 
exchange rate regimes to the euro illustrates the fact that they consider the euro to be an 
international factor of stability due to the stabilizing role it has played and still plays in the 
euro area. 
