Toshihiko Fukui: A tale of two cities in the eyes of a central banker 
Remarks  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  Japan  Society,  New  York, 
6 January 2005. 
 Introductory remarks 
1. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  address  this  eminent  audience  of  Japan  Society.  Before  I  proceed  any  further,  I 
would like to offer my deepest condolences to all the people affected by the earthquake in Indonesia 
and the tsunamis that followed it. Though we are far away in New York from the tragic events in the 
Indian Ocean, I hope that we could do everything within our capacity to help our sisters and brothers in 
distress. 
Tsunami  happens  to  be  a  word  derived  from  Japanese,  and Japan  has  in  fact  suffered  from  many 
tsunamis  in  the  past.  Though  tsunamis  are  not  necessarily  made  in  Japan,  I  believe  that  we  could 
share our experiences with the world. 
The purpose of my visit to New York in this frigid season is to commemorate the 100th anniversary of 
the Bank of Japan’s representative office. Some of you might feel disinclined to listen to me, as central 
bankers tend to harp on the same string. But I can assure you that my speech here will prove to be a 
lot warmer and more humane than the freezing air outside. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  world  economy  is  in  fact  a  lot  warmer  than  a  year  ago.  This  is  true  of 
Japan’s economy too. Indeed, the fundamentals of Japan’s economy have visibly improved during the 
past  few  years.  The  basis  for  renewed  momentum  is  emerging  in  both  the  corporate  and  financial 
sectors, putting the current recovery on a stronger footing than the last two recovery phases in the 
1990s. 
The corporate sector has come a long way in its adjustment efforts to eliminate past excesses, and is 
working  actively  to  devise  new  business  strategies  in  this  globally  competitive  environment.  The 
financial  sector,  having  made  great  strides  in  reducing  non-performing  loans  (NPLs),  seems  better 
prepared to provide innovative services, going forward beyond this April when the blanket protection of 
deposits is removed. In a nutshell, Japan’s economy has virtually regained health that it lost a decade 
and a half ago. 
On  the  prices  front,  economic  recovery  has  tended  to  slow  deflation  during  the  past  few  years.  As 
productivity  growth  accelerates  and  unit  labor  cost  (ULC)  declines,  however,  linkages  between 
economic growth and prices seem to be becoming a little tenuous in recent years. It is against this 
background  that  the core consumer  price  index  is still  registering  a small  decline  in  recent months, 
while the corporate goods price index is rising moderately. 
Under the present circumstances, the Bank of Japan has two tasks to achieve simultaneously: first, 
put Japan’s economy on a sustainable growth track by maximizing the new dynamism in our economy; 
and  second,  end  deflation  entirely.  This  is  my  New  Year  message  to  those  who  are  particularly 
interested in Japan’s economy. 
As I said a few minutes ago, I have come to this city to commemorate the 100th anniversary of our 
New York office. I have learned that Japan Society will also mark its 100th anniversary in two years, 
meaning  BOJ  New  York  office  and  Japan  Society  are  almost  the  same  age.  Actually,  the  general 
manager  of  our  New  York  office  98  years  ago  -  Mr.  Eijiro  Ono  -  was  involved  in  organizing  Japan 
Society. With this in mind, please allow me, for the moment, to talk about the early days of both Japan 
Society and the Bank of Japan’s New York office, that is, the early 20th century. 
Japan Society came into being in 1907 to promote friendly relations between our two nations. Many 
prominent  leaders  from  both  sides  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  contributed  to  the  establishment  of  this 
important forum. This was almost 50 years after Japan had opened its doors to the Western world, 
when Commodore Perry arrived on Japan’s shores to seek diplomatic relations between our countries. 
Japan Society was formed when our bilateral relationship was becoming closer, but sometimes tense 
due  to  the  vagaries  of  international  geopolitics  in  those  days.  As  is  often  said,  there  was  a  bit  of 
ambivalence in US-Japan relations. 
On  the  positive  side,  the  United  States  was  most  helpful  in  guiding  Japan  towards  successful 
modernization. We especially owed a great deal to US assistance in the process of industrialization. 
Trade linkages between the two countries were growing stronger year by year. 
At the same time, the downside of our deepening ties was emerging around the turn of the century. A 
rift appeared in parallel with the palpable increase in Japan’s military power in the Pacific and Japan’s 
surprising victory over Russia in 1905. Set against this backdrop, it was natural for the United States to 
see Japan as a rising power in Asia, with the potential to challenge US primacy in this geo-politically 
complex region. 
Japan Society was born out of this delicate international context. It was expected to perform a dual 
function  -  that  is,  cultivating  a  mutually  beneficial  relationship  on  the  one  hand,  while  preventing 
possible misunderstandings from developing into confrontations on the other. 
As I mentioned at the outset, the Bank of Japan was engaged in founding Japan Society. To say a few 
words on “pre-history,” the Russo-Japanese war (1904-05) prompted Japan to tap international capital 
markets  to  secure  the  war  chest.  As  part  of  this  effort,  the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to  station  an 
executive auditor each in London (1904) and New York (1905), two international financial centers, to 
supervise the issuance of foreign currency sovereign debts of Japan. 
This marked the formal inception of our New York office. Since then the New York office has played a 
significant  role  in  establishing  solid  relationships  with  the  US  financial  authorities  and  banking 
communities. 
Japan Society saw its membership ballooning from 250 at the end of 1907 to over 1,300 at the end of 
the  1920s.  But  in  the  dark  1930s  when  military  tensions  between  our  two  nations  escalated,  its 
activities were severely constrained. Similar hardship fell upon the Bank of Japan, leading up to the 
temporary closure of our New York operations in 1941, following the US government’s decision to put 
a freeze on Japan’s assets in America. Japan Society also virtually stopped activities in 1942. 
The  rebirth  of  Japan  Society  following  World  War  II  began  around  1946  and  became  active  when 
Mr. John Rockefeller the 3rd became President in 1952. It is a testament to his foresight that he rebuilt 
Japan  Society,  which  contributed  greatly  to  bringing our bilateral  relationship back  on  a  viable  path 
towards friendship and mutual respect. In a similar vein, the Bank of Japan re-opened its New York 
office in 1950. 
Financial sectors in the US and Japan 
2. 
Having  reflected  on  the  history  of  Japan  Society  and  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  am  becoming  more 
uncertain whether I am speaking as a central banker or simply as a friend of yours. Being a careered 
central banker, however, I should perhaps begin to focus on the developments that have taken place 
in the financial sectors of both our countries. 
It is often pointed out that Japan is different from the United States. This view is voiced not only in 
Japan but also in the United States. Some argue, again on both sides of the Pacific, that Japan is a 
unique country. I am always amused to hear it, because every country is different, and every country 
is unique in my opinion, just like everyone in this room is unique. There is always a Japanese way of 
business like there is an American way of business, a French way, an Italian way, and a Chinese way. 
In fact, such diversity makes the world very rich, in the same way as we enjoy Japanese food, Chinese 
food, French food, Italian food, and American hot dogs and hamburgers. 
As far as financial business is concerned, however, I think there are a number of similarities between 
Japan  and  the  United  States.  By  this,  I  mean  not  only  a  growing  similarity  in  terms  of  financial 
businesses in recent years, but also plenty of similarities in terms of financial developments in history 
as well. I am referring to not just rosy episodes but also painful experiences. 
United States 
From  the  1970s  through  the  1980s,  the  US  financial  system  weathered  several  seismic  difficulties. 
Failures  of  Franklin  National  Bank  in  1974,  Penn  Square  Bank  in  1982,  and  Continental  Illinois 
National  Bank  in  1984  are  particularly  memorable.  The  Latin  American  debt  crisis  in  1982  put 
enormous strains on US money center banks. Over-stretched investment boom was one of the culprits 
for the Savings & Loans (S&L) debacle in the late 1980s. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
In  the  wake  of  traumatic  experiences  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  the  US  regulatory  framework  was 
revamped  to  better  prepare  for  future  contingencies  in  the  financial  system.  The  enactment  of  the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) in 1991 marked a watershed in the 
regulatory context. 
In  the  1990s,  deregulation  for  financial  business  progressed,  prompting  large-scale  consolidation 
among US financial institutions such as the mergers of Chemical Bank and Chase Manhattan Bank 
(1996), Travelers Group and Citicorp (1998) and Chase Manhattan Bank and JP Morgan (2000), to 
name just a few examples. According to a study by Finance Ministry and Central Bank Deputies of the 
Group of Ten (G10), the United States accounted for nearly 55% of the merger and acquisition (M&A) 
activities in the financial industry during the 1990s, centering heavily on the banking sector. 
This  trend  to  consolidation  continues  in  the  21st  century.  US  banks’  stronger  earnings  and  capital 
base  have  given  a  further  boost  to  consolidation,  including  the  creation  of  a  financial  colossus  by 
JP Morgan Chase’s recent marriage with Bank One (2004). Primary motives behind the current wave 
of  consolidation  are  revenue  enhancement  by  synergy  as  well  as  its  stability  through  product  and 
geographic  diversification,  in  addition  to  cost  savings  through  economies  of  scale.  Increased 
competition  and  stronger  pressure 
the  urgency  of  revenue 
enhancement for many financial institutions. 
from  shareholders  accentuate 
Japan 
Looking  back  on  the  past  two  decades,  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  followed  their 
US counterparts at least in terms of lending sprees. During the euphoric period of the mid- and late 
1980s,  Japanese  banks  expanded  their  balance  sheets  disproportionately,  aided  by  sharp  rises  in 
share and real estate prices. Their aggressive investments overseas, particularly those in the United 
States,  galvanized  serious  debate  as  to  whether  Japanese  financial  institutions  would  end  up 
dominating  the  global  financial  landscape.  It  was  in  this  period  that  a  number  of  Japanese  banks, 
including regional banks, rushed to New York to open up new offices. 
However,  success  tends  to  breed  excess.  The  burst  of  speculative  bubbles  in  the  early  1990s  left 
awful  damages  on  the  balance  sheets  of  Japanese  banks.  At  the  same  time,  another  adjustment 
pressure was imposed on the industrial side of Japan’s economy. That was a competitive pressure 
that the rapid industrialization of China and other Asian economies posed to labor-intensive industries 
in Japan. In other words, both lenders and borrowers were hard hit by these structural shocks to an 
unprecedented degree. 
This was the beginning of the abysmal spiral in which Japanese banks were trapped as an economic 
downturn  and  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  fed  on  each  other.  The  bulk  of  NPLs  forced  a  drastic 
shakeout of Japanese banks’ businesses, both domestic and international. I presume many of you still 
remember  the  “exodus”  of  Japanese  banks  from  downtown  New  York  in  the  late  1990s.  This 
withdrawal en masse drove several famous Japanese restaurants in New York out of business, which 
was an international spill-over from the Japanese financial problems. 
After a decade-long hardship, however, a silver lining has finally emerged on Japan’s financial horizon. 
Progress has  been  made over  the past  years  in resolving  NPL  problems.  Structural  adjustments  in 
domestic  industries  seem  to  have  run  their  course  in  view  of  the  fact  that  a  number  of  corporate 
businesses  are  posting  record  high  profits,  together  with  the  lowest  leverages  during  the  past  two 
decades. Improvements in corporate profitability and balance sheet adjustment have in turn enabled 
banks to reduce loan-loss provisioning. 
Being freed from “capital constraints,” Japanese banks are becoming more proactive in strengthening 
their  viability  through  consolidation  and  strategic  alliances.  Consequently,  the  number  of  large  city 
banks has dwindled from 9 to 4 during the past 4 years. Corporate culture in the banking industry is 
also  undergoing  a  number  of  profound  changes,  as  symbolized  by  the  ongoing  take-over  bids  for 
UFJ Bank by two rival mega-banks. 
Foreign  capital  has  also  played  a  meaningful  role  in  this  revitalization  process.  Carving  out  new 
business  opportunities  such  as  M&A  advisory,  distressed  debt  transactions  and  private  wealth 
management, foreign financial institutions are providing the Japanese market place with good stimuli. 
Against this backdrop, Japanese banks and other financial services companies have begun to develop 
new business models, like providing a variety of non-conventional products and distribution channels 
that were unthinkable a decade ago, when the parochial turf war within the financial industry was all 
the more important. 
Japan and Asia 
With  their  non-performing  asset  problems  receding,  Japanese  financial  institutions  are  shifting  their 
strategic  focus  to  profit  enhancement,  including  reinforcing  their  business  outreach  overseas.  This 
change  is especially  notable  in  Asia where  opportunities  for  new  financial  business  are opening  up 
saliently. A new economic dynamism is unfolding in the Asian region. I refer to the vertical division of 
production processes whereby Japan and the rest of Asia are becoming increasingly inter-dependent 
through the trade linkages based on their comparative advantages. 
In contrast to such close trade linkages, financial linkage in this area is still weak. As is widely known, 
however,  Asia  is  abundant  in  both  savings  and  investment  opportunities.  Linking  savings  with 
investment is the key role of finance. If savings are channeled into investments within the region, that 
will  increase  the  scope  of  finance,  thereby  enhancing  efficiency  of  capital  allocation.  In  this  regard, 
sharing closer time zones is a huge advantage for financial institutions in Asia. I hope that Japanese 
financial institutions will take advantage of this strategic potential to cultivate a new business horizon. 
The successful marriage of savings and investments within Asia will have global policy implications, 
too.  The  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital  in  Asia,  the  greater  demand  for  goods  and  services  in 
savings-rich Asia, and consequently the smaller imbalances in the global payment balances. 
Let me remind you that development of Asian economies has been made possible by its free access 
to  the  global  market  place,  in  particular  US  markets.  This  is  evident  not  only  by  recent  history  of 
emerging economies but also by the history of Japan hundred years ago. Throughout history, not only 
consumers but also industries in the United States have benefited from growing trade and investment 
in Asia. Both the United States and Asia have therefore a common interest in keeping our economies 
open to international flows of goods and capital. I hope this economic reality will continue to provide a 
basis for US involvement in Asia, on which benefits accrue to all countries. 
At this juncture, let me add a few words about US-Japan relations by highlighting the fact that Japan is 
located at the west end of the Pacific Ocean, where the United States has a crucial stake. For this 
geographic reason, it is quite natural that Japan has long been the gateway for US engagement in 
Asia. I hope this will lay the groundwork for the plus-sum nexus of economy and finance between Asia, 
Japan and the United States. 
Closing remarks 
3. 
Now, the clock tells me that I should conclude my speech. At the beginning of 2005, the US economy 
is  growing  steadily.  Japan’s  economy  is  regaining momentum after  13  years  of  stagnation.  It  is  my 
pleasure to see our two economies expanding at this historic juncture, when both the Bank of Japan’s 
New York office and Japan Society are marking their centennials. I am sure this relationship between 
us  will  flourish  for  the  next  hundred  years  after we  shared  much  wisdom  in  the  preceding  hundred 
years. 
Thank you very much for your attention and I wish you a very happy New Year. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2005
