Toshihiko Fukui: Toward sustainable economic recovery 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Naigai  Josei  Chousa  Kai 
(Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 28 February 2005. 
 For Japan, this year is a crucial one, which may set the future direction of the country's economy. With 
the full removal of blanket deposit insurance scheduled for April 2005 now imminent, it is important to 
ensure  that  the  financial  system  remains  stable,  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  is  further 
enhanced, and that the economy is brought firmly onto a sustainable growth track. Today, I will talk 
about the Bank of Japan's assessment of the economic and financial situation and the thinking behind 
its conduct of monetary policy.  
Recent economic developments  
I.  
The  Bank  releases  its  assessment  of  the  economy  as  "The  Bank's  View"  in  the  Monthly  Report  of 
Recent  Economic  and  Financial  Developments  following  discussions  at  Monetary  Policy  Meetings 
(MPMs).  In  "The  Bank's  View"  for  February,  the  Bank's  assessment  was  that  "Japan's  economy 
continues  a  recovery  trend,  although  there  seem  to  be  somewhat  weak  movements  mainly  in 
production."  
In other words, the economy is at a temporary pause: production has been weak reflecting exports, 
which have been more or less flat. Production in the IT-related sector has been weak due to continued 
inventory adjustment reflecting lower-than-expected growth in demand for digital appliances and the 
decline in global demand for PCs and mobile phones. In addition, production in the materials-related 
industry is lackluster, as spare production capacity is limited. For example, with the surge in demand, 
especially  in  exports  to other  Asian  economies,  steel  and chemical  industries  have  been producing 
close to full capacity and find it difficult to raise their production levels immediately. In the processing 
and  assembly  industries,  such  as  automobiles,  it  has  been  reported  that  firms  may  not  be  able  to 
increase  production  due  to  the  limited  availability  of  materials  such  as  steel  plates.  Although  these 
firms cannot increase production significantly, they have been able to raise profitability by expanding 
margins and improving productivity.  
Corporate  profits  are  at  high  levels  across  most  industries,  although  some  IT-related  firms  have 
revised their profit forecasts downward. The ratio of current profits to sales in fiscal 2004 for firms of all 
sizes in all industries is likely to exceed not only the peaks recorded during the recovery phases of the 
1990s  but  also  the  high  point  of  the  bubble  period  in  the  late  1980s.  Given  such  improvements  in 
corporate  profits  as  well  as  a  decline  in  structural  adjustment  pressures  arising  from  excessive 
production capacity and debt, many firms are revising upward their business fixed investment plans for 
fiscal  2004.  According  to  interviews  with  corporate  management,  firms  seem  likely  to  continue 
increasing business fixed investment in fiscal 2005. In the household sector, the employment situation 
continues  to  improve,  and  recently  the  figures  for  income  appear  to  have  bottomed  out.  Private 
consumption has been steady, although developments have lacked upward momentum due partly to 
adverse weather conditions.  
Adjustments  in  the  IT-related  sector  are  likely  to  be  completed  in  or  after  spring  2005,  while  trend 
expansion of overseas economies, particularly the United States and China, is expected to continue. 
Against this background, Japan's economy will gradually emerge from its current temporary pause and 
move onto a sustainable growth path.  
Current economic situation in relation to the inventory cycle  
II.  
Some hold the view that the Bank's outlook for the economy is a little too optimistic. They maintain 
that, in the expansion and contraction of the business cycle, an economy which has lost its upward 
momentum  will  inevitably  enter  a  downturn.  These  views  focus  on  the  short-term  business  cycle 
mainly caused by cyclical fluctuations in inventories.  
As the economy recovers, increases in product sales boost shipments, and thus cause inventories to 
decline.  Firms  then  increase  production  to  restore  depleted  inventories.  However,  if  firms  become 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 1
bullish  about  the  economic  outlook  and  continue  increasing  production,  at  some  point  the  pace  of 
increase in production will exceed that of shipments and production will need to be curtailed to prevent 
inventories  from  accumulating.  When  shipments  fall  short  of  firms'  projections,  production  will  also 
need to be cut to reduce accumulated inventories. Although fluctuations in GDP caused by changes in 
firms'  inventories  tend  to  average  out  and  so  can  generally  be  ignored,  changes  in  inventory 
investment can be seen to have had a considerable impact on the business cycle in Japan, especially 
during periods of recession.  
During the past two recessions of 1997-98 and 2001-02, the fall in final demand caused substantial 
inventory accumulation, and the subsequent inventory adjustment placed strong downward pressure 
on the economy. Current inventory levels are, however, low, and few firms perceive their inventories to 
be  in  excess.  The  general  background  to  this  is  that  many  firms  continue  to  keep  a  tight  lid  on 
inventories so  as  to  increase  their  balance-sheet  efficiency.  By  industry,  while  inventory  adjustment 
pressure  remains  in  the  IT-related  sector,  inventory  conditions  in  the  materials  and  machinery 
industries have actually tightened with firms in these industries unable to produce fast enough to meet 
increases in shipments. Inventory adjustment in the IT-related sector is expected to be relatively mild 
since IT-related manufacturers have promptly reduced their pace of production. In this situation, it is 
unlikely that inventory adjustment will cause the economy to deteriorate.  
Developments in overseas economies  
III.  
There have been periods when developments in external demand rather than domestic demand have 
posed greater downside risks to Japan's economy. For example, the Asian currency crisis of 1997 and 
the bursting of the IT bubble in 2001 had a considerable impact on Japan's economy. Business cycles 
across economies worldwide have become more closely correlated as globalization has progressed. 
In the recent recovery phase, uncertainty has attended the outlook for external demand due to factors 
such as the unpredictability of geopolitical developments and the surge in crude oil prices.  
Despite persistently high crude oil prices, there is less concern about the sustainability of overseas 
economic  growth,  and  particularly  the  United  States  and  China  continue  to  expand  steadily.  In  the 
United States, components of domestic private demand, such as household spending and business 
fixed investment, continue to increase, and the number of employees has been on an improving trend. 
Market attention has been focused on the sustainability of the U.S. twin deficits. The U.S. economy, 
however,  seems  unlikely  to  experience  difficulty  in  financing  its  current  account  deficit  for  the  time 
being,  given  that  it  continues  to  provide  a  high-growth,  low-inflation  environment  and  attractive 
opportunities for both domestic and foreign investors. Its fiscal deficit, the expansion of which is due 
partly to large-scale tax cuts, is expected to decline in line with the increase in tax revenues that will 
accompany the anticipated sustainable economic expansion. In China, overheating investment and an 
infrastructural bottleneck arising, for example, from the paucity of the electricity supply, are pointed out 
as potential sources of risk, and policy measures have been implemented to address these issues. 
Meanwhile,  the  Chinese  economy  continues  to  expand  strongly,  underpinned  by  firm  domestic  and 
foreign demand. These developments in overseas economies suggest that the associated downside 
risk is smaller than it was up to and including 2004.  
Relationship between business cycles and structural problems  
IV.  
It was thought that a greater degree of correlation between business cycles in economies worldwide 
would  result  in  more  volatile  economic  fluctuations.  Recent  economic  fluctuations  among  major 
industrialized countries, however, seem to be displaying less volatility. The following are suggested as 
possible  reasons  for  this:  (1)  changes  in  the  economic  structure  which  have  resulted  in  a  greater 
weight  on  less  volatile  components  of  demand  such  as  consumption  of  services;  (2)  smaller 
fluctuations in the inventory cycle due to improved inventory management by firms; and (3) increased 
central bank credibility and the resulting stability of inflation expectations which have allowed central 
banks  to  avoid  substantial  tightenings  of  monetary  policy  that  cause  sharp  economic  downturns.  In 
Japan,  however,  troughs  in  the  two  post-1990  recessions  have  been  extremely  deep.  While  these 
three factors have operated to some extent, excesses in production capacity, holdings of labor, and 
debts, along with the corresponding weakness in the financial system, have combined to place strong 
downward pressure on the economy.  
Structural  adjustment  has  progressed  considerably  in  the  current  recovery  phase.  As  mentioned 
earlier, corporate profits are likely to exceed not only the peaks recorded during the past two economic 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2005
recovery phases but also that recorded during the bubble period. Since firms' success in dealing with 
their structural problems is reflected in their profitability, firms are judged to be approaching the end of 
a  prolonged  adjustment  phase.  In  this  situation,  the  pace  of  decline  in  land  prices,  which  was 
substantial, has started to slow. While land prices have continued to plunge in regional areas, specific 
parts of some metropolitan areas have experienced surging prices. Land price developments such as 
these, as well as the factors causing them, require monitoring.  
Turning to the financial system, considerable progress has been made toward restoring the system to 
soundness,  particularly  in  dealing  with  the  nonperforming-loan  problem.  Financial  institutions  have 
therefore been less concerned about the availability of liquidity. Under these circumstances, financial 
institutions  have  become  less  inclined  to  increase  their  current  account  balances  at  the  Bank  -  a 
phenomenon  reflected  in  undersubscription  during  the  Bank's  funds-supplying  operations.  Financial 
institutions are expected to continue further improving their business performance even after the full 
removal of blanket deposit insurance in April, as this will contribute both to the soundness and to the 
further revitalization of  the  financial  system.  The  stronger  the  financial  system,  the  easier  it  is  for  a 
virtuous  cycle  to  operate,  whereby  improved  profits  and  ongoing  structural  adjustment  keep  driving 
firms to even greater heights of activity. Economic fluctuations in Japan are also expected to exhibit 
less volatility, coming into line with the trend in other major industrialized countries.  
The economic environment in which Japan finds itself is basically robust: factors such as inventories, 
which  can  cause  imbalances  in  the  domestic  economy,  are  currently  insignificant;  overseas 
economies are likely to continue expanding; and there has been progress in structural adjustments. 
The economy is likely to emerge from the current temporary pause and continue to recover. With time, 
the economic outlook visualized by the Bank will gradually take more concrete shape, as the economy 
moves more clearly onto a sustainable recovery path.  
Assessment of the decline in prices  
V.  
Japan's economy  is  experiencing  its  third recovery  phase since  the  1990s,  during  which  period  the 
Bank has been conducting an accommodative monetary policy. In the four years between 1991 and 
1995,  the  official  discount  rate  was  cut  from  6  percent  to  0.5  percent  (it  currently  stands  at  0.1 
percent). Faced with continuing weakness in the economy, however, and with prices still falling, the 
Bank embarked on the zero interest rate policy in 1999. Now, in a situation where short-term interest 
rates  are  constrained  by  the  zero  bound,  the  Bank  is  providing  more  ample  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions through its "quantitative easing policy," and has made a commitment to continue with this 
policy until the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on 
a nationwide basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. By implementing drastic 
monetary easing, the Bank has sought to avert the risk that a vicious cycle, involving the translation of 
price  declines  into  reduced  corporate  profits,  depressed  economic  activity,  and  hence  further  price 
declines, could impair the monetary policy goal of price stability over the medium to long term.  
When  general  prices,  which  are  the  yardstick  for  evaluating  individual  prices,  fluctuate  on  a  large 
scale, households and firms have difficulty in accurately distinguishing a price fluctuation caused by 
changes in the supply and demand balance of an individual good/service from a fluctuation caused by 
a change in the general price level. This results in distortions in the efficient allocation of resources in 
the  economy  as  well  as  increasing  uncertainty  about  the  future.  Moreover,  a  decline  in  prices 
generates the following three problems. First, real wages adjust slowly when there is downward rigidity 
in nominal wages, and this impacts negatively on corporate profits and unemployment. Second, a rise 
in  deflationary  expectations  produces  an  equivalent  rise  in  real  interest  rates.  Typically,  nominal 
interest  rates  would  be  reduced  to  counteract  this  rise  in  real  interest  rates,  but  when  an economy 
comes up against the zero bound on nominal interest rates, it is possible for real interest rates to rise 
above their optimal level and thus depress economic activity. Third, higher real interest rates and the 
fall in asset prices that tends to accompany a price decline cause financial institutions' asset quality to 
deteriorate.  As  these  problems  intensify,  the  operation  of  a  negative  cyclical  mechanism  between 
falling prices and declining economic activity generates significant costs for the macroeconomy.  
The  Bank  has  continued  to  implement drastic  monetary  easing  to  prevent  the  economy  from  being 
caught up in this negative cyclical mechanism, i.e., from falling into a deflationary spiral. The year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI, which had fallen for a time to as low as minus 1 percent, has recently 
recovered to around minus 0.2 to minus 0.3 percent in line with improvements in the output gap. A 
breakdown by components shows that the year-on-year rate of decline in the prices of goods, which 
are  sensitive  to  economic  developments,  is  gradually  diminishing,  and  is  currently  at  virtually  zero 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 3
percent. Excluding the effects of the rise in petroleum prices and the decline in rice prices and public 
utility charges, the pace of decline in the CPI is seen to be slowing moderately. The corporate goods 
price index continues to increase year on year, and the year-on-year rate of decline in the corporate 
service  price  index  is  diminishing.  Various  surveys  also  suggest  that  households'  and  firms' 
expectations for deflation, which have important implications for the economy, have been improving 
steadily since around 2001.  
In this situation, the problems arising from the downward rigidity of nominal wages and the zero bound 
on nominal interest rates are unlikely to be too serious, and the risk of a negative cyclical mechanism 
operating between falling prices and declining economic activity is therefore correspondingly small. In 
fact, the economy has been on a recovery trend in spite of the continuing decline of consumer prices 
year on year. This suggests that the current decline in prices is qualitatively very different from that 
experienced during 2001-02 when the fall in demand triggered anxiety about the economy falling into 
a deflationary spiral.  
VI.   Effects of quantitative easing  
The  economic  and  price  conditions  confronting  a  central  bank  change  with  time.  Under  normal 
circumstances,  the  role  of  monetary  policy  is  to  respond  to  these  shifting  phases  by  making  the 
appropriate adjustments to the tightness/easiness of the monetary policy stance. Since June 2004, the 
U.S. Federal Open Market Committee has made six cautious 0.25 percent adjustments to the federal 
funds rate target, producing a cumulative rise of 1.5 percent. The Bank of Japan, however, has made 
a commitment, unprecedented in the history of central banks, to continue with the quantitative easing 
policy until the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable 
basis.  The  Bank has  made  this commitment  to  prevent  the  economy  from  once  again  falling  into a 
downward spiral in which falling prices and declining economic activity could be negatively reinforcing. 
This  policy  framework  is  expected  to  more  strongly  support  private-sector  activity  as  the  economy 
recovers. Explaining this in a little more detail, the policy commitment to continue with the quantitative 
easing  policy  ensures  that,  even  during  phases  of  economic  recovery,  expectations  of  short-term 
interest  rates  remain  stable  as  long  as  prices  themselves  are  not  rising.  In  terms  of  the  current 
situation, this has allowed firms to continue to enjoy low funding costs. Firms are better able to take 
advantage of these lower interest rates to carry out forward-looking investment since they have been 
highly successful in their efforts to raise profitability. When firms are more confident about the future, a 
financial environment such as this makes it easy for them to raise necessary funds and execute their 
spending plans more aggressively.  
Yet  when  pursuing  an  unprecedented  quantitative  easing  policy  such  as  this,  it  does  not  do  to  be 
complacent  about  "excessive  movements"  -  that  is,  phenomena  which  are  not  consistent  with  the 
sustainable growth of the economy. In the United States, low interest rates over a protracted period 
have generated remarkably high levels of liquidity. There is now discussion over whether this may be 
contributing to signs of potentially excessive risk taking, which seem to be reflected in relatively narrow 
credit spreads and the speculative demand becoming apparent in the housing market. Reduced credit 
spreads are a worldwide phenomenon, which is becoming slightly more marked in Japan than in other 
economies,  and  we  cannot  ignore  the  possibility  that  market  participants  have  begun  to  take  less 
notice of risk. Similarly, attention now needs to be paid to whether or not low long-term interest rates 
are consistent with the likely duration of accommodative monetary policy. It goes without saying that 
such matters will need to be taken duly into account in conducting monetary policy in the future.  
VII.   Firms' positive commitments and their adaptability to change  
Even if some parts of the economy are moving forward aggressively, this is not to say that the whole 
economy is characterized by similar vigor. Some firms are starting to adopt a more positive stance as 
evident in the increase in business fixed investment. However, such cases are still limited, with a large 
number of firms placing priority on reducing interest-bearing liabilities by using their increased profits, 
and  taking  a  "wait-and-see"  attitude  toward  investment  commitments.  Although  many  firms  are 
increasing business fixed investment, this is being kept within the limits of their cash flow. As pointed 
out  earlier,  firms  have  been  cautious  about  increasing  inventories  during  this  recovery  phase.  The 
persistent decline in bank lending is also indicative of firms' hesitancy about making forward-looking 
commitments.  
4 
 BIS Review 13/2005
Firms  became  concerned  about  business  risk  and  financial  risk  management,  having  experienced 
highly volatile economic conditions during the 1990s and financial system instability during the second 
half  of  that  decade.  Their  incentives  to  reduce  interest-bearing  liabilities  and  increase  their  capital 
bases as much as possible are therefore understandable. Expanding business lines is not so easy for 
firms in the current situation where, faced with price-sensitive consumers, they have difficulty in raising 
product prices in order to pass on the rise in materials and intermediate goods prices caused by the 
surge in commodity prices at home and abroad. There may also exist some concern about the impact 
of changes in the economic environment, such as those caused by the low birth rate and rapidly aging 
society.  However,  corporate  management  will  not  continue  to  appeal  to  uncertainty  about  the 
economic  outlook  to  justify  its  hesitancy  in  making  positive  commitments  for  long.  Amid  rapidly 
changing  technology  and  increasing  competition,  firms  know  that  they  need  to  maintain  high 
profitability in the medium term by continuously and swiftly reallocating their management resources 
while continuing to invest in highly profitable areas.  
The economic environment surrounding firms is now well suited to encourage such commitments. In 
the  labor  market,  deregulation  and  changes  in  people's  attitudes  and  lifestyles  have  combined  with 
firms' need to adapt to changes in the industrial structure and to improve profitability, with the result 
that the number of non-regular employees has increased. Although indicative of firms' unwillingness to 
commit  themselves  to  hiring  longer-term  regular  employees,  such  developments,  in  so  far  as  they 
illustrate the increased flexibility of the labor market, also suggest that firms have become better able 
to adapt to change. In addition, some firms have started to invest in highly profitable areas. They have 
been studying consumer needs so as to provide attractive new products and new services, and this 
has contributed greatly to private consumption, which has continued to be firm despite sluggish growth 
in income. A breakdown by household spending behavior shows that spending is increasing in a wide 
range of areas; these include travel both within Japan and abroad, education geared toward lifelong 
learning and self-improvement, and health- and sports-related services. The evidence suggests that 
firms' efforts in various areas have been gradually bearing fruit. Furthermore, there are signs that the 
effects  of  monetary  easing  have  been  feeding  through  into  the  corporate  financing  situation.  In  the 
December Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the number of firms that 
perceived financial institutions' lending attitudes as "accommodative" exceeded those that perceived 
them as "severe," even among small firms.  
In such a setting, firms will be more likely to use their free cash flow, not to pay down debts, but to 
increase  business  fixed  investment  and  financing  for  other  research  or  investments  aimed  at 
increasing  growth.  Alternatively,  they  may  prefer  to  buy  back  their  own  stock  or  increase  dividend 
payments. Gradually, more firms will start to make use of the accommodative financial environment to 
raise funds in the markets and execute more aggressive spending plans. As the economy achieves a 
balanced  recovery  path,  this  kind  of  positive  forward-looking  behavior  should  become  more 
widespread. Meanwhile, financial institutions are making more efficient use of their capital to devise 
new financial services that more closely meet the needs of firms and households. At the same time, 
they  are  maintaining  efforts  to  further  enhance  their  risk  management  and  increase  profitability  by 
adopting new financial engineering techniques, as well as by making better use of financial markets. 
As the efforts of industries and financial institutions combine and reinforce one another, the economy 
will  escape  the  current  confines  of  the  short-term  business  cycle  and  enjoy  longer  periods  of 
sustainable recovery.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  so  as  to  offer  vigorous  support  for  the  positive 
efforts being made by the private sector.  
BIS Review 13/2005 
 5
