Caleb M Fundanga: Bringing banking facilities closer to the people in Zambia 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  official  opening  of  the 
Stanbic Bank Matero Branch, Matero, Lusaka, 2 February 2005. 
 Your Excellency, the South African High Commissioner to Zambia, Mr. Mzwandile Masala  
Honourable Chance Kabaghe, MP - Matero Constituency 
Your Worship the Deputy Mayor of Lusaka 
The Town Clerk, Lusaka City Council  
Stanbic Africa Regional Director, Mr. Robert Mbugua  
Representative of Stanbic Africa Retail, Mr. Lincoln Mali 
Managing Director of Stanbic Bank Zambia, Mr. Larry Kalala 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I feel extremely honoured to have been invited to officiate at this important occasion to mark the official 
opening of the Stanbic Bank Matero Branch.  
Sometime  last  year,  Stanbic  Bank  management  informed  me  that  they  would  be  opening  two  new 
branches, namely the Arcades Branch and the Matero branch, and asked me to choose which one I 
would prefer to officiate at. Without much hesitation, I choose to officiate at the opening of the Matero 
Branch.  
The  reason  was  very  simple.  For  those  of  you  that  are  familiar  with  the  development  of  the  city  of 
Lusaka, you will recall that Matero compound is one of the oldest communities in Lusaka. Yet in spite 
of  being  the  oldest,  Matero  has  not  seen  any  growth  in  modern  infrastructure,  let  alone  banking 
facilities. For this reason therefore, as Governor of the Central bank, it gives me tremendous pleasure 
to see a reputable, privately owned commercial bank taking the bold step of bringing banking services, 
of international standards, to the doorsteps of a community like Matero. In this regard, the opening of 
the Stanbic Branch today has given me enormous optimism and re-assurance that banking facilities 
can, indeed, be extended to ‘financially excluded’ communities, like Matero. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Developments, like the one we are witnessing today, must not be taken for granted nor taken lightly. I 
am  reliably  informed  that  this  has  come  about  as  a  result  of  the  policy  reforms,  undertaken  by  the 
Standard Bank Group, which have culminated in Stanbic Bank Zambia being conferred with the status 
of a ‘Universal Bank’. By assuming this status, Stanbic Bank Zambia has been given the authority to 
offer banking services to all the segments of the market. 
For obvious reasons, this move is not only uplifting to the technological advancement and capability of 
the Matero community through the provision of modern banking services like the AutoBank, but also 
goes a long way in assisting the Bank of Zambia, as a monetary authority, to have a firm control over 
the implementation of monetary policy. You would agree with me that it is quite difficult for a central 
bank,  like  ours,  to  implement  monetary  policy  effectively  in  an  environment  characterised  by 
inadequate banking facilities.  
It is for this reason therefore that I commend the Management of Stanbic Bank Zambia for bringing 
banking facilities closer to the people. In this regard, I wish to assure you that on our part we shall 
continue to support you in your endeavours to open more of such branches, because we firmly believe 
that you are making our work and that of the Government much easier.  
However, may I take this opportunity to advise the Management of Stanbic Zambia that if you want 
this branch or many of such branches you intend to open in future to be beneficial to the communities 
in which they operate, kindly be flexible on the requirements for opening accounts as well as lowering 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 1
the minimum account balances to be maintained by your clients. I say so because communities like 
Matero and the surrounding areas comprise mainly of people who are in the informal sector.  
Therefore, it would be unreasonable for you to ask an unemployed prospective customer to bring a 
letter  from  their  employer  before  an  account  could  be  opened  with  your  branch!  In  other  words,  I 
strongly urge you to tailor your banking services to the needs of the community you operate in. 
Finally, let me also take this opportunity to urge the other commercial banks operating in Zambia to 
emulate  Stanbic  Bank  Zambia  by  establishing  community  banking  branches.  As  your  regulator  and 
supervisor,  we  take  a  lot  of  pride  in  seeing  commercial  banks  coming  up  with  innovative  and 
progressive financial services, such as community banking. I believe that it is through the provision of 
such  tailor-made  banking  services  that  banks  would  meaningfully  fulfil  their  role  as  financial 
intermediaries in our economy. 
With  these  few  remarks,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  privilege  to  declare  the 
Stanbic Bank Matero Branch officially open. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2005
