Philipp M Hildebrand: The EU economic recovery - why is it so slow? 
Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Brussels Economic Forum, Charlemagne, 21-22 April 2005. 
 Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking the Commission and Klaus Regling in particular for inviting me to join this 
outstanding panel. As an EU outsider, it is a special privilege to join the Brussels Economic Forum. 
The question I was asked to address today - why is the EU economic recovery so slow – is crucial for 
many reasons. Let me highlight two.  
The asymmetric nature of the global growth dynamic during the last decade is a worrying development 
for  the  European  Union.  Together  with  Japan,  Europe  has  failed  to  make  a  growth  contribution 
commensurate with its share of the world economy. The U.S. economy has had to step in and assume 
the role of what some have referred to as a “global consumer of last resort”. One of the consequences 
of  this  dynamic  is  a  potentially  vulnerable  world  economy  beset  with  historically  unprecedented 
economic imbalances. How these imbalances will adjust over time is a complex question that goes 
beyond the topic of today’s panel.1 Suffice it to say, Europe will not be an island of prosperity in the 
hopefully unlikely event of a financial market crisis triggered by these imbalances.  
The EU also has an internally motivated incentive to address its economic weaknesses if it aims to 
preserve many of the core social values which lie at the heart of the European integration project. In 
light of the prevailing European demographics, welfare reforms are imperative. In the end, however, 
the  core  values  of  the  European  social  model  can  only  be  maintained  for  future  generations  if 
Europe’s growth potential is augmented.  
I would like to begin by briefly addressing a number of measurement issues that need to be kept in 
mind  when  comparing  Europe’s  economic  performance  with  that  of  the  United  States.  I  will  then 
address the underlying cause of Europe’s economic weakness, namely its potential growth rate with a 
specific focus on the all important measure of productivity growth. Finally, I will venture outside of the 
traditional domain of a central banker’s portfolio and offer some tentative conclusions as to where the 
main EU economic policy challenges will likely lie in the years ahead.  
GDP growth differences EU – U.S.  
As you can see in Graph 1, real GDP growth in the U.S. has consistently outperformed growth in the 
European Union since the early 1990s. Between 1995 and 2003, real annual GDP growth in the U.S. 
has averaged 3.3% compared to 2.2% in the EU-13. This sustained growth gap suggests that there is 
a structural dimension to the seemingly cyclical question of why the EU recovery is so weak. 
Measurement discrepancies account for some of the gap between official growth statistics in Europe 
and the United States. These discrepancies emanate from different sources of data, from differences 
in the scope of measurement and from different ways in which prices and hence price deflators are 
measured. Price measurement differences exist in the quality adjustment of prices (hedonic pricing) 
and in the pricing of services in trade and finance as well as in non-market sectors like education and 
health.  In  addition,  the  measurement  scope  itself  can  vary.  An  example  is  the  treatment  of  military 
expenses  which  are  categorized  as  investments  in  the  U.S.  and  as  current  expenses  in  the  EU. 
Finally,  data  source  issues  are  particularly  relevant  in  the  technology  sector.  In  the  EU,  software 
investments  are  derived  from  typically  conservative  corporate  accounts.  In  the  U.S.,  software 
investments are estimated directly from software expenses.  
These  measurement  issues  are  well  known  amongst  economists  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic. 
Nonetheless,  I  am  struck  by  how  little  attention  they  receive  in  comparative  economic  discussions. 
With increasing focus on data measurement synchronization, measurement differences are fortunately 
on  the  decline  in  cross-country  comparisons  of  national  income  accounts.  Nonetheless,  such 
                                                      
1   See e.g. IMF World Economic Outlook April 2005, Chapter III. 
BIS Review 27/2005 
 1
measurement  issues  currently  explain  between  0.5  and  at  most  1  percentage  point  of  the  growth 
differential between the EU and the United States.2 We should consider the upper limit of this range as 
a litmus test to the question of whether there is a structural growth differential between the EU and the 
United States.  
In addition to various measurement differences, about one percentage point of the difference in real 
GDP growth rates between the EU and the U.S. can be attributed to the higher growth rate of labour 
input in the U.S. for the period between 1980 and 1995. This is attributable to a stronger increase in 
the working population in the U.S. and a marked relative decline of effective working hours in the EU.  
Factors  causing  this  decline  in  individual  labour  input  can  be  divided  into  two  categories:  First, 
numerous rigidities in European labour markets were introduced over the past decades: working hour 
restrictions, minimum wage agreements, and other restrictions on the conditions of hiring and firing 
employees.  These  restrictions  are  often  valid  over  a  broad  range  of  sectors  and  geographic  areas 
irrespective  of  economic  fundamentals.  Second,  changes  in  taxing  labour  evolved  over  time  with 
significant tax cuts realized in the United States.3  
In total, overall labour input for the period 1990 to 1995 increased in the U.S. by an average of 1.2% 
per annum against a decrease of 0.8% per annum in the EU-13. This is pictured in Graph 2. From a 
European employment perspective, the good news is that Europe is catching up in line with the goals 
of the Lisbon agenda. From 1995 to 2003, the respective growth rates of overall labour input are still 
0.9% for the U.S. against a now positive growth rate of 0.7% per annum for the EU-13.  
Thus,  while  the  relative  growth  of  labour  input  and  measurement  differences  can  explain  the  GDP 
growth difference up to 1995, this is no longer true since. The data indicates that instead, GDP growth 
divergence since 1995 has been influenced much more by changes in productivity growth. Productivity 
growth as change in GDP per work hour is crucial as it determines wages and – together with labour 
input growth - the potential growth rate. 
Productivity growth differential EU – U.S. 
As you can see from Graph 3, labour productivity growth rates since 1995 have been markedly less in 
the European Union than in the United States. Previously, the reverse was true for several decades. 
Graph  4  shows  that  between  1995  and  2000,  Europe  lagged  behind  the  United  States.  Labour 
productivity grew on average 0.6 percentage points per annum less in the EU-11 than in the United 
States. After 2000, the situation worsened. Between 2001 and 2003, EU-11 lagged the United States 
by an average of 1.7 percentage points of labour productivity growth per year. In total, the EU-11’s 
relative  position  in  annual  productivity  growth  worsened  by  2.9  percentage  points  for  the  period  of 
2000 to 2003 or by 1.8 percentage points for the period of 1995 to 2000 against the period of 1990 to 
1995. 
The GDP measurement differences I outlined earlier explain at best less than half of this productivity 
growth gap between the European Union and the United States during the last ten years. Admittedly, 
we  need  to  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  Europe’s  economic  performance  over  this  period  has  been 
significantly  and  adversely  affected  by  the  terms  of  German  unification.  The  residual  productivity 
growth gap lies at the heart of the question of why European potential growth has been so weak. To 
understand  the  gap,  we  need  to  focus  on  different  relative  conditions  in  input  as  well  as  output 
markets.  
Strongly diverging labour market conditions between the EU and the United States over the decades 
up  to  1995  have  led  to  a  massive  reduction  in  EU  overall  labour  input.  Rigid  labour  regulations  in 
Europe restricted labour input and thereby increased the capital-labour ratio which helps explain the 
higher productivity growth rates in Europe until 1995. From an employment perspective, labour market 
reforms deserve the high priority they now get by refocusing the Lisbon agenda on “growth and jobs”. 
                                                      
2   See e.g. Nadim Ahmad, François Lequiller et al., ”Comparing Labour Productivity Growth in the OECD Area: The Role of 
Measurement”,  OECD  Statistics  Working  Paper  Nr.  5,  Paris,  2003.;  Philipp  M.  Hildebrand,  “Wo  bleibt  das 
Produktivitätswachstum in Europa?”, Speech at the „Vereinigung Basler Ökonomen“, 28 october 2004. 
3   Edward C. Prescott, „Why Do Americans Work so Much More than Europeans?“, NBER Working Paper 10316, Cambridge, 
2004.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2005
Beside the labour market reforms, other reforms should not be neglected. Different conditions in other 
input  markets,  for  example  capital  markets,  have  probably  contributed  to  lower  potential  growth  in 
Europe. Frictions between national EU capital markets and payment systems render financing more 
costly.  This  pushes  the  capital-labour  ratio  down,  resulting  in  relative  undercapitalization  and  lower 
labour  productivity.  The  same  line  of  argument  of  inefficient  allocation  of  capital  applies  to 
non-economic restrictions on corporate mergers and acquisitions as well as on profit transfers. If firms 
are not allowed to transfer profits from investments ex post the same disincentive to invest ex ante 
leads to undercapitalization. As in labour markets, the same dynamic is relevant here: Exit barriers are 
entry barriers. 
Different  regulations  in  the  product  markets  represent  another  important  obstacle  to  an  augmented 
growth performance in Europe. Modern information and communication technologies (ICT) in essence 
provide  leverage  to  an  economy.  Product  market  restrictions  on  the  scope  of  the  use  of  the 
technologies lead to undercapitalization and underinnovation ex ante. The potential of these growth 
dynamics may be grossly underestimated as the costs of the regulations are not easily visible. 
In the United States, the largest productivity gains were not realized in the high-tech sector or from the 
IT investments itself but from the widespread use of information and communication technologies in 
traditional  sectors 
intermediation  and  construction.  The  new 
technologies  led  to  a  complete  reorganization  of  the  value  chain  thereby  enhancing  total  factor 
productivity, albeit with a lag. One cannot entirely exclude that this leverage effect will simply occur 
with a lag in Europe. After all, productivity growth is one of the least well understood phenomena in 
economics. While I do not want to exclude a productivity lag effect in favour of Europe, I suspect the 
story  is  a  more  complicated  and  a  more  challenging  one.  Structural  conditions  must  be  in  place  in 
Europe to allow maximum flexibility so that the full potential of the new technologies can be unleashed 
throughout the real economy.  
like  wholesale 
financial 
trade, 
Conclusions 
The question of why the EU recovery is so slow implies a cyclical answer. The European track record 
of  the  last  ten  years,  however,  strongly  suggests  that  there  is  a  crucial  structural  dimension  to  the 
problem of weak European growth. The real challenge for the EU is to boost productivity growth and 
augment its potential growth rate. In the words of Mervyn King: “Raising productivity growth is the key 
to improving the prosperity of future generations.”4 It is therefore not particularly meaningful to analyze 
the growth weakness in Europe in purely cyclical terms. In other words, expanding fiscal and monetary 
policy will be no panacea to Europe’s growth challenge. Longer-term fiscal consolidation is imperative 
in light of a rapidly aging European population. On the monetary side, there is no indication that policy 
is  too restrictive  in  light of  real  interest  rates at or near  zero  for  the  Eurozone.  Indeed,  based  on a 
standard Taylor rule framework, the ECB’s monetary policy stance is equally or in the recent past even 
more expansionary than that of the Federal Reserve. At any rate, neither fiscal nor monetary policy 
can ultimately address structural impediments to higher growth dynamics in the Euro area.  
In  an  effort  to  augment  the  EU’s  growth  potential,  the  focus  must  therefore  be  on  breaking  down 
labour  market  rigidities  for  additional  labour  input  on  the  one  hand  and  on  accompanying  policy 
measures to increase productivity on the other hand. Despite the subdued nature of the current growth 
outlook which is adversely affected by a strong Euro and rising oil prices, there are some promising 
signs that structural change is under way. Both the gradual dismantling of the 35 hour week in France 
and the shift to part-time and temporary employment in Germany are boosting labour input. In line with 
this positive albeit hesitant trend of bringing more workers back into the economy, productivity growth 
rates  have  begun  to  recede  in  Europe.  The  primary  challenge  for  the  European  economy  is  to 
compensate  this  natural  initial  decline  in  productivity  as  a  result  of  higher  labour  input.  Product 
markets  must  be  further  liberalized  in  order  to  unleash  the  full  productivity  potential  of  the  new 
information  and  communication  technologies.  This  will  in  turn  further  enhance  ICT  enabled  capital 
deepening by European businesses. Such a virtuous cycle may well be enhanced by an insufficiently 
understood  productivity  lag  effect  from  ICT  investments  which  could  further  benefit  European 
businesses in the years to come. 
                                                      
4   Mervyn  King,  “Foreword”,  in:  James  Proudman  und  Stephen  Redding  (ed.),  “Openness  and  Growth”,  Bank  of  England, 
1998. 
BIS Review 27/2005 
 3
This  virtuous  process  can  be  initiated.  Indeed,  many  European  countries  are  well  on  their  way. 
Germany, for example, has steadily increased its competitiveness and is the only G7 country with a 
growing  global  export  share  over  the  last  5  years.  By  the  same  token,  we  must  recognize  that  the 
process creates uncertainty for many European citizens. Such heightened levels of uncertainty may 
impede consumer confidence. Increasing overall labour input decreases labour productivity at least in 
the short-run and leads to downward pressure on wages. It seems to me of vital political and economic 
importance to counteract this pressure along two lines.  
First,  as  I  have  already  indicated,  we  have  to  ensure  that  by  way  of  product  market  reforms  these 
productivity gains find their way through to consumers in the form of lower prices thereby dampening 
the downward pressure on real wages. In Switzerland, where we face similar issues in the framework 
of the bilateral treaties, we have introduced an instrument package called “accompanying measures” 
to ensure an orderly transition. The officially fixed transition periods offer a time window within which 
the corresponding reforms on product markets can offset an eventual decline in nominal wages.  
Second,  European  policy  makers  should  focus  on  educational  efforts  to  efficiently  integrate  the 
workers that are being brought back into productive activities through labour market reforms. We must 
not  forget  that  many  of  these  men  and  women  have  been  unproductive  for  many  years  due  to 
exclusionary labour market practices. Their skills are unlikely to be state of the art when they return to 
work. Continuing education  and  on  the  job  training will  therefore  be  crucial elements  in  bringing  up 
their  skills  to  a  level  commensurate  with  the  new  technologies  they  are  likely  to  encounter  in  their 
newly found jobs.  
Let  me  conclude  on  an  optimistic  note.  In  1994,  Paul  Krugman  published  “The  Age  of  Diminished 
Expectations”, a beautifully written book that emphasized much of what seemed wrong with America 
at the time. We now know that 1994 can in many ways be viewed as the starting point of the great 
American boom of the 1990s. In his foreword, Paul Krugman expresses the hope that “America will 
eventually be roused from its slumber and once again begin to face up to problems instead of letting 
them slide.” It seems to me these words are propitious for the challenges that Europe has begun to 
tackle. Much as it did in 1994 in the U.S., the hard part lies ahead.  
Appendix 
Graph 1 
Average Annual GDP Growth Rates 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
EU-13 (EU-15 excl. Austria and Luxembourg)
Source: OECD, Productivity Database, February 2005. 
4 
 1970-1980
1980-1990
1990-1995
1995-2003
 BIS Review 27/2005
Average Annual Growth Rate of Labour Input: EU-13 vs. U.S. 
Graph 2 
1990-1995
1995-2003
[%]
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
EU-13 (EU-15 excluding Aust ria and Luxembourg)
Unit ed St at es
Source: OECD, Productivity Database, February 2005. 
 Graph 3 
Growth of Labour Productivity: EU vs. U.S. 
EU - U.S.
U.S.
EU
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
-1.0%
-2.0%
-3.0%
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
Source: Datastream (OECD Economic Outlook). 
BIS Review 27/2005 
  5
Average Annual Growth Rates of Labour Productivity: EU vs. U.S. 
Graph 4 
[%]
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
EU-11
U.S.
EU-11 minus U.S.
1970-80
1980-90
1990-95
1995-2000
2001-2003
Source: OECD, Productivity Database, February 2005. 
 6 
 BIS Review 27/2005
