Svein Gjedrem: Petroleum and the Norwegian economy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Alfred Berg 
ABN AMRO’s Nordic Energy Conference, Oslo, 30 August 2005. 
The speech does not contain assessments of the economic situation or current interest rate setting. Please note 
that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
The references and the 
Charts in pdf-format  can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 Let me start by reminding you of the importance of the petroleum sector to the Norwegian economy. In 
2004,  it  accounted  for  20  per  cent  of  total  GDP  and  almost  half  of  Norway’s  total  exports.  Due  to 
spillover  effects,  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  affects  the  activity  level  both  offshore  and  in 
mainland Norway.  
Oil gives us an economic base that is not available to many other countries. But it also presents us 
with considerable challenges.  
Our petroleum resources are part of our national wealth. When oil is extracted and sold, natural assets 
are transformed into financial wealth. Norway’s national wealth belongs not only to our generation, but 
also  to  future  generations,  and  government  policy  takes  this  into  account.  When  exercising  fiscal 
discipline,  the  Norwegian  authorities  are  seeking  to  ensure  that  our  petroleum  wealth  is  distributed 
equitably across generations.  
Second,  the  size  of  the  cash  flow  from  petroleum  activities  varies.  Considerable  fluctuations  in 
demand  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  which  amplify  cyclical  fluctuations,  would  be  the  result  if 
petroleum revenues were to be used as they accrue.  
Third, the use of petroleum revenues has an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business and 
industry.  A  high  level  and  substantial  variations  in  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  would  have  a 
negative impact on internationally exposed industries.  
The  establishment  of  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  and  the  guidelines  for  the  use  of  petroleum 
revenues are intended to meet these challenges.1 The Petroleum Fund serves as a buffer between 
current petroleum revenues and the use of these revenues in the Norwegian economy. In this way, the 
economy is shielded from fluctuations in prices and extraction rates in the petroleum sector. Petroleum 
revenues may be gradually phased into the Norwegian economy.  
The Fund is also a savings fund that allows petroleum wealth to be distributed across generations. 
The objectives are best achieved by investing the Petroleum Fund outside the Norwegian economy. 
The Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund stipulates that all central government revenues 
from petroleum operations shall be transferred to the Petroleum Fund and that the Fund’s capital may 
only be spent over the central government budget. The Act prohibits using the Fund’s capital in any 
other way.  
Once a year, the government authorities decide in accordance with the Act how much of the Fund may 
reasonably be used. All use of central government funds is thus subject to the same assessment and 
alternative uses must be weighed against one another. The background material for the Act relating to 
the Petroleum Fund clearly indicates that the Fund shall not be a second central government budget 
and, by implication, shall not be used for investment or spending that have not received priority in the 
budget.  
The chart shows the share of the central government’s annual net cash flow from petroleum activities 
that has been transferred from the Fund to the fiscal budget. Since 1996, a considerable portion of the 
petroleum revenues has been retained in the Fund. In 2000 and 2001, there were almost no transfers 
from the Fund to the fiscal budget while in the past two years the share transferred to the fiscal budget 
represented about one-third of the cash flow.  
                                                      
1   See Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund, adopted on 22 June 1990 and amended by Act no. 2 of 16 January 
2004. 
The Petroleum Fund has become large. At the end of the second quarter of 2005, the market value of 
the  Petroleum  Fund’s  portfolio  was  nearly  NOK  1  200  billion  or  approximately  EUR  150  billion,  or 
roughly 65 per cent of GDP.  
The Ministry of Finance has defined a clear mandate for Norges Bank’s management of the Petroleum 
Fund.  Norges  Bank  shall  seek  to  achieve  an  excess  return  in  relation  to  a  benchmark  portfolio  by 
means of active management within a certain risk limit.  
The chart shows developments in both the average annual net real return and the real return without 
the contribution from active management.  
Returns have fluctuated considerably since the Petroleum Fund made its first investments in equity 
markets in 1998.  
Since  1998,  the  first  whole  year  the  Petroleum  Fund  invested  in  equities,  the  annual excess return 
from active management has been close to half a percentage point. The corresponding krone amount 
is about NOK 18 billion.  
Petroleum  revenues  generally  involve  substantial,  but  uneven  currency  inflows  into  Norway.  The 
currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and large variations in the exchange rate.  
The Petroleum Fund acts as a buffer and dampens the wide fluctuations in the krone exchange rate 
that  petroleum  revenues  might  otherwise  have  generated.  An  increase  in  petroleum  revenues  will 
result in higher capital outflows from the Petroleum Fund. Operators in the foreign exchange market 
may at times have a tendency to underestimate the Fund’s function as a stabilisation mechanism. The 
capital  outflows  through  the  Fund  contribute  to  both  curbing  the  appreciation  of  the  krone  and 
maintaining its stability.  
Since  the  summer  of  2004,  the  krone  exchange  rate  has  appreciated  by  about  5  per  cent,  as 
measured by the trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI).  
The chart shows the krone exchange rate and oil spot prices from 1999. The chart indicates that there 
is  no  clear  relationship  between  the  nominal  exchange  rate  and  oil  spot  prices  over  time.  An 
appreciation of the krone has accompanied higher oil prices in some periods and lower oil prices in 
others.  
The  correlation  between  oil  prices  and  the  nominal  exchange  rate  has  therefore  varied  over  time. 
However, since the introduction of the inflation target in March 2001, the average correlation has been 
about zero. This is a remarkable result and may indicate that the Petroleum Fund has shielded the 
nominal  exchange  rate  from  movements  in  oil  prices.  Therefore,  there  is  cause  for  some  optimism 
regarding the possibilities of isolating the mainland economy from variable oil prices in the short and 
medium run. In the long run, however, we cannot insulate the real exchange rate from developments 
in the petroleum sector or the use of petroleum revenues. I will return to this later.  
An  increase  in  oil  prices  may  nevertheless  generate  expectations  of  increased  petroleum  revenue 
spending  ahead,  particularly  if  high  oil  prices are  assumed  to persist.  Such  expectations  may  exert 
appreciation  pressures  on  the  krone.  The  chart  shows  that  future  oil  prices  6-7  years  ahead  have 
increased more than spot prices since January 2004. This sharp rise may help to explain some of the 
appreciation over the past year. In addition, there may be expectations that developments will be more 
favourable in the Norwegian stock market than in foreign markets when oil prices rise. This may also 
have contributed to strengthening the krone.  
However, when estimating the future value of the Petroleum Fund, the expected decline in the level of 
production on the Norwegian continental shelf should also be taken into account. In addition, there has 
been a tendency lately to overestimate production when looking a few years ahead.  
Investment in the petroleum sector is an important source of business cycle fluctuations in Norway. 
Investment rose sharply in the 1970s and 1980s and reached a peak in 1998. Mainly as a result of 
persistently  high  oil  prices  and  expectations  that  oil  prices  will  remain  high,  investment  in  the 
Norwegian petroleum sector may again reach record levels this year. Norges Bank’s regional network 
currently reports a very high level of activity among suppliers to the petroleum industry.  
However,  investment  may  decline  as  large  development  projects  like  Ormen  Lange,  Kristin  and 
Snøhvit near completion. It is uncertain how sharp the fall will be, but today’s high level of exploration 
activity  and  a  long  period  of  high  oil  prices  imply  that  petroleum  investment  will  remain  high  in  the 
years ahead.  
Investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  spillover  effects  on  the  mainland  economy,  initially  on  the 
engineering industry and the construction sector. Looking forward, the scale of petroleum investment 
and  its  spillover  effects  are  highly  uncertain.  The  last  time  petroleum  investment  showed  a  sharp 
increase,  in  1997/1998,  growth  was  substantially  stronger  than  had  been  assumed.  An  upturn 
occurred  in  the  Norwegian  economy  as  a  whole  at  the  same  time.  The  unexpected  increase  in 
petroleum  investment  contributed  to  an  economic  upturn  that  was  substantially  stronger  than 
projected.  If  oil  prices  rise  further  or  remain  at  the  current  high  level  for  a  long  period,  petroleum 
investment may again amplify the cyclical upturn to a greater extent than projected.  
Let  me  now  return  to  the  framework  for  economic  policy  in  Norway.  The  Storting  (Norwegian 
parliament)  has  approved  a  fiscal  guideline  for  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues.  It  states  that,  in 
general, petroleum revenue spending shall be limited to 4 per cent, or the expected annual real return 
on  the  Petroleum  Fund  over  time.  This  fiscal  rule  shall  ensure  that  the  use  of  revenues  in  the 
Norwegian economy is at a level that can be sustained over time.  
The usefulness of a fiscal guideline is that it gives weight to long-term considerations when addressing 
day-to-day economic policy challenges. The fiscal rule stabilises enterprises’ expectations concerning 
competitiveness and the krone exchange rate, thus preventing abrupt and pronounced swings in the 
structure  of  the  economy.  If  the  government  authorities  disregard  the  rule,  enterprises  will  lose  an 
important reference. A policy rule can make matters worse if economic agents have drawn up long-
term plans on a faulty basis.  
The fiscal rule for the budget states that the government can use 4 per cent of the Fund over time. 
This year, around 6 per cent of the Fund is being used. The deviation partly reflects an unexpected 
shortfall in tax revenues from the non-oil economy in recent years. The government budget deficit is 
the difference between total revenues and total expenditure. They each account for about half of total 
GDP in Norway. Even small deviations from expenditure and revenue projections can have a major 
impact on the deficit. Exchange rate changes will also lead to fluctuations in the value of the Petroleum 
Fund. For these reasons alone, the use of petroleum revenues may in periods deviate from the 4 per 
cent  rule.  Spending  was  also  increased  in  response  to  the  economic  downturn  in  2003.  We  can 
therefore safely affirm that the fiscal rule has been normative for fiscal policy.  
Nevertheless, over the last years more oil money has flowed into the Norwegian economy than earlier. 
Petroleum  investment  shows  a  pronounced  increase  this  year.  Moreover,  government  petroleum 
revenue spending has increased in recent years.  
The fiscal rule is part of a set of economic policy guidelines. The various components of economic 
policy have varying effects. This is why they have different functions:  
• 
Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to 
smoothing swings in output and employment.  
The central government budget – growth in public spending – influences the krone and the 
size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  medium  term.  Government 
expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the long term.  
Wage formation, the structure of the economy and incentives determine how efficiently we 
use our labour resources and other economic resources. 
  There is also an interaction. To give you an example:  
• 
In its budget resolutions, the government authorities will attach importance to the effects of 
the  budget  on  the  Norwegian  economy  and  will  therefore  take  account  of  interest  rate 
effects. In this way, they avoid a situation where growth in public spending and the interest 
rate push the economy in different directions. 
Norway’s history as an oil nation goes back to the end of the 1960s. At the beginning of the oil age in 
Norway,  the relationship  between  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  and  changes  in  industry  structure 
was highlighted.  
However, since then, competitiveness in the business sector in Norway has deteriorated both due to 
high wage growth and in later years an appreciation of the krone against our trading partners. Costs 
rose sharply from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s. In subsequent years, costs have varied around this 
higher level.  
So  far  this  year,  competitiveness  in  Norway’s  manufacturing  industry  has  been  about  5.5  per  cent 
weaker than the average for the period 1970-2004. Over the past 30 years, manufacturing has been 
scaled  back  in  waves.  A  substantial  decline  occurred  in  the  period  1977  to  1984 and  from  1987  to 
1992.  The  last  wave  occurred  around  the  turn  of  the  millennium.  Manufacturing  employment 
decreased by close to 55 000 persons from 1998 to 2004.  
There  are  many  studies  in  international  literature2  that  point  to  the  pitfalls  facing  a  country  that 
suddenly  discovers  large  natural  resources.  Certainly,  the  Norwegian  manufacturing  sector  has 
undergone substantial changes over the past 30 years. On the other hand, this period has also been 
marked by substantial productivity gains in parts of the sheltered sector, for example in retail trade and 
the  banking  sector.  Petroleum  activities  have  contributed  to  technological  developments  in  the 
shipbuilding industry and the offshore sector.  
The current cost level in the Norwegian business sector is adapted to an expansion of the petroleum 
sector and a steady phasing-in of petroleum revenues into the mainland economy.  
In the long term, the exchange rate tends to adjust so that both the domestic economy and the current 
account are in balance.  
After  a  period,  we  will  be  able  to  cover  a  smaller  share  of  our  imports  using  current  petroleum 
revenues and by drawing on the Petroleum Fund. Competitiveness will then have to be improved. It 
may have to be brought back to around the level prevailing at the end of the 1960s prior to Norway’s 
emergence  as  an  oil  nation.  Rough  estimates3  suggest  that  the  real  exchange  rate  that  ensures 
balance in the external account when petroleum wealth no longer has the same significant role in the 
economy is more in line with the real exchange rate that we started with. This is shown in the chart, 
where the real exchange rate in the very long term will revert to the level prevailing before petroleum 
extraction began. 
In conclusion, the Petroleum Fund and the fiscal rule shield the economy from fluctuations in oil prices 
and extraction rates. With an inflation target, inflationary pressures are steered using the interest rate, 
while  the  value  of  the  krone  fluctuates.  Consequently,  when  decisions  on  the  use  of  petroleum 
revenues are taken, weight must not only be given to long-term considerations and the distribution of 
wealth  across  generations,  but  also  to  developments  in  the  real  exchange  rate  and  the 
competitiveness of the exposed sector over the short and medium term.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
2  See e.g. J. D. Sachs and A. M. Warner (2001)”The curse of natural resources” in European Economic Review 45,   pp  827 
– 838.
3   See Akram, Farooq Q. (2003): “Reell likevektsvalutakurs for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway), in Norsk 
Økonomisk Tidsskrift 118, pp 89-112. 
