Mugur Isărescu: Inflation targeting - international experience and Romania’s 
prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the  Conference  on 
Inflation Targeting, Bucharest, 30 March 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to begin by extending a very warm welcome to you to the National Bank of Romania. It is a 
great  honor  for  me  to  open  the  conference  “Inflation  Targeting:  International  Experience  and 
Romania’s Prospects”. I would like to add that I am particularly pleased that such distinguished guests 
agreed to join us today and share some of their insights regarding inflation targeting. 
This spring marks an important moment in our history: in April 1880, the National Bank of Romania 
was  established,  and  became  the  19th  central  bank  in  the  world;  now,  125  years  later,  our  central 
bank is getting ready to become the 19th (plus 3) inflation targeter. For a few years now, the National 
Bank of Romania considered inflation targeting to be the monetary policy framework suitable for the 
timeframe between achieving single digit inflation and joining the ERM II. 
My confidence in inflation targeting stems from my belief that price stability should be the primary goal 
of monetary policy and that there is full long run compatibility between this objective and economic 
growth.  This  has  been  proved  by  successful  inflation  targeting  experiences  of  numerous  countries, 
regardless of the level of economic development. 
Although  I  see  why  it  is  difficult  to  define  inflation  targeting,  I  consider  the  definition  given  by  Ben 
Bernanke as being the appropriate one. Accordingly, inflation targeting is “a framework for monetary 
policy characterised by the public announcement of official quantitative targets […] for the inflation rate 
over one or more time horizons, and by explicit acknowledgement that low, stable inflation is monetary 
policy’s  primary  long-run  goal.  Among  other  important  features  of  inflation  targeting  are  vigorous 
efforts to communicate with the public about the plans and objectives of the monetary authorities, and, 
in  many  cases,  mechanisms  that  strengthen  the  central  bank’s  accountability  for  attaining  these 
objectives.”  The  definition  can  be  wrapped  up  by  adding  instrument  independence  for  the  Central 
Bank  and  the  lack  of  an  explicit  intermediate  target,  as  all  factors  affecting  inflation  are  taken  into 
consideration. 
An important feature of inflation targeting is the need for accountability of the central bank. Within the 
inflation targeting framework, this is enhanced by the public announcement and commitment to attain 
an inflation target. The explicit target and the public and transparent nature of inflation targeting also 
enable  the  central  bank  to  withstand  political  pressures  more  easily  and  to  overcome  the  so-called 
time  inconsistency  problem.  In  this  sense,  as  Frederic Mishkin1  argues, central  bank  independence 
and inflation targeting are mutually reinforcing. 
Adopting  inflation  targeting  is  not  just  a  matter  of  choice,  but  also  of  fulfilling  a  number  of  key 
requirements. Having these in mind, I believe that Romania is in a good position to pursue disinflation 
by implementing such a framework. 
Most of the conditions required for a successful implementation of the inflation targeting framework in 
Romania have already been met: 
- 
by year end 2004, inflation was brought down to single digit levels for the first time from 1990 
onwards; 
since 2004, the National Bank of Romania has benefited from full operational independence, 
as stipulated by Law No. 312 of June 28, 2004; 
the success in disinflation over the recent years has strengthened the NBR’s credibility; 
                                                        
1   Frederic  S.  Mishkin,  “What  Should  Central  Banks  Do?”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review,  vol.  82,  #6 
(November/December 2000): 1-13. 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
    after  five  years  of  continuous  development  and  adequate  supervision,  the  financial  sector 
can undoubtedly be considered sound and stable; 
fiscal dominance is no longer an issue, witness the afore-mentioned legal independence of 
the National Bank, a relatively low public debt, as well as the increasingly consistent financial 
policies mix; 
inflation targets have been set for the following years in cooperation with the government. 
The Pre-Accession Economic Programmes underline the commitment to attain these targets; 
since  2002,  an  inflation  report  has  been  published  on  a  half-yearly  basis.  Following  the 
implementation  of  inflation  targeting,  the  report  will  be  published  quarterly;  -  a  model 
calibrated  by  the  Bank’s  staff  is  currently  being  tested  and  will  be  used  for  forecasting 
purposes. 
Instead  of  going  into  the  details  related  to  the  Inflation  Targeting  framework,  I  will  let  my  fellow 
speakers tackle the most important issues. Shortly after this, Deputy Governor Ms. Rachel Lomax will 
present a compelling account of UK’s experience and, may I add, success as a benchmark inflation 
targeter.  After  the  lunch  break,  Gill  Hammond, Deputy  Director of  CCBS,  will  give  you  an  excellent 
presentation dealing with specific issues and challenges faced by emerging market economies when 
adopting inflation targeting. Later on, we will have our guests from the Czech National Bank and the 
National Bank of Hungary giving you a purposeful insight of such challenges and of their countries’ 
experiences with the IT framework. Mr. Ludek Niedermayer, Deputy Governor of the Czech National 
Bank, will first explain to you “why and how” inflation targeting was adopted in the Czech Republic – 
the first country to embrace this regime in our region. Then, it will be for Ms Csermely Agnes, Director 
with the National Bank of Hungary, to share with us the “Lessons and Challenges” put forth by the 
Hungarian experience with inflation targeting. Our last speech for this event will be held by Mr. Cristian 
Popa, Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Romania, showing you just where we, as central bank 
and as economy, stand in the preparation of the introduction of inflation targeting. 
What I do want to mention is the current debate on the appropriateness of adopting inflation targeting 
in  Romania.  I  am  very  happy  that  monetary  policy  steals  the  spotlight  from  football,  at  least 
temporarily.  Some  acknowledged  Romanian  economists  claim  that  inflation  targeting  is  not  needed 
since future euro adoption requires fulfilling the grueling conditions of the ERM-II framework. In line 
with this argument, the exchange rate might prove to be a better choice for a nominal anchor. 
Given  the  soon  to  be  completed  capital  account  liberalization,  I  believe  that  exchange  rate 
management  would  be  very  difficult  outside  a  currency  board.  Although  I  am  confident  about  our 
option, I respect all disagreeing opinions. For those retaining their doubts about the benefits of inflation 
targeting,  there  is  one  more  argument,  courtesy  not  of  a  renowned  economist,  but  of  the  Danish 
physicist Niels Bohr. When asked why he, an enlightened scientist, kept a horse-shoe on display in his 
house, his prompt answer was that “it helps non-believers too”. Likewise, provided that the National 
Bank of Romania has convinced enough people of its commitments, non-believers should also enjoy 
the benefits of this policy change. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now introduce Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of Bank of England and 
member of the Monetary Policy Committee. Before passing on the floor, I would just like to mention 
that  Mrs.  Lomax  has  previously  visited  Romania.  Ten  years  ago  Mrs.  Lomax  was  negotiating 
development  programs  in  Romania  on  behalf  of  the  World  Bank  with  a  team  including  myself  and 
some other people in this audience. She is now here again to assist us in preparing to achieve another 
goal related to Romania’s development, that of lasting price stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
