Nout Wellink: Pension in motion - the Netherlands in an international perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  at  the  ABP/PGGM-Congress  “Pension  Plan  Design  for  the  Future”,  The 
Hague, 25 April 2005. 
 “The Dutch pension system is among the best in the world. But does it have a future?” This is how the 
opening  question  reads  on  the  invitation  to  this  two-day  conference.  A  challenging  question,  to  be 
sure, one that is bound to release many emotions. For a discussion of pension and the future cannot 
be held without raising the need for reforms. And politicians do not win public favour with proposals 
towards reforms. On the contrary, strikes and mass demonstrations are their lot all over Europe and 
even in the Netherlands.  
Even so, many citizens, the younger generation in particular, seem convinced of the need for pension 
reforms. The main cause – the ageing of the population – is leading to increasing fiscal pressure in 
most Western countries. Considerable fiscal deficits or pension contribution rises are imminent if we 
do not take action. In this address, I will therefore look at the situation in several European countries. 
Has any progress been made yet? And how is the Netherlands doing in this context? Subsequently, I 
will highlight two other themes: transparency and freedom of choice.  
Transparency is a very topical theme for pension funds in the Netherlands. Greater transparency is 
vital for the system to be future-resistant. Transparency regarding the financial position, the risks and 
the risk distribution. For the traditional actuarial and accounting techniques no longer afford consistent 
insight into the financial position of pension funds. Deficits are not identified in time, and once they are 
established,  it  is  not  always  clear  by  which  party  they  should  be  absorbed.  Things  just  have  to 
improve. The Financial Supervisory Framework will bring relief. This is my first message for you.  
My second message concerns freedom of choice. The increasing diversity of labour patterns among 
workers  calls  for  customization  of  pensions  schemes.  However,  the  Dutch  appear  to  hold  pension 
security  very  dear.  Greater  freedom  of  choice  must  therefore  not  be  provided  at  the  expense  of 
pension security. More than that, for the truck system that is typical of our system, a high degree of 
security  is  a  prerequisite.  People  must  be  able  to  rely  on  a  given  minimum  level  of  pension  rights. 
Above  that  level,  they  could  be  allowed  more  freedom  of  choice  in  the  risks  they  run.  How  Dutch 
pension funds will be able to realise such a system is what I’m going to explain next.  
Europe 
First, the situation in Europe. Everywhere in Europe, life expectancy is rising and birth rates are falling. 
In particular in countries relying heavily on the pay-as-you-go system, the attendant increase in the 
“grey” pressure leads to ever higher pension contributions. This situation applies to most European 
countries. Exceptions are the United Kingdom, Denmark, Sweden, Ireland and our own country, where 
money is set aside for pension, the so-termed second-pillar. A number of countries, like Germany, are 
seeking  to  develop  a  capital-funded  private  pillar,  but  it  will  take  a  lot  of  time  and  a  long  period  of 
double burdens before this goal is achieved.  
Countries like the United States and the United Kingdom, which were already convinced of the need 
for  adjustments  decades  ago,  started  reforming  their  pension  systems  in  recent  years.  As  early  as 
1983, the United States decided to raise the age of retirement stepwise from 65 to 67 between 2003 
and 2022. The United Kingdom, too, has a long tradition of pension reforms. As early as in the 1970s, 
it was recognised that something had to be done in order to raise private pension savings and reduce 
the  state  pension’s  share.  To  this  end,  enterprises  were  initially  stimulated  to  set  up  collective 
pensions schemes. However, this plan failed under Thatcher. Her government encouraged citizens to 
build up their old age pensions individually. Thousands of those risking this change were set back for 
large amounts on being wrongly advised by questionable intermediaries. As a result, the cutbacks in 
state pensions were not set off by improvements in private arrangements.  
The  pension  issues  have  meanwhile  been  brought  home  to  continental  European  countries,  too. 
Solutions are proving politically nettlesome, though. Most countries are taking the first cautious steps 
now. For example, in a large number of countries the ages of retirement and early retirement or the 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
number of years of service required for entitlement to pension benefits are being revised. In Italy, for 
one,  the  retirement  age  of  men  will  be  raised  from  57  to  62  years,  between  2008  to  2014,  while 
in France not the pensioning age, but the number of years of service will be increased, i.e. to 40 in 
2008.  
In a number of countries, the austerity measures are combined with the introduction of a flexible age of 
retirement. Workers in Finland, for example, may choose to retire at an age between 63 and 68. Every 
year they postpone retirement they secure a higher pension. Italy and Sweden are interesting cases 
when  it  comes  to  life  expectancy  risk.  They  have  converted  their  system  into  a  Notional  Defined 
Contribution (NDC) system, which provides for a closer link between the contributions paid and the 
pensions paid and uses the life expectancy at the moment of retirement as a basis for the pension 
rights.  In  other  words:  the  costs  of  a  longer  life  expectancy  are  no  longer  shouldered  by  the  next 
generation, but translated into lower pensions.  
The Dutch situation 
Indeed, rising life expectancy is one of the main causes of the increasing burden. As a result of rising 
life expectancy, many more people reach the age of 65. When, back in 1957, the Netherlands adopted 
the old-age pension system for people aged 65 and upwards, the average age of death was still about 
61 years. It would last another small decade before the average age of death for men had risen above 
65 years. At the time, men did not reach the age of 65 as a rule. By the time you were 65, you were 
simply unable to work anymore. If we were to extrapolate this line of reasoning, the age of retirement 
would  need  to  be  raised  to  79  on  the  grounds  that  the  current  average  age  of  death  is  75.  This 
comparison, while absurd, serves to demonstrate how much better and, hence, more expensive our 
pension  provisions  have  become.  The  number  of  people  receiving  an  old-age  pension  has  grown 
substantially because the age of retirement has remain unchanged. To avoid an abrupt adjustment of 
the age of retirement, it is therefore advisable to start discussing a system by which the average age 
of  retirement  is gradually raised, while allowing  individual  flexibility  as  to  the  age  of retirement  and, 
hence, freedom of choice as to the height of the pension benefit.  
Unlike most other European countries, the Netherlands is so fortunate as to have built up high pension 
reserves. As a result, the ageing of the population affects our total pension benefits to a lesser degree. 
All the same, our second-pillar pensions are sensitive to the ageing of the population. This sensitivity 
is  reflected,  among  other  things,  in  the  effectiveness  of  the  contribution  instrument:  it  is  becoming 
increasingly  difficult  to  absorb  setbacks  with  contribution  adjustments.  In  recent  years,  many 
arrangements  have  been  converted  from  final  pay  to  average  pay  schemes,  with  conditional 
indexation  of  pension  accruals  and  benefits.  This  permits  a  more  flexible  use  of  the  indexation 
instrument  and  makes  for  a  different  risk  distribution  between  the  parties  concerned.  Through  this 
development, our system seems to be shifting towards a “defined contribution” system, for lower than 
expected investment results and reduced indexation will result in lower benefits. However, it certainly 
still is not a DC system in all respects. In a DC system, the risks are entirely borne by the individual 
worker, while average pay schemes are characterised by risk sharing and intergenerational solidarity. 
If  returns  are  lower  than  expected,  the  active  and  next  generation  may  be  resorted  to  in  order  to 
safeguard post-actives’ benefits. However, the use of indexation as a steering instrument increases 
the risk of erosion of the future value of our pensions. This risk is directly related to the indexation 
ambition and the corresponding contribution reduction that pension funds will be required to formulate 
under the Financial Supervisory Framework.  
Social  partners  are  of  course  free  to  determine  the  indexation  ambition  themselves,  but  everybody 
should bear in mind that their pension’s value will be considerably eroded if during the accrual phase 
indexation is incomplete. Proceeding from 2% indexation, one-third of the total capital accumulated at 
the  age  of  65  is  made  up  of  these  indexation  allowances.  To  the  extent  that  full  indexation  is  too 
ambitious, a stable value pension must surely be feasible? This ambition may be pegged to the ECB’s 
inflation target of 2%, the lowest indexation percentage that a pension funds should strive to ensure.  
Transparency 
The  adjustments  in  the  supervisory  framework  and  the  transition  to  the  average  pay  scheme  are 
closely related to the financial recession that pension funds have faced in recent years. This brings me 
to  transparency.  Owing  to  the  traditional  actuarial  and  accounting  techniques,  the  actual  financial 
position  of  pension  funds  was  insufficiently  transparent.  Pension  funds  were  required  to  value  their 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
investments at current prices, whereas liabilities were valued at a fixed actuarial interest rate of 4%. 
This led to a situation that prevented timely identification of hidden surpluses and deficits. Due to this 
lack of transparency, the higher yields realised during the stock market boom were translated too soon 
into  contribution  reductions  and  more  generous  pensions,  without  it  being  evident  how  lower-than-
expected  yields  would  have  to  be  absorbed.  To  many  Dutch  pensioners  it  came  as  a  complete 
surprise that “lower than expected investment yields” could mean no or lower indexation. Apparently, 
they had failed to read the key features document, or gave up reading when they came to the small 
letters section. Nearly all pension regulations contain an escape clause that renders indexation only 
obligatory if permitted by the funds available. This makes it imperative, though, that the actual value of 
these funds can be verified. Transparency is therefore of the utmost importance. And transparency is 
just what was lacking. I shall show this to you on the basis of the following two figures (see Annex).  
The first figure reflects two funding ratios. The blue curve represents the traditional funding ratio, the 
red curve the funding ratio based on market rates. The figure shows that the funding ratio based on 
the fixed actuarial interest rate rose in the second half of the nineties and did not decline until after 
1999, when the creeping slump had set in. If you just look at the liabilities side, thing become a lot 
clearer yet.  
The blue curve stands for the liabilities at the fixed actuarial interest rate. The red one, for the liabilities 
at the market rate. What may be concluded from this chart is that the room for indexation did not start 
to narrow until as late as 2000, but, due to the declining trend in the capital market interest, already in 
the  early  nineties.  In  fact,  the  use  of  a  fixed  actuarial  interest  rate  has  masked  half  of  the  actual 
increase in pension liabilities. 
The financial problems in recent years have made all the parties concerned more aware of the risks 
incurred  by  pension  funds.  Implementation  of  the  financial  supervisory  framework  should  enhance 
transparency  and  consistency  between  the  values  of  investments  and  liabilities,  making  hidden 
reserves visible. Compare this to the Tower of Winds by the renowned Japanese architect Toyo Ito. 
The Tower of Winds, a ventilation tower for the subterranean space of Yokohama station, is equipped 
with 2,000 computer-steered light bulbs that respond to wind, sound and temperature. In daytime, the 
light is reflected by aluminium panels, bringing out the building’s cylindrical shape. In night time, the 
lamps  transform  the  tower  into  a  transparent  structure.  Our  pension  system  should  eventually 
resemble that Tower, looking beautiful during the day, and revealing its internal structure and robust 
foundation during the night.  
Besides making visibility of reserves mandatory, the Financial Supervisory Framework contains stricter 
provisions  regarding  cost-effective  contributions,  with  a  view  to  creating  more  clarity  about  the 
market-comparable costs of pension commitments. Moreover, funds should offer more insight into the 
way  they  have  distributed  the  risks  between  the  parties  concerned.  They  must  communicate  their 
indexation ambition to the participants in unambiguous terms. A great challenge lies ahead of them 
within  this  scope.  They  must  be  open  about  the  risks  run  by  each  individual,  as  well  as  about  the 
consequences of these risks, for running risks means suffering pain every now and again. The parties 
concerned  might  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  decisions  made  were  ill-advised.  How  is  one  to 
explain  that  the  risk  was  deliberately  taken  and  that  the  decisions  made  on  the  basis  thereof  were 
good,  but  that  there  is  always  a  chance  that  things  go  wrong?  In  an  unpredictable  world,  ex  ante 
“good” decisions may prove “wrong” ex post, if the risk materialises. The very fact that pension funds 
take  risks  also  obliges  them  to  render  an  account  for  their  policy,  as  such  conduct  will  ensure  the 
public’s  confidence  in  the  system.  This  also  fits  in  with  the  demands  made  by  today’s  society  on 
institutions. In short, for a system to be future-resistant all parties involved must be aware of the risks 
they  run  and  the  possible  consequences  thereof.  Transparency  regarding  the  financial  position  of 
funds is a prerequisite to this end.  
Freedom of choice 
This brings me to my second theme: freedom of choice. Not only is it necessary for participants to 
know  the  risks  they  run,  but  for  pension  funds  it  is  equally  important  to  know  what  risks  their 
participants  are  willing  to  run.  When  it  comes  to  their  pension  provisions,  the  Dutch  turn  out  to  be 
risk-averse and consider themselves financially incompetent. This emerged from a recent survey by 
De Nederlandsche Bank. The outcome of this survey is that the vast majority of Dutch workers are not 
interested in a transition to a DC system. The majority value security and are willing to pay for that. 
This means that more freedom of choice must not be provided at the expense of pension security. 
More than that, for the truck system characterizing our present system a high degree of security is a 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 3
prerequisite. People must be able to rely on a given minimum level of pension rights. Above that level, 
they could be allowed more freedom of choice regarding the risks they run.  
What can pension funds do to accommodate these preferences and the diversity of risk profiles? By 
offering a lower, but guaranteed indexed pension, supplemented with an individual pension build-up 
based on a risk profile of the participant’s free choice. This does not imply that participants must be 
showered with thousand-and-one different options. In his book “The Paradox of choice: why more is 
less”,  Barry  Schwartz  explains  that  maximum  freedom  of  choice  is  not  necessarily  always  better. 
There  is  a  boundary  across  which  more  freedom  leads  to  diminishing returns.  People  tend  to  grow 
depressed when offered abundant freedom of choice. The sense of not having enough time to make 
the  right  choice  causes  stress  and,  not  seldom,  to  disappointments.  Also  experiences  in Sweden, 
where  workers  may  choose  from  650  different  collective  investment  schemes  for  their  public  DC 
pension show that an abundance of choice is felt to be a burden.  
Pension funds had therefore better offer a limited number of risk profiles. Subsequently, participants 
can  choose  the  risk  profile  that  suits  them  best.  The  risk-averse  will  opt  for  a  no-risk  profile;  those 
willing  to  run  high  risks,  for  a  high-risk  profile.  And,  naturally,  those  finding  themselves  in  between 
these two categories will pick the low-risk variety. The security of the basic pension in any case offers 
participants a minimum guaranteed pension they can fall back on. 
For the guaranteed basic pension, pension funds should make sure that the mismatch risk is minimal. 
This is in compliance with the Financial Supervisory Framework, which makes clear that either side of 
the balance sheet is sensitive to market rate changes and, hence, makes the interest rate risk visible. 
The interest rate risk is determined by the difference in maturity between investments and liabilities. 
As,  at  present,  the  average  maturity  of  fixed  interest  assets  of  the  pension  funds  varies  from  5  to 
7 years and that of liabilities runs to 15 years on average, a mismatch, also referred to as “duration 
gap”,  is  in  evidence.  This  gap  renders  pension  funds  vulnerable  to  interest  rate  decreases.  It  is 
expected that pension funds will shift their focus to the overall risk profile in order to close this gap. 
They  can  do  so  by  buying  bonds  with  a  longer  maturity  or  off-balance  sheet  products  like  swaps, 
futures  and  swaptions.  And  to  hedge  the  inflation  risk,  they  can  include  index  loans  or  index  swap 
products in their investment mix.  
The European governments are meanwhile responding to the risen demand for long-term loans from 
both European and American pension funds. Recently, the French government issued a 50-year loan. 
Also Greece, Germany and Italy recently sold long-term paper. And, this month, the Dutch government 
will issue a 30-year loan. The market for index loans is still limited, but if demand picks up, index loans 
will  automatically  become  an  attractive  financing  instrument  for  general  government.  General 
governments are able to complement the current financial markets by issuing index loans. They are in 
a unique position to do so, since tax revenues are positively correlated to wage movements.  
A continuously changing world calls for regular assessments of new developments and subsequent 
adjustments.  Or  as  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  puts  it  in  his  History  of  Economics:  “In  fact,  economic 
ideas are always a product of their own time and place, they cannot be seen apart from the world they 
interpret. And that world changes – is, indeed, in a constant process of transformation – so economic 
ideas, if they are to retain relevance, must also change.” 
This is why this conference is a laudable initiative. Today and tomorrow you will be learning a great 
deal about innovations in the financial markets and the new possibilities to combine collectivity and 
risk  sharing  with  more  freedom  of  choice  and  tailor-made  pension  schemes.  Stability  of  pension 
values,  transparency  and  freedom  of  choice  are  the  chief  challenges  in  the  process  towards  a 
future-resistant system. For our system to be sustainable, it is necessary that everybody knows the 
risks and the possible consequences thereof. The Financial Supervisory Frameworks offers a solution. 
Moreover,  participants  should  be  allowed  more  freedom  of  choice  regarding  the  risks  they  run. 
Pension funds can provide this by offering a specific guaranteed minimum pension, supplemented with 
an individual pension build-up based on a risk profile of the participant’s own free choice.  
I wish you much inspiration in the next few days and much wisdom in the years ahead. And please try 
to keep your emotions under control. As the Dutch pension system is among the best in the world, we 
would like things to stay as they are.  
4 
 BIS Review 30/2005
