Ishrat Husain: Economic cooperation in Asia  
Address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  high  level  seminar 
organised on the occasion of the Asian Cooperation Dialogue, Islamabad, 5 April 2005. 
 During  the  past  five  decades  developing  countries  in  Asia  have  provided  the  most  persuasive  and 
credible story as to how poor countries can progress and bring about prosperity for their downtrodden 
people. Beginning with Japan, followed by NICs particularly Korea, ASEAN countries and now China, 
these  countries  have  not  only  doubled  or  quadrupled  per  capita  incomes  in  a  record  time  but  also 
significantly reduced the incidence of poverty. 
There are several different interpretations of the East Asian miracle and every school of thought has 
taken the credit for the unprecedented success of more than 1.5 billion people inhabiting this region. 
Those who believe in the supremacy of state led industrialization have attributed the turn around to the 
selective interventions by the Government through directed credit, subsidized foreign exchange, tax 
concessions, tariff exemptions and picking the winners. Those whose faith in pure market mechanism 
remains  unblemished  argue  that  unilateral  trade  liberalization,  integration  with  the  global  economy, 
attracting foreign investment and technology and generally pursuing market friendly economic policies 
were responsible for these spectacular results. A more dispassionate analysis would reveal that no 
single  extreme  model  can  satisfactorily  explain  this  phenomenon.  There  are,  however,  several 
common  elements  of  strategy  that  have  also  been  practiced  outside  East  Asia  and  have  also 
generated  similar  results.  There  is  now  a  wide  consensus  that  participation  in  international, 
inter-regional  and  intra-regional  trade  enhances  the  market  size  for  sale  of  goods  and  services 
substantially relative to those who remain confined to the domestic markets. This added purchasing 
power  accelerates  the  pace  of  economic  growth  and  shortens  the  period  required  for  doubling 
incomes.  Second,  as  the  poor  countries  have  low  domestic  savings  in  relation  of  their  investment 
needs they have to draw on foreign savings either in form of official flows, commercial loans or foreign 
direct investment to supplement this inadequate pool of domestic savings. The only exception is China 
whose citizens save a remarkable 40 percent of their income in form of savings. The contrast between 
China and other comparators is evident in the time it took China to double its per capita income. Third, 
even  if  the  countries  have  large  pool  of  domestic  savings  they  cannot  transform  this  pool  into 
productive  and  remunerative  investment  over  sustained  period  unless  they  acquire,  assimilate  and 
disseminate  the  latest  technology  in  production,  process  and  marketing.  Embodied  in  foreign 
investment  is  the  transfer  of  technology  that  can  be  adapted  and  internalized  to  suit  the  local 
conditions.  Fourth,  the  state  has  a  major  role  to  play  and  cannot  retreat  to  the  sidelines  as  a 
disinterested bystander. 
Maintenance  of  macroeconomic  stability,  pursuit  of  sound  economic  policies,  provision  of  physical 
infrastructure,  assuring  security  of  property  and  person,  adjudicating  disputes,  respecting  property 
rights and  enforcing  contracts,  investing  in  research  and  development  and  more  generally  in  public 
goods  are  some  of  the  elements  of  the  enabling  environment  that  Governments  create  for  private 
businesses to flourish. Fifth, no country in the world can aspire to achieve sustainable improvement in 
the living standards of its people unless it has invested in education health, nutrition, drinking water, in 
other words, in human development. This is going to be even more pressing in the 21st century as the 
world becomes a knowledge-based economy. A literate, healthy, educated and continuously learning 
and adapting labor force will make the difference between the success and failure of countries. 
It is against this background that we should examine the future course of Economic Cooperation in 
Asia.  There  is  no  way  that  increased  cooperation  can  be  wished.  It  has  to  be  embedded  in  the 
confluence of interests of all the participants and anchored in ground realities. Intra-regional trade and 
investment among the ASEAN + 3 countries has insulated this region from the vagaries, vicissitudes 
and volatility of the western economies. The correlation and dependence of the region’s economy on 
the rest of the world is weakening and as the share of intra-regional trade and investment flows further 
increase  the  link  will  become  unimportant.  South  Asia  and  Central  Asia,  on  the  other  hand,  have 
neither benefited from integration within their respective regions nor with the ASEAN + 3 region. The 
market size, the increased purchasing power, the nature of economic reforms and pursuit of liberal 
and open door policies, a large pool of trained manpower and the emergence of India as the reservoir 
of  scientific  and  technological manpower  do create a  win-win situation  for  all  the  participants  in  the 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
Asian Cooperation Dialogue. Pakistan has completely turned its economy around during the last five 
years  and  is  now  experiencing  7  percent  plus  growth  rate  with  a  fast  emerging  middle  class  of 
15 million people. Similarly, the other countries of South Asia are also making considerable progress 
economically. Thus together the South Asia and Central Asia offer an expanding and buoyant market 
and also provide source of supplies to the value chain for the more advanced countries of the region. 
Japan  and  Korea  are  already  using  ASEAN  Countries  and  China  as  the  platform  for  production  of 
goods  in  a  cost  effective  way  while  providing  design,  technology,  specifications  and  taking  care  of 
marketing and sales. Malaysia is beginning to feel the pinch of labor shortages and is looking towards 
South  Asian  Countries  for  relieving  this  pressure.  Singapore  and  Malaysia  are  capital  surplus 
countries  with  high  foreign  trade-GDP  ratios  and  limited  domestic  markets.  They  are  now  looking 
towards the middle classes of South Asia whose incomes are rising fast and whose appetite for goods 
and services is voracious. India alone is adding about 2 million cellular phone subscribers every month 
while Pakistan has increased the size of cellular phone market from 3 million to 8 million within just 
one  year.  This  example  can  be  multiplied  for  fast  moving  consumer  goods,  energy,  infrastructure, 
services of all kinds. Thus investment in these countries can be beneficial for both the capital surplus 
and  large  market  size  countries.  Central  Asia  has  huge  energy  resources  but  is  geographically 
disadvantaged as it is landlocked. Infrastructure development providing access to seaports as well as 
gas pipelines, hydroelectric power transmission lines can make their economies more competitive and 
at the same time ease the energy shortages in India and Pakistan. China, because of its tremendous 
success,  is  facing  or  likely  to  face  growing  restraints  and  impediments  in  expanding  access  to  the 
Western  markets  for  its  manufactured  goods.  Joint  Ventures  between  Chinese  companies  and 
relocation in other parts of the region with low costs of production combined with availability of ample 
labor would be in the economic interest of both China as well as the recipient countries. India’s proven 
prowess in information technology, Internet-related services, Biotechnology and other intellectual fields 
can  be  used  to  enhance  the  productivity  across  the  board  in  all  the  countries  of  Asia.  Given  the 
growing demand of skills among the Asian economies the inter operability of skilled manpower across 
the territorial boundaries of each individual country will help meet this demand. 
This above scenario is doable in my view but it requires a shared vision, a long term strategy, political 
will  and  commitment,  a  time  bound  action  plan,  an  institutional  mechanism  for  implementation  and 
monitoring,  and  a  machinery  for  follow  up,  dispute  resolution,  and  problem  solving.  If  the  foreign 
ministers present at Islamabad this week can proceed along this road map I am quite confident that all 
the countries in region will be winner and nobody will be loser. Historians will then rightly describe 21st 
Century  as  the  Asian  Century  just  like  the  past  three  centuries  were  the  American  and  European 
centuries. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
