European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 7 April 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is our pleasure to welcome you to this press conference. The Vice-President 
and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which 
was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
All in all, we have not changed our assessment of risks to price stability over the medium term. So far, 
we have seen no significant evidence of underlying domestic inflationary pressures building up in the 
euro area.  Accordingly,  we  have  left  the  key  ECB  interest  rates unchanged. Both  nominal  and  real 
interest rates are at exceptionally low levels, lending ongoing support to economic activity. However, 
upside risks to price stability over the medium term remain and continued vigilance is therefore of the 
essence.  
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. Recent data 
and  survey  indicators  on  economic  activity  have  been  mixed.  In  general  they  point  to  ongoing 
economic growth at a moderate pace over the short term, with no clear signs as yet of a strengthening 
in underlying dynamics. 
Looking  further  ahead,  the  conditions  remain  in  place  for  moderate  economic  growth  to  continue. 
Global  growth  remains  solid,  providing  a  favourable  environment  for  euro  area  exports.  On  the 
domestic  side,  investment  is  expected  to  continue  to  be  supported  by  very  favourable  financing 
conditions, improved profits and greater business efficiency. Consumption growth should develop in 
line  with  real  disposable  income  growth.  However,  at  the  same  time,  persistently  high  oil  prices  in 
particular pose downside risks to growth.  
Turning to consumer prices, Eurostat’s flash estimate for annual HICP inflation was 2.1% in March, 
unchanged from February. In the coming months, annual inflation rates are likely to remain somewhat 
above  2%,  although  the  exact  figure  will  depend  largely  on  how  oil  prices  develop.  Looking  further 
ahead,  so  far  we  have  seen  no  significant  evidence  of  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures 
building up in the euro area. Wage increases have remained contained over recent quarters and, in 
the context of moderate economic growth and weak labour markets, this trend is likely to continue for 
the time being.  
However, upside risks to price stability remain. Given recent oil price rises, it is once again paramount 
that second-round effects stemming from wage and price-setting throughout the economy are avoided. 
It  is  particularly  important  that  the  social  partners  assume  their  responsibilities  in  this  respect.  In 
addition, developments in longer-term inflation expectations need to be monitored closely. 
The monetary analysis provides further insight into the outlook for price developments at medium to 
longer-term horizons. While the latest monetary and credit data show some moderation in the pace of 
monetary  expansion,  they  confirm  that  the  stimulative  effect  of  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  has 
remained  the  dominating  force.  In  addition,  the  fact  that  monetary  dynamics  continue  to  be  driven 
mainly  by  the  most  liquid  components  suggests  that  excess  liquidity  may  entail  risks  of  upward 
inflationary pressures in the medium to longer term. Furthermore, strong monetary and credit growth 
indicates the need to carefully monitor whether risks are building up in the context of strong house 
price increases in some regions of the euro area. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  confirms  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained,  while  there  continue  to  be  medium-term  upside  risks  to  price  stability  which  need  to  be 
monitored  closely.  Cross-checking  with  the  monetary  analysis  supports  the  case  for  continued 
vigilance with regard to the materialisation of such risks.  
Turning to fiscal policies, recent information provides a mixed picture and continues to raise concerns. 
Although  public  finances  remain  sound  in  a  few  euro  area  countries  and  fiscal  consolidation  is 
progressing slowly in others, in several countries fiscal perspectives are worrying, as imbalances are 
not projected to decline, as planned earlier, and in some cases are even forecast to rise.  
Given that inappropriate consolidation strategies and shortcomings in their implementation have, in the 
past, made compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact difficult, it is now essential that consolidation 
plans are ambitious and are fully implemented. It is equally essential that the European Commission 
and the ECOFIN Council strictly enforce the new agreement on the implementation of the Pact so as 
to restore the framework’s credibility. The Governing Council would also like to reiterate the need to 
deliver  on  fiscal  and  structural  reforms  that  enhance  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  and 
confidence in the growth prospects of all Member States.  
As  regards  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  Presidency 
Conclusions  of  the  Brussels  European  Council  of  22  and  23  March  2005,  which  state  that  “it  is 
essential  to  relaunch  the  Lisbon  Strategy  without  delay  and  re-focus  priorities  on  growth  and 
employment”.  EU  countries  urgently  need  to  promote  innovation  and  human  capital  formation, 
establish a regulatory environment which is friendlier for businesses, accelerate market liberalisation, 
and increase labour market flexibility.  
Attention must now shift towards implementing this reform agenda. Closing the implementation gap is 
essential  in  order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  structural  reforms  in  terms  of  both  a  higher  growth 
potential in the medium term and improved consumer and business confidence in the short term.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
