Timothy F Geithner: Key challenges in risk management 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  RMA/Risk  Business  KRI’s  Global  Operational  Risk  Forum,  New 
York, 13 January 2005. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today. 
I want to talk about the mix of forces at work on the broader macroeconomic front and what that may 
imply for risk and for financial stability. 
By many measures, the economic landscape looks reasonably good. The qualified optimism that now 
seems  to  prevail  about  the  global  expansion  is  reflected  in  low  risk  premia,  unusually  low  credit 
spreads, low and quite stable inflation expectations, and low actual and implied volatility. 
But  the  global  economy  faces  a  set  of  pressing  macroeconomic  policy  challenges.  How  should  we 
think about the risks presented by these broader macroeconomic forces, and their implications for the 
sustainability of this recent period of stable economic performance, and low volatility and risk premia? 
The U.S. expansion has proven quite resilient. We enter the new year with what appears to be a pretty 
solid  underlying  pace  of  growth.  Core  inflation  is  moderate,  and  various  measures  of  inflation 
expectations suggest confidence in the outlook for price stability. Estimates of structural productivity 
growth remain high, although there has been some moderation recently. 
The pace of global growth has moderated a bit, but most forecasts anticipate a quite strong and broad 
based  expansion.  The  IMF’s  projection  is  just  over  four  percent  for  real  global  GDP  growth.  The 
consensus of private forecasters sees growth in Europe and Japan close to estimates of potential, or 
in the neighborhood of two percent. 
Growth in the major emerging markets looks impressive, reflecting not only the benefits of a positive 
external environment, but also the impact of better economic leadership and policies more supportive 
of  macroeconomic  stability  and  reduced  external  vulnerability.  In  China,  officials  now  seem  more 
confident that they have induced the desired moderation in growth to a more sustainable, but still high 
pace of growth. 
The global economy has weathered the oil price shock quite well. If the long term futures prices are 
right, we need to be prepared to live with the possibility of a sustained period of higher oil prices, and 
perhaps more volatility in oil prices, and the world seems to be getting itself more prepared for that 
prospect. 
In the financial markets, this broadly positive outlook has been accompanied by a dramatic reduction 
in risk premia, leaving the price of insurance unusually low against a less favorable or more volatile 
environment. 
These developments imply a view among market participants that future macroeconomic shocks will 
be  more  moderate  than  in  the  past  and  more  likely  to  be  absorbed  without  broader  damage  to 
economic  performance  or  the  financial  system.  They  reflect  a  general  increase  in  confidence  that 
monetary authorities here and in other countries can keep inflation stable at appropriately moderate 
levels. They reflect diminished uncertainty about the expected path of monetary policy in the United 
States. And they imply that the imbalances in the global economy will be diffused smoothly. 
Of course, not much is certain in economics and finance. One cannot know with confidence whether 
future economic policies and outcomes will justify the confidence in the benign outlook now reflected in 
risk premia. 
What are the broader challenges and forces that will dominate the policy agenda and affect economic 
outcomes? I want to touch on four, though this is a selective list. 
First, all of the major economies face difficult fiscal sustainability issues, and these will be exacerbated 
by the approaching demographic cliff. Fiscal policy in most of the major economies is on a path that 
will  lead  to  increasing,  rather  than  stable  or  falling  debt-to-GDP  ratios.  In  virtually  all  the  major 
economies, the cost of committed benefits substantially exceeds the stream of tax resources available 
under current policies. If one were to produce a ten year forecast of the U.S. fiscal position using the 
fan charts to illustrate uncertainty that are a feature of the inflation reports of many central banks, the 
size of the fan would be very wide, indicating a substantial probability of deficits significantly worse 
than the already troubling central path for the deficit predicted given current policies. 
Alongside these fiscal challenges, the size and concentration of external imbalances in the system are 
at an unprecedented scale, between five to six percent of GDP in the case of the U.S. current account 
deficit. This imbalance is the result of a combination of a sharp decline in U.S. net national savings, 
driven  by  increased  public  sector  borrowing  and  a  large  rise  in  household  debt,  and  a  sustained 
increase  in  the  relative  strength  of  U.S.  demand  growth  compared  with  Europe  and  Japan.  The 
counterpart of this deficit is a large inflow of capital from the world’s private savers and foreign central 
banks.  The  expected  trajectory  for  this  imbalance  produces  a  dramatic  deterioration  in  our  net 
international position and cannot be sustained indefinitely. 
These  two  broad  forces  coincide  with  the  increasingly  rapid  integration  of  China  and  India  into  the 
global economy and financial system. Their impact on the world economy already seems substantially 
greater than their shares of global GDP. This process of integration has a long way to go. It offers 
tremendous potential gains in income growth, not just for their 2.5 billion citizens, but also for those 
who trade with them, through lower prices and further impetus to productivity gains. But it also brings 
greater  adjustment  pressures  for  producers  of  tradable  goods  and  services,  generating  greater 
demands on political leaders to provide protection against those competitive pressures. This dynamic 
will test the ability of governments to sustain commitment to an open multilateral trading system, and 
the manner in which this plays out will have an important impact on future productivity gains. 
A fourth challenge involves prospective changes in the global exchange rate regime. The international 
monetary  system  now  incorporates  an  uncomfortable  disparity  in  the  extent  to  which  real  effective 
exchange rates vary across regions. The monetary authorities of the United States and Europe allow 
considerable variability in their real exchange rates, though they are not indifferent to movements in 
exchange  rates.  Japan  has  somewhat  less  enthusiasm  for  flexibility  and  runs  a  regime  in  which  it 
seeks to avoid large swings in the value of their currency. Emerging market economies run a mix of 
regimes from those that permit significant flexibility to those that run essentially fixed pegs or regimes 
that seek to contain variations to relatively small degrees around implicit targets for their currencies 
against the dollar or a basket of the currencies of their major trading partners. 
The world has lived with this system for some time. But this is not an ideal mix, either for the monetary 
system  as  a  whole,  or  for  those  countries  which  permit  very  little  variability  in  their  real  effective 
exchange rates, and it’s probably not sustainable over time. 
It also is not ideal because it limits the extent to which markets work to facilitate adjustment. It creates 
the  risk  of  larger  moves  in  the  major  currencies  than  might  otherwise  be  the  case.  In  the  national 
economies  of  those  not  yet  prepared  to  allow  more  flexibility  in  their  effective  exchange  rates,  it 
creates the risk of growing distortions in the allocation of resources, conflict with domestic monetary 
policy objectives, and the risk of larger and more abrupt future movements in the exchange rate. 
These four broad forces will have substantial implications for the macroeconomic performance of the 
world economy over the medium term. 
This combination of fiscal sustainability problems, large external imbalances, and the tension in the 
existing exchange rate system creates the risk of unanticipated shocks to financial prices, even in a 
context where monetary policy credibility is strong. The probability of these shocks may be low, but it 
is higher than it has been, and higher than we should be comfortable with. These shocks could be 
large enough to lower future growth outcomes. The world’s economies have very different capacities 
to  comfortably  manage  the  inevitable  adjustments.  Without  policy  action  commensurate  with  the 
challenges, we face some risk, it may not be high, but it is material, of a world with somewhat lower 
growth performance and higher volatility. 
Although  the  United  States  has  the  distinction  of  presiding  over  the  more  awkward  combination  of 
imbalances, it is in many ways in a better position than other countries to manage successfully through 
this period. 
Our underlying fiscal position is stronger, our debt to GDP burden lower, our demographic cliff more 
moderate, and our trend growth rate substantially higher than that of the other major economies. 
We have a more flexible economy, which is evident in the speed with which enterprises adjust and the 
relative ease with which labor and capital move to their most productive uses. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
Our financial system provides a strong combination of bank-centered financial groups that are capable 
of  withstanding  larger  shocks  than  was  possible  in  the  past,  a  more  diverse  mix  of  other  financial 
intermediaries,  and  deeper  and  more  liquid  capital  markets  than  exist  in  the  other  major  financial 
centers. Together these factors seem to have produced a more stable and resilient financial system, 
one that is better able to withstand stress. 
These are important strengths for the United States, and they are formidable even in comparison with 
the scale of the broader challenges ahead for the world economy. 
What are the most important actions policy makers can take to mitigate the risks and challenges on 
the horizon? Here’s a list of actions the U.S. can take on its own or initiate in cooperation with others. 
First, with respect to monetary policy. We need to preserve confidence that policy will move toward a 
positive real fed funds rate at a pace sufficient to keep inflation expectations stable at a low level. How 
far policy moves and the pace at which it moves will depend on how the outlook evolves. Preserving 
the credibility of our commitment to price stability is vitally important, not least because of the flexibility 
it affords us to confront future shocks that have the potential to cause damage to the financial system 
and the economy. 
Second, it is important that the United States work to build more confidence that it will act on the fiscal 
front to achieve a better balance between our commitments and our resources, both with respect to 
the medium term and the longer term. Given the inherent uncertainty surrounding long-term growth 
forecasts, the formidable rise in costs associated with providing for an aging population with longer life 
expectancy, and a potentially protracted elevation in national security costs, it makes sense to build a 
stronger financial position into our fiscal future. The present fiscal trajectory entails an uncomfortable 
scale  of  borrowing  and  little  insurance  against  possible  adverse  outcomes  in  an  uncertain  world. 
Building  a  stronger  fiscal  cushion  can  help  reduce  the  risk  of  adverse  outcomes  -  those  that  might 
come in the form of a decline in the willingness of foreigners to acquire claims on the United States on 
the present scale, as well as those that might take the form of a reduction in private investment and 
lower  future  productivity  gains.  Strengthening  confidence  in  our  fiscal  management  and  fiscal 
sustainability is critical to reducing the risk in the size of our external imbalance. 
Third,  the  U.S.  and  the  major  economies  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  encouraging  further 
evolution  in  the  international  monetary  system.  Policy  makers  in  Asia  are  well  aware  of  the 
complications  and  costs  involved  in  sustaining  their  current  regimes.  Many  are  moving  toward 
permitting more flexibility against the dollar, and even in their effective exchange rates. Few however 
are comfortable with the prospect of accepting large short-term volatility and large movements over 
time  in  their  effective  exchange  rates.  They  are  looking  for  a  world  in  which  they  can  have  more 
monetary policy independence, progressively more financial integration with the globe, and face less 
risk of large destabilizing moves in the major currencies and less vulnerability to acute pressure on 
their own currencies. 
The exchange rate system among the major currencies provides a desirable degree of flexibility in real 
exchange  rates.  Although  the  process  of  cooperation  among  the  G-7  has  not  eliminated  the  large 
swings  in  exchange  rates  associated  with  large  changes  in  fundamentals  among  the  major 
economies,  it  has  had  some  modest  success  in  avoiding  more  damaging  movements.  This 
cooperative  framework,  characterized  by  a  pragmatic  approach  to  promoting  greater  stability  in 
exchange markets, offers a reasonable model for cooperation among the major currencies and those 
of the emerging world. The challenge ahead is to help manage the transition to the monetary system 
that provides for more flexibility in the exchange rates of all the major economic areas, and this has to 
be handled with care. 
Finally,  it  is  important  that  the  world’s  major  private  financial  institutions  run  themselves  with  a 
sufficiently strong financial cushion, a cushion calibrated not just against the risks they confront in this 
uncertain world, but to the much more central role they play in many markets. Particularly for those 
institutions whose size and scope make them systemically important, capital, liquidity, and the overall 
risk  management  and  control  architecture  need  to  be  exceptionally  strong,  stronger  than  would  be 
necessary and appropriate for smaller institutions. The consequence of size is not just that failure or 
the perceived risk of failure at one of these institutions has larger negative implications for the financial 
system today than would be the case in a less consolidated world. It is also the case that their greater 
relative size limits their ability to take actions that would reduce their exposure in the event of a shock 
without creating the risk of magnifying the shock. 
Let me conclude by noting the overwhelming significance of the economic policy decisions we make 
here in the United States to the world’s capacity to deal with these broader challenges. Our impact on 
global economic activity and on international financial stability is greater than simple measures of our 
share  of  GDP.  When  we  are  strong  economically,  the  world  can  more  easily  tolerate  economic 
weakness outside the United States. When we are less strong, the impact on the world economy is 
powerful. This has been true for some time. What’s new is that we are significantly more dependent 
today on the confidence of the rest of the world in U.S. economic policy and the safety and stability of 
our financial markets. This gives us, along with the rest of the world, a compelling interest in sustaining 
credibility and confidence in U.S. financial management and the strength of our financial system. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2005
