Marion Williams: The drivers of a changing financial system in Barbados 
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to a seminar hosted by the 
University  of  the  West  Indies  Alumni  Association  and  the  Barbados  Institute  of  Banking  &  Finance, 
Cave Hill, 14 February 2005. 
 Good Evening, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I wish to congratulate Professor Frank Alleyne, the UWI Alumni Barbados Chapter and the Barbados 
Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  for  conceptualising  this  forum.  It  is  indeed  timely.  My  topic  will be 
about the changes that we have witnessed in the financial sector in recent years and more especially 
the  likely  future  changes.  In  these  opening  remarks,  I  will  touch  on  the  international  and  regional 
influences,  technological  changes,  business  needs,  changing  regulation  and  their  impact  on  the 
financial system and on the economy. Further, I will look at the prospects for the sector’s performance 
in an increasingly liberalised and globalised environment. 
The past 10 years have seen more changes in international banking than we have experienced in the 
previous fifty years. Internationally, we have seen banks become bigger as a spate of mergers and 
acquisitions have taken place. We have seen the banking system become more integrated as banks 
were  allowed  to  get  involved  in  securities  business  in  many  jurisdictions  where  this  was  previously 
prohibited. We also saw the opening up of capital markets accompanied in some cases by increasing 
levels of volatility. 
At  the  same  time,  international  financial  centres  like  Barbados  began  to  grow  significantly  and  this 
prompted a well-planned and orchestrated effort to keep them in check. Globalization began to bring 
with it new levels of risk, and operational risks in banking became a matter of increasing concern. The 
complexity of banking supervision increased as international regulators introduced new measures of 
evaluating  portfolios.  The  role  of  credit  rating  agencies  became  increasingly  important  as  potential 
investors  sought  reliability  of  information  for  assessment  investments.  Exchange  of  information  and 
the level of transparency became important issues in judging the credibility of transactions. Guidelines 
became more and more international in nature and national authorities found themselves faced with a 
plethora of new rules. Technology in the banking system advanced rapidly to real time settlement, and 
instant transfer of funds became common place. 
Barbados 
On the national front, in Barbados, this country saw globalisation and regionalism in action as both the 
local  banks  and  a  regional  bank  changed  hands.  We  also  witnessed  a  widescale  takeover  of 
indigenous  banks  and  for  the  first  time  in  many  years  Barbados  by  2004  had  no  local  commercial 
banks. 
In the insurance sector we saw a spate of amalgamations which led to the dominance of the sector by 
a single company. In the non-bank financial sector we saw new competition entering by way of foreign 
and regional financial institutions. 
The credit union movement, which has grown in stature in the past few years, become a significant 
socio-economic organisation that caters in a large part, to a section of the population which had limited 
access to credit from commercial banks. They grew in strength and became as large as some of the 
smaller  banks  but  stopped  short  of  fully  challenging  them  on  their  own  terms.  New  entrants  to  the 
market led to commercial banks became highly competitive, bidding down interest rates by outdoing 
each other in the marketing of loans. 
The  distribution  sector  continued  to  be  an  important  recipient  of  credit,  and  the  banking  system 
facilitated this import orientation. Financing of imports continued to receive a major part of the bank’s 
portfolio despite efforts to mitigate reliance on this sector. 
Efforts to change this through credit controls worked for a time until methods were found to get around 
it through leasing, direct lending and other means of financing and until the emphasis on market forces 
made such approaches appear inconsistent with modern trends. 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 1
The Central Bank through its discount schemes offered facilities to key sectors so as to give priority to 
the productive sectors – in an attempt to encourage a change in lending orientation but the demand 
for these services remained low. I take this opportunity to encourage the use of the small business 
guarantee  services  which  have  been  offered  by  the  Central  Bank  and  which  have  been  heavily 
underutilised. I would urge banks to encourage their customers to use them more frequently. 
Drivers of change 
However,  liberalisation  of  the  financial  industry  over  the  past  two  decades  has  helped  to  support 
creative  financial  markets  throughout  the  region,  particularly  in  Trinidad  and  Jamaica,  and  seems 
poised to drive the same type of evolution in Barbados. At the same time, changes in technology have 
lead to the creation of new financial products and services to automated teller machines to customer 
credit  checks  at  the  teller  and  to  some  the  development  of  e-banking.  These  changing  financial 
industry  dynamics  have  facilitated  a  growing  trend  towards  increased  efficiencies  but  have  entailed 
major capital outlays. 
Increased liberalisation has been accompanied by an increase in the level of oversight and regulation 
of the financial system. While it is important not to over-deregulate the need for regulation particularly 
in the area of finance became more important. Greater market orientation needed to be supported by 
policies that discouraged inappropriate behaviour, but encouraged competition, hence the regulatory 
framework for the financial sector developed new guidelines for economic interaction within a market 
environment.  New  trends  in  regulation  are  seeing  a  shift  from  prescribing  detailed  rules  and 
regulations to a focus on identifying risks at the system level, and on ensuring that individual banking 
institutions have the necessary capacity in terms of internal controls and systems to undertake and 
manage risks. This was further emphasised by international regulators who pushed greater oversight 
of the non-banking sector and more anti-money laundering vigilance. 
While there has been increased financial consolidation, up to now this has not affected the conduct 
nor the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, the Central Bank remains alert to the possibility 
that consolidation can affect the competitiveness of financial markets, and is conscious of the need to 
continuously  monitor  the  transmission  mechanisms  with  a  view  to  evaluating  their  impact  on  policy 
effectiveness. 
Traditional  banks  face  increased  competition  from  new  financial  service  providers  as  well  as  new 
foreign  entrants  and  new  technologies  for  conducting  traditional  operations  in  more  efficient  and 
effective ways also drive change. A number of firms have sought to increase the use of technologically 
assisted modes of transacting business, such as Internet and telephone banking. There is widespread 
acceptance of credit and debit cards and many merchants now have point-of-sale outlets to facilitate 
the use of varying types of cards. In addition, new technologies, along with the demand for ebusiness, 
continue to lead to important changes in financial support systems. 
The major domestic banks and financial institutions have made significant investments in technology 
and the cost of keeping up has become quite onerous. Some have entered into alliances with high-
technology firms to control the cost of information technology data-processing and this pooling may be 
a trend which we may continue to observe. 
At  the  level  of  marketing,  some  banks  have  also  targeted  growth  areas,  such  as  corporate  and 
investment banking and have made inroads to the bond market. Changes have also been driven by 
the new emerging regional economic opportunities and changing customer demands. 
High  performance  of  the  industry  requires  that  the  banking  institutions  increasingly  offer  greater 
product differentiation and value-added services. I expect that in the very near future such demands 
will require resources to be directed to new areas of research and development in the search for a 
wider  range  of  structured  and  customised  products.  Indeed,  there  has  been  evidence  of  growing 
consumer  involvement  in  product  development  and  delivery  as  customers  are  demanding  greater 
service quality and product offerings. The Central Bank itself started in 2004 a series of seminars on 
new financial instruments and proposes to continue this in 2005. 
Capacity building and infrastructural development 
Though  efforts  have  been  intensified  towards  developing  a  more  diversified  financial  system, 
responses  in  some  areas  have  been  lukewarm.  Small  enterprises  continue  to  have  difficulty  in 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2005
accessing funds on appropriate terms, and venture capital funds have been limited. So that there are 
still market segments that are unsatisfied. Investors in the stock market continue to buy and hold, and 
trading in government securities is very limited, so that instruments continue to lack the needed level 
of liquidity. 
However, competition has resulted in improvements in the turnaround time in processing loans, and in 
most instances, the response time in resolving customer problems. 
Credit  growth  has  rebounded  strongly  in  2004  and  retail  lending  for  consumption  generally  has 
increased. Indeed, the banking industry has continued to benefit from strong demand for consumer 
credit  to  the  detriment  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves.  But  there  remains  a  greater  need  for 
institutions  to  develop  more  avenues  to  assist  productive  sectors.  In  this  regard,  not  much  has 
changed. 
A change in the mode of financial regulation 
Given the importance of maintaining public confidence and trust in the financial system, regulation and 
supervision continue to be vital components of a well-developed financial system. 
The Central Bank continued to balance carefully the objective of promoting efficiency in the banking 
system, and maintaining financial stability, conscious that while competition and innovation are always 
important stability of the financial system remains of paramount importance. 
Opportunities from regional integration 
With the imminent implementation of CSME, large businesses and corporations have begun to review 
their business architecture more aggressively, and have moved to relocate business operations and to 
operate subsidiary operations in new locations - some of them non-English speaking. This has been 
accompanied by new ways of organising production, sale and marketing within the region. 
The  CARICOM  region  offers  a  market  of  approximately  6  million  people  (excluding  Haiti). 
Opportunities therefore exist for financial institutions to support regional business and investors who 
are  venturing  into  new  activities.  The  role  of  banking  institutions  also  needs  to  extend  beyond  the 
traditional one of financier, to one of manager of financial relationships. 
Strategic alliances have been growing, and have tended to enhance commercial banks’ capacity to 
compete  in  both  the  domestic  and  external  markets,  and  thus  has  enabled  them  to  position 
themselves to capture the opportunities afforded by liberalisation and globalisation, both within a wider 
CARICOM and outside it. 
Customer-focused finance 
However,  there  are  areas  where  more  attention  needs  to  be  paid.  One  such  area  is  the  need  to 
commit more resources to microfinancing. While institutional arrangements are being put in place to 
increase access to financing for micro-enterprises at the government level, the banking sector with its 
large  network  of  branches  can  become  an  important  channel  to  enhance  its  services  to  this 
sub-sector. 
Conclusion 
I envisage further expansion in selected markets outside Barbados will likely become a key strategy 
for a number of the large domestic financial institutions. 
I expect in the near future that since Credit Unions in Barbados will begin to match commercial banks 
in the range and quality of the services provided and that they will become virtual replacements for 
indigenous commercial banks. 
While  the  insurance  companies  which  owned  banks  have  disposed  of  their  interests,  greater 
coordination in the regulation of the financial sector will still likely occur as the services supplied by 
banks and insurance companies become less distinct. Already Registered Retirement Savings Plans 
offered by commercial banks resemble an insurance product. 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 3
In  the  future pension  funds  and  insurance companies could become  more  integrated  as  individuals 
seek to supplement their pensions, following on the new Pensions Act. 
Within the CSME cross-border capital flows are likely to increase and a greater convergence of the 
financial system is likely to occur. Cross-border ownership of shares in financial institutions is likely to 
increase  and  customers  are  likely  to  become  more  discerning  as  they  compare  products  offered  in 
other jurisdictions in the region. 
Greater  competition  could  mean  that  national  development  goals  may  have  to  struggle  to  re-assert 
themselves.  Emphasis  in  profitability  and  on  credit  ratings  may  mean  that  social  and  national 
economic objectives may become even more secondary to financial outcomes. This is likely to place 
greater onus on moral suasion and on assertions by government of national priorities. 
I envisage however, that the domestic financial landscape will evolve into a financial environment that 
will emerge to meet the future demands of the economy. 
We must aim for a world-class financial system that is best able to contribute to economic growth in an 
environment of financial stability. 
I wish you a most informative panel discussion session and I thank you for your attention. 
I now formally launch the public forum of the UWI Alumni and the Barbados Institute of Banking and 
Finance. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2005
