Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Moving towards a more competitive market  
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  2005 
dialogue session with insurers and takaful operators, Kuala Lumpur, 9 August 2005. 
 The  annual Dialogue between  Bank Negara  Malaysia  with  insurers and  takaful  operators  is  held  to 
discuss  issues  confronting  the  insurance  and  takaful  industries,  major  policy  initiatives  by  Bank 
Negara Malaysia as well as current economic and financial developments affecting the industry. This 
year's  dialogue  is  being  held  on  9  and  10  August  and  attended  by  the  Chairmen,  members  of  the 
Board and Chief Executive Officers of insurers, takaful operators and bank holding companies.  
Themed "Moving Towards a More Competitive Market", the dialogue this year will provide a platform 
for  insurers  and  takaful operators  to  discuss strategic  issues  relating  to  the  challenges  of  the  more 
competitive and rapidly changing financial landscape. The keynote address delivered by the Governor, 
Bank Negara Malaysia at the opening of the Dialogue session is attached. 
The  Malaysian  economic  and  financial  landscape  continues  to  be  dramatically  transformed.  As  this 
transition process gains momentum, the key issues confronting the insurance and takaful industries 
today  are:  defining  effective  growth  strategies  in  an  increasingly  borderless  world;  sustaining 
confidence in the face of increased demands for greater transparency; responding to the challenges of 
regulatory  and  accounting  changes;  and  managing  risk  in  an  increasingly  complex  and  volatile 
environment. These challenges have spawned multi-faceted reforms, involving changes in business 
models,  risk  orientations,  operating  practices  and  in  the  interface  with  customers.  It  is  this 
modernisation process of the insurance and takaful industries that will take it to new heights, bringing 
with it widespread and far reaching implications on the overall financial system and the economy.  
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this year's dialogue session between Bank Negara Malaysia and 
the  insurance  and  takaful  industries  to  discuss  these  issues  in  greater  depth  within  our  domestic 
context,  and  to  consider  the  necessary  actions  that  need  to  be  taken  under  increasingly  more 
challenging  conditions.  The  theme  for  this  year's  dialogue:  "Moving  Towards  a  More  Competitive 
Market",  will  focus  on  the  challenges  of  pricing  deregulation,  product  transparency,  operating  cost 
efficiencies  and  commission  disclosures.  The  issues  revolving  around  operating  practices  and  the 
interface  with  customers  also  needs  to  be  viewed  in  terms  of  the  broader  dimensions  of  public 
confidence, transparency and risk management.  
The  dialogue  this  year  is  also  based  on  a  new  format  focused  on  issues  with  long-term  strategic 
implications  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  the  current  environment.  It  is  designed  to  encourage 
deliberations from the different perspectives between industry participants and Bank Negara Malaysia. 
The dialogue will also serve as a platform to reflect on recent economic and financial developments 
and the major policy initiatives by Bank Negara Malaysia. Allow me to take this opportunity to share 
some thoughts with you in these areas.  
The  outlook  for  the  Malaysian  economy  continues  to  remain  favourable,  despite  some  signs  of 
moderating growth in the global economy arising from the higher oil prices. Malaysia has had a track 
record of solid and steady growth for a number of years now. The diversified economic structure and 
sound macroeconomic fundamentals have been important in supporting this trend. Of importance is 
that this growth is private sector driven. While price pressures have been contained by improvements 
in labour productivity and capacity expansion, domestic inflation has begun to edge upwards, largely 
due  to  cost-related  factors.  In  balancing  these  trends,  monetary  policy  has  continued  to  remain 
supportive  of  growth.  Growth  in  Asia  has  also  remained  strong  with  mutually  reinforcing  effects  for 
regional economies, including Malaysia, as regional integration continues to intensify.  
The  global  environment,  however,  is  clouded  by  uncertainties  amid  the  persistence  of  global 
imbalances.  The  United  States  continues  to  record  large  deficits  in  its  external  accounts.  There  is 
significant  discussion  in  the  global  community  on  how  these  imbalances  may  be  unwound.  The 
consensus, however, is clear that the adjustment should be orderly. There has however, been an over 
focus  on  realignment  of  exchange  rates  to  facilitate  this  adjustment.  But  this  may  risk  destabilizing 
adjustments.  Ultimately,  the  structural  imbalances  have  to  be  addressed  by  some  combination  of 
adjustments in demand, prices and exchange rates. In particular, the rebalancing of global growth can 
be expected to be a major factor contributing to an orderly adjustment to these imbalances. Indeed, it 
would  require  more  than  just  adjustments  in  exchange  rates.  The  nature  and  breadth  of  the 
adjustments will be important to achieve a long-term solution.  
With  its  young  workforce,  growing  productivity,  competitive  and  dynamic  economies,  there  is  great 
potential for the Asian economies to contribute towards the re-balancing of global growth. With rising 
income levels in regional economies, particularly among the growing middle income group in China, 
India and the ASEAN economies, there is potential for an expansion of demand within the region. The 
rebalancing of global growth across the world will eventually contribute towards reducing the prevailing 
imbalances. Malaysia's own agility to absorb and respond to the external and domestic challenges has 
allowed  us  to  efficiently  shift  resources  to  new  areas  of  growth,  to  new  areas  of  comparative 
advantage and thus, sustain our long-term prospects. Going forward, Malaysia's economic policy will 
therefore continue to focus on ensuring that the economy's flexibility and resilience is sustained.  
With  the  strengthening  of the  economy,  the  financial  system  and our  fundamentals,  the  opportunity 
has been taken to deregulate and liberalise the environment further. The most recent policy initiative in 
this direction has been the shift in the exchange rate regime to a managed float. Under this regime, 
exchange rate stability will continue to be a primary objective of exchange rate policy. Malaysia is a 
trading  economy  that  is  highly  integrated  with  the  world  economy,  and  in  this  context,  a  stable 
exchange rate environment continues to be important. With changes in the international economic and 
financial  environment,  the  move  towards  a  managed  float  was  important  to  enable  Malaysia  to 
maintain  a  stable  exchange  rate  against  its  major  trading  partners.  Under  this  arrangement,  Bank 
Negara Malaysia will now monitor the exchange rate against a currency basket to ensure it remains 
close  to  fair  value.  The  transition  to  the  new  system  has  been  orderly,  with  transactions  mainly 
reflecting trade and foreign direct investment as well as portfolio investment activities.  
As providers of long-term capital and efficient risk transfer solutions for productive economic activity, 
the  insurance  and  takaful  sectors  play  an  important  role  in  supporting  the  economic  transformation 
process. Over the years, that role has increased in prominence with the impressive growth achieved 
by the industry. In 2005, the insurance and takaful industries have continued to demonstrate resilience 
and strong  performance  despite  challenging  investment  and underwriting conditions.  Premiums  and 
contributions have continued to expand at double digit growth rates in the first half of 2005, with the 
general  sector  rebounding  strongly  after  two  consecutive  years  of  slow  growth.  The  underlying 
fundamentals for sustainable growth have also strengthened with stronger solvency positions reported 
by the majority of players, continued profitability and improved underwriting discipline.  
The growth has also been accompanied by enhancements to the competitive structure, improvements 
in innovation and a greater degree of differentiation in the market, offering consumers a wider range of 
products and services. In particular, the advent of bancassurance and bancatakaful has seen more 
players packaging life insurance and family takaful with innovative investment options that incorporate 
banking product features. Today, bancassurance and bancatakaful constitutes a significant feature of 
Malaysia's  financial  landscape,  and  continues  to  develop  rapidly  in  terms  of  market  reach  and 
operational sophistication.  
The  recent  passage  of  the  Insurance  (Amendment)  Bill  on  Financial  Advisers  marks  yet  another 
important  milestone  in  ongoing  efforts  to  achieve  a  more  diversified  market  structure.  With  the 
legislative framework now in place, I am pleased to announce that Bank Negara Malaysia will soon be 
issuing licences for financial advisers. The introduction of financial advisers in the Malaysian insurance 
industry  will  further  diversify  the  distribution  system  for  life  insurance.  Corporate  bodies  with  a 
minimum paid-up capital of RM100,000 will be eligible to apply for a financial adviser's licence. Similar 
amendments to the Takaful Act 1984 will be undertaken in the near future within the context of more 
substantive and wide-ranging changes to the current legislation.  
Our foundations for financial stability will also continue to be strengthened with the ongoing evolution 
of a more diversified and balanced financial structure. Today, Malaysia stands at the forefront in the 
provision of comprehensive Islamic financial services covering banking, takaful, and the capital and 
money markets. In the area of takaful, Bank Negara Malaysia continues to undertake initiatives aimed 
at developing significant market players that are able to compete effectively and efficiently.  
Although the organic growth of the existing takaful operators may meet the current demand for takaful 
products  and  services,  it  is  envisaged  that  players  with  strong  capabilities  in  operational  and  risk 
management, and product development would hasten the further expansion of the takaful industry. In 
May this year, the Bank announced the issuance of up to four new licences for takaful operators. The 
additional  takaful  licences  are  offered  to  sound  financial  institutions,  with  priority  accorded  to  those 
with experience in Islamic banking, takaful or insurance business. It could also include joint ventures 
or consortiums of financial institutions, which includes at least a banking group. Such joint ventures or 
consortiums  would  enable  the  new  takaful  operators  to  leverage  on  the  expertise,  experience  and 
infrastructure of their partner financial institutions. In line with the liberalisation in the Islamic banking 
industry,  foreign  equity  interest  of  up  to  49%  will  be  allowed  in  the  takaful  entity  to  secure  strong 
shareholders, and foster meaningful strategic alliances.  
For  insurers,  the  potential  to  participate  with  strong  local  and  foreign  partners  in  the  new  takaful 
operators  will  open  up  significant  opportunities  to  expand  their  product  offerings  to  include  a 
comprehensive range of insurance and takaful products. Existing takaful operators will therefore need 
to  review  their  business  and  management  strategies  in  response  to  the  increased  competitive 
elements that are set to shape the takaful industry.  
Malaysia has also moved strategically to establish closer economic linkages and integration with our 
neighbours to enable Malaysian businesses to tap the vast commercial opportunities present in Asia. 
The Government has already started negotiations on a number of free trade agreements that will open 
doors  to  greater  market  access  in  the  growth  economies  within  the  region.  These  negotiations  are 
currently  now  at  various  stages.  We  remain  confident  of  achieving  a  positive  outcome  that  will  be 
balanced  and  mutually  beneficial.  Specific  opportunities  for  expansion  abroad  by  Islamic  financial 
institutions,  in  particular,  are  also  being  further  enhanced  through  various  bilateral  and  multilateral 
arrangements. This includes the signing of a memorandum of understanding between Malaysia and 
the  Islamic  Development  Bank  in  2004  to  enhance  cooperation  among  member  countries  of  the 
Organisation of Islamic Conference, or OIC, in the areas of trade, investment, islamic finance and ICT 
development.  These  initiatives  will  pave  the  way  for  Malaysian  takaful  operators  to  promote  and 
expand takaful and retakaful business to key target markets abroad, in particular, within the OIC.  
The  net  benefits  that  will  ultimately  accrue  to  Malaysia  will  depend  on  the  ability  of  Malaysian 
institutions  to  develop  targeted  globalisation  strategies  that  will  position  them  to  gain  from  the  first-
mover advantages where they arise. This needs to be reinforced with research into the new growth 
markets, and exploring opportunities for strategic alliances or joint ventures in these markets. At the 
same  time,  the  growth  strategies  must  also  accord  an  equal  inward  focus  on  reinforcing  financial 
strength and resilience, human capital development, a strong business reputation and high standards 
of  service  and  professionalism  all  of  which  are  the  critical  success  factors  for  effective  strategies 
abroad.  
Maintaining  financial  stability  remains  a  primary  mandate  of  the  Central  Bank.  In  response  to  the 
constantly  changing  financial  landscape,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  approach  to  the  regulation  and 
supervision  of  the  insurance  and  takaful  sectors  has  evolved  to achieve  a  more  robust  regime  that 
emphasises three key dimensions: first, creating a strong risk management culture that overlays the 
operations of insurers and takaful operators; second, facilitating market-led adjustments that will allow 
the  industry  to  evolve  in  response  to  market,  technological  and  demographic  developments,  while 
maintaining  sufficient  regulatory  oversight  to  maintain  financial  stability  and  public  confidence;  and 
third , ensuring mutually consistent policies for the banking and insurance sectors.  
Two fundamental changes underpinning the Bank's current approach to regulation and supervision are 
the shift towards "principle-based" regulations and the implementation of a risk-based regulatory and 
supervisory  regime.  Increasingly,  regulations  have  focused  less  on  prescriptive  rules,  and  more  on 
establishing the broad parameters for sound financial and business practices that provide substantial 
flexibility for insurers and takaful operators to apply the principles in the manner most appropriate to 
their specific circumstances. Under this approach, greater attention is also being given to the creation 
of appropriate incentives within the system to achieve the desired outcomes.  
The  adoption  of  "principle-based"  regulations  is  complemented  by  an  increased  focus  on  risk 
management  in  the  capital  and  supervisory  framework.  On  this  front,  I  am  encouraged  by  the 
industry's  positive  response  to  the  new  risk-based  supervisory  framework  implemented  for  the 
insurance  and  takaful  industries  since  August  2004.  The  new  approach  amplifies  the  focus  on 
institution-specific risks in the supervisory assessment and rating process. Importantly, the framework 
serves  to  mutually  enhance  understanding  by  the  institutions  and  the  Central  Bank  of  the  inherent 
risks faced by the respective institutions, and thereby establish the common expectations regarding 
the management and control of those risks, taking into account the nature, scope, complexity and risk 
profile  of  the  institution.  This  process,  in  turn,  facilitates  appropriate  supervisory  and  institutional 
responses that are proportionate to the risk assessments of individual institutions and their systemic 
impact.  
Similarly, the implementation of the risk-based capital framework for insurers will further reinforce the 
regulatory  focus  on  risk.  The  adjustments  to  this  framework  will  take  into  account  the  feedback 
received from the industry on the concept paper released by Bank Negara Malaysia in December last 
year,  as  well  as  the  results  of  the  impact  study  that  was  concurrently  carried  out  to  assess  the 
potential capital adjustments required by insurers. Specifically, the adjustments to the framework are 
being made to achieve greater consistency between the valuation bases for assets and liabilities, and 
to fine-tune the asset risk charges. A second consultation paper, incorporating these changes, will be 
released for further industry comments later this year.  
Insurers will no doubt welcome the greater degree of investment flexibility that will be allowed under 
the risk-based capital framework. It is an important improvement over the current "admitted assets" 
framework,  and  one  that  is  also  expected  to  significantly  raise  the  profile  of  the  investment 
management  function  within  the  industry.  As  the  scope  for  differentiation  between  institutions 
increases under the risk-based regime, it will become more critical for insurers to attract, develop and 
retain the right human capital resources. With the liberalisation of financial markets and the rapid pace 
of  financial  convergence,  the  investment  management  function  within  insurers  needs  to  be  flexible, 
risk-focused,  and  equipped  with  professionals  who  are  able  to  respond  to  the  exigencies  of  the 
marketplace.  
An  important  component  of  the  new  risk-based  capital  and  supervisory  framework  is  the  notion  of 
supervisory  target  capital  levels  which  insurers  will  be  required  to  maintain  under  the  risk-based 
framework. This is new to our environment, and has been a matter of some concern to insurers which 
may view it as an additional capital burden. Although the risk-based capital regime will more closely 
align economic capital with regulatory capital, it is important to recognize that it necessarily derives its 
application from industry-wide tests which cannot fully address risks that are specific to an individual 
institution.  The  supervisory  capital  target  therefore  serves  to  provide  an  early  signal  of  emerging 
difficulties so that appropriate intervention measures can be taken to prevent a further deterioration of 
conditions which would warrant more drastic and costly actions. For insurers that already adopt robust 
internal  approaches  to  capital  management,  the  introduction  of  the  supervisory  target  level  in  itself 
should  not  significantly  alter  existing  capital  management  strategies.  Insurers  that  do  not  yet  have 
such systems in place, will be encouraged to develop them, and thereby enhance their own resilience 
to adverse changes in business conditions.  
The Bank is mindful that developments internationally on this front remain extremely fluid. Work is still 
in progress on the International Financial Reporting Standard for Insurance Contracts, the Solvency II 
initiative in the European Union, and the development of cornerstones for solvency assessments by 
the International Association of Insurance Supervisors. The Bank will therefore continue to maintain an 
open  consultative  approach  in  proceeding  with  this  initiative  to  preserve  our  ability  to  respond 
appropriately and to ensure its smooth implementation.  
Going forward, greater attention will be given to  market conduct issues, which recent experience in 
other  markets  has  shown  to  be  an  increasingly  important  factor  in  promoting  confidence  in  the 
insurance  and  takaful  industries.  Financial  markets  cannot  operate  efficiently  and  effectively  unless 
market  participants  act  with  integrity.  This  needs  to  be  reinforced  with  adequate  information  to 
consumers  and  investors  to  make  informed  decisions.  In  today's  information  era,  the  business 
environment has changed dramatically, and with it, the expectations of consumers and investors have 
also increased. The industry needs to adapt accordingly.  
Policy  initiatives  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in  the  area  of  market  conduct  will  continue  to  focus  on 
achieving complete, true and plain disclosures to consumers, thereby equipping consumers to make 
informed  decisions essentially  through consumer  education  initiatives,  and  ultimately,  promoting  the 
fair treatment of policyholders. In this connection, I am pleased to announce that after more than two 
years  of  extensive  discussions  with  the  industry,  the  revised  Guidelines  on  Medical  and  Health 
Insurance  Business  have  now  been  finalized.  The  Guidelines  will  be  released  to  the  industry  this 
month for implementation early next year. This is an important strategic development, both from the 
public policy and consumer perspectives. Today, medical insurance business accounts for the largest 
share1 of non-tariff general insurance premiums in the market, with premiums exceeding RM1.3 billion 
in 2004. The revised Guidelines have retained a significant degree of product flexibility, and enhanced 
disclosure requirements to promote increased competition while more clearly defined rules governing 
                                                      
1  
10,5% of total general gross direct premiums, third (in terms of market share) only to motor and fire business.
minimum policy terms and conditions will be put in place to deliver a reasonable level of protection to 
policyholders. These requirements will also promote more consistent treatment of consumers in the 
provision of core benefits under medical insurance policies.  
Where  regulatory  intervention  remains  necessary,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  balance  the  business 
interests  of  industry  participants  with  that  of  consumers,  to  ensure  that  the  costs  of  regulation  are 
commensurate  with  its  perceived  benefits  to  consumers.  In  the  long  term,  however,  reliance  on 
regulation  and  supervisory  oversight  alone  is  not  a  sustainable  solution  to  the  market  conduct  and 
broader  confidence  issues  that  confront  the  industry.  The  desired  outcome  should  be  one  where 
freedom  of  action  is  accompanied  by  an  appropriate  degree  of  moral  restraint  on  the  part  of  the 
market. This requires compatible incentives in the system and a strong ethical foundation built within 
institutions which will ensure that insurers and takaful operators act responsibly within an environment 
that allows greater business flexibility.  
The strategic issues before us today concern the industry's responsibility to deliver a fair proposition to 
consumers,  its  relevance  in  the  changing  environment  and  its  readiness  in  terms  of  capacity  and 
infrastructure to support and sustain a successful strategy for growth.  
It  is  hoped  that  discussions  at  this  dialogue  will  contribute  towards  the  thinking  on  future  corporate 
strategies  as  well  as  on  the  regulatory  responses  to  ensure  sound  development.  This  will  be  an 
opportunity  to  engage  actively  in  the  discussions  on  these  keys  issues  confronting  the  industry  in 
moving forward. I wish you a successful and productive dialogue.  
Thank you.  
