P M W Tucker: “Where are the risks?” 
Speech by Mr P M W Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of 
the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Euromoney  Global  Borrowers  and  Investors  Forum  -  remarks  to  the 
session “Where are the risks?” 1, London, 23 June 2005. 
 Central bankers are fond of discussing myriad uncertainties in the global macroeconomic and financial 
environment. Yet judging by the level of implied volatility, derived from option prices, on a wide range 
of asset classes, the market perceives uncertainty as fairly low. And, even after the recent adjustment, 
credit spreads across a wide range of instruments suggest that the premium charged for risk has fallen 
over recent years. This, all in an environment where long-maturity risk-free forward rates – real and 
nominal – are unusually low. It is hard to know quite what to make of this, but it forms an important 
backdrop to the few remarks I want to make today.  
For this audience, I think the interesting question is not whether or not risk will crystallise, as in one 
form or another risks crystallise every day. Rather, the important question is whether, in the event of 
nasty shocks, our capital markets can absorb them or whether they have developed characteristics 
which may, as some suggest, leave them vulnerable. Or, more constructively, what risk managers – 
and the authorities – might usefully monitor to help contain any such risks.  
It’s hardly a new question. But it’s one that has gained colour from the debate about derivatives. An 
oddly polarised debate. Overstating it somewhat: in one corner, a group contending that derivatives 
bring  tangible  benefits  to  civilisation.  In  the  other,  a  group  arguing  that  they  have  within  them  the 
seeds of severe disorder.  
Unsurprisingly, my take is that the truth lies somewhere in between. It is nicely illustrated by the quite 
extraordinary development of the credit derivatives market over the past five years or so.2
Dispersion of risk, and the price of risk 
Credit derivatives plainly have been used as an effective risk management tool by a number of banks 
and others. Contrary to some suggestions, the acid test is not especially whether banks, individually or 
in  aggregate,  have  been  net  sellers  of  credit  risk.  Individual  banks  have  been  able  to  reduce 
concentrated  loan  exposures  to  single  corporates,  industries  or  countries.  As  the  Telecom  episode 
reminded everyone just a few years ago, that is really important, if elementary. Individual banks have 
also  been  able  to  increase  their  exposure  to  borrowers  with  which  they  do  not  have  a  lending 
relationship.  (Indeed,  some  commentators  suggest  that  it  may  sometimes  be  more  effective  for 
second-tier and smaller banks to take corporate credit exposure via the derivatives market than via 
participation in the lower tiers of loan syndicates.) If, overall, the result were a greater dispersion of risk 
around the banking system and fewer large exposures relative to capital, the system as a whole would 
probably be safer even if, net, no credit risk had left the banking industry in aggregate.  
According  to  various  surveys,  some  credit  risk  has  been  shed  to  non-banks,  including  insurance 
companies, pension funds and hedge funds. That too should, on balance, promote the resilience of 
the system, not least because non-banks are not part of the core payment systems that underpin our 
financial markets – provided, of course, that banks prudently manage their counterparty exposures to 
non-bank sellers of credit protection. As others have argued, this is a change of degree rather than 
kind: with the growth of corporate bond markets, and especially securitisation, non-banks have been 
                                                      
1    My  thanks  to  Mike  Cross,  Colin  Miles  and  David  Rule  for  long-running  debates  on  the  issues  discussed  here.    For 
comments, to Peter Andrews, Andrew Bailey, Alex Bowen, Alastair Clark, Paul Fisher, Damien Lynch, Peter Westaway and 
Simon Wells.  And to Sandra Bannister for secretarial support.  
 2    For  an  early  review,  see  Rule,  D,  (2001)  ‘The  Credit  Derivatives  Market:  its  Development  and  Possible  Implications  for 
Financial  Stability’,  Financial  Stability  Review,  Issue  10,  June  2001,  pages  117-140  and  Rule,  D,  (2001),  ‘Risk  transfer 
between banks, insurance companies and capital markets: an overview’, Financial Stability Review, Issue 11, December 
2001, pages 137-159. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
running credit portfolios for years. By separating the provision of liquidity from exposure to credit risk, 
credit  derivatives,  and  the related  developments  in  structured  finance,  give non-banks  new  ways of 
accessing credit risk.   
As well as more dispersed risk buttressing systemic stability, the innovation of credit derivatives has 
plausibly  taken  us  a  further  step  towards  complete  markets,  in  effect  providing  a  richer  market  for 
credit  insurance  than previously existed.  Investors and  others  may,  therefore, be  able  to  get  a  little 
closer to the portfolios they really want to hold, which would facilitate a better allocation of risk and so 
bring broader welfare benefits. This works in the direction of reducing the price of risk, which would 
reduce the risk premium used to discount uncertain future cash flows.  
There are, therefore, tangible benefits from the new derivative markets for unbundling and transferring 
credit risk. And the same can be argued for the earlier development of interest-rate, foreign currency 
and equity derivatives.  
So where’s the catch? 
Short-option positions and market dynamics 
Everyone  is  familiar  with  the  risk  present  in  markets  if  ‘everyone’  tries  to  sell  –  or  buy  –  at  once. 
Various features of markets can create the conditions for, or reinforce, such herd-like behaviour. Panic 
in the presence of excess leverage is the familiar culprit, and goes back to well before the invention of 
derivatives, as various authors have documented in the context of the Great Crash. Derivatives have 
not altered the firmament in some deep, unrecognisable way. But they have introduced some novel 
variations on old themes.  
One of the most interesting can potentially arise when a particular market is characterised by traders 
who  are  structurally  short  options,  have  short  holding  periods,  and  are  leveraged;  and  where  the 
underlying markets are not highly liquid. That needs a bit of unpacking.  
Options  can,  of  course,  be  hedged  with  an  offsetting  position  in  a  similar  option:  a  so-called  ‘static 
hedge’.  Where,  for  one  reason  or  another,  traders  cannot  do  that,  they  can  attempt  to  hedge  by 
running a position in the underlying instrument, with the intent that gains or losses on the value of their 
option positions will be offset by losses or gains on the underlying asset position: a so-called ‘dynamic’ 
hedge. It’s dynamic hedging that can be interesting.  
The  effects  of  dynamic  hedging  of  long  and  short  option  positions  can  be  quite  different.  Broadly, 
dynamically hedging a long option position entails selling the underlying as prices rise, and buying as 
prices fall. Conversely, those who have sold (or written) options need to buy to balance their hedge 
when  the  value  of  the  underlying  is  rising,  adding  to  the  buying  pressure.  And,  if  the  price  of  the 
underlying instrument is falling, they need to sell to balance their hedge, adding to the selling pressure.  
This is, of course, going on every day in a wide variety of deep and liquid markets without anything 
particularly odd happening to market dynamics. Things are potentially more interesting when markets 
are structurally imbalanced, with short-term traders, dynamically hedging, concentrated on one side. If 
short-term  traders  are  structurally  long,  their  dynamic  hedging  may  have  the  effect  of  dampening 
market  movements,  producing  zones  of  local  stability.  But  where,  as  a  group,  they  are  structurally 
short,  their  dynamic  hedging  can  sometimes  amplify  price  movements,  increasing  volatility,  if  the 
market proves illiquid under stress.  
While I have set this out in a rather general way, it isn’t fanciful. There are examples of it going back 
over nearly twenty years: some involving the explicit writing of options; some implicit writing of options; 
and some arising from trading strategies that mimic optionality.  
For example, the 1987 equity market crash was exacerbated by the prevalence of portfolio insurance, 
a trading strategy akin to delta hedging an option: sell when prices are falling. A dynamic variant of a 
‘stop loss’. 
Similar  strategies  are  now  a  key  feature  of  some  Principal-Protected  hedge  fund  investments,  via 
so-called  Constant  Proportion  Portfolio  Insurance  (CPPI).  To  preserve  the  nominal  principal,  the 
‘guarantor’  will  sell  units  in,  say,  a  fund  of  funds  as  its  value  falls,  and  vice  versa.  I  guess  some 
assumptions are made about underlying liquidity, and that these are reflected in how such strategies 
are effected.  
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
In  1994,  and  again  in  2003,  hedging  the  negative  convexity  of  US  mortgage-backed  securities 
amplified the rise in dollar bond yields, with some violence.3 The underlying factors here, of course, 
are  that  US  mortgage  borrowers  have  an  option  to  prepay,  so  they  are  long  options  on  mortgage 
interest rates. The financial sector is, correspondingly, structurally short options, which it can – and 
does – slice and dice in various ways in an attempt to distribute the option exposure to those who want 
it. But to a greater or lesser extent, a residue is left, some of it with institutions which de facto seem to 
have short holding periods. They dynamically hedge, either continuously or within thresholds.  
A rather graphic – if, ultimately, not stability-threatening – example of what I’m describing occurred a 
few weeks ago in the structured credit markets. I’ll spend a few moments on this as the distribution of 
optionality was quite complex. For some while, a wide range of regional banks, insurers and pension 
funds in Europe and Asia have been selling protection on intermediate tranches of credit portfolios, 
say on losses between 3% and 7%. Although they are effectively short an option on portfolio credit 
risk, they are widely regarded as passive investors who do not dynamically hedge. Their counterparts, 
the dealers, are initially long an option on portfolio credit risk; as spreads generally widen, the value of 
the bought-protection position increases non-linearly. Over time it became popular amongst short-term 
leveraged traders to exploit the strong supply of intermediate (or mezzanine) protection by holding a 
bought-protection  position  on  mezzanine  tranches  as  a  hedge  against  selling  protection  on  equity 
tranches. This was a so-called long credit correlation position, as its value would tend to increase with 
rises  in  the  implied  correlation  of  default  risk  among  the  companies  represented  in  the  underlying 
portfolios. In effect, traders were betting that implied correlation, as modelled, would not fall. As well as 
being highly convex, the position’s popularity no doubt owed something to a straightforward search for 
yield:  the  big  positive  carry  from  being  long  high-yielding  equity  tranches  and  short  lower-yielding 
mezzanine.  This  type  of  position  did,  though,  leave  holders  exposed  to  so-called  idiosyncratic  risk; 
that’s to say, a deterioration in the credit of a few constituents of the underlying portfolio. This was akin 
to  a  short-option  position,  requiring  dynamic  hedgers  to  buy  protection  as  spreads  widened  on 
troubled names. When GM and Ford spreads rose, these correlation positions unravelled as traders 
went into the market to cover themselves. In effect, the structured credit market was reminded that 
credit risk has a major idiosyncratic element; that even the most sophisticated statistical models can 
be found wanting when they are detached from fundamentals and/or based on short runs of data; that 
hedging can hurt when a trade is ‘crowded’; and that, in such circumstances, volatility can suddenly 
spike and spreads move in unplanned-for ways. 
There are still-more complex variants. In some instances, options are embedded into products where 
there isn’t a liquid market in options with quite the same characteristics or long expiry dates. Power-
Reserve Dual Currency Bonds may be an example,4 although not one where excess volatility has yet 
crystallised.  
While these and other examples suggest that, in certain conditions, volatility can be exacerbated by 
option-driven or option-like trading strategies, related developments in global capital markets can at 
times help to dampen volatility. Notably, with the growth of the hedge fund industry, there are more 
short-term traders willing to take risk – in effect providing liquidity – when they perceive a temporary 
anomaly, as perhaps happened in the US bond market during summer 2003. That is somewhat less 
likely,  though,  when  the  prior  trading  strategies  of  funds  themselves  have  become  part  of  the 
underlying imbalance. 
This points up a useful lesson. That the major intermediaries – and the authorities – would do well to 
try to identify where there might be big structural short, or imbalanced, option positions in a market 
whose  liquidity  might  be  strained  in  stressed  conditions.  Sometimes,  as  for  example  in  the  US 
mortgage  market,  this  amounts  to  identifying  a  structurally  long  position  and  asking  whether  the 
counterpart  short  positions  are  well  distributed  and  how  managed.  Sometimes,  as  perhaps  in  the 
structured credit market, it may amount to asking whether there is anything that could trigger an exit by 
apparently long-term and passive holders of short option positions. For the firms themselves, this kind 
of analysis may be something that could be fed into stress tests developed in recent years to examine 
the effects of the exit of a dealer or major fund. Central banks rely largely on market intelligence. At 
the Bank of England, one of the questions we now more or less routinely ask in our MI work goes 
along the lines of “is the Street and/or is the fund community short volatility /gamma/vega in a big way 
                                                      
3 ‘The dynamics of US dollar interest rate adjustment’, Financial Stability Review, Issue 15, December 2003, page 22. 
4 ‘Structured notes and the US dollar/yen exchange rate’, Financial Stability Review, Issue 14, June 2003, page 43. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 3
in  any  particular  market?”  This  is  discussed  further  in  the  latest  edition  of  the  Bank  of  England’s 
Financial  Stability  Review,  which  is  published  next  Monday.  Regulators  can  put  any  general 
information gleaned from MI alongside their more granular sources on the positions of firms. 
A risk properly understood is, I hope, a risk that can be managed effectively. And so my analysis of the 
impact of options hedging on market dynamics does not cancel out the benefits that derivatives can 
potentially bring. For the reasons described earlier, the plugging of ‘missing markets’ is something to 
welcome.  
Innovation, competition, and risk management 
That so many markets are no longer ‘missing’ owes something to innovation in the wholesale financial 
services industry. The underlying forces driving innovation seem to be powerful, and indeed perhaps 
self-feeding. They may also give rise to some risk management challenges. 
One possible story – there are others – would go along the following lines.  
Core wholesale markets have become more efficient. This has been driven by a whole host of things, 
including improved technology and deregulation reducing transaction costs; the unbundling of different 
types of risk associated with the development of derivatives; and the entry of relatively unconstrained 
traders, including hedge funds. One result is that in ‘vanilla’ markets it may have become more difficult 
for intermediaries to make positive risk-adjusted returns that exceed their cost of capital. Anecdotally 
at  least,  they  make  a  more  attractive  return  on,  amongst  other  things,  exotic  products  and  via 
transactions tailored to address the risk-management challenges of particular clients or client types. 
As such, they have a powerful incentive to innovate.  
Over  time,  many  of  the  most  successful  innovations  become  mainstream,  enhancing  market 
efficiency, helping to optimise the distribution of risk, and reducing the initial supernormal returns to the 
innovators,  who  move  on  to  the  next  thing;  and  so  on.  As  put,  that  sounds  like  a  benign  story  for 
society. And, by and large, I think it is. It does, though, have at least two corollaries.  
First, investors – whether in funds or firms – should occasionally ask themselves whether they can 
safely extrapolate into the future the returns that they have earned in the past.  
Second, investment bank innovators may from time to time face a challenge in keeping the industry’s 
controls up to speed with what, ex post, turn out to be their most successful innovations. Imagine that, 
at any particular time, a firm has a portfolio of many innovations. Some will succeed, some won’t. Ex 
ante, they won’t know for sure which is which. Plausibly, it might not be economical to put controls in 
place  for  every  single  innovation  on  an  assumption  of  ‘exponential  growth’.  So  when  exponential 
growth occurs, controls can sometimes be left behind. 
Maybe something like that helps to explain the backlog in credit derivative confirmations, which the 
FSA cautioned banks about a few months ago. Growth in the market has been relentless. And to the 
concerns  about  confirmations  have  been  added  concerns,  amongst  practitioners,  about  unnotified 
assignments of credit derivative positions, related in part to the growth of hedge fund participation in 
the structured credit market. If something really bad were to happen, the system would, perhaps, be 
less robust than otherwise if dealers were not sure about who their counterparties were, etc.  
This is the type of challenge where collaboration across the industry is needed; and where individual 
firms’ incentives are stronger if they can each be confident that their peers are taking broadly the same 
actions. What I have in mind is the disincentive a firm faces in being tough with a hedge fund client if 
they doubt their peers will take the same line. Bodies such as ISDA have a role to play here, and I 
understand are doing so. 
Collective elements in atomistic markets 
So, where are the risks? They are all around us all of the time, of course. Some will crystallise. But 
that need not lead to disorder. Indeed, in most circumstances, global capital markets are deep and 
liquid enough – having a sufficiently wide range of participants able to trade with each other, and with 
different risk appetites and different actual risk exposures – to absorb shocks. But history suggests 
that strains can appear at times. And as the system develops, we need to be alive to whether cracks 
might show up in new places or old weaknesses manifest themselves in new ways. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2005
The  two  challenges  I  have  sketched  out  for  today’s  markets  –  the  incidence,  now  and  then,  of 
structural  short  option  positions  amongst  short-term  traders;  and  of  controls  occasionally  lagging 
behind innovations – have a common feature. They both entail understanding markets as something 
more than the positions of atomistic agents. In the first case, market participants have an interest in 
factoring into their risk management an assessment of whether a market has structurally imbalanced 
option (or option-like) positions. In the second case, market participants have an interest in working 
together to establish robust practices and infrastructure when a particular innovation takes off.  
Many  risk  managers  are,  of  course,  well  seized  of  this.  Let’s  hope  they  are  empowered  too.  As 
practitioners, you can, and should, play a part in buttressing the system – by continuing to innovate, 
and by factoring collective outcomes into your private calculus and risk management.  
BIS Review 50/2005 
 5
