Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Review of economic and financial development in 
Iceland in 2004 
Address by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Governor and Chairman of the Board of Governors of the 
Central Bank of Iceland, at the Bank’s Annual Meeting, Reykjavík, 30 March 2005. 
 On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I welcome you all to the Bank’s 
44th annual meeting. The Bank’s financial accounts for the year 2004 have been ratified today by the 
Prime Minister. The Bank’s annual report has also been published. It includes a survey of the Bank’s 
activities and operation, along with a report on the Bank’s monetary policy and actions, the financial 
system, financial stability and the financial markets, and the main features of economic developments 
in the course of last year. 
Under the Act on the Central Bank of Iceland that was passed by Parliament four years ago, the main 
objective of monetary policy is price stability. The joint declaration by the Government and the Central 
Bank from March 27, 2001 set a formal inflation target for the Central Bank, i.e. it is obliged to aim at a 
rate of inflation, measured as the annual twelve-month increase in the CPI, of as close to 2½% as 
possible.  Since  price  stability  is  the  Bank’s  main  objective,  monetary  policy  will  not  be  applied  to 
achieve  other  economic  targets  such  as  a  balanced  current  account,  high  level  of  employment  or 
specific exchange rate, except insofar as these are compatible with the Bank’s inflation target. 
Inflation rose in 2004 after being close to or marginally below the 2½% target since the end of 2002. 
The rate of inflation was 4% from the beginning to the end of the year. At the beginning of March this 
year,  inflation  measured  4.7%,  having  moved  above  the  4%  tolerance  limited  defined  in  the  joint 
declaration by the Government and the Central Bank from March 2001. When inflation moves beyond 
the tolerance limit, the Bank is obliged to submit a report to the Government explaining the reasons for 
the deviation, how the Bank intends to react and how long it will take to reach the inflation target again 
in the Bank’s assessment. The report shall be made public. Such a report was sent to the Government 
on February 18 and published the same day. 
There  are  a  number  of  explanations  for  the  recent  rise  in  inflation.  Large  investments  in  aluminium 
smelters and power sectors have built up demand pressures in the economy. These investments will 
be  stepped  up  this  year,  when  they  will  peak  instead  of  in  2006,  as  assumed  under  earlier  plans. 
Investment cost this year is estimated at 85 b.kr., or almost 10% of GDP in 2004. New conditions in 
the credit market have also driven inflation. Plans by the Housing Financing Fund (HFF) to raise its 
loan-to-value  ratio  and  maximum  mortgage  amounts  prompted  a  response  from  the  banks,  which 
began offering mortgage loans on far easier terms than had been customary. So far the main impact 
of  increased  credit  supply  on  the  price  level  has  been  through  the  housing  component  of  the 
Consumer Price Index (CPI). In the beginning of March the twelve-month rate of increase in housing 
prices  was  24%.  Excluding  the  housing  component,  the  CPI  had  increased  by  2%  over  the  same 
period.  Housing  inflation  has  therefore  clearly  made  a  major  contribution  to  total  inflation  in  recent 
months.  Another  cause  of  concern  is  inflation  in  services.  Over  the  past  twelve  months,  prices  of 
public services have risen by 6.9%, driving up the CPI by 0.5 percentage points, and private sector 
services by 3.5%, adding a further 0.8 percentage points. Rising prices of private sector services have 
often been an indication of mounting demand pressures. 
According to estimates by Statistics Iceland, GDP growth amounted to 5.2% in 2004, on the back of 
4.2%  growth  in  2003.  Faster  GDP  growth  was  largely  the  result  of  a  continued  surge  in  national 
expenditure, while exports also increased significantly after a low in 2003. Private consumption also 
continued to firm up during the year with an estimated growth rate of 7.5%, the fastest for five years. 
Real disposable income increased more slowly than in 2003, but private consumption was spurred by 
lower  mortgage  debt  service  and  easier  access  to  credit.  Investment  grew  by  an  estimated  12.8%, 
somewhat less than in 2003. GDP growth in the euro area is estimated at 1.9% in 2004 and growth 
prospects  are  lean  for  the  years  to  come.  This  shows  yet  again  the  difference  in  the  economic 
challenges  faced  by  Iceland  and  the  rest  of  Europe,  since  policies  there  aim  at  stimulating  the 
economy, whereas Iceland’s problem is to try to prevent overheating. 
The widening current account deficit is also a cause for concern. Last year it is estimated at 70 b.kr., 
the equivalent of 8% of GDP. Exports increased by 12% in 2004 after being virtually stagnant in 2003. 
The  strong  value  of  the  króna,  robust  private  consumption  and  stepped-up  investments  in 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 1
aluminium-related  projects  are  reflected  in  substantial  import  growth  during  the  year.  Merchandise 
imports  were  up  by  23%  in  real  terms,  the  sharpest  increase  since  1998.  Roughly  one-third  of  the 
current  account  deficit  may  be  attributed  to  investments  in  the  aluminium  and  power  sectors.  The 
current account deficit is forecast to widen even further in 2005, but will also peak this year instead of 
in 2006, as had been forecast earlier. 
Unemployment declined slowly last year despite brisk economic activity. It was not until the closing 
months  of  the  year  that  labour  market  statistics  indicated  mounting  pressures.  Seasonally  adjusted 
unemployment  measured  2.4%  in  February  and  vacancies  have  soared.  To  some  extent,  growing 
labour demand was met with imported labour; issues of new work permits almost doubled in 2004. 
However, the number of new work permits has not increased year-on-year over the past quarter. More 
labour has been imported to meet the labour requirement on aluminium and power sector projects, but 
it has increased in other sectors as well. 
Private sector wage settlements agreed in the first half of 2004 were broadly uniform and their cost 
effect more or less consistent with the inflation target. The settlements are in force for four years but 
may be renegotiated at the end of 2005 and 2006 if inflation moves out of line with the target and the 
increased wage costs that they imply are not adopted across the labour market in general. This is one 
example of the importance of keeping inflation as close to target as possible later this year. 
When Iceland moved onto an inflation target, this involved abandoning the fixed exchange-rate regime 
and allowing to the króna to float in the market. Experience has shown that, in a climate of unrestricted 
cross-border  capital  movements,  it  is  impossible  for  a  central  bank  to  control  the  exchange  rate. 
Central  Bank  interest  rate  decisions  admittedly  affect  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  but  many  other 
factors  operate  as  well.  Thus  it  is  totally  unrealistic  to  insist  that  the  Central  Bank  should  keep  the 
exchange rate at a certain level and find the right combination of interest rates and exchange rate, 
whatever that may be. To do so, the Bank would either need to abandon its inflation target or impose 
foreign  exchange  restrictions,  which  of  course  is  unrealistic.  After  depreciating  at  the  beginning  of 
2004, the króna remained fairly stable until it appreciated noticeably towards the end of the year. It 
continued to appreciate in the New Year and is currently higher than it has been since early 2000. 
The exchange rate of the króna has a widespread impact on the Icelandic economy. It directly affects 
the prices of imports and exports of goods and services. The combined value of Iceland’s imports and 
exports  in  recent  years  has  been  equivalent  to  75-80%  of  GDP.  The  real  exchange  rate  may  be 
defined as the development of domestic prices or unit labour costs relative to trading partner countries, 
based on a given reference year and measured in the same currency. A rise in the real exchange rate 
implies  that  prices  or  labour  costs  in  Iceland  have  increased  by  more  than  among  trading  partner 
countries after adjustment for changes in the exchange rate, i.e. the competitive position of domestic 
sectors has deteriorated. When it was decided to launch the large-scale investment projects for the 
aluminium industry that are currently under way, it was perfectly clear that the real exchange rate of 
the króna would rise considerably, as the Central Bank repeatedly pointed out in its public statements. 
In particular, the real exchange rate would be driven up by a rise in the nominal exchange rate caused 
by heavy capital inflows. If inflation could not be kept under control, the real exchange rate would also 
increase as a result. 
Thus the task has primarily involved controlling the way that developments unfold, and in the Central 
Bank’s view the worst path would have been if the real exchange rate had been driven up by domestic 
inflation.  We  are  familiar  with  such  cycles  from  historical  experience  and  neither  businesses  nor 
households benefited from them. The Central Bank’s approach was therefore to raise its policy interest 
rate, causing a corresponding increase in the nominal exchange rate, in an attempt to prevent the real 
exchange  rate  from  rising  in  step  with  inflation.  An  easier  monetary  stance  may  lead  to  a  lower 
nominal exchange rate in the short run, but not to a lower real exchange rate in the long run. Lower 
interest rates would eventually lead to more inflation and wage rises, which in the final analysis would 
probably move the real exchange rate to broadly the same level as if monetary policy had been kept 
tight from the outset. The chief difference would simply be a much higher rate of inflation when the 
inevitable  exchange  rate  adjustment  arrived  as  the  aluminium-related  investments  came  to  an  end. 
There  is  no  question  that  the  high  real  exchange  rate  has  squeezed  the  export  and  traded  goods 
sectors, but it was known that such difficulties would emerge when the investments peak, so it should 
not  have  come  as  a  surprise.  However,  the  sectors  that  have  been  affected  would  be  in  an  even 
tougher position with a lax monetary stance at present, which would leave us facing a much higher 
rate of inflation and a strong real exchange rate at the end of this expansionary episode. Tightening 
the monetary stance under such conditions could also provoke problems and shocks for the financial 
system, with unforeseeable consequences. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2005
The real exchange rate is heading for a historical high this year which is unlikely to be sustainable for 
very long. It is important to engineer as soft a landing as possible. In this context I want to mention the 
study in the latest Monetary Bulletin which shows that the real exchange rate is no more volatile in 
Iceland  than  in  other  countries,  for  example  other  inflation-targeting  countries  with  which  we  often 
compare  our  performance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  importance  of  foreign  trade  varies  from  one 
economy to the next, so exchange fluctuations have a different impact on households and business in 
different countries. 
According to the Central Bank Act, one of the Bank’s roles is to promote an efficient and safe financial 
system,  including  payment  systems  domestically  and  with  foreign  countries.  I  shall  not  dwell  on 
financial  stability  issues  on  this  occasion.  The  reason  is  that  the  Central  Bank  will  be  publishing  a 
separate  financial  stability  report  in  April  which  will  include  its  assessment  of  the  position  of  the 
financial  system.  However,  I  would  like  to  mention  two  points  which  are  closely  related  to  financial 
stability. One is the noteworthy overseas expansion by Icelandic banks, which has major ramifications 
for the financial system. Among the changes that this entails is that the banks are now less exposed to 
volatility  in  the  Icelandic  economy,  because  of  the  large  share  of  their  activities  that  has  been 
transferred abroad. At the same time, they are left more prone to shocks originating in foreign markets. 
This  development  calls  for  a  review  of  the  Central  Bank’s  working  procedures.  I  shall  not  go  into 
details here of possible changes, which were discussed in Monetary Bulletin last autumn. 
The other point is the growth in lending by the credit system, in particular by the banks. The surge in 
lending over the past two years is a cause of concern both for financial stability and the Central Bank’s 
inflation target. Accounts of the credit system are published quarterly and the most recent statistics 
show that lending by the credit system as a whole increased by 16% in real terms last year. The credit 
system  embraces  all  undertakings  involved  in  lending  activities,  including  the  HFF  and  the  pension 
funds. The latest figures for the largest credit institutions show that domestic lending by the deposit 
money banks (DMBs) grew by 40% over the twelve months to the end of February. By far the greatest 
increase has been in mortgage lending. From August to the end of February the DMBs had disbursed 
14,500  mortgage  loans,  for  a  total  of  158  b.kr.  In  the  opposite  direction,  pension  funds’  loans  to 
members contracted over the same period by 6 b.kr. and lending by the HFF by 59 b.kr. The transfer 
of mortgage lending to the banking system is beneficial and will strengthen it in the long run. However, 
the  timing  of this  development  during a  strong  expansionary  phase  is  inappropriate. Given  the way 
that  events  have  unfolded,  a  review  of  the  role  of  the  Housing  Financing  Fund  and  the  legislation 
governing it has become very necessary. Excluding their direct foreign operations, the DMBs’ foreign 
debt amounted to 1,200 b.kr. at the end of January, and had grown by 561 b.kr. over the previous 
twelve months. The lion’s share of this debt is long-term, which is a great improvement from the times 
when the banks were overdependent on short-term borrowing for their funding. Their foreign assets 
have grown as well, but not in pace with their debts. Foreign assets of DMBs amounted to 590 b.kr. at 
the  end  of  January,  having  grown  by  312  b.kr.  over  the  previous  twelve  months.  Iceland’s  external 
debt, which is largely comprised of the banks’ foreign debts, is one of the weakest links in its economy. 
All the agencies that issue sovereign ratings for Iceland identify this as a risk and warn that increased 
indebtedness  could  lead  to  a  downgrading  of  its  credit  ratings.  The  banks  therefore  bear  a  great 
responsibility in this respect. 
The only conclusion that can be drawn from the massive growth in lending by the banks is that they 
have overstepped the mark. There is no question that this surge in lending is a major contributor to the 
current expansionary forces in the economy, which have fuelled inflation and call for a higher policy 
interest  rate  than  otherwise.  The  banks  are  a  pillar  of  the  Icelandic  economy.  They  insist  that  the 
Central Bank and the Government should act with restraint and promote economic stability, so they 
also  have  to  make  comparable  demands  towards  themselves.  In  the  long  run,  no  economy  can 
sustain this huge expansion in credit that originates in the banking system. 
Last week the Central Bank published its quarterly Monetary Bulletin in which it discusses economic 
and  monetary  developments  and  prospects  and  has  published  its  new  macroeconomic  forecast. 
Without going into detail here, the broad finding is that robust private consumption will continue and 
investment will increase, especially business investment, for reasons including that aluminium-related 
projects  have  been  stepped  up  for  this  year,  as  I  mentioned  earlier.  Public  consumption  growth  is 
expected to be modest, however. GDP growth will be 6.4% this year. It will be marginally less next 
year, when growth of private consumption and investment will also slow down. The positive output gap 
will widen considerably this year and in 2006. This year the current account deficit will peak at 12% of 
GDP, then shrink next year, contrary to previous forecasts. From all this it is clear that the economy 
will be characterised by vigorous expansion this year and into 2006. 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 3
According  to  the  inflation  forecast  also  published  in  Monetary  Bulletin,  the  outlook  for  inflation  has 
improved since the previous forecast in December but will remain above target two years ahead. The 
higher  policy  rate  and  a  substantial  appreciation  of  the  króna  will  subdue  domestic  demand  and 
dampen rises in import prices, especially in the short term. Inflation will therefore be somewhat lower 
over the forecast horizon than was forecast in December. The Central Bank forecasts an inflation rate 
around the 2½% target one year ahead, which is lower than forecast in December. Two years ahead, 
inflation is forecast at just over 3%, which is also somewhat lower than the rate forecast in December, 
although still above target. 
It  is  important  to  remember  that  an  unchanged  monetary  policy  stance  and  unchanged  strong 
exchange rate are assumed over the forecast horizon. The forecast describes the way that the Bank 
considers developments are most likely to unfold if it takes no further measures than it had already 
taken. Obviously, uncertainty increases over the horizon of the forecast. A particular uncertainty is the 
exchange rate, which is at a historical high at present as I have discussed, posing a higher probability 
that it will give way over this period and inflation will increase. In light of this forecast, at the same time 
as  Monetary  Bulletin  was  published  the  Central  Bank  decided  to  raise  its  policy  interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage points, which is a somewhat lower hike than market agents had predicted and also 
less than the Bank’s other recent policy rate rises. The policy rate is therefore currently 9%. Among 
other things, the decision to take a relatively modest step now is based on the fact that the tightening 
implied  by  the  recent  policy  rate  hikes  and  the  significant  appreciation  of  the  króna  have  yet  to  be 
transmitted in full. Nonetheless, further tightening may be necessary over the next few months. 
Comparisons with previous forecasts and various indicators suggest that since December the Central 
Bank’s policy rate hikes have by and large delivered a tighter stance. The Central Bank’s monetary 
policy  is  very  much  debated  in  society  at  large  at  the  moment,  which  is  natural  given  the  great 
interests at stake. Obviously I have closely followed discussions of monetary policy for a fairly long 
time and must admit that the debate in recent times has been more mature and bears witness to a 
deeper understanding of economic principles than before. It is normal for opinions to be divided over 
the Central Bank’s measures during tight stances such as the present. The Central Bank welcomes 
public debate and is ready to take part in it. I would like to use this opportunity to address a few points 
that have been raised in this debate recently. 
Sometimes it is alleged that monetary policy is impotent in a climate of heavy capital inflows. Claims 
are also heard that the Central Bank’s monetary policy measures only exert an influence through the 
exchange rate and have no effect on long-term interest rates, and absolutely not on indexed interest 
rates. Certainly, a tight monetary stance does put significant upward pressure on the exchange rate, 
contributing to lower inflation in the short run. Central Bank policy rate hikes also have a very swift 
effect on the money markets, and interest rates on other instruments with maturities of a few months 
or years are soon influenced too. Central Bank policy rate decisions also have an impact on long-term 
interest  rates,  both  indexed  and  nonindexed.  All  research  in  Iceland  and  everywhere  else  confirms 
this, but because the effect is transmitted with a long lag, monetary policy must be forward-looking. 
Interest rate decisions made today are not transmitted in full to long-term interest rates until one or two 
years hence. Thus the debate often focuses on the short-term effects of monetary policy, but people 
need to be patient and bear in mind the impact which does not emerge until well into the future. 
The Central Bank  does  not  have  the slightest doubt  that  interest  rate  changes  in  Iceland ultimately 
have  the  same  effect  as  those  in  other  countries,  in  other  words  that  general  economic  principles 
apply just as much in Iceland as anywhere else. 
When monetary tightening is beginning to have an effect and specific sectors of the economy bear the 
brunt, it is normal to ask whether there are no softer alternatives, which preferably affect no one. In the 
search  for  such  approaches,  it  is  sometimes  claimed  to  be  preferable  to  target  liquidity  through 
minimum reserve requirements, rather than interest rates, or to change the composition of the CPI, for 
example by excluding housing costs, which in fact would leave the rate of inflation within the target at 
the  moment.  The  Central  Bank  has  explained  its  position  towards  both  these  ideas.  Regarding 
minimum  reserve  requirements,  the  Bank  has  pointed  out  that  strong  domestic  financial  institutions 
have  various  possibilities  for  sidestepping  the  effects  of  tighter  liquidity.  Individual  credit  institutions 
would therefore be affected very unequally. Such a measure would doubtless hit the savings banks 
very  hard,  since  they  do  not  have  the  same  scope  as  the  commercial  banks  for  sidestepping  the 
effects.  International  experience  also  shows  that  the  impact  of  changes  in  minimum  reserve 
requirements  is  extremely  difficult  to  predict.  For  individual  institutions,  the  consequences  could  be 
very significant. This is the main reason that none of the world’s main central banks use changes in 
minimum reserve requirements as a policy instrument any longer. However, even if liquidity worked, 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2005
their impact on interest rates and the exchange rate would be broadly the same as raising the policy 
rate,  although  the  transmission  mechanism  might  be  different,  and  they  would  affect  individual 
segments of the credit system unevenly. In addition, changing the minimum reserve requirement is not 
a transparent measure and its impact on expectations is unpredictable. 
The Central Bank firmly advocates that housing costs should remain part of the reference index for the 
inflation  target,  and  believes  that  by  and  large  the  best  available  methodology  is  being  used  by 
Statistics  Iceland  to  evaluate  them.  This  is  because  housing  costs  are  a  major  item  in  household 
consumption  in  Iceland,  where  the  level  of  owneroccupancy  is  80%.  Excluding  changes  in  housing 
prices would ignore a large proportion of household expenditures. Experience also shows that housing 
inflation  has the  advantage,  from  the perspective  of  central  banks  on  an  inflation  target,  of  being a 
leading  indicator  of  general  inflation  later  on.  Presumably  this  is  because  the  housing  market  is 
independent  from  foreign  markets.  Increased  housing  demand  cannot  be  channelled  out  of  the 
economy, unlike various other goods and services, nor is foreign competition present to any significant 
extent. When demand surges, housing prices often rise sooner and by more than prices of goods and 
services in general. It may be added that if housing prices had not been included in the CPI, the rate 
of inflation would have exceeded 10% in the recessionary year of 2001, which would have demanded 
even tougher measures on the part of the Central Bank than were applied then. 
Standard & Poor’s recently upgraded its credit rating for the Republic of Iceland, which now has very 
good  ratings  from  the  three  main  sovereign  ratings  agencies,  i.e.  Standard  &  Poor’s,  Moody’s  and 
Fitch.  All  the  agencies  keep  a  very  close  watch  on  economic  developments  in  Iceland.  Because 
Standard & Poor’s has recently upgraded Iceland’s sovereign rating, it is interesting to examine the 
main  points  in  its  rationale,  both  the  positive  factors  that  support  the  rating  and  others  that  are 
identified as potentially weakening it. 
The agency says that its upgrade reflects significant and sustained improvements in the resilience and 
structure  of  the  Icelandic  banking  sector.  Improved  regulation  and  supervision  leave  the  financial 
sector  much  more  resilient.  The  recent  entry  of  the  commercial  banks  into  the  Icelandic  mortgage 
market provides the private financial sector with additional domestic stability and profitability. Public 
finances continue to be healthy and Iceland boasts stable and flexible political institutions. 
However,  the  agency  also  points  to  very  high  and  rising  levels  of  net  external  debt  throughout  the 
economy,  high  current  account  deficits  and  relatively  poor  external  liquidity.  Adherence  to  the 
government’s  medium-term  fiscal  framework  is  central  to  maintaining  the  ratings  and  further 
unforeseen adjustment  would  need  to be  accommodated  through  fiscal policy,  not  monetary  policy. 
Any  significant  increase  in  net  external  leverage  or  a  recurrence  of  entrenched  macroeconomic 
imbalances  on  the  back  of  the  large  investment  projects  could  weaken  Iceland’s  creditworthiness. 
These were the main points highlighted by Standard & Poor’s and there is every reason to take them 
seriously. Of course it is crucial for the Republic to enjoy a good credit rating. It is important for the 
Treasury’s access to markets and investors, and for its credit terms. Iceland’s sovereign rating also 
represents the ceiling for ratings of Icelandic banks and other rated institutions. Favourable ratings are 
vital for the banks’ expansion abroad and for their growing need for easy access to foreign credit. Thus 
the Treasury and the banks share an interest in Iceland being able to maintain its good credit rating. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
As I mentioned earlier, the Central Bank raised its policy interest rate by 0.25 percentage points last 
week. The Bank has thereby raised its policy rate by 3.7 percentage points since its first hike in May 
last year. These measures reflect the Central Bank’s view that, given the current economic situation 
and  the  scenario  two  to  three  years  ahead,  it  is  much  more  effective  to  ensure  a  sufficiently  tight 
stance in good time rather than to wait and take action later. Belated measures to tighten the monetary 
stance entail a risk of higher inflation afterwards, and thereby a far greater risk for the financial system, 
businesses and households. It is crucial to take immediate measures to tackle the inflation that we see 
on the horizon. This is the Central Bank’s  mandatory role and the Bank is determined to perform it. 
The more that other economic agents contribute towards containing expansionary trends, namely the 
central government, local government and credit institutions, the easier it will be to ensure long-term 
stability.  The  successful  economic  policies  of  past  years  must  not  be  swept  aside  in  favour  of 
short-term solutions that would ultimately only backfire. 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 5
