Shri V Leeladhar: Regulation and risk management - implementing Basel II 
Speech  by  Mr  Shri  V  Leeladhar,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  delivered  at  the 
Platinum Jubilee Celebrations of the South Indian Bank Ltd, Thirussur, 9 July 2005. 
 It is indeed an honour to be amongst you on the occasion of the Platinum Jubilee Celebrations of The 
South Indian Bank Ltd. Today we remember the founders and pay homage to their vision and drive 
that led to the establishment of this bank. It is not only a day to feel proud, it is a day to reflect, a day to 
share, and a day to celebrate. It is also an opportunity to re-emphasise what the institution stands for, 
which not only helps in projecting its corporate culture and identity, but also constitutes an integral part 
of the institutions’ brand building exercise.  
In it’s more than 75 years of existence, the bank has traversed a long journey from a unit bank set up 
in Thrissur, with a capital of Rs. 22,000 contributed by 44 shareholders to a bank with capital funds of 
Rs. 474 crore contributed by 90,000 shareholders, and a branch network spread over 17 States/Union 
Territories. The South Indian Bank Ltd. has thus become a major old generation private sector bank 
with a regional origin and national presence.  
I am told that as on 31 March 2005, the South Indian Bank Ltd. had recorded a total gross business 
turnover  of  Rs.  14,000  Crores  with  deposits  of  Rs.8523  Crores  and  advances  of  Rs.5727  Crores. 
Gross NPA ratio of the bank stood at 6.61% and net NPA ratio at 3.87. The bank will have to work on 
reducing the level of existing NPAs, and put in place proper risk management systems to ensure a low 
level  of  incremental  NPAs  in  future.  This  is  essential  for  ensuring  that  the  bank  is  in  a  position  to 
compete successfully with the other banks in the post Basel II era. This brings me to the topic of my 
address - Regulation and Risk Management: Implementation of Basel II.  
Regulation and Risk Management 
Friends, it is clear that we are at the beginning of a new phase in the Indian banking. The last decade 
has  witnessed  major  changes  in  the  financial  sector:  New  banks,  new  financial  institutions,  new 
instruments, new windows, and new opportunities and, along with all this, new challenges. The most 
prominent on our minds in the context of banking these days, perhaps, are the implications arising out 
of the Basel II accord. Banks, as we all know, are subjected to more intense regulation as compared to 
the non-financial firms. This is probably because the banks possess certain “special” characteristics:  
Banks are much more leveraged than the other firms due to their capacity to garner public deposits. 
The asset - liability structure of the banks is also different from not only the non-financial firms but also 
the financial firms. To illustrate, the risk in an insurance company arises mainly from the liability side of 
the balance sheet in the form of insurance claims whereas for the bank the risk mainly comes from the 
diminution  of  asset  values  (for  example,  illiquid  loans  that  are  not  fully  recoverable).  The  deposits 
which constitute a major part of the liability of banks are repayable on demand, unsecured and their 
principal amount does not change in value whereas the loans of a bank are illiquid and there can be 
erosion in the value of loans or of other assets. The liquidity transformation by an insurance company 
is  in  the  reverse  direction  as  compared  to  a  bank.  The  balance-sheet  structure  of  an  insurance 
company  is  the  least  likely  to  give  rise  to  systemic  risk,  whereas  banks  due  to  their  typical  asset 
liability mismatches  i.e. long term assets funded by short term liabilities, may be prone to ‘run’ and 
pose a very high degree of potential systemic risk. The resolution costs of systemic bank insolvencies 
and  significant  banking  problems  can  be  substantial.  The  financial  services  regulators  and  Central 
Banks  are  increasingly  focusing  their  attention  not  only  on  the  health  of  the  individual  banks  and 
financial institutions but also on issues of financial stability.  
Bank  regulation  is  now  increasingly  getting  risk-centric.  This  process  had  its  origin  in  the  Cooke 
Committee or the Basel I proposals which for the first time prescribed a risk-based capital adequacy 
framework for banks by recognizing that different counterparties had different risks and therefore had 
to be risk-weighted differently. Accordingly, the risk-weights of 0%, 20% and 100% were assigned for 
the  exposures  to  Government,  Banks  and  Corporates,  respectively.  Further,  for  the  first  time  the 
framework  required  capital  to  be  maintained  for  the  off-balance  sheet  exposures  also.  Moreover, 
capital was seen as multi-tiered with Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital and some jurisdictions permit the use of 
Tier  3  capital  as  well.  These  proposals  were  path-breaking  considering  the  credit  risk  management 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
capabilities  of  the  banks  in  1980s.  As  we  all  know,  more  than  100  countries  implemented  Basel  I 
which indicates the widespread impact it had on the bank regulation and risk management.  
Basel I proposals forced the banks to look at credit risk and regulatory capital more closely than they 
had done earlier. As banks found ways to arbitrage regulatory capital, some of the provisions of Basel 
I became less relevant. Simultaneously, banks in the G-10 countries developed newer approaches to 
manage credit risk by building portfolio models for pricing, provisioning and allocating economic capital 
for the credit portfolios. These developments made the weaknesses in the Basel I framework more 
apparent and this set the stage for the creation of “International Convergence of Capital Measurement 
and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework”, popularly known as Basel II.  
Concurrently, there has been a realization that the traditional supervisory practices were out of step 
with  the  sophisticated  risk  management  techniques  being  employed  by  the  complex  financial 
institutions and a risk-based approach to supervision was required to capture the various risks that the 
firms  were  undertaking  and  the  controls  built  for  addressing  these  risks.  Although  there  are  key 
differences in design and methodology of risk-based supervision framework in countries like America, 
Canada, UK and Australia, yet the underlying principles remain the same: the supervisory processes 
and  tools  are  reoriented  in  accordance  with  the  risks  in  the  supervised  firms;  specific  tools  of 
supervision are targeted to the areas of greatest risk and concern in individual firms and this results in 
a cost effective allocation of the finite supervisory resources across the regulated entities.  
Basel II  
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision1  has  observed  that  the  fundamental  objective  in 
revising the 1988 Accord has been, and I quote, “to develop a framework that would further strengthen 
the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  international  banking  system  while  maintaining  sufficient 
consistency that capital adequacy regulation will not be a significant source of competitive inequality 
among internationally active banks. The (Basel) Committee believes that the revised Framework will 
promote the adoption of stronger risk management practices by the banking industry, and views this 
as one of its major benefits”2. Unquote. Basel II has brought regulation and risk management to the 
centre stage: the regulatory capital is more closely aligned to the risks in banks and there is a trend 
towards convergence of the regulatory and economic capital, especially in the advanced approaches.   
Basel II rests on the three pillars, Pillar I - minimum capital requirements, Pillar 2 - supervisory review 
process and market discipline as Pillar 3.  
Pillar 1 – Minimum Capital Requirements 
For the first time, capital charge for operational risk has been mandated under pillar 1. Moreover Pillar 
1 provides for a menu of approaches for computing capital adequacy and banks have the freedom to 
choose the approach they would like to adopt. Basel II requires that all the three pillars need to be 
implemented and, therefore, each pillar is as important as the other one.  
As you would be aware, India has decided that all the commercial banks would have to be Basel II 
compliant  by  adopting  at a  minimum,  the  Standardized  Approach  for credit  risk and  Basic  Indicator 
Approach for operational risk under Pillar 1, with effect from March 31, 2007.  The adoption of IRB 
Approach may be permitted by RBI in due course after adequate skills are developed, both in banks 
and at supervisory levels.  
Implementation  of  the  simplified  approaches  also  requires  preparation  on  the  part  of  the  banks, 
banking regulators and the rating agencies. Banks have to gather data relating to the rated exposures 
                                                      
1  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is  a  committee  of  banking  supervisory  authorities  that  was 
established  by  the  central  bank  governors  of  the  Group  of  Ten  countries  in  1975.  It  consists  of  senior 
representatives of bank supervisory authorities and central banks from Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, 
Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. It 
usually meets at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, where its permanent Secretariat is located. 
 
2  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  “International  Convergence  of  Capital  Measurement  and  Capital  Standards-  A 
Revised Framework”, June 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
in  order  to  risk-weight  them  accordingly  and  track  the  ratings  migrations  of  these  exposures.  The 
rating agencies have to demonstrate that they adhere, on an ongoing basis, to the six parameters laid 
down  under  Basel 
International 
Access/Transparency,  Disclosure,  Resources  and  Credibility.  The  rating  agencies  have  also  to 
develop frameworks for assigning Issuer Rating instead of the Issue Rating that they have carried out 
so far. 
recognition,  viz.,  Objectivity, 
Independence, 
their 
for 
II 
Pillar 2- Supervisory Review 
Pillar 2 is meant not only for ensuring adequate capital to support all the risks in a bank, but also to 
encourage  banks  to  adopt  better  risk  management.  It  is  the  prime  responsibility  of  the  bank 
management  to  ensure  that  the  bank  has  adequate  capital  commensurate  with  its  risk  profile  and 
control environment. The role of Supervisors is to evaluate whether or not the banks are assessing 
their capital requirements under pillar 2 properly in relation to their risks & if necessary the supervisors 
may intervene to mandate a higher capital requirement. However, it is important to note that increased 
capital  is  not  the  only  option  for  addressing  increased  risks  in  a  bank.  Although  capital  serves  the 
purpose  of  meeting  the  unexpected  losses,  capital  is  not  a  substitute  for  inadequate  control  or  risk 
management  systems.  Banks  should  strive  to  create  sound  internal  control  or  risk  management 
processes.   
From the point of view of analyzing risks and assigning capital against those risks, Pillar 2 is much 
more  inclusive  in  the  sense  that  it  not  only  captures  the  risks  covered  under  Pillar  1  (  credit  risk, 
market risk and operational risk) but also the credit concentration risk which is not fully captured by 
Pillar 1.  In addition, Pillar 2 must address the risks not captured by Pillar 1, such as, Interest rate risk 
in banking book, Liquidity risk, Business risk, Strategic risk and Reputation risk. The Business cycle 
effects which represent factors external to the bank are also to be covered under Pillar 2.  
India has implemented the risk based supervision (RBS) framework which evaluates the risk profile of 
the banks through an analysis of 12 risk factors viz, eight business risks and four control risks. The 
eight  business  risks  relate  to:  Capital,  Credit  Risk,  Market  Risk,  Earnings,  Liquidity  Risk,  Business 
Strategy and Environment Risk, Operational Risk and Group Risk. The control risks relate to Internal 
Controls  Risk,  Organisation  risk,  Management  Risk  and  Compliance  Risk.  The  RBS  framework  is 
currently undergoing further refinement. The RBS methodology can be used as a starting point for the 
implementation of pillar 2 proposals in India.  
Pillar 3- Market Discipline 
Regulation  is  not  and  cannot  be  an  alternative  to  market  discipline.  Actually,  market  discipline 
supplements regulation in the sense that monitoring of the banks and financial institutions is not only 
carried  out  by  the  regulators  but  also  by  the  markets,  which  includes  other  banks  &  financial 
institutions,  customers,  depositors,  subordinated  debt  instrument  holders,  rating  agencies  etc.  The 
discipline imposed by the markets can be as powerful as the sanctions imposed by the regulator.  
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  been  advising  banks  to  make  disclosures  in  order  to  enhance  market 
discipline. Although banks in India make several disclosures in their Notes on Accounts to the Balance 
Sheet,  for  implementing  Pillar  3  more work  requires  to  be  done. The  banks  are  required  to  have  a 
formal disclosure policy approved by their Board of directors highlighting what disclosures the bank will 
make  and  the  internal  controls  over  the  disclosure  process.  The  banks  have  also  to  implement  a 
process for assessing the appropriateness of their disclosures, including validation and frequency. The 
Reserve Bank of India may consider imposing a penalty, including financial penalty, in case of non-
compliance with the prescribed disclosure requirements.  
Conclusion  
So  far,  we  have  covered  the  various  issues  in  the  implementation  of  the  simplified  approaches  of 
Basel  II.  The  implementation  of  Advanced  Approaches,  such  as  IRB  Approach  for  credit  risk  and 
Advanced  Measurement  Approach  for  Operational  Risk,  require  much  more  preparation  and  pose 
several challenges for both the banks as well as the supervisors.  The banks would require to meet the 
minimum requirements relating to internal ratings at the outset and on an ongoing basis, such as those 
relating to the design of the rating system, operations, controls, corporate governance and estimation 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 3
and validation of credit risk components: Probability of Default (PD) for both Foundation and Advanced 
IRB, and Loss Given Default (LGD) and Exposure At Default (EAD) for Advanced IRB.  The banks 
should  have  at  a  minimum  PD  data  for  five  years  and  LGD  and  EAD  data  for  seven  years.  The 
manpower skills, the IT infrastructure and MIS at the banks would have to be upgraded substantially. 
The supervisors would require developing skills in validation and back testing of models.   
With the focus on regulation and risk management in the Basel II framework gaining prominence, the 
post Basel II era will belong to the banks who manage their risks effectively. The banks with proper 
risk  management  systems  would  not  only  gain  competitive  advantage  by  way  of  lower  regulatory 
capital charge but also add value to the shareholders and other stakeholders by properly pricing their 
services, adequate provisioning and maintaining a robust financial health. 
As  we  stand  at  this  juncture,  I  trust  innovative  and  illuminating  ideas,  fresh  insights  and  alternative 
ways of thinking about the competitive yet cooperative combat that the world of banking and finance is 
readying itself for will mark the South Indian Bank’s business strategies and institutional development 
plans and will give you the emotive content to carry forward the legacy and vision of your founding 
fathers and take your institution to new heights. With these words I wish you every success in all your 
future endeavours. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2005
