Su Ning: Promoting actively development of China’s bond market 
Speech  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  First  China  Bond 
Market Forum, Beijing, 15 July 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  join  you  for  a  discussion  on  issues  related  to  bond  market  development. 
China’s bond market has a history of more than 20 years, and the rapid growth of the OTC market, 
which constitutes the main pillar of the bond market, in the recent eight years has enabled the bond 
market  to  serve  as  an  important  platform  for  macro  financial  control.  With  the  reform  on  financial 
institutions being advanced and the financial services being improved, the bond market is bound to 
play an even more significant role in conducting financial reform and safeguarding financial stability. 
I’d like to take this opportunity to give a brief review of the efforts made by the People’s Bank of China 
(PBC)  so  far  in  promoting  the  development  of  the  bond  market,  and  then  share  with  you  my 
observations on the current situation and some reflections on further developing the bond market. 
I. Development of the inter-bank bond market in recent years 
Since the inter-bank bond market established in 1997, it has been developed by the PBC in a steady 
and  sequenced  way  according  to  the  advanced  international  experiences  and  following  the  OTC 
market mode. In recent years, the inter-bank bond market has grown rapidly and emerged as an open 
OTC bond wholesale market for all institutional investors, which constituted a major pillar of China’s 
bond market and played an important role in ensuring the effective transmission of monetary policy, 
sound performance of the macro economy and the effective allocation of financial resources. Since 
last  year,  the  PBC  has  reinforced  market  infrastructure  with  emphasis  on  innovation  of  financial 
products,  and  has  taken  measures  to  promote  and  standardize  the  development  of  the  inter-bank 
bond  market.  With  these  efforts,  the  inter-bank  bond  market  has  maintained  its  sound  growth 
momentum  and  the  product  innovation  and  institutional  building  have  also  achieved  new  progress, 
which can be basically summarized as follows: 
First, the market has seen a good growth momentum with the volume of bonds issued continuing to 
increase. From the beginning of 2004 to end-March of 2005, bonds issued in the inter-bank market 
reached RMB3561.7 billion yuan accumulatively, increasing by RMB1535.7 billion yuan over the end 
of 2003. By the end of this March, the stock value of bonds in inter-bank bond market amounted to 
RMB5214.3 billion yuan, growing by RMB1859.2 billion yuan over the end of 2003, up 35.65 percent. 
The total market turnover was RMB15.4 trillion yuan for the same period of time. Market participants 
increased rapidly in greater diversity. By the end of this March, there were altogether 5596 institutional 
participants in the market including banks, securities firms, mutual funds, insurance companies, and 
other non-banking financial institutions and enterprises, 1613 more than that recorded at the end of 
2003.  
Second, significant progress has been made in product innovation. Since last year, the PBC has made 
great  efforts  in  promoting  financial  product  innovation,  expanding  bond  issuers  and  developing 
financing channels, including allowing commercial banks to issue subordinated bonds, supporting the 
implementation  of  the  pilot  share-holding  reform  of  banks  as  approved  by  the  State  Council, 
introducing short-term financing bills to widen financing channels for the securities firms, encouraging 
international  development  institutions  to  issue  RMB  bonds  in  domestic  market,  improving  the  bond 
market and promoting the opening-up of the financial market. In the near term, by introducing short-
term  corporate  financing  bills,  we  have  made  important  strides  in  enhancing  the  capability  of 
enterprises  to  directly  raise  funds  in  the  market.  With  the  increase  of  bond  issuers,  bond  products 
became more diversified. The pilot program of asset securitization was explored and advanced. To 
promote  the  pilot  program  on  the  securitization  of  mortgage  loans  and  credit  assets  in  the  banking 
sector,  the  PBC,  jointly  with  the  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission,  issued  the  Administrative 
Rules on the Pilot Conduct of Credit Asset Securitization, which advanced the financial innovation. In 
terms of bond issuance, The Agricultural Development Bank of China was approved to issue policy 
financial bonds to make its funding more market-oriented. A new bond product with floating interest 
rate  based  on  the  new  benchmark  rate  was  introduced  in  the  market,  which  has  enriched  financial 
   1/4 
products and investment instruments. In terms of bond transactions, certain types of corporate bonds 
such as railway construction bonds started to be traded in the inter-bank market, leading to extended 
market coverage. The introduction of outright repo business paved the way for interest rate derivatives 
transactions such as bond credit and forward transactions.  
Third,  market  infrastructure  was  reinforced.  The  PBC  has  taken  active  steps  to  strengthen 
infrastructure  construction,  foster  the  development  of  qualified  institutional  investors  and  improve 
relevant legal framework. First, efforts were made to promote the development of money market fund. 
The  PBC  and  the  China Securities  Regulatory  Commission  (CSRC)  jointly  released  the  Provisional 
Rules  for  Money  Market  Fund  Management  to  support  the  development  of  money  market  fund 
business by fund management companies. Twelve money market funds have been launched so far. 
Second, fund business and the incorporation of fund management companies by commercial banks 
were  encouraged.  The  PBC  drafted  and  issued  the  Administrative  Rules  on  Incorporation  of  Fund 
Management  Companies  by  Commercial  Banks.  Allowing  commercial  banks  to  set  up  fund 
management  companies  would  help  to  enhance  the  proportion  of  direct  financing,  advance  the 
development  of  institutional  investors,  promote  commercial  bank  reform  and  optimize  resource 
allocation.  Third,  market  maker  system  was  established  in  the  inter-bank  bond  market  based  on 
bilateral quotations. Apart from commercial banks, 2 securities firms were accepted as market makers 
for the first time. Currently, there are 15 market makers in the market and the market maker system 
has  been  further  improved.  Fourth,  infrastructure  construction  of  the  inter-bank  bond  market  was 
advanced.  Under  the  guidance  of  the PBC,  the  China  Government  Securities  Trust Depository  and 
Clearing Company upgraded the bond trading system, and connected the bookkeeping system with 
the payment system. As a result, DVP settlement of bond transactions was preliminarily realized in the 
inter-bank  market.  Fifth,  legal  system  was  reinforced  to  regulate  the  fast  development  of  financial 
market and new instruments. For instance, the Rules for Licensing Inter-bank Bond Transactions and 
Circulations was released to regulate the inter-bank bond transactions, and the Administrative Rules 
for Inter-bank Outright Bond Repo Transactions was issued to resolve certain legal issues regarding 
such businesses.  
II. Seizing favorable opportunity to foster the development of the inter-bank bond market 
The Third Plenary Session of the Sixteenth National Congress of CPC called for “actively developing 
bond market”, creating valuable opportunities for the development of the inter-bank bond market and 
allowing the market to play a more important role in financing restructuring, financial macro control and 
the reform of financial institutions. 
First,  developing  the  inter-bank  bond  market  is  in  urgent  need  for  financing  restructuring.  With  the 
deepening of the financial reform, some deep-rooted problems gradually emerged, a serous one of 
which  was  the  excessively  high  ratio  of  indirect  financing.  In  the  current  financing  structure,  the 
proportion of indirect financing stands excessively high compared to that of direct financing, with bank 
loans  accounting  for  80  percent  of  the  total  financing  in  the  non-financial  sector  and  bank  savings 
accounting for 70 percent of the household financial assets. The irrational financing structure not only 
fermented  a  formidable  potential  financial  risk  but  also  seriously  hindered  economic  development. 
Therefore, the financial community has reached a consensus on improving financing structure, with 
emphasis on developing capital market especially the bond market, which shall allow enterprises and 
investors  to  directly  raise  funds  from  or  invest  in  the  market.  In  addition  to  promoting  the  steady 
development of the stock market, developing the inter-bank bond market provides us another effective 
way to reform the irrational financing structure. Thus, an improved financing structure is in great need 
and shall provide new opportunities for accelerating the inter-bank bond market development.  
Second, improving financial macro control system and transmission mechanism calls for fostering the 
development of the inter-bank bond market. A well-functioned financial market is crucial for conducting 
indirect financial control. In recent years, the inter-bank bond market has grown rapidly and played a 
significant  role 
improving 
macroeconomic  control.  However,  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  market  still  need  to  be  developed, 
financial products and trading instruments are yet to be diversified, and the market liquidity remains 
low. Therefore, efforts should be made to strengthen market infrastructure, increase the diversity of 
financial  products  and  improve  market  functions  so  as  to  ensure  the  effective  implementation  and 
transmission of financial control policies.  
Third, upgrading the inter-bank bond market is vital for the reform of financial institutions. The inter-
bank bond market should provide not only investment facility for commercial banks and other financial 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  and 
the  effective 
in  ensuring 
   2/4 
institutions but also instruments for their liability management, flexible means to adjust asset structure, 
and  source  of  funds  to  supplement  the  capital  base  and  enhance  the  capital  adequacy  ratio. 
Moreover,  it  should  offer  more  measures  and  various  instruments  for  financial  institutions  to  adjust 
their asset and liability structure and create a favorable market environment for their reform so as to 
enable them to transform their operating mechanism through market-based means and become micro 
financial entities commensurate with the market-oriented economy. 
III. Some reflections on accelerating the inter-bank bond market development 
In order to further develop the inter-bank bond market, under the guidance of the central government 
and the State Council, the PBC will deepen the reform with the priority in financial product innovation 
by  following  the  principles  of  market  economy  and  relying  on  the  initiatives  of  market  participants. 
Meanwhile, the PBC will also coordinate the development of product innovation and the market growth 
within the market capacity, foster the market infrastructure construction, and advance the development 
of the inter-bank bond market and the whole financial market.  
First,  focusing  on  financial  product  innovation  and  further  expanding  direct  financing  channels.  To 
satisfy  the  needs  of  the  inter-bank  bond  market  and  provide  instruments  for  market  participants  to 
conduct liability management and prevent risks, we will further conduct in-depth research and launch 
as  soon  as  possible  financial  products  which  are  based  on  corporate  credit  standings  such  as  the 
financial bonds and asset backed securities, and gradually develop financial derivatives according to 
market conditions.  
1.  Actively  promoting  the  issuance  of  financial  bonds  by  financial  institutions.  While  improving  the 
management of subordinated bonds issued by commercial banks, steps will be taken to encourage 
financial  institutions  to  issue  financial  bonds  in  the  inter-bank  bond  market,  provide  instruments  for 
commercial banks  to enhance  their  liability  management  and  ease  the  mismatch of  their asset  and 
liability term structure.  
2.  Speeding  up  the  issuance  of  asset  backed  securities.  Efforts  will  be  made  to  improve  the  pilot 
program on credit asset securitization, accelerate the launch of asset securitization business on a pilot 
basis, and promote China Development Bank and China Construction Bank, as the pilot institutions, to 
make  detailed  plan  on  the  securitization  of  credit  assets  and  mortgage  loans  respectively  so  as  to 
enable them to formally issue asset backed securities at an early date. 
3. Promoting the issuance of RMB bonds by international financial institutions in domestic market. The 
issuance and trading of RMB bonds by international financial institutions will be regulated according to 
the  promulgated  Administrative  Rules  on  the  Issuance  of  RMB  Bonds  by  International  Financial 
Institutions. 
4.  Vigorously  developing  short-term  corporate  financing  bills.  Following  the  promulgation  of  the 
Administrative Rules for Short-term Financing Bills and the successful introduction of the first batch of 
short-term corporate financing bills, the development of short-term corporate financing bills market will 
be  further  promoted  and  regulated  so  as  to  reduce  the  reliance  of  enterprises’  financing  on  bank 
loans. 
5.  Fostering  the circulation  of  corporate  bonds  in  the  inter-bank bond  market. Bidding  for corporate 
bond  issuance  by  institutional  investors  in  the  inter-bank  market will  be  publicized  and  promoted  to 
further develop the corporate bond market.  
6. Gradually introducing financial derivatives. To enhance market liquidity and provide instruments for 
market investors to hedge risks, bond credit and forward business will be launched according to the 
development of market, and operating patterns and institutional framework will be determined for bond 
credit and forward products. Meanwhile, relevant rules and regulations will be revised to provide legal 
support for these two kinds of products. 
Second,  fostering  the  development  of  qualified  institutional  investors.  The  development  of  money 
market fund business and the establishment of fund management companies by commercial banks 
will  be  supported.  Currently,  the  Provisional  Rules  for  Money  Market  Fund  Management  and  the 
Administrative  Rules  for  the  Establishment  of  Fund  Management  Company  by  Commercial  Banks 
have  been  released.  The  PBC,  jointly  with  other  relevant  government  departments,  will  further 
promote the pilot project according to the rules so as to enable commercial banks to establish fund 
management company and issue funds at an early date. Meanwhile, to enhance the opening up of the 
   3/4 
inter-bank bond market, qualified foreign institutional investors such as the Asian Bond Fund will be 
allowed to invest in the market.  
Third,  strengthening  the  infrastructure  construction  of  the  inter-bank  bond  market.  To  ensure  the 
smooth introduction of various new types of financial products, efforts will be made to reinforce market 
infrastructure and improve the legal system so as to provide legal and technical support to the healthy 
development of the inter-bank bond market. Relevant rules and regulations will be further improved. In 
addition to the existing regulatory rules, the Administrative Rules for the Inter-bank Bond Market will 
be  drafted.  Meanwhile,  the  PBC  will  specifically  define  its  supervisory  functions,  and  clarify  certain 
important  principles  based  on  which  bond  is  issued  and  traded.  Steps  will  also  be  taken  to  further 
improve development of rules, contracts and system regarding the DVP settlement in the inter-bank 
bond market, explore the ways of adopting DVP settlement by non-banking financial institutions, and 
establish relevant systems. Certain issues such as the data exchange and sharing will be coordinated 
so as to foster the linkage between the bookkeeping system and the trading system. The management 
of the trading information in the inter-bank bond market will be strengthened. The PBC will also further 
improve the market-maker system, increase policy support to the market makers and gradually put in 
place  a  inter-bank  bond  market  with  the  market  makers  as  the  core,  the  brokers  and  financial 
institutions as the mainstay, and the non-financial investors as the major participants. 
I am confident that, with the efforts of all parties in China’s bond market, the Chinese bond market is 
bound to see a rapid and healthy development.  
Thank you! 
   4/4 
