Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance - promoting the competitive advantage 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Islamic 
Bankers’ Forum 2005: Islamic Finance - Promoting The Competitive Advantage, Putrajaya, 21 June 
2005. 
 “Islamic finance has become a competitive form of financial intermediation that has been able to meet 
the differentiated requirements of our economies. In an environment of rapid change, a key factor that 
will influence the future prospects of the Islamic financial services industry will be the investments to 
build the foundations on which further progress can be achieved. Investing in the future, in research 
and development and in the development of talent and expertise will be the differentiating factor that 
will  contribute  to  the  effectiveness,  resilience  and  competitiveness  of  the  industry.  This  undertaking 
needs  to  be  the  joint  responsibility  of  both  the  private  and  public  sectors  to  mutually  elevate  the 
performance  of  the  industry  and  thus  increase  its  potential  to  contribute  to  wealth  creation  and 
prosperity of our nations.” 
Your Excellencies, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honour to be invited to speak at this Islamic Banker’s Forum organized by the General Council 
for  Islamic  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  (CIBAFI)  on  the  strategic  approach  in  developing  a 
progressive Islamic financial system. The occasion of this Forum is indeed an excellent opportunity for 
the industry practitioners, regulators and academia to deliberate on the key issues that are important 
to the future of the Islamic financial services industry. My remarks today will focus, in particular, on the 
issues  relating  to  innovation,  which  is  indeed  derived  from  the  investment  in  research  and 
development, and from the investment in the workforce in the sector. 
Innovation  is  key  to  sustaining  growth  and  securing  the  competitive  advantage.  Innovation  is  about 
developing  new  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  and  increasing  the  range  of  products  and 
services  to  meet  the  more  sophisticated  and  complex  requirements  of  today’s  consumers  and 
businesses. It is also about improving the overall efficiency by which the products and services are 
being  provided.  Innovation  will  also  involve  the  introduction  of  new  structures  that  may  contribute 
towards enhancing convenience for consumers and businesses. Finally, it may also contribute towards 
creating  new  markets  or  expand  the  existing  markets  for  Islamic  products  and  services.  Industry 
practitioners thus have an important role to promote innovation. Financial institutions need to equip 
their  business  strategies  with  research  and  development  to  design  new  innovative  products  and 
services. Such innovative financial products and services which are credible, competitive and Shariah-
compliant would indeed find a ready market. The introduction of the global sovereign sukuk more than 
two years ago was an important innovation that has since gained significant ground. 
Innovation  can  also  take  the  form  of  the  application  of  technology  to  improve  convenience  for 
customers and reduce the cost of financial transactions. In embracing new leading-edge technology, 
the potential for the Islamic financial industry to provide new products and services will be enhanced. It 
also represents the potential to increase access to financial products through a wider range of new 
delivery channels. Greater application of IT in the industry can also enhance efficiency by driving down 
costs  for  consumers  and  businesses.  Other  areas  include  leveraging  on  IT  in  making  strategic 
decisions in the alignment of business, in elevating institutional capacity and operational efficiency and 
strengthening  risk  management  capabilities.  Moving  forward,  the  enhancement  of  technological 
capabilities becomes vital for the financial industry as it competes in an increasingly technology-driven 
environment. 
The environment and the incentive structure is also important in providing an enabling environment 
that promotes innovation. In particular, the regulatory framework and the tax structure are important to 
the innovation process. The regulatory framework should not be so onerous as to impose a high cost 
and a regulatory burden on businesses. Intrusive regulatory approaches on new products can become 
a disincentive to innovation. Tax structures can also be designed to support the innovation process. 
Within financial institutions, organisational structures can also create an environment for innovation by 
aligning the organization’s processes and implementing appropriate performance incentives. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 1
The pace of innovation that has taken place in the Islamic financial services industry has contributed to 
the development of a broad and diversified range of Islamic financial products and services that has 
been  able  to  effectively  mobilize  financial  resources  to  meet  the  investment  requirements  of  the 
economy. Notwithstanding this significant progress, the process of innovation in Islamic finance has 
generally been structured mainly along the adaptation approach. Although there are Islamic financial 
instruments that are distinct from the conventional financial instruments, the numbers are still few. In 
most instances, the Islamic financial products are repackaged along the features of the conventional 
financial products, while eliminating the elements that are not in compliance with the Shariah. 
The Islamic financial services industry is now at the threshold of a new level of development. As we 
advance forward, the Islamic financial services industry can expect to have a different set of regulatory 
and  supervisory  standards  which  is  conducive  to  its  unique  financial  operations.  There  is  also  an 
increased awareness and understanding amongst the international financial community on the distinct 
nature of Islamic banking and financial operations. In addition, a higher degree of Shariah dynamism 
is evident in the evolution of sophisticated Islamic financial products that are being structured based 
on  multiple  Shariah  concepts.  Against  these  developments,  it  is  timely  to  move  away  from  “plain 
vanilla”  innovation  and  to  embrace  a  new  wave  of  innovation  that  will  evolve  Islamic  financial 
instruments into distinct products that will maximize the potential and wisdom of the Shariah and that 
meets  the  greater  sophistication  of  consumers  and  the  more  complex  requirements  of  today’s 
businesses.  This  paradigm  of  innovation  in  Islamic  finance,  which  by  itself  shall  accord  Islamic 
financial institutions with the competitive advantage to forge ahead, entails substantial and continuous 
investments  in  research  and  development  (R&D).  R&D  is  indeed  an  essential  aspect  of  modern 
industries  and  enterprises  and  is  no  less  the  case  in  the  financial  world.  There  are  three  important 
pre-requisites in strengthening research and development capabilities, namely, adequate allocation of 
resources  for  infrastructure  development,  forging  strategic  alliances  through  smart  partnerships  and 
developing the required pool of qualified and skilled talent. 
Adequate allocation of resources for infrastructure development 
Islamic  financial  institutions  are  continually  being  confronted  with  new  challenges  that  need  to  be 
addressed. Their institutional capacities and capabilities need to be continuously strengthened. This 
includes attention to continually review their strategic orientation and key priorities and the necessary 
adjustments  that  need  to  be  made  to  position  the  institutions  to  effectively  respond  to  the  new 
developments and challenges that have emerged. 
In order to meet the increasing demands of a modern and sophisticated market, financial institutions 
must continually invest in the supporting infrastructure that promotes research and development. This 
will enhance the capacity for innovation. Attention also needs to be given to the applied approach to 
Islamic finance and its modern practice. Financial support for advanced research at universities and 
research institutes will increase research opportunities. Efforts to utilise and install strong technological 
capabilities will also contribute to enhance research and development. In embracing the new leading-
edge technology, the potential for the Islamic financial industry to develop new products and services 
will also be enhanced. 
Forging strategic alliances through smart partnerships 
To  further enhance research and development (R&D) activities, the  promotion  of strategic  alliances 
through  smart  partnerships  can  play  an  important  role.  Entering  into  strategic  alliances  with  other 
entities would create greater synergy, which may bring about new approaches, new technologies and 
new  areas  of  specialization.  Collaborative  efforts  amongst  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  particular, 
would  strengthen  the  ability  to  leverage  on  the  industry’s  expertise.  The  introduction  of  innovative 
Islamic financial products in a specific jurisdiction can be expanded to other jurisdictions, which in turn, 
will  contribute  to  broaden  and  deepen  Islamic  financial  markets  and  thus  strengthen  the  overall 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  In  addition,  active  collaboration  between  academic 
researchers and the practitioners will enable the practical application of research findings. In Malaysia, 
an industry-owned research and training institute in Islamic banking and finance, the Islamic Banking 
and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) has been established to spearhead greater collaborative efforts 
with universities to undertake research in areas that are key for the progressive development of the 
Islamic financial industry. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2005
A highly qualified and skilled pool of talent 
The fast pace of innovation in global financial services in general and for the Islamic financial services 
sector in particular, will demand a rapid and continuous infusion and upgrading of skills. Developing a 
substantial pool of talent and expertise is indispensable for strengthening research capabilities. In this 
regard, there has to be a strong focus on human capital development through training and education. 
In today’s competitive environment, intellectual capital is the major factor in determining the level of 
innovation and competitiveness of an institution or corporation. A key challenge for Islamic financial 
institutions is to attract a knowledge-based workforce with the skills required to enhance the potential 
for  innovation,  productivity  and  performance.  The  Islamic  financial  services  industry  needs  to 
continually promote human capital development and expertise to create a larger pool of experts and 
high  calibre  professionals.  This  involves  attracting  and  retaining  the  existing  talent,  and  building  a 
robust pipeline of skilled individuals for the future. In addition, specialists in Islamic finance would need 
to  combine  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  Shariah  with  the  necessary  skills  in  finance.  The 
provision  of  training  and  career  development  will  have  a  key  role  in  the  sector.  Learning  systems 
therefore need to be strengthened to meet the skills and talent requirements of the next decade. 
Training  is  a  joint  responsibility  between  the  industry,  academia  and  Government.  In  Malaysia,  the 
Government  plans  to  establish  an  international  financial  training  institute  on  Islamic  finance.  The 
ground  work  to  establish  this  institute  has  already  commenced.  While  this  may  meet  some  of  the 
requirements, Islamic banking institutions are also encouraged to explore the feasibility of entering into 
collaborative arrangements with universities and other institutions locally and abroad, to identify and 
provide specialized training for the financial services industry. These would include training workshops 
and courses in new and emerging product lines which require specialised skills and expertise. 
Education  of  graduates  and  other  personnel  entering  the  Islamic  financial  market  is  also  important. 
Undergraduate  opportunities  to  study  Islamic  finance  or  Shariah,  either  as  a  speciality  or  a  major 
component  of  a  business  degree,  should  be  readily  available  at  local  and  foreign  universities.  The 
challenge  is  to  provide  programmes  which  keep  pace  with  changes  in  financial  innovation  and 
technology.  Meeting  this  need  requires  rigorous,  extended  programmes  such  as  the  post-graduate 
programmes  in  Islamic  Finance  and  Financial  Engineering  with  emphasis  on  Islamic  banking 
principles. At the same time, relevant organizations can support such programmes by creating funds 
to sponsor promising students to pursue formal education, ranging from modular courses in Islamic 
finance to full post-graduate programmes. There is also a need to increase programmes and initiatives 
that provide education and training in Shariah. Islamic research organizations and financial institutions 
need  to  work  towards  developing  a  sufficient  number  of  competent  Shariah  scholars  who  are 
equipped with sound knowledge and expertise in both Islamic jurisprudence and Islamic commercial 
laws to deal with innovative and cutting-edge products. 
There is also the need for extensive education of the consumer and business community. This would 
increase  the  outreach  resulting  in  increased  demand  for  new  and  innovative  products  and 
approaches.  Malaysia  has  implemented  a  10-year  structured  consumer  education  programme  to 
increase the level of consumer awareness on the unique characteristics of Islamic financial products 
and the product choices offered by Islamic financial service providers. Increased awareness will drive 
the demand for a broader range of Islamic products and services customized to their requirements at 
more competitive prices and through more convenient channels. The outreach has also been targeted 
at small and medium sized businesses. This process will also prompt the financial industry to increase 
innovation  to  strengthen  their  competitive  position.  This  can  be  reinforced  by  market  research  to 
enhance the understanding of customers’ distinct financial needs and their risk tolerance and therefore 
enable the design of Islamic financial instruments that offer tangible benefits and value to customers. 
In  addition,  with  increased  disclosure  and  transparency  on  the  manner  in  which  Islamic  financial 
transactions are being conducted and on how Islamic financial contracts are being executed as well as 
on the risk and return profiles of financial products, this will further strengthen the role of competition. 
In conclusion, the investment in the future needs to be undertaken by all the relevant entities in the 
Islamic financial sector - the industry, the regulators, the market participants, the academia and the 
international  community.  As  a  co-ordinated  and  concerted  effort  it  will  be  mutually  reinforcing  in 
elevating  the  performance  of  Islamic  finance.  While  the  increasingly  more  competitive  prevailing 
environment  raises  the  pressures  to  produce  immediate-term  results,  it  is  the  investment  in  human 
capital and in research and development that will secure the long-term sustainability of the industry. It 
is these investments that will be the defining element of the future development of Islamic finance and 
its long-term success. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 3
