Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration - the view of the ECB 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Eurofi conference 
entitled  “Europe’s  single  capital  market:  time  to  tackle  the  toughest  challenges”,  Luxembourg, 
10 March 2005. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It gave me great pleasure to accept the invitation to this conference, which addresses an issue of the 
highest  importance  to  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem.  With  this  in  mind,  I  would  like  to  express  the 
ECB’s views on European financial integration.  
Let me start by reminding you that financial integration is achieved through an effective interplay of 
market forces in an environment of free competition, coordinated action by private actors and specific 
measures  taken  by  public  authorities.  The  ECB  both  supports  and  complements  such  steps.  Our 
support for financial integration is not something we see as optional. On the contrary, we see it as an 
issue  that  is  of  great  importance  in  the  conduct  of  our  own  activities.  Let  me  give  the  underlying 
reasons behind this stance. 
First,  a  well  integrated  financial  system  is  pivotal  to  the  smooth  and  effective  implementation  of 
monetary policy throughout the euro area. In this regard, I would also like to mention the ECB’s task of 
promoting the effective operation of payment systems, as well as its interest in the smooth running of 
securities settlement systems. 
Second,  a  well  integrated  financial  system  helps  to  make  the  euro  area  economy  more  efficient 
through the reduction of financing costs and an improved allocation of financial resources. This is likely 
to  be  conducive  to  higher  and  more  sustainable  non-inflationary  growth.  A  study  sponsored  by  the 
European  Commission  concluded  in  2002  that  further  integration  in  the  European  Union  might 
generate additional gains of 1% in the overall level of real GDP over a decade or so. 
Third, European financial integration is a priority that has been reiterated by the European Council on 
several  occasions.  The  ECB’s  support  for  European  financial  integration  is  therefore  in  accordance 
with Article 105 of the Treaty, which states that “the ESCB [– European System of Central Banks –] 
shall  support  the  general  economic  policies  in  the  Community  with  a  view  to  contributing  to  the 
achievement of the objectives of the Community”. 
Finally,  there  is  the  interconnection  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability.  As  deeper 
financial integration may, to some extent, change the interplay of vulnerabilities, the potential impact of 
these on financial stability – which is of natural interest to central banks – has to be taken into account.  
The ECB uses all available channels in its efforts to foster European financial integration. We try to 
raise  awareness  of  the  need  for  integration  and  the  means  of  achieving  it.  We  also  advise  on  the 
shaping of the legal framework. Furthermore, the ECB can act as a catalyst for collective initiatives 
from  the  private  sector.  Finally,  where  appropriate,  the  ECB  can  take  direct  action.  I  will  later  give 
several examples of these different roles. 
I  would  like  to  discuss  now  the  three  major  components  of  the  financial  system,  namely  the 
institutions, the markets and the infrastructure. I will address both the wholesale and retail aspects of 
these three components, and will touch upon developments that can be deemed a success, as well as 
areas where more effort is required.  
Institutions 
Following the adoption of the single currency, the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) represented 
the next major stage in the integration process. Now that the FSAP is nearing completion, I see the 
post-FSAP period as a “window of opportunity” for further enhancing financial integration. At the same 
time, I am convinced that further progress is inextricably linked to the improvement of the regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  and  the  financial  stability  arrangements.  In  particular,  institutional 
BIS Review 18/2005 
 1
arrangements  must  respond  to  the  need  for  greater  cross-border  cooperation,  with  a  view  to  both 
supporting further integration and at the same time preserving financial stability. 
In  the  area  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  a  key  objective  is  to  achieve  a  high  degree  of 
regulatory and supervisory convergence across countries. This will help reduce the compliance burden 
on  financial  institutions,  thus  addressing  one  of  the  largest  remaining  obstacles  to  enhanced 
cross-border  activities.  At  the  same  time,  well  developed  arrangements  for  the  exchange  of 
information  and  the  cooperation  among  supervisory  authorities  have  become  a  prerequisite  for  the 
effective supervision of cross-border entities. 
In the area of financial stability, arrangements for financial stability monitoring and crisis management 
need  to  be  tailored  to  the  fact  that  liquidity  and  solvency  problems  at  financial  institutions  are 
increasingly likely to affect more than one country. 
The institutional framework for banks is especially important. Given its pivotal role in channelling funds 
into  the  EU  economy,  a  well  integrated  banking  sector  is  a  prerequisite  for  achieving  a  truly  single 
financial  market.  In  recent  years,  we  have  witnessed  an  increase  in  cross-border  banking.  The 
considerable  competitive  pressures  in  the  global  markets  and  the  increasing  saturation  of  domestic 
markets  should  normally  spur  further  cross-border  banking.  Policy-makers  have  already  launched 
important  initiatives  to  step  up  cross-border  cooperation  in  line  with  the  growth  of  cross-border 
banking.  While  some  challenges  for  the  coming  period  certainly  remain,  impressive  progress  has 
already been made.  
In the area of financial regulation and supervision, the extension of the Lamfalussy approach to the 
banking sector and the establishment of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) are 
such  milestones.  Here,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  crucial  work  performed  by  the  CEBS,  which 
develops common benchmarks and best practices for the consistent implementation of EU Banking 
Directives  as  well  as  agreed  principles  for  cooperation  between  home  and  host  supervisors.  In 
addition, the forthcoming revision of the Codified Banking Directive will provide a robust underpinning 
for  greater  cross-border  cooperation  among  authorities,  especially  for  large  banking  groups.  The 
revised Directive will tighten the requirements for the information exchange and coordination between 
the  consolidating  supervisor  and  host  supervisors.  It  will  also  assign  the  consolidating  supervisor  a 
coordinating  role  in  the  gathering  and  dissemination  of  information  about  the  group  as  well  as  the 
planning and coordination of supervisory activities. Following these two major reforms, efforts should 
now focus on their effective implementation. 
As regards financial stability, there has been a significant increase in cross-border arrangements in 
response to the recommendations of the reports by the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) on 
financial  stability  and  crisis  management.  The  important  role  of  the  Financial  Services  Committee 
(FSC), which was responsible for monitoring the implementation of the EFC recommendations, should 
be fully acknowledged at this point.  
With  regard  to  crisis  management,  the  2003  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  EU  banking 
supervisors and central banks, and to which the new EU Member States adhered in June 2004, was a 
great  accomplishment.  For  the  first  time,  principles  for  managing  financial  crises  that  may  have  a 
cross-border impact were agreed at EU level. Nevertheless, the Memorandum may be not sufficiently 
detailed  to  cover  large  cross-border  banking  groups  comprising  several  authorities,  where  crisis 
management  is  particularly  complex.  Given  the  potential  far-reaching  implications  of  financial 
disturbances  involving  such  groups,  the  development  of  group-specific  agreements  could  be  an 
important avenue to explore. Another important issue is the involvement of finance ministries in the 
crisis  management  framework.  A  High-Level  Working  Group,  comprising  representatives  from  the 
ministries  of  finance,  central  banks  and  banking  supervisors,  is  working  on  concrete  proposals  for 
cooperation arrangements between the three authorities at EU level. 
As regards financial stability monitoring, the EU framework has been enhanced considerably in recent 
years.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  stability  assessment  of  the  EU  banking  sector, 
performed  by  the  ESCB’s  Banking  Supervision  Committee,  and  the  comprehensive  analysis  of 
potential vulnerabilities in the euro area financial system as a whole, which was carried out as part of 
the  ECB’s  Financial  Stability  Review.  In  addition,  the  CEBS  is  expected  to  improve  its  internal 
exchange of information on individual institutions and groups. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2005
Markets 
I now turn to the second component of the financial system, the financial markets. The introduction of 
the euro and the measures adopted under the FSAP  have spurred the integration of the  European 
financial markets. Nevertheless, there continue to be varying degrees of integration.  
Wholesale money and bond markets tend to be relatively well integrated, but only the unsecured euro 
money market has reached a fully satisfactory level of integration.  
The  integration  of  the  market  of  debt  securities  has  been  significantly  increased,  although  not  yet 
reaching the level of the United States. In the euro area, the amount of outstanding debt securities 
issued  by  non-financial  corporations  in  their  domestic  currency  represents  around  5%  of  GDP, 
compared to a figure of more than 20% in the United States.  
Integration  is  progressing  in  the  government  bond  markets  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  also  in  the 
corporate  bond  markets.  The  corporate  bond  markets  have  grown  and  deepened  substantially  in 
Europe  over  the  past  years,  although  a  large  gap  with  the  United  States  still  exists  as  regards  the 
outstanding  volume.  But  the  new  issuances  in  2003,  according  to  the  best  estimates,  were  of  the 
same order of magnitude on both sides of the Atlantic. The business of underwriting corporate bonds 
in euro, on the other hand, is a wholesale banking area that has become largely pan-European and 
even international.  
The short-term securities markets in Europe are slowly integrating. The market’s size for commercial 
paper  in  the  EU  represents  about  EUR  1000  billion,  which  is  about  two  thirds  of  the  size  the  US 
market  for  commercial  paper.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  one  of  the  ECB’s  approaches  to  fostering 
financial integration is to act as a catalyst for initiatives from the private sector. One such example is 
the  Short-Term  European  Paper  (STEP)  initiative,  which  was  set  up  by  the  ACI  –  The  Financial 
Markets Association. It aims to promote the convergence of the practices prevailing in the fragmented 
European  short-term  securities  markets  through  market  players’  voluntary  compliance  with  the 
standards set out in the STEP Market Convention. The Governing Council of the ECB has decided to 
support,  in  principle,  the  activities  pertaining  to  the  introduction  of  a  STEP  label,  which  would 
acknowledge adoption of the standards, for the first two years after its launch. It has also decided to 
produce and publish STEP yield indices as well as statistics on volumes on an ongoing basis. The 
ECB would like to strongly encourage similar initiatives to promote financial integration in Europe. 
Continuing my assessment of the wholesale markets, I will briefly discuss the equity market. Recent 
empirical  evidence  shows  that  the  degree  of  integration  has  increased  here.  For  example,  the 
so-called  “home  bias”  in  the  equity  holdings  of  investment  and  pension  funds  has  decreased 
substantially over the time. Overall, however, this market segment is still one of the least integrated. 
As a final comment on the wholesale markets, I would like to say a few words on the development of 
new credit markets. Sometimes, these markets are set up in a pan-European context right from the 
start  –  we  might  say  they  are  “born  integrated”.  One  example  of  this  is  the  European  market  for 
synthetic collateralised debt obligations.  
This development is encouraging. However, the existence of cross-border activity, with its impact on 
prices  and  volumes,  does  not  always  signal  the  absence  of  hurdles  and  the  achievement  of  full 
integration. Factors of segmentation may still exist, but can be overcome by innovative instruments. 
For  example,  in  the  securitisation  market,  originators  need  a  two-layer  structure  to  create 
pan-European transactions backed by well diversified multi-jurisdictional asset portfolios: first, assets 
must  be  securitised  at  the  domestic  level,  and  then,  a  pan-European  vehicle  backed  by  several 
domestic securitisation transactions must be set up. This is a complex procedure and incurs costs. 
I now turn to an important retail market, namely the mortgage credit market which represents in the EU 
an  outstanding  volume  of  around  EUR  4  trillion.  The  lack  of  integration  manifests  itself  here  in 
numerous  ways.  In  no  national  market  can  borrowers  access  the  full  range  of  mortgage  products. 
Moreover, only a negligible portion of European mortgage credit is granted across borders, and the 
techniques for loan origination and servicing differ substantially from country to country.  
More than half of mortgage lending is still financed by retail deposits, although in recent years capital 
market instruments, such as covered bonds and residential mortgage backed securities, have gained 
in  importance.  These  are  important  asset  categories  that  can  also  be  used  as  collateral  in  the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  operations.  Nevertheless,  they  still  exhibit  a  high  degree  of 
heterogeneity across countries due to differences in their legal, tax and regulatory framework.  
BIS Review 18/2005 
 3
Given the size of the mortgage credit market, the costs incurred through the lack of integration cannot 
be ignored. In this regard, the ECB supports both private-sector and European Commission initiatives 
to encourage further integration, such as the follow-up to the report of the Commission’s Forum Group 
on Mortgage Credit.  
Infrastructure  
Integration  of  financial  markets  cannot  take  place  without  an  integrated  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement infrastructure. This brings me to the third component of the financial system, the financial 
infrastructure,  which  also  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  illustrate  some  cases  of  where  the  ECB  has 
taken direct action.  
TARGET  is  one  such  example.  Had  TARGET  not  been  operational  from  the  first  day  of  Monetary 
Union, there would have been no means of transferring liquidity from a country with a liquidity surplus 
to a country with a liquidity deficit. Consequently, we would not have had a single but several money 
markets, which would have made monetary policy far more difficult to implement. Over time, TARGET 
has continuously increased its market share in large value payments in euro. TARGET's market share 
is  now  around  90%  of  the  total  traffic  value  compared  to  70%  at  the  moment  when  the  euro  was 
launched. At the same time, the domestic component has remained at roughly three quarters of the 
total traffic value. 
However, our ambitions did not stop in 1999. We are currently building TARGET2, which is due to go 
live in 2007 and will replace the current decentralised system with a single technical platform. By the 
way,  with  EUR  1.7  trillion  settled  every  day,  TARGET  is  already  one  of  the  two  largest  wholesale 
payment systems in the world, alongside Fedwire in the United States. With the functionalities that will 
be introduced in TARGET2, we also expect it to be one of the most, if not the most, sophisticated. 
TARGET2 will further improve financial integration in several respects. Not only will it increase cost 
effectiveness,  but  it  will  also  allow  for  the  provision  of  a  harmonised  service  level  ensuring  a  level 
playing field for banks across Europe. This will be supported by the implementation of a single price 
structure for domestic and cross-border payments. Moreover, TARGET2 will offer new functionalities 
enabling banks to better integrate their euro liquidity management. For example, participants will be 
able to group some of their accounts and pool the available intraday liquidity for the benefit of all of the 
members of the group of accounts. In addition, TARGET2 will benefit its users in terms of consolidated 
information. Whereas in the past an institution’s head office has not been able to see the information 
being held across its various branches, TARGET2 will enable it to monitor and process automatically 
all of its data from a single location.  
The level of integration that TARGET had already achieved in 1999 can be considered higher than 
that  of  the  securities  infrastructure  today.  Owing  to  the  single  currency,  a  significant  process  of 
consolidation  has  also  taken  place  in  the  securities  infrastructure  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  present 
moment, the current configuration remains complex, with a significant number of national exchanges, 
clearing  houses  and  central  securities  depositories.  Further  consolidation  of  some  of  the  European 
infrastructure is advisable. 
The ECB has a particular interest in an integrated securities infrastructure because it uses it in the 
context of the collateralisation of its intraday credit operations for payment system purposes and its 
monetary policy. In addition, a major disruption in a securities settlement system could undermine the 
stability of financial markets.  
There  are  numerous  private  and  public-sector  initiatives  under  way  to  promote  the  integration, 
efficiency,  and  security  of  the  European  securities  infrastructure.  The  “Standards  for  Securities 
Clearing and Settlement in the European Union” that have been drawn up jointly by the ESCB and the 
Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) are an important initiative. In its communication 
on “Clearing and Settlement in the European Union”, the European Commission recently outlined the 
actions it intends to undertake to improve clearing and settlement arrangements, which are welcomed 
by  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem.  In  particular,  we  agree  that  the  barriers  as  identified  by  the 
“Giovannini Group”, must  be eliminated.  In  addition,  we  concur  that  some  parts  of  the clearing  and 
settlement industry deserve careful attention from a competition policy point of view. Finally, in order to 
ensure  the  smooth  operation  of  the  markets  and  guarantee  financial  stability,  we  share  the 
Commission’s view that a sound regulatory framework is essential.  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2005
In  principle,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  also  support  the  adoption  of  a  framework  directive  on 
clearing  and  settlement,  for  two  main  reasons.  First,  a  directive  would  complement  the  market-led 
removal of the “Giovannini barriers”, a necessary condition for competition to be able to fully play its 
role. Second, the implementation of the ESCB/CESR standards, as well as any other harmonisation 
measures, may require changes to the national legal framework that cannot be made by the national 
supervisory  authorities.  We  do  not  expect  this  framework  directive  to  duplicate  the  work  of  the 
ESCB/CESR.  Rather,  in  line with  the Lamfalussy  approach,  the  directive should  stipulate  high-level 
principles to be further developed by implementing measures. We agree with the Commission that the 
ESCB/CESR standards might form the basis of such implementing measures. Last, but not least, in 
the light of our interest in the financial market infrastructure, the Commission is invited to recognise 
explicitly, the responsibilities and tasks of the ESCB and the Eurosystem, especially their role in the 
oversight of the securities clearing and settlement infrastructure.  
Having covered the wholesale aspects of the financial infrastructure, I now turn to the retail aspects, 
which  are  very  important.  Take  the  example  of  the  mortgage  markets  that  I  covered  earlier.  A 
pan-European mortgage market cannot develop if there are limitations on making payments from one 
bank to another within the euro area.  
In this regard, the Eurosystem’s initial objective is to have a Single Euro Payments Area – a SEPA – 
for  citizens  and  enterprises  in  the  euro  area  from  1  January  2008  onwards.  According  to  the 
Commission’s regulation, the price charged by banks for a cross-border transfer must be the same as 
that of a transfer within the same country. While prices to the end-customer have been homogenised 
through  legislation,  the  level  of  service  cannot  be  influenced  by  legislation.  What  is  lacking  is  the 
possibility of using national instruments for pan-European business as well. A real SEPA will only be 
achieved when payments can be made throughout the whole area from a single bank account, using a 
single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely as in the national context today.  
The ECB’s second objective is to have a SEPA for the infrastructure by the end of 2010. Once national 
instruments, services and standards have been gradually phased out and replaced by pan-European 
ones, national infrastructures will be abolished or transformed into pan-European ones. Consequently, 
decisions  related  to  the  next  generation  of  national  systems should  be  made  from  a  pan-European 
perspective to ensure compliance with the SEPA. 
To encourage national implementation, the respective national banking communities should translate 
the SEPA objectives into national transformation plans, allowing each bank and infrastructure provider 
to tailor its strategies and solutions towards a SEPA. The ECB intends to monitor this progress with 
the  assistance  of  the  European  Payments  Council  (EPC).  National  banking  communities  will  be 
requested to provide national migration plans for a SEPA in the course of this year. 
The  EPC  has  the  initiative  and  capability  to  define  the  pan-European  schemes  for  credit  transfers, 
direct debits and cards. However, since the EPC has no power to enforce, it would have to rely on the 
cooperation of the banking sector and infrastructures. The ECB, in cooperation with the Eurosystem 
NCBs, stands ready for facilitating the implementation of the SEPA objectives and for fostering the full 
adoption of the project which it considers key for achieving financial integration. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  explained  why  the  ECB  attaches  utmost  importance  to  progress  in 
European financial integration and I have talked about the various channels we have at our disposal 
for fostering it. In describing the present state of affairs, I have also given the main examples where 
the ECB actively contributes to European financial integration. At the same time, I have made it clear 
that the ECB expects continued efforts from the private sector and I have mentioned the substantial 
opportunities of, but also the challenges to, the relevant public policy framework. 
The ECB has demonstrated since the first days of its existence that it is a credible and solid anchor for 
monetary stability. Financial institutions and market participants know also that they can count on the 
ECB  to  be  in  the  domain  of  financial  integration  a  very  strong  pillar  to  sustain  their  efforts  and  to 
facilitate the success of this important European endeavour.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 18/2005 
 5
