David Dodge: Canada’s competitiveness - the importance of investing in skills 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Humber College Institute of 
Technology and Advanced Learning, Toronto, 30 March 2005.  
 Thank  you,  Michael,  and  good  evening.  I  am  honoured  to  be  here  with  you  to  kick  off  this  lecture 
series.  Once  again,  I  want  to  thank  Humber  College  and  the  Canadian  Foundation  for  Economic 
Education for this opportunity.  
It’s  a  bit  daunting  to  try  to  deliver  a  lecture  this  late  in  the  evening.  But  the  subject  that  I  want  to 
discuss tonight is one that should be of interest to all of us - the importance of investing in skills to 
improve productivity growth.  
As most of you know, this lecture series was announced by the CFEE at a dinner here in Toronto in 
November 2003. At the conclusion of my speech that evening, I said that, in an increasingly complex 
and competitive world, furthering our national economic welfare will depend importantly on the quality 
of our labour force. I also said that improving skills will require concerted efforts from all of us who are 
involved directly or indirectly in education: parents, educators, employers, community organizations, 
and policy-makers. 
It  is  this  shared  responsibility  that  I  would  like  to  emphasize  this  evening.  I  will  begin  with  a  brief 
discussion  about  some  of  the  factors  influencing  Canada’s  productivity  performance.  Then,  I  will 
review some of the larger forces at work on the world economy and their implications as we strive to 
improve productivity. Finally, with these forces in mind, I will offer a few thoughts on how we can best 
develop Canada’s human resources.  
What drives productivity growth?  
Productivity plays a critical role when it comes to our national standard of living. Productivity growth is 
the main element that contributes to continued improvements in real incomes and overall prosperity. 
Rising  productivity  lets  businesses  pay  higher  wages,  while  keeping  costs  down,  employment  high, 
and  profits  coming  in.  That’s  why  economists  like  me  spend  a  lot  of  time  thinking  about  ways  to 
improve the productivity of our economy.  
There are several factors that help to raise labour productivity - by which I mean the amount of goods 
and  services  produced  per  worker  per  hour.  These  factors  include  the  education,  training,  and 
experience of the workers and the amount and type of equipment available to them. Productivity can 
also  be  raised  through  technological  innovation,  and  through  changes  in  organizational  and 
management practices.  
All of these key determinants of productivity influence how "smartly" human and capital resources are 
used.  And  these  determinants  are,  in  turn,  influenced  by  broader  factors  such  as  competition, 
openness  to  foreign  trade  and  investment,  macroeconomic  policies,  and  the  efficiency  of  financial 
markets.  
We all recognize that improving productivity is the key component to raising the standard of living of 
Canadians. From 1996 to 2002, output per hour worked grew at just over 2 per cent, on average, a 
little faster than our undistinguished performance of the previous quarter century. This provided some 
reason  for  optimism.  But  over  the  past  two  years  -  while  economists,  business  leaders,  and 
policy-makers have talked about the need to raise productivity - output per hour has been essentially 
flat. While we’re talking the talk on productivity, we are not doing a good job of walking the walk. 
We have to do better. And over the next decade or two, we will be working to improve this country’s 
productivity amid significant global economic change. This evening, I’ll focus on three important and 
ongoing  elements  of  this  change:  technological  innovation,  globalization,  and  demographic  shifts. 
Then I’ll discuss the implications of these trends for skills development. 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 1
Technological change 
Let  me  start  with  technological  change.  It’s  difficult  to  untangle  and  measure  the  individual 
components  that  contribute  to  productivity  growth.  But  we  do  know  that  one  of  the  most  important 
factors  in  recent  years  has  been  the  adoption  of  new  technologies.  Key  among  these  has  been 
information  and  communication  technology,  or  ICT.  It  is  by  no  means  the  only  area  where 
transformative technological advances have been made, but it is the one on which I will focus tonight, 
for  two  reasons:  first,  because  ICT  offers  a  useful  example  of  the  sweep  and  the  impact  of 
technological change; and second, because it relates to the other two broad trends that I will discuss 
this evening.  
The  productivity  potential  of  new  technology  is  only  realized  when  companies  and  institutions 
reorganize their business and management practices to integrate the new technology. Our lacklustre 
productivity record suggests that Canadian firms and public sector institutions are moving too slowly to 
adopt these new technologies and business practices. 
Let us also remember that technology not only creates opportunities to change work within a firm, it 
also creates opportunities to change the nature of transactions across firms. Technological innovation 
lowers transactions costs and facilitates productivity improvements through increased specialization. 
Specialized firms can build expertise by developing specific skills and then trading that expertise with 
other firms that offer complementary advantages.  
Globalization 
Technological  change  is  hastening  the  second  trend  that  I  want  to  discuss  tonight  -  and  that  is 
globalization. Travelling or shipping goods around the world now takes hours, not days. Information 
and ideas are available simultaneously to anyone who has access to the Internet. Wireless technology 
has  brought  telecommunication  to  places  where  phone  lines  cannot  reach.  In  short,  technological 
advances have allowed markets to expand as never before. In many ways, technology is the enabler 
of  many  of  the  trends  leading  to  globalization,  by  slashing  the  costs  and  the  time  it  takes  to  reach 
across borders and continents.  
Today, we’re all shopping in the same global village market. Consumers and businesses around the 
world have become the target customers of Canadian firms. At the same time, our firms are exposed 
to new sources of competition and new pressures to innovate. 
Perhaps the most preoccupying element of this trend towards globalization is the emergence of China 
as an economic powerhouse. And India is not far behind. When you consider that China and India 
account  for  40 per  cent  of  the  world’s  population  -  and  that  their  economies  are  growing  at  annual 
rates of 9 and 7 per cent, respectively - it is not hard to see why they have such an impact on the 
global economy. 
China and India are now major global competitors in labour-intensive industries. Increasingly, they’re 
also  flexing  their  muscles  in  skill-intensive  industries.  Asia’s  highly  efficient  production  capacity  is 
prompting  a  transformation  of  manufacturing  and  distribution  processes  around  the  world.  And  the 
skills-based software industry in India is transforming that sector globally.  
So we’re seeing tremendous competitive pressure on industries that are the traditional mainstays of 
the Canadian economy in general and of Ontario in particular - such as automobiles and parts, steel, 
and  other  manufacturing  industries.  We’re  also  seeing  competitive  pressures  transform  Canada’s 
high-tech sector, which has only recently emerged as an engine of growth. 
But the income and wealth created in China and India are increasing the ability of these countries to 
buy goods and services from abroad. So, their integration into the global economy represents both a 
competitive challenge and a tremendous opportunity. These emerging markets are just that - markets. 
China is already one of the world’s largest importers. This growing demand can provide a real boost to 
the Canadian economy, if we gear up to meet the challenge. 
So,  how  do  we  meet  those  challenges?  One  way  is  to  integrate  low-cost  components  from  other 
regions of the world into our own production processes, through direct investment or joint ventures. 
This can help to keep costs down and free up our resources to concentrate on those areas where we 
have  a  competitive  advantage.  Second,  we  can  focus  on  activities  that  embrace  and  facilitate 
technological advances. I’m thinking of activities such as industrial design, marketing, customization, 
packaging, and high-quality, individualized service. Humber College and similar institutions are helping 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2005
to  develop  and  maintain  the  skilled  labour  force  that  Canada  needs  to  be  a  global  player  in  these 
activities.  
At the same time, we can’t ignore the fact that refocusing activity will likely mean job displacement in 
certain  sectors.  There  will  be  some  activities,  particularly  those  that  are  labour-intensive  and 
lower-value-added, where Canadian firms will not be well placed to compete with lower-cost producers 
in Asia. Adjustment will require shifting resources into expanding, higher-value-added activities where 
Canadian  firms  can  exploit  the  new  opportunities  presented  by  the  changing  world  economy.  By 
making these adjustments, we will be able to increase productivity and raise our standard of living over 
time.  
Demographic trends 
The  third  significant  trend  that  Canada  and  other  industrialized  countries  face  is  the  aging  of  our 
populations. Right now, about one Canadian in eight is aged 65 years or older. By 2026, that ratio will 
be one in five. 
So, we can expect reduced growth in the labour force and a smaller, older workforce in proportion to 
our  population.  And  let’s  remember  that  this  aging  of  the  workforce  is  taking  place  as  Canada  is 
shifting to a knowledge-based economy. Technology-intensive employers require increased emphasis 
on retraining and on continuous learning for all workers, including older ones. Studies have shown that 
older  workers  participate  less  than  younger  ones  in  job-related  education  and  training.  And  those 
workers with less education or low literacy levels find it particularly difficult to adjust to the knowledge-
based economy. They are at a higher risk of being laid off and have greater difficulty in finding new 
work. 
The good news is that we still have time to prepare for the demographic shift. We have several factors 
working in our favour. First, technological change and increased use of ICT mean that participation in 
the  labour  force  can  be  more  flexible  -  through  teleworking,  part-time  work,  job-sharing,  off-site 
consulting,  and  other  innovations.  Second,  older  Canadians  are,  on  average,  healthier  than  in 
previous generations, and could stay in the labour force longer. Third, the nature of many jobs has 
changed. There are more skills-based jobs, but they are often less physically intensive and therefore 
can be done by older workers. Fourth, since the baby boomers are better educated than the current 
cohort of retiring workers, they may find it easier to adapt to changing work environments.  
All of these factors mean that the aging of our population over the next two decades need not have as 
serious an effect on economic growth as some fear. But we will need to increase productivity and to 
prepare our workforce and our economy for the demographic realities ahead. 
A focus on skilled labour 
This leads naturally to the subject that I will discuss in the remainder of my remarks tonight. These 
three global trends - technological change, globalization, and demographic shifts - must be central to 
our thinking as we prepare our workforce and our economy for the challenges that we face. So, in light 
of these trends, how do we best develop our labour force to boost our productivity?  
As  I  said  at  the  beginning,  the  key  to  achieving  these  goals  lies  in  coordinated  effort.  Skills 
development is a shared responsibility of business, academic institutions, the public sector, workers, 
and students. We need a system of incentives for continuous learning and upgrading of skills, and an 
infrastructure that delivers the training. This has always been important. But, as I mentioned earlier, it 
will be particularly important in the next two decades, as labour force growth in Canada slows. 
This system of incentives must benefit both workers and firms. If companies don’t see the payoff from 
training and skills development for their workers, they won’t make the investments. If workers don’t 
see what’s in it for them, they won’t devote the time and energy to improve their skills.  
The first step to improving skills is to build an excellent infrastructure for early childhood development, 
feeding into a school system that effectively teaches basic skills. For Canada to generate productivity 
gains  in  a  world  market  that’s  embracing  technological  change,  provincial  education  systems  must 
continue to boost literacy and numeracy rates among students. There’s no longer such a thing as an 
unskilled  job.  The  workers  of  today  and  tomorrow  need  to  know  how  to  learn,  so  that  they  can 
continuously improve their skills after they leave school.  
BIS Review 22/2005 
 3
If we find more innovative ways to keep students engaged in their education, they will leave school 
with  the  enthusiasm  they  need  to  continue  learning  throughout  their  career.  For  some  students, 
especially  boys,  school  can  feel  like  incarceration.  One  reason  why  drop-out  rates  are  high  is  that 
some students don’t see the connection between what they’re being taught in school and what they 
want to do when they leave school.  
In order to be motivated to learn math, language, or science, students need to understand that this 
knowledge is relevant to the careers they want - that these courses are the foundation on which they 
will build their skills and interests. No one who learns a musical instrument practices scales so that 
they can be really good at playing scales. They practice scales so that they can play the songs they 
like. And students need to see first-hand the opportunities that will open up for them by studying hard 
and staying in school. Colleges, and the industries that support them, play a key role in providing that 
motivation,  through  programs  that  give  high  school  students  a  first-hand  look  at  the  career  options 
ahead. 
The  flip  side  of  the  aging  population  that  I  discussed  a  minute  ago  is  relatively  smaller  cohorts  of 
young people. But that doesn’t mean that we can stop focusing on the problems we face in preparing 
these young people for the workforce. Indeed, the fact that we have smaller cohorts means that we 
must do better - we can’t afford to squander the potential of these young people. 
Once  they  have  finished  high  school,  they  need  to  learn  the  skills  that  will  help  them  to  become 
productive workers in the expanding sectors of the economy. I’m in the right place to be talking about 
this,  because  Humber  College  has  an  exemplary  record  of  training  in  areas  such  as  design, 
merchandising,  high-end  services,  and  product  innovation.  Of  course,  it  will  always  be  critical  that 
Canada stay on the leading edge of advanced research and theory. But pure research always needs 
to be complemented by the ability to commercialize, customize, and market the products that result.  
Service industries will also require increasing numbers of skilled workers. Older people buy relatively 
more services as a percentage of their overall consumption. The health care sector, for example, will 
require  more  medical  technicians,  therapists,  nurse  practitioners,  and  home  care  workers  to  meet 
growing demand. And as our population ages, the demand for leisure and travel services is increasing. 
The hospitality and tourism sectors can differentiate Canada from other destinations by delivering the 
exemplary service that only well-trained workers can provide. 
In  order  to  learn  relevant  skills,  students  should  be  trained  to  use  the  latest  tools  and  production 
methods  employed  by  the  sector  for  which  they’re  training.  This  means  innovative  partnerships 
between educational institutions and industry, to give students access to equipment and methods that 
are  actually  being  used  by  leading-edge  businesses.  It  means  embracing  the  classic  notion  of 
apprenticeship to help make education and training as efficient and as relevant as possible.  
One  more  word  on  apprenticeships.  We  need  to  focus  on  creating  a  new  generation  of  skilled 
craftspeople to replace the generation that is retiring. This is not a new problem. I was writing papers 
about it in the early 1970s, and it still hasn’t been resolved. Existing shortages in some skilled trades 
are likely to worsen, particularly in those trades where Canada used to rely on imported skills to meet 
domestic  demand.  The  time  to  train  this  new  generation  is  now,  so  that  they  can  gain  from  the 
experience of the older generation while learning the latest techniques.  
I’ve spoken at length about our education system. But, as we improve the training of young workers, 
demographics  will  demand  that  we  also  make  better  use  of  older  workers  over  the  next  couple  of 
decades. And that requires continued and innovative on-the-job training. 
Employers  may  be  reluctant  to  invest  in  training  older  individuals  because  of  the  shorter  period  in 
which  to  recoup  training  costs  and  because  of  a  perception  that  older  workers  are  less  "trainable." 
These  are  misperceptions.  First,  because  of  rapidly  changing  technology,  the  payoff  period  for  any 
training  has  become  shorter  and  the  need  for  the  continuous  upgrading  of  skills  greater.  Second, 
research suggests that successful training depends on the design of the training program, not on the 
age of the trainee. We should help older workers to continue to get the skills they need to remain in 
the workforce - should they wish to do so. 
I’ve said that improving the skills of Canada’s workers is a shared responsibility. So let me say a word 
about  the  role  of  the  public  sector.  Boosting  productivity  requires  microeconomic  policies  that 
encourage innovation in Canada’s private and public sectors. As I mentioned earlier, sometimes this 
innovation results in the displacement of workers. Public policy should assist those workers to upgrade 
their skills - not just when they lose their jobs, but during their entire working life. That requires the 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2005
right mix of policy incentives for individuals and employers to continue to invest in training. And it must 
be a continuing process, not just a remedial one.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, I don’t for a minute believe that these are easy tasks. But the more flexible and 
efficient we can make our labour force, the better prepared we will be to improve our productivity and 
to increase the real incomes of Canadians in the years ahead.  
So  let  me  conclude  with  a  challenge.  I  began  my  remarks  by  talking  about  the  importance  of 
productivity in our efforts to assure rising incomes and economic well-being. And just as we need to 
improve the productivity of our factories and enterprises, we also need to improve the productivity of 
our training and education system. 
So I challenge Humber College and other educational institutions to constantly evaluate and improve 
the methods they are using to develop the skills of Canada’s workforce. And I challenge subsequent 
lecturers in this series to come up with new ideas to help them achieve this goal. Creating the world’s 
most innovative framework for education and training is not a simple task. But it’s an extraordinarily 
important one. Because the more innovative we can be in skills development, the more innovative we 
will be as a nation. And that is the best way to promote sustained, long-term economic prosperity for 
Canadians.  
BIS Review 22/2005 
 5
