European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 March 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is our pleasure to welcome you to this press conference. The Vice-President 
and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which 
was also attended by Prime Minister Juncker and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the whole, we continue to see no significant evidence of underlying domestic inflationary pressures 
building up in the euro area. Accordingly, we have left the key ECB interest rates unchanged. These 
interest rates are at historically low levels and are making an important contribution to the economic 
recovery. At the same time, upside risks to price stability over the medium term exist. These require 
continued vigilance on the part of the Governing Council. 
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. According to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the euro area grew at a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.2% in the 
fourth  quarter  of  2004.  In  addition,  third-quarter  real  GDP  growth  was  revised  down  to  0.2%.  This 
overall  outcome  for  the  second  half  of  last  year  was  disappointing.  However,  the  composition  of 
demand  growth  in  the  fourth  quarter  also  offered some positive  signs with  regard  to  the  underlying 
trend.  The  strengthening  of  domestic  demand  and,  in  particular,  consumption  may  point  to  the 
recovery in economic activity in the euro area regaining some momentum. 
There are a number of reasons why the weaker real GDP growth in the second half of 2004 could be a 
transitory phenomenon. On the external side, growth in the world economy remains strong, supporting 
euro  area  exports.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  is  expected  to  continue  to  benefit  from  very 
favourable financing conditions, robust earnings and greater business efficiency. Consumption growth 
should benefit from anticipated developments in real disposable income.  
Accordingly,  we  expect  continued  economic  growth  in  2005  and  2006.  This  assessment  is  also 
reflected in the new ECB staff projections, which will be published today. Euro area real GDP growth is 
projected by the ECB’s staff to be, on average, between 1.2% and 2.0% in 2005 and between 1.6% 
and 2.6% in 2006. These projections are lower than those published in December 2004, reflecting the 
weaker economic developments in late 2004. Available forecasts from international and private sector 
organisations convey a broadly similar outlook. 
The picture emerging from the projections contains a number of risks. On the external side, high and 
volatile  oil  prices  and  persistent  global  imbalances  pose  downside  risks  to  growth.  As  regards 
exchange rates, we confirm our position – expressed when the euro rose sharply – that such moves 
are unwelcome and undesirable for economic growth. On the domestic side, there are uncertainties 
surrounding  the  evolution  of  consumption,  while  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions  and  the 
recovery in corporate earnings could lead to higher investment growth than currently projected. 
Turning to consumer prices, annual HICP inflation declined quite substantially in January 2005, falling 
to 1.9% from 2.4% in December 2004. This was largely a result of base effects from developments in 
indirect taxes and administered prices in some countries. In February, according to Eurostat´s flash 
estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.0%.  
In the coming months, annual inflation rates are likely to fluctuate around 2%. Looking further ahead, 
there  is  no  evidence  that  stronger  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  are  building  up  in  the 
euro area. Over recent quarters, wage increases have remained moderate. In the context of moderate 
economic growth, this trend should continue.  
These  views  are  also  embodied  in  the  ECB  staff  projections.  Average  annual  HICP  inflation  is 
projected by the staff to lie between 1.6% and 2.2% in 2005 and between 1.0% and 2.2% in 2006. 
These  projections  are  broadly  unchanged  from  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections  published  in 
December  2004  and  consistent  with  forecasts  recently  released  by  international  and  private  sector 
organisations.  
BIS Review 14/2005 
 1
Several  upside  risks  to  these  projections  need  to  be  taken  into  account,  notably  future  oil  price 
developments. Developments in indirect taxes and administered prices may also again surprise on the 
upside. Furthermore, continued vigilance is required regarding the potential risk of past price increases 
leading  to  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting  throughout  the  economy.  In  this  respect, 
developments in longer-term inflation expectations need to be monitored closely. 
Further insight into the outlook for price developments at medium to longer-term horizons is provided 
by the monetary analysis. The latest monetary data confirm the strengthening of M3 growth observed 
since  mid-2004.  This  increasingly  reflects  the  stimulative  effect  of  the  historically  very  low  level  of 
interest rates in the euro area. As a result of the persistently strong growth in M3 over the past few 
years,  substantially  more  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  exists  than  is  needed  to  finance  non-inflationary 
economic growth. This could pose risks to price stability over the medium term and warrants vigilance. 
The exceptionally low level of real interest rates is also further stimulating private sector demand for 
credit.  Growth  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has  continued  to  pick  up  in  recent  months. 
Moreover,  demand  for  loans  for  house  purchase  has  continued  to  be  robust,  contributing  to  strong 
house price dynamics in some regions of the euro area. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  confirms  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained,  while  medium-term  upside  risks  to  price  stability  exist  and  will  be  monitored  closely. 
Cross-checking with the monetary analysis supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to the 
materialisation of risks to price stability over the medium term.  
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  notes  that,  while  some  progress  with  fiscal 
consolidation  and  the  correction  of  excessive  deficits  is  envisaged  in  euro  area  countries’  updated 
stability programmes, further consolidation in a number of countries is needed. In particular, several 
countries  do  not  plan  to  pursue  an  appropriately  ambitious  adjustment  path  and  are  not  targeting 
close-to-balance or in-surplus budgetary positions by the end of the programme horizon. In addition, in 
some cases, fiscal targets are based on rather favourable growth assumptions and on insufficiently 
specified measures. 
With respect to the Stability and Growth Pact, discussions now need to be brought to a convincing 
conclusion  with  an  outcome  that  safeguards  fiscal  discipline.  The  credibility  of  the  excessive  deficit 
procedure needs to be fully preserved. This is not only fundamental for macroeconomic stability and 
cohesion in the euro area but also for confidence and growth prospects in all Member States.  
In  this  regard,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  decision  by  the  ECOFIN  Council,  based  on  a 
recommendation by the European Commission, to move, for the first time, to the next procedural step 
in  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  and  to  give  notice,  in  accordance  with  Treaty  Article  104(9),  to 
Greece. The Governing Council also takes the view that the extension of the deadline, from 2005 to 
2006,  for  correcting  the  excessive  deficit  pushes  the  room  for  interpretation  of  the  rules  and 
procedures to the limit. It is now indispensable for Greece to take effective action to correct its severe 
fiscal imbalances. 
As regards structural developments, the euro area has seen relatively low trend productivity growth 
since  the  mid-1990s.  An  analysis  of  the  determinants  of  productivity  shows  that  lower  productivity 
growth in the euro area has been partly related to higher employment due to greater participation of 
lower-skilled labour. Sustained wage moderation and some progress in labour market reforms aimed 
at increasing labour market participation appear to have partially shifted production towards a more 
intensive use of labour.  
There are also indications that the slower pace of productivity growth observed in the euro area since 
the  mid-1990s  reflects  an  insufficient  use  of  new  productivity-enhancing  technologies.  While 
productivity growth has increased in sectors that produce information and communication technologies 
or  provide  related  services,  it  has  declined  in  many  other  areas  of  the  economy.  This  points  to 
structural rigidities in the euro area that prevent or hinder the fast and effective dissemination of new 
technologies and improved production processes across the economy.  
Against this background, structural reforms that stimulate innovation, investment and productivity, and 
promote the use of new productivity-enhancing technologies are crucial. Stimulating product market 
competition,  facilitating  restructuring  and  improving  human  capital  through  adequate  educational 
systems  and  “on-the-job”  training  are  likely  to  speed  up  productivity  gains  from  the  use  of  new 
technologies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2005
