Rafael Buenaventura: Strengthening the cornerstones of excellence  
Opening and closing remarks by Mr Rafael Buenaventura, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
(Central Bank of the Philippines), at the BSP Strategic Planning Conference, Manila, 10 January 2005. 
 Introduction  
Business planning with a strategic perspective has paved the way for the Bangko Sentral not just to 
get by but more importantly, to get ahead. At a time when the national economic agenda is confronted 
with sometimes seemingly insurmountable roadblocks, our institution is left with no other option but to 
tackle  them  head  on.  And  faced  with  the  temptation  to  give  up  most  of  our  strategies  because  of 
numerous risks and uncertainties, we have remained steadfast in our mission and unyielding in our 
convictions.  
Building on diversity  
It  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  welcome  you  to  part  three  of  the  2004  BSP-Strategic  Planning 
Conference, the assembly of bold visionaries in the BSP.  
All  of  us  here  today  have  performed  a  diversity  of  roles  and  contributed  a  diversity  of  gifts  to  this 
endeavor.  This  planning  conference  is  yet  another  opportunity  to  weave  those  disparate  fibers 
together,  to  gauge  how  far  we  have  come  and  determine  what  the  overall  picture  is  telling  us. 
Understandably, there are still sizeable gaps, and as in the past, we ought to be decisive in dealing 
with the challenges we face.  
“Strengthening the cornerstones of excellence.” This is the theme of our strategic planning exercise for 
this year. In the previous years’ planning initiatives, we set forth to establish the direction we intended 
to  pursue  and  consequently  laid  the  groundwork  upon  which  to  propel  our  aspirations.  This  time 
around, we embarked on a journey of introspection, stepping back a little and indulging ourselves in 
inward examination - deliberating about how we could further fortify the cornerstones of excellence, 
from  people  to  business  processes  to  information  systems  to  infrastructure.  This  undertaking 
ultimately  guides  the  refinement  of  our  strategies  -  an  inevitable  course  towards  more  effectively 
executing our ideas and more successfully implementing our plans.  
Legacy for excellence  
They say the best way to deal with the future is to take a hold of it. In so doing, it becomes vital to 
secure our own design of the future, which, I am proud to mention, is precisely what we have in our 
hands  right  now.  The  BSP  medium-term  blueprint  is  an  embodiment  of  the  tradition  of  world-class 
excellence we have envisioned to unify our energies and ignite inspiration in our workforce. It likewise 
symbolizes our hope that the resolve we now possess to deliver on our commitments will be sustained 
by the ones we shall eventually bequeath it to. Nothing appeases a parent more than the assurance of 
a formidable future he/she could leave behind.  
Today is the time  
Strengthening  the  structures  around  which  we  have  built  our  vision  and  upon  which  we  enable  the 
fulfillment of our objectives is the order of the day. I am well aware that the road to accomplishing our 
operational  plans  has  left  not  merely  a  handful  of  us  battered  and  bruised,  hardly  getting  time  to 
breathe,  more  so,  to  regroup  or  reflect.  But  today  provides  the  moment  for  us  to  recognize  and 
celebrate  our  milestones,  identify  and  accept  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  and  renew  our  vigor  to 
move forward with our mandate.  
Let us, at all times, be encouraged by the unwavering importance of our mission and the promise of 
better times before us. Let us draw strength from the very resilience of the people we serve and the 
allies we have in each other. Let us, most of all, remember that the route to excellence may never be 
simple and easy but the journey itself, a rewarding experience. Good morning and good luck! 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
 Introduction  
We have come to the close of the three-part Annual Planning Conference this year, the last during my 
term as Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) Governor.  
level  objectives  and  strategies,  and  down 
Strategic planning in BSP  
Though it may be said that we are in the early stage of strategic planning, we have already achieved 
several milestones in promoting strategic management thinking and in institutionalizing a synchronized 
planning and budgeting process in the bank. The creation of the Corporate Planning Office in 2001 to 
oversee the strategic management process was a decisive step towards this goal. In 2002, for the first 
time  in  the  planning  efforts  of  the  Bank,  participants  to  the  planning  conference  underwent  the 
complete strategic planning process - from crafting the vision and mission of Bangko Sentral, to the 
formulation  of  corporate 
formulation  of 
departmental/office level operational plans.  
In 2003, again for the first time in the history of the Bangko Sentral, we drafted a medium-term plan 
focusing on our twin mandates of maintaining price and financial sector stability. The plan defined the 
strategic intent, key objectives, strategies and key operational plans in performing our core functions of 
monetary  policy  formulation  and  bank  supervision  and  examination.  It  also  defined  our  approach 
toward  organizational  capability  building,  specifically  in  the  areas  of  human  resource,  information 
technology, infrastructure, and service excellence.  
A synchronized planning and budgeting cycle was approved by the Monetary Board in March of 2004, 
institutionalizing the top-to-bottom strategic planning approach and synchronizing the annual planning 
and budgeting processes of the bank.  
As we continue to improve our strategic planning processes, we shall endeavor toward enhancing our 
framework  for  goal  setting,  performance  measurement,  monitoring  and  evaluation.  This  calls  for 
further  strengthening  our  strategic  planning  capabilities  that  would  include  the  department  and 
business unit levels.  
the 
to 
Journey towards our vision  
We have made significant strides in our journey towards becoming a world-class monetary authority. 
The  Chairman  of 
the  Corporate  Monitoring  Committee  presented  earlier  a  report  on  our 
accomplishments. I personally would like to congratulate all of us, the members of the “Bangko Sentral 
team”, for these significant achievements in this “not so best of times”. Together we withstood external 
pressures and hurdled operational bottlenecks, as we continued to edge our organization closer to our 
vision.  
The road ahead  
With our blueprint done, and the deliverables by end-March 2005 already defined and prioritized, our 
real work has just begun. The road ahead calls for heightened cooperation and tighter coordination 
among  the  different  sectors  and  departments/offices  of  the  bank  to  ensure  that  the  imperative 
programs are successfully implemented. In simple terms, what needs to be done has to be done.  
In gratitude and in recognition  
It is but fitting to conclude this last planning conference during my term with words of gratitude for, and 
in recognition of, the dedication and hard work of all of you, including the valuable assistance provided 
by the technical staff and the secretariat.  
Our strategic planning exercises have benefited greatly from the direction and guidance provided by 
the  members  of  our  Monetary  Board.  On  behalf  of  the  management  team  of  the  Bangko  Sentral,  I 
would  like  to  thank  you  for  your  active  participation,  your  insights  and  inputs,  which  provided  an 
independent perspective that enhanced the quality of our planning outputs.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
I  would  like  to  thank  the  management  team  of  Bangko  Sentral  -  our  Deputy  Governors,  Assistant 
Governors  and  Managing  Directors,  and  the  heads  of  the  different  departments  and  offices.  Your 
commitment, energy and hard work have produced this very important document – the medium term 
plan of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas which translates our vision into operational terms. This same 
commitment, energy and hard work of both the leaders and members of this institution will put life to 
this plan and transform our organization into one that will make the Filipino people proud.  
Let  me  also  acknowledge  the  significant  contributions  made  by  our  consultants  in  crafting  the 
medium-term plan and in the implementation of our projects. To the Corporate Planning Office, I thank 
you for all your efforts and I wish you good luck in meeting the challenges ahead as you continue to 
spearhead the strategic management initiatives in the bank.  
When I turn over the reigns of leading this organization in July this year, I am confident that the Bank’s 
management team shall carry on what we have started, strengthen what we have put in place, and 
sustain the gains of our collective efforts. For all your support and cooperation, thank you and I wish 
you all the best.  
BIS Review 11/2005 
 3
