David Dodge: Reflections on the international economic and monetary order 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Conférence  de  Montréal, 
Montreal, 30 May 2005.  
 Today,  I  want  to  talk  about  an  issue  that  is  central  to  the  prospects  for  the  world  economy  -  the 
management  of  large,  global  economic  imbalances  that  have  become  the  subject  of  increasing 
concern among market participants and policy-makers around the world. I am referring, of course, to 
the persistent and growing current account deficit in the United States that is mirrored by large current 
account surpluses elsewhere, especially in Asia.  
Up to now, world capital markets have been managing these imbalances in a reasonably smooth way. 
In the short term, it is reasonable to expect that they will continue to do so. But over the medium term, 
imbalances of this magnitude are not sustainable. At some point, they will have to be resolved. Why? 
For  one  thing,  a  country's  external  indebtedness  cannot  keep  growing  indefinitely  as  a  share  of  its 
GDP. Eventually, investors will begin to balk at increasing their exposure to that country, even if it is a 
reserve-currency  country,  such  as  the  United  States.  For  another  thing,  the  buildup  of  foreign 
exchange  reserves  by  Asian  countries  will,  eventually,  feed  into  domestic  monetary  expansion  and 
lead  to  higher  inflation.  These  imbalances  will  ultimately  be  resolved,  either  in  an  orderly,  or  in  an 
abrupt,  disorderly  way.  The  question  is,  are  current  economic  policies  and  today's  international 
monetary  order  likely  to  facilitate  an  orderly  resolution  of  the  imbalances?  If  not,  what  changes  are 
needed to reduce the risk of an abrupt, disorderly adjustment?  
The origins of global imbalances 
Before we discuss solutions and prescriptions, let me talk briefly about the nature and origins of the 
current  global  imbalances.  In  essence,  these  imbalances  reflect  the  international  financial  flows 
associated  with  saving-investment  mismatches.  Specifically,  over  the  past  decade  or  so,  we  have 
seen many countries outside the United States increase their saving by a very large amount, while at 
the  same  time,  the  United  States  has  reduced  its  saving  and  has  become  increasingly  reliant  on 
foreign borrowing.  
The  origins  of  the  increased  saving  outside  the  United  States  are  many  and  varied.  Following  the 
Asian  crisis  of  1997-98,  many  countries  in  that  region  built  up  large  foreign  exchange  reserves  to 
guard  against  having  to  rely  on  international  assistance  in  any  future  crisis.  Even  countries  that 
avoided  the  worst  effects  of  the  Asian  crisis  -  China,  for  example  -  increased  their  net  savings  by 
building  up  reserves.  But  more  importantly,  policies  to  encourage  export-led  growth  in  many  Asian 
economies  have  exacerbated  the  situation.  Some  countries  have  actively  tried  to  prevent  an 
appreciation of their currencies by intervening in the foreign exchange market. In doing so, not only 
are  they  increasing  the  imbalances,  they  are  also  seen  by  some  to  be  securing  an  unfair  trade 
advantage and shifting the burden of global adjustment onto others. 
Of course, savings have also increased outside Asia. In Germany, for example, two factors have led to 
a large increase in saving in recent years: the conclusion of the reconstruction effort following the 1989 
reunification  and  efforts  to  fix  the  German  public  pension  system.  Certain  oil-exporting  countries, 
including Russia, have also started to generate large net savings. And some developing economies, 
such as Brazil, have moved from being rather large net borrowers to being net savers today. 
Inside  the  United  States,  there  has  been  a  sharp  decrease  in  national  saving.  The  high  expected 
returns  in  equity  markets  in  the  late  1990s  led  to  large  capital  flows  into  the  United  States.  The 
significant capital gains - first on equities in the late 1990s and then on housing in this decade - led to 
a net decline in household saving out of current income. Furthermore, the low interest rates after 2001, 
and  importantly,  the  shift  in  the  U.S.  fiscal  position  after  2000,  have  contributed  to  growing  net 
dissaving  in  the  United  States.  As  a  result,  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit  -  which  represents  the 
amount of net dissaving going on in the United States - now stands at about 6 per cent of GDP.  
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
Why global imbalances are a problem 
So you might ask, why should policy-makers worry about the resolution of these imbalances? After all, 
there should be a process that works through world financial markets to allow savers in one country to 
lend  to  borrowers  in  another.  Such  a  process  supports  higher  global  growth,  since  countries  with 
surplus savings can invest them in countries that do not save enough internally. 
Within  national  borders,  regional  savings-investment  imbalances  emerge  all  the  time.  And  we  don't 
normally worry about them because there are effective market-based mechanisms in place that work 
to resolve them. Relative wages and prices change, as do relative returns on capital. This causes a 
movement  in  the  real  exchange  rate  between  regions,  which  then  provides  an  equilibrating 
mechanism.  The  ability  of  labour  to  move  within  a  country  helps  to  promote  an  orderly  adjustment 
process. 
But  there  are  reasons  to  worry  about  imbalances  in  a  global  context.  To  begin  with,  market-based 
means  of  resolving  international  imbalances  are  somewhat  less  effective  and  potentially  more 
disruptive.  This  is  because  there  is  less  labour  mobility  across  international  borders,  and  so  larger 
movements  in  relative  wages  and  prices  are  needed  in  order  for  them  to  act  as  an  equilibrating 
mechanism. Further, certain national and international policies, as well as interventions in the foreign 
exchange  market,  have  been  inhibiting  the  necessary  relative  wage  and  price  movements.  Indeed, 
some of these policies are making the situation worse. And so the concern is that the longer these 
imbalances remain unresolved, the greater the chances that the ultimate resolution will be disorderly. 
Equally troubling, there is a greater chance of protectionist measures that can seriously damage the 
global economy. 
Policy impediments to resolving imbalances 
Let's look a bit more closely at some of the key impediments to the resolution of imbalances. Some of 
these impediments are national policies, while others relate to the international monetary order. Let me 
talk about national policies first. Many of these impediments have been identified in discussions at the 
G-7 over the past couple of years. 
It  is  clear  that,  to  date,  there  has  not  been  enough  progress  on  structural  reforms.  This  lack  of 
progress is somewhat frustrating, given that there is a reasonable consensus on what should be done 
domestically in all countries. First, microeconomic policies should allow markets for both goods and 
labour to function as well as possible and with a maximum degree of flexibility. Almost every country, 
including Canada, talks a good line about this, but action has been rather slow everywhere. Second, 
strong  policies  must  encourage  the creation  and  maintenance  of  a  sound  financial system that  can 
efficiently allocate domestic and foreign savings. Progress here, although slow, is taking place. The 
work of the Financial Stability Forum, and the contributions in this area from the Bank for International 
Settlements, have been helpful. But much remains to be done. Third, all countries must pursue fiscal 
policies aimed at producing a sustainable public debt-to-GDP ratio. Where structural fiscal balance is 
absent,  it  should  be  achieved;  where  it  is  present,  it  should  be  maintained.  There  are  some  real 
problems on this front in the United States, in Europe, in Japan, and in some developing countries.  
A multiple-front approach like this, that works to remove the impediments arising from existing national 
policies, would certainly go a long way towards allowing market-based mechanisms to resolve global 
imbalances in an orderly way. However, I doubt that this approach by itself would do the whole job, if 
real exchange rates are not allowed to adjust in a timely manner. 
Movements in real exchange rates can come from changes in nominal exchange rates, changes in 
relative wages and prices, or a combination of the two. But when the nominal exchange rate is fixed, 
the  only  way  to  bring  about  adjustments  in  the  real  exchange  rate  is  through  large  movements  in 
relative  wages  and  prices.  Theoretically,  this  is  feasible  -  but  only  if  wages  and  prices  are  highly 
flexible both upwards and downwards. But this high degree of flexibility is practically non-existent. And 
so, when exchange rates are fixed, global economic adjustment can still take place, but it comes at a 
high cost - through shrinking output and rising unemployment in countries with current account deficits 
and through very high inflation in countries with current account surpluses. 
While this adjustment is costly, it does work, provided countries that are fixing their currencies through 
foreign exchange intervention are not offsetting the monetary consequences of this by "sterilizing" the 
intervention. This is an important point. When intervention is sterilized, this temporarily prevents the 
movements in wages and prices needed to bring about the necessary economic adjustment. In these 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
cases, adjustment is postponed - in both surplus and deficit countries. But the adjustment and its costs 
are only delayed, they are not avoided. Indeed, the costs typically end up being larger than they would 
otherwise be, precisely because they have been delayed. The only way to truly minimize the costs of 
adjustment is to allow nominal exchange rates to move around. 
The ability of a flexible exchange rate to help with economic adjustment was a major factor behind 
Canada's  decision  to  float  its  currency  in  1950.  By  the  end  of  the  1990s,  most  industrialized 
economies  and  a  number  of  emerging-market  economies  had  done  the  same.  Other  economies, 
particularly in Asia, have opted for a fixed exchange rate regime. However, some of these countries, 
by  sterilizing  their  foreign  exchange  intervention,  have  rejected  the  adjustment  mechanisms  that 
should go along with such a regime. By sterilizing, not only are they accumulating even larger foreign 
exchange  reserves,  more  importantly,  they  are  undermining  the  efficiency  of  their  own  domestic 
economies and interfering with the resolution of imbalances. 
So there are impediments in Europe, the United States, and Asia that are all getting in the way of a 
timely and orderly resolution. Because of this, global imbalances are growing, and this is increasing 
the risk of a disorderly correction at some point down the road. In addition, the longer the adjustment is 
delayed,  the  greater  the  risk  that  industrialized  nations  will  take  protectionist  measures  against 
emerging-market economies that are perceived as not playing by the rules. 
The rules of the game 
So,  what  are  the  policy  prescriptions  that  hold  the  greatest  probability  of  bringing  about  an  orderly 
resolution of the imbalances? Put simply, what should be the "rules of the game?" I've already spoken 
about the consensus that exists on the need for action domestically. What I want to do now is talk 
about what would be helpful on the international front. 
To  begin  with,  we  certainly  need  to  preserve  and  increase  the  potential  for  goods  and  services  to 
move  freely  across  national  borders.  This  means  further  enhancement  of  the  rules  of  free  trade 
through the Doha round and a strengthening of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to ensure proper 
compliance with the rules. This effort, as you know, is going on rather more slowly than we would have 
hoped three years ago, and my sense is that the prospects for substantial improvement are not as 
good  as  we  thought  they  might  be.  However,  keep  in  mind  that  the  last  round  took  10  years  to 
complete. So, it is important to keep moving forward and to support the WTO in its enforcement of 
proper compliance with the rules.  
Of course, free trade needs the support of well-functioning capital markets, as well as exchange rate 
regimes that allow market-equilibrating forces to play a greater role in the adjustment process. Just as 
the WTO provides critical support for trade, there is also a need for an effective organization to support 
the  international  monetary  system.  Under  Bretton  Woods,  this  role  was  given  to  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  But  world  financial  conditions  have  evolved  dramatically,  while  in  many 
respects, the IMF remains the same institution that was created in 1944 for an era of fixed exchange 
rates. 
To  be  clear,  the  basic  mandate  of  the  Fund  -  the  promotion  of  an  international  order  that  fosters 
economic  growth  and  investment  -  remains  relevant  and  important.  And  the  Fund's  main 
responsibilities  -  surveillance,  lending,  and  helping  member  nations  to  develop  their  financial 
infrastructure and efficient product and labour markets - are the right ones. But the IMF  could, and 
should, be doing its job more effectively. The IMF must evolve to take account of today's realities. 
Essentially, change is needed in four areas. First,  we must recognize that the Fund has little direct 
ability  to  affect  the  policies  of  non-borrowing  members.  Consequently,  its  ability  to  influence 
discussions  of  important  global  issues,  such  as  external  imbalances,  hinges  on  the  quality  of  its 
economic and financial surveillance, its advice, and its ability to communicate its message. The IMF 
should  focus  its  surveillance  on  systemic  issues  that  can  affect  global  financial  stability  -  an  area 
where the Fund's particular expertise gives it a strong comparative advantage over other institutions. 
This  surveillance  must  be  seen  to  be  independent  of  national  authorities  -  and  independent  of  the 
IMF's lending activities. The Fund's analytic and surveillance functions must be strengthened and must 
not be subservient to its lending function.  
Second,  in  a  world  of  freely  flowing  private  capital,  we  must  rely  on  market-based  mechanisms  to 
resolve  financial  crises,  if  and  when  they  occur.  While  the  Fund  has  a  continuing  role  to  play  in 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 3
providing liquidity assistance to members in financial distress, there are limits to such assistance - the 
IMF does not, cannot, and should not have endless reserves. 
Third, to help guide market expectations regarding the scale of official assistance, we must be very 
clear  that  extraordinary  Fund  lending  is  just  that  -  extraordinary.  If  market  players  cannot  judge 
whether or not the Fund will intervene, and at what amount, they are unable to make appropriate credit 
decisions. Without clarity on the rules governing access to Fund resources, we leave ourselves open 
to delays in resolving crises and to moral hazard. These rules must also be as free as possible from 
political considerations and must allow funds to be used for liquidity assistance only. The provision of 
additional loans to insolvent countries helps neither the borrower nor other creditors. In this regard, the 
Fund must improve its ability to distinguish between cases of illiquidity and insolvency.  
Finally,  and  very  importantly,  the  IMF  must  be  more  effective  in  its  role  as  a  forum  where  global 
economic issues are discussed and solutions are found. The Fund should be considered as the place 
where national authorities can gather around the same table for a frank exchange about policy issues 
common to all. The Fund must be imbued with the same co-operative spirit seen at the OECD during 
the 1960s and 1970s as it helped to build a liberal economic order and framework for freer trade. 
But it's difficult to discuss problems and find solutions if key players don't feel that they are adequately 
represented.  There  is  a  crucial  need  to  build  an  international  financial  institution  that  is  seen  as 
meeting the needs of all members. A good start would be to re-examine the representation of Asian 
and other emerging-market economies, and the implications for their quotas and voting power on the 
IMF's Board.  
A larger stake by Asian members in the IMF also  implies greater responsibility on their part for the 
success  of  the  Fund  as  guardian  of  the  international  monetary  and  financial  systems.  Indeed,  by 
taking  greater  responsibility,  Asian  nations  would  affirm  their  commitment  to  the  Fund's  important 
objectives. Moreover, by being able to draw more on the strengths of the Asian economies, the IMF 
would be in a better position to do its job properly. 
Conclusion 
I truly hope that such an institution - one that makes progress in these four areas - will emerge from 
the strategic review of the IMF that is currently underway. The creation of a global institution for the 
twenty-first century is tremendously important, not just for Canada, but for all nations. 
If we can get it right, a more effective IMF would be helpful in the worldwide effort to resolve global 
imbalances in an orderly way. But a global institution can't do it all by itself. Policy-makers around the 
world need to make sure that they are part of the solution and not part of the problem. All countries 
must recognize that it is doubly important to pursue the sound domestic policies that I mentioned - the 
promotion  of  flexible  markets,  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  a  sound  financial  system,  and  the 
pursuit of sound fiscal and monetary policies. Clearly, following these policies is in each country's own 
domestic  interest.  But  the  benefits  would  flow  beyond  national  borders.  If  we  all  follow  appropriate 
policies, then market mechanisms can defuse the danger posed by global imbalances. And that is an 
outcome that is in everyone's interest. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2005
