Joseph Yam: Hong Kong Institute of Bankers Beijing Representative Office 
Address by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the inaugural 
ceremony  and  dinner,  Beijing  Representative  Office  of  the  Hong Kong  Institute  of  Bankers,  Beijing, 
10 June 2005. 
 for 
funds 
the  most 
for  raising  new 
important  channel 
financing  remained 
Chairman Liu, Vice Governor Xiang, Mr Sullivan, Ms Li, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Institute of Bankers for inviting me to attend this inaugural ceremony of its 
Beijing Representative Office. On behalf of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, I would like to extend 
our warmest congratulations to the Institute for making a major step in its development. 
As we all know, the savings rate in Mainland China is among the world’s highest, accounting for more 
than 40% of its GDP. The effective channelling of private-sector savings into fixed-assets investments 
is  a  major  function  of  the  financial  system.  Such  is  also  an  important  responsibility  of  the  many 
employees  engaged  in  the  normal  workings  of  the  financial  system.  The  proper  functioning  of  the 
financial sector, with effectiveness in financial intermediation, is crucial for the promotion of economic 
growth  and  development.  Mr  Deng  Xiaoping once said,  “Finance  is  very  important;  it  is  the  core  of 
modern economics.” 
Presently Mainland China relies preponderantly on the banking system in intermediating funds. Last 
year  bank 
the 
non-government non-financial sector, accounting for over 90% of total funds raised. There are clear 
needs for developing other channels of financial intermediation in the longer term, in order to promote 
diversification and ensure financial stability and sustainable growth. However while the capital markets 
on the Mainland are still in their nascent stage and face some difficulties in development, the banking 
system  will  remain  the  most  important  channel  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  foreseeable  future. 
Thus, those engaged in the banking sector will continue, for a long period of time, to play an important 
role in ensuring the effective intermediation of funds. 
Given  the  rapidly  changing  macroeconomic  environment,  the  banking  sector  professionals  face  a 
difficult task in achieving this mission. The changes involved in this broad picture include supervisory 
policies  for  the  banking  sector,  relationship  between  the  regulatory  authority  and  banks,  and 
governance arrangements of individual banks. In line with the government’s reform and open policies 
and  under  the  supervision  of  the  China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission,  Mainland  banks  have 
become increasingly commercialized. Banking professionals have progressed from their former mode 
of following the authorities’ policy instructions to a more active role in assessment of loan applications 
before making credit decisions. 
This is not an easy change. It involves both time and considerable adjustment in the thinking. Besides, 
good tools are a must for a good job: bank employees have to increase their knowledge of the banking 
business in a market economy and enhance their professional standards. This is precisely one of the 
objectives of the Institute of Bankers, and with its newly launched Representative Office in Beijing, the 
Institute  will extend  its  existing good work  to  the  Mainland.  It  will  help  promote  the  training  of  bank 
employees on the Mainland, thereby contributing to the effective financial intermediation and smooth 
functioning of this crucial part of modern economy. The economies of the Mainland and Hong Kong 
are  now  highly  interdependent.  The  Institute’s  Beijing  Representative  Office  will  not  only  serve  to 
enhance  professionalism  of  the  Mainland’s  banking  sector  as  a  whole,  but  also  contribute  to  the 
financial stability and development of both the Mainland and Hong Kong. 
Let me end this address by wishing the Institute’s Beijing Representative Office every success in its 
future endeavours. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
