Bandid Nijathaworn: Developing the bond market - a central bank perspective 
Remarks by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Asset Forum, 
Bangkok, 29 March 2005. 
 Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let me first thank the Asset magazine for inviting me to give this luncheon address. It is a pleasure to 
be here. 
I  also  would  like  to  congratulate  the  organizer  for  putting  up  today's  event.  The  bond  market  in 
Thailand is now at an important stage of development and a function like this is certainly a positive 
contribution. 
For my brief remark today, I want to make a few points on the Thai bond market from the standpoint of 
the Bank of Thailand. I also want to share with you our plan for developing the bond market this year. 
From the Bank of Thailand's point of view, the bond market is of exceptional importance to us. This is 
because it is the market that we operate monetary policy through open market operations and through 
our operations in the repo market. Therefore, the more developed and efficient the bond market, the 
more effective the conduct of monetary policy would also be. 
Also, a vibrant domestic bond market is essential for a robust and efficient financial system. This is 
important for the development of the economy in the longer-term. At this time, the Thai bond market 
has a strong potential to become the important third pillar of Thailand's financial structure next to the 
credit and the equity markets. At present, the size of the bond market in terms of market capitalization 
to GDP is about 50 percent. Hence, there is considerable scope for the local bond market to grow and 
expand. 
Thai bond market in 2004 
Last  year,  the  Thai  bond market  grew by  about  9 percent  in  terms  of  the amount  of  bonds  issued, 
while activities in the secondary market increased by about 12 percent. 
The growth reflects mostly transactions in government securities, particularly treasury bills and Bank of 
Thailand bonds. 
Last year was also an important year for bonds as it was the year that we saw a shift in the stance of 
monetary  policy.  The  policy  interest  rate  was  raised  three  times  in  the  second  half  of  last  year  in 
response to increased pressure on prices and economic stability. 
Looking  back,  one  has  to  say  that  the  bond  market  adjusted  very  well  to  the  shift  in  the  monetary 
policy  stance.  Bond  market  interest  rates  responded  in  an  orderly  manner  and  moved  in  line  with 
policy signal. 
This  smooth  adjustment  reflects  two  important  qualities  that  we  are  now  seeing  in  the  local  bond 
market. The first is greater market liquidity which has allowed the bond market to adjust to the change 
in  monetary  policy  without  difficulties.  And  the  second  is  the  improved  communication  between 
policymakers and market participants, which has allowed the bond market to form its own expectations 
about policy direction and to respond accordingly. These two qualities, in my view, are positive for the 
development of the bond market in the longer-term. 
Outlook and developments in the bond market 
This year the Thai economy will continue to expand, driven by momentums in domestic demand and 
export,  including  the  launching  of  new  infrastructural  projects.  Higher  investment  will  imply  higher 
funding requirement. Given ample liquidity in the system, funding investment expansion domestically 
should be a preferred option to funding it from abroad. Domestic funding will help make the domestic 
credit market competitive while helping to avoid the unnecessary pick-up in external debt. It is in this 
context of domestic resource mobilization that the bond market can have an important role to play. 
BIS Review 29/2005 
 1
This is to say that while bank credit will continue to be a major intermediary for investment finance, the 
need for long-term investment financing will offer considerable opportunity for the bond market. On the 
supply side, the fixed income market can be an important channel for long-term capital mobilization, 
while  on  the  demand  side,  there  will  be  ample  demand  to  invest  in  fixed  income  instruments  from 
domestic  institutional  investors.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  current  efforts  to  develop  the  domestic 
bond  market  by  the  Government  are  timely,  and  this  priority  now  ranks  high  on  the  Government's 
agenda. 
Roles of the Bank of Thailand in developing the bond market 
A High-level Domestic Bond Market Development Steering Committee was set up by the Government 
in  January  this  year.  The  committee  is  chaired  by  the  Finance  Minister  and  comprises  high-level 
representatives from both the public and private sectors, including the Bank of Thailand. The aim of 
the committee is to promote the development of the domestic bond market in five key areas, namely, 
(1)  the  primary  market  (2)  the  secondary  market  (3)  taxes  (4)  market  infrastructure  and  (5)  market 
information. 
As  for  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  we  have  been  tasked  with  the  responsibility  to  develop  an  active 
secondary market. To meet this challenge, the Bank of Thailand has mapped out a multi-year strategy 
from which our work plan for bond market development this year will focus on six areas. 
First  is  the  development  of  the  private  repo  market.  The  repo  market  will  provide  bond  market 
participants with the tools to hedge their bond position, as well as to manage liquidity more effectively. 
The private repo market will also provide an important link between the money market and the bond 
market,  meaning  that  liquidity  in  the  secondary  bond  market  can  be  substantially  improved  once  a 
well-functioning private repo market is in place. 
Second, the Bank of Thailand will coordinate with the Thailand Securities Depository to set up a "Bond 
Lending and Collateral Management Unit" to activate the bond lending business. This again will help 
facilitate the private repo market and enhance overall market liquidity. 
The  third  is  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  begin  integrating  the  depository  system  as  well  as  the 
clearing and settlement system for all debt instruments with the TSD under a multi-year migration plan. 
This is aimed at enhancing market efficiency and reducing transaction costs in the debt market. The 
integrated system will also provide an important foundation for future regional linkages of the clearing 
and settlement system. 
Fourth is the development of hedging instruments. With the current upward trend in domestic interest 
rates, hedging instruments particularly interest rate swaps will provide the bond market with additional 
instruments that will be useful in an environment of market volatilities. The interest rate swaps market 
can help diversify and reallocate risk among various groups of bondholders. 
The fifth focus is our plan to improve the functioning of primary dealers as market makers. This is to 
say  that  their  obligations  and  privileges  will  be  reviewed  so  that  they  will  be  in  a  strong  position  to 
perform their functions as market makers. 
And the sixth is the ongoing project to strengthen the regional bond market through the Asian Bond 
Funds Project. 
For  the  past  years,  development  of  the  local  and  regional  bond  markets  has  been  given  an 
unprecedented emphasis by various regional fora. The most notable is the launching of ABF1 project 
by eleven EMEAP central banks. That efforts is now being followed by the ABF2 project. Under ABF2, 
the  eleven  regional  central  banks  will  invest  a  fraction  of  their  reserves  in  the  local  currency 
denominated  bonds  issued  by  sovereign  and  quasi-sovereign  entities  in  eight  EMEAP  markets, 
namely, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. 
The passively managed style of ABF2 will help attract the interests of both domestic and international 
investors  in  the  Asian  bond  markets,  as  it  would  provide  an  attractive  alternative  for  investors  who 
seek innovative, low-cost and efficient bond products in the Asian financial markets. Furthermore, the 
ABF2 Initiative would also help expedite market development and regulatory reforms at both domestic 
and regional levels, which would benefit both potential issuers and investors in the region. But most 
importantly, ABF2 would make available a new set of transparent, replicable and credible Asian bond 
indices which will be an important bond market infrastructure for the region. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2005
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  a  lot  of  activities  can  be  expected  this  year  in  our  domestic  bond  market.  The 
opportunities  will  come  from  continued  momentum  of  investment  finance,  as  well  as  from  the 
authorities' efforts to push through a number of initiatives to develop the bond market. As for our own 
monetary  operations,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  also  plans  to  issue  more  bonds,  with  more  varieties,  to 
support our day-to-day management of domestic liquidity. 
The Bank of Thailand now sees the local bond market as entering an important period of growth and 
market  development.  The  Government  is  also  keen  to  reduce  market  impediments  in  order  to  help 
expedite  the  development  of  the  bond  market.  Therefore,  this  year  can  be  a  year  of  many 
opportunities where a lot of progress can be made. 
And to foster its success, a close cooperation between the public sector and the private sector will be 
vital so that progress made in the bond market will be consistent with the needs and the expectation of 
the  private sector.  This  is  important  because, at  some  point  in  the  longer-term,  development  of  the 
bond market will need to be driven by market rather than by policy. Hence, your active contribution 
and cooperation will be vital in fostering the success in the development of the Thai bond market in the 
longer-term. 
BIS Review 29/2005 
 3
