David Dodge: Monetary policy report update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, Ontario, 14 July 2005. 
 Today,  we  released  the  July  Update  to  our  April  Monetary  Policy  Report.  The  Update  reviews 
economic and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
Global  and  Canadian  economic  developments  have  been  unfolding  broadly  as  expected,  and  the 
Bank's outlook for output and inflation in Canada through to the end of 2006 is little changed from the 
scenario outlined in the April Report. Strong growth in final domestic demand in Canada continues to 
offset  the  drag  from  net  exports.  Further  progress  has  been  made  across  sectors  of  the  Canadian 
economy in adjusting to global developments, and the economy is operating close to its production 
capacity. 
The Bank expects Canada's economy to grow by about 2.7 per cent in 2005 and 3.3 per cent in 2006. 
With the economy projected to continue to operate near capacity, and with inflation expectations firmly 
anchored, inflation is expected to return to 2 per cent by the end of 2006. 
To support aggregate demand, the Bank has held the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 2½ 
per cent since October 2004. However, in line with the Bank's outlook for growth and inflation, some 
reduction  in  the  amount  of  monetary  stimulus  will  be  required  in  the  near  term  to  keep  aggregate 
demand and supply in balance and inflation on target. 
The risks to the outlook through 2006 relate primarily to the future path of prices for oil and non-energy 
commodities, the pace of growth in China, and the ongoing adjustment of the Canadian economy to 
global developments. These risks appear to be balanced. Over the medium term, however, there is 
increasing  risk  that  the  correction  of  global  current  account  imbalances  could  involve  a  period  of 
weakness in world aggregate demand. 
   1/1 
