Rafael Buenaventura: Deepening domestic financial reforms 
Speech  by  Mr  Rafael  Buenaventura,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines),  at  the  Financial  Executives  Institute  of  the  Philippines  (FINEX)  forum  on  “Deepening 
reforms, strengthening core values” and Induction of FINEX Officers, Makati City, 19 January 2005. 
 It is my great honor and pleasure to speak before the FINEX today, a stalwart partner and moving 
force,  in  shaping  our  domestic  financial  system.  Indeed,  I  am  happy  to  note  that  your  incoming 
president is one of our own.  
Today, allow me to focus on my presentation mainly on our efforts to strengthen our financial system 
and develop, in particular, our domestic capital market.  
It is pleasing to note that 2005 started off with a slew of very good economic data. First of all, 2004 
GDP  growth  is  expected  to  reach  more  than  6%  on  account  of  increased  private  consumption  and 
exports; robust services and agriculture growth despite increased inflationary pressures in the second 
half of the year.  
The fiscal accounts are more or less in line with program. This has prompted recent declines in the 
bell  weather  91-day  Treasury  bill  rate.  Our  dollar  reserves  ended  at  a  very  comfortable  level 
US$16.1 billion, at the high end of our target range.  
The positive news have spilled over to our foreign exchange market, with rates averaging now well 
below  the  PhP56/US$  mark,  and  to  the  stock  exchange.  Year-to-date,  the  PHISIX  has  posted  an 
8% growth, easily making our exchange among the top ten performing markets in the world.  
However, in order to sustain all of these positive developments in the long-run, we must continue our 
concerted  efforts  in  further  strengthening  the  financial  system,  particularly,  the  development  of  the 
domestic  capital  market.  Without  this,  the  whole  package  of  reforms  being  shepherded  will  not  be 
sustainable in the future and we will constantly be in a roller-coaster ride.  
A  more  stable  and  stronger  financial  sector  ensures  a  more  efficient  mobilization  of  capital  and 
resources. These are in turn channelled to the best and most productive investment activities thereby 
supporting  higher  economic  growth.  With  a  stronger  domestic  financial  system,  the  economy  will 
become more resilient in coping with negative external shocks and disturbances and less vulnerable to 
contagion and reduced access to international capital markets. Furthermore, monetary policy will be 
able to operate more efficiently as a wider array of market-based tools become available for calibrating 
economic activity and maintaining price stability.  
A  fundamental  initiative  of  the  BSP  to  support  capital  market  development  is  the  shift  to  inflation 
targeting, and the higher level of policy transparency that it requires, as basis for the conduct of our 
monetary  policy  in  achieving  price  stability.  A  stable  price  environment  is  a  central  pillar  towards 
securing  overall  macroeconomic  stability,  in  turn  a  necessary  pre-condition  to  capital  market 
development. Although recent acceleration in inflation has been mostly supply side driven, the BSP 
remains very cautious with its monetary policy stance while retaining the flexibility to support economic 
growth. This is the usual balancing act that is the traditional measure of the mettle of a central bank. 
But preserving price stability is really a cooperative endeavor and the government has responded with 
measures  to  mitigate  supply-side  pressures  through  increased  price  monitoring  of  staple  foodstuff, 
ensure  supply  of  commodities  through higher  productivity  in  agriculture  and  industry,  and lessening 
dependence to imported fuel and energy prices.  
The  BSP  has  launched  major  reform  initiatives  in  the  banking  sector  where  we  have  direct 
responsibility  as  its  supervisor.  Key  initiatives  include  strengthening  corporate  governance  and 
transparency,  clearing-out  non-performing  assets  and  strengthening  bank  balance  sheets  through 
better liability management and recapitalization, upgrading risk management standards, and improving 
consumer  protection.  Consistent  with  these  objectives,  we  have  been  systematically  aligning  our 
regulations  with  key  international  standards  such  as  the  Basle  Committee  recommendations  on 
supervisory practices and on capital adequacy, the IAS/IFRS Standards for the proper accounting and 
disclosure of financial transactions, OECD principles on good corporate governance. We are likewise 
closely consulting with our peer central banks and bank regulators to learn from their rich experiences.  
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
These have yielded a slew of regulatory changes and others yet to come that will radically change the 
rules  of  the  game  for  our  banking  industry.  For  the  better,  we  are  convinced.  We  believe  that  the 
changes  will  also  further  hasten  the  long  overdue  consolidation  in  our  banking  industry  that  is 
essential  to  make  it  stronger.  The  rigors  of  international  standards  and  the  growing  presence  of 
international level competitions will inexorably hasten the exit of weak institutions that are unwilling to 
reform.  
The proposed amendment of the BSP Charter is a very critical element in the banking reform agenda. 
We  are  particularly  seeking  changes  to  strengthen  the  institutional  arrangements  for  banking 
supervision  that  will  enable  us  to  fully  comply  with  best  international  practice.  The  most  critical 
changes  include  strengthening  the  basic  legal  protection  of  bank  supervisors  in  the  course  of 
performing their official duties and improving the ability of the BSP to resolve problem banks. Without 
these vital amendments, we will be unable to properly enforce the reforms embedded in the regulatory 
changes.  These  are  very  basic  arrangements  that  are  widely  adopted  internationally,  precisely  to 
achieve a healthy banking system.  
The BSP is likewise spearheading the initiative to establish a world-class credit information system. 
We  have  recommended  a  bill  to  congress  creating  such  a  system  anchored  by  central  credit 
information bureau that will have the ability to collect, consolidate, and distribute credit information to 
credit  providers  and  analysts.  World  Bank  studies  and  other  independent  studies  have  established 
that  a  good  credit  information  system  will  significantly  increase  access  to  credit  especially  by  small 
borrowers, lower credit transaction costs, lower cost of borrowing, and improve management of credit 
risk.  
These are the two major pieces of legislation that the BSP is prioritizing in its advocacy with Congress. 
We  hope  that  the  FINEX  collectively  can  help  us  in  this  effort  that  is  so  vital  to  strengthening  the 
financial system.  
There are other pieces of vital legislation that we should all be working closely together on to have 
enacted.  One  of  these  is  an  improved  bankruptcy  framework  through  the  proposed  Corporate 
Recovery  Act.  We  are  in  critical  need  of  a  modern  framework  for  orderly  resolution  of  failed 
organizations that even-handledly settles potentially conflicting interests of borrowers and creditors. A 
bias for the former will lead to a weak financial system while a bias for the latter will sow the seeds of 
inequity and instability.  
Other important pieces of legislation are oriented to furthering the development of the domestic capital 
market.  These  include  the  proposed  RICA  and  PERA  bills.  Even  more  basic  is  the  necessity  to 
re-think the whole approach on the taxation of the various financial instruments to encourage a deep 
capital  market  that  is  able  to  offer  a  wide  array  of  investment  outlets  catering  to  diverse  risk 
preferences and investment objectives. I understand this is now the subject matter of a comprehensive 
study in preparation for a specific legislative proposal.  
The high degree of interconnectedness of our financial system has compelled the BSP to play a more 
active  role  in  developing  the  domestic  capital  market  and  to  collaborate  more  closely  with  other 
financial regulators.  
Let me mention a number of key initiatives. One initiative is to broaden the array of available capital 
market instruments such as Tier 2 Paper, LTNCDs, documented repos, structured debt, collateralized 
debt obligations, and credit derivatives. We have gone out of our way to overhaul our regulations to 
allow financial innovation but under appropriate risk management standards.  
On the demand side, we have initiated a major reform of the trust business beginning with common 
trust funds that are being converted to a better product called the unit investment trust fund (UITF). 
Other managed funds are next in line primarily to create a wider domestic investor base where both 
sophisticated and unsophisticated investors can participate under adequate safeguards.  
We are also encouraging the entry of high quality rating agencies, a critical actor in a capital market 
that is transparent and efficient in discovering fair prices commensurate to risk.  
In the last few months, we have struggled to operationalize the fix income exchange [which FINEX and 
other organizations are major stakeholders] and to institutionalize an independent securities custody 
system  that  will  improve  investor  protection,  defeat  market  malpractices  such  as  multiple  selling  of 
securities  and  undocumented  transactions,  and  reduce  systemic  risk  overall.  Sad  to  say,  we 
encountered fierce resistance from some market players and even government provider. Fortunately, 
that  issue  now  appears  to  have  been  decisively  resolved  by  the  Department  of  Justice  to  allow 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
BSP-accredited third party custodians to finally operate. I hope all will now act with goodwill to achieve 
full implementation as soon as possible. We have already wasted too much time.  
Why  is  the  third  party  custody  system  so  vital  to  the  reform  effort?  It’s  really  very  simple.  To  an 
important  extent,  the  root  of  current  problems  lie  in  the  basic  fact  that  securities  already  sold  by 
dealers remain undelivered to investors and effectively stay under dealer control. By requiring delivery 
of  securities directly  to  investors or  their  designated independent custodians, we  hope  to  break  the 
back  of  bad  practices  that  rob  our  domestic  capital  market  of  its  credibility  to  investors.  The  new 
system will also lead to greater investor empowerment by allowing them more flexibility to choose the 
best possible price from the market and break free from the stranglehold of potentially leonine dealer 
partnerships.  
The  financial  system,  being  a  large  and  complex  sector,  has  necessitated  the  need  for  a  stronger 
consolidated  supervision  mechanism  among  the  different  financial  services  regulators.  One  such 
initiative in this direction was the creation of the Financial Sector Forum or FSF last year. Composed 
of the BSP, SEC, PDIC and Insurance Commission, the FSF is currently undertaking its agenda of 
harmonizing supervisory and regulatory efforts, strengthening of the exchange of information among 
the  different  regulators  and  promotion  of  better  consumer  protection.  We  intend  to  continuously 
strengthen this coalition.  
The road ahead for full financial system reform is indeed still long and complex. It is a historic struggle 
seemingly most genteel but no less tougher than military battles fought with real blood and tears. It is a 
struggle against entrenched interests that seek to preserve the mediocre status quo that has led our 
country’s financial system to nowhere.  
We appeal for the full support of our reform-minded financial professionals, the kind of professionals 
that FINEX has placed under its wing. Your authoritative and rational voices are badly needed both in 
advocacy for the reforms and for educating the broader public to understand the complex issues and 
changes.  We  should  be  working  together  to  build  an  unbreakable  coalition  for  deep  reform  in  the 
financial sector.  
My term, as Governor, is almost finished and there will be a major change at the Monetary Board. But 
I am confident that, with your support, the process of reform will march on relentlessly.  
Thank you and good day!  
BIS Review 11/2005 
 3
