Joseph Yam: Exchange fund notes  
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
signing  ceremony  for  the  appointment  of  retail  exchange  fund  notes  distributors,  Hong  Kong, 
3 May 2005. 
 I  have  often  emphasised  the  need  for  diversification  in  the  financial  intermediation  channels  to 
maximise the contribution of the financial system to economic growth and development. Diversification 
can also promote financial stability through reducing the over-dependence of financial intermediation 
upon  one  particular  channel.  Such  diversification  is  therefore  clearly  in  the  public  interest,  to  the 
extent, I think, of requiring the involvement of the public sector in its promotion, if the free market does 
not produce the desired results. 
Indeed, Hong Kong’s non-interventionist Government finally got around to this view back in 1989 and 
on 14 March 1990 the first weekly issue of 91-day Exchange Fund Bills, amounting to HK$300 million, 
was  launched.  Since  then  the  Exchange  Fund  Bills  and  Notes  Programme  has  become  a  central 
feature of Hong Kong’s debt market. The total amount of Exchange Fund paper now outstanding is 
HK$125  billion.  And  it  was  not  just  a  matter  of  bringing  supply  to  the  market  to  meet  demand.  We 
developed  a  benchmark  yield  curve,  a  market-making  system  and  a  sophisticated  market 
infrastructure, including a paperless clearing and custodian system.  
But  more  needs  to  be  done.  Although  the  debt  market  has,  over  the  past  15  years,  become  a 
significant  channel  of  financial  intermediation,  sizing  it  against  GDP  it  is  still  a  lot  smaller  than  the 
banking and equity markets, and by quite a wide margin. Furthermore, retail interest, increasing as it 
may  have  been,  is  still  lacking  by  the  standards  of  the  developed  markets  in  the  US,  Europe  and 
Japan. And the further promotion of retail interest, specifically in Exchange Fund Notes, is the focus of 
attention of our gathering today.  
As  you may be  aware,  over  the  past  year or  so,  we  made  various experimental  attempts  to  attract 
retail investors to the primary issues of Exchange Fund Notes. On the basis of the experience gained, 
and subject to three refinements to be introduced to the arrangements, we have decided to continue 
offering Exchange Fund Notes to retail investors.  
The  first  refinement  is  the  introduction  of  greater  flexibility  in  the  selection  of  specific  issues  of 
Exchange Fund Notes to be offered to retail investors in the primary market. Instead of indiscriminately 
opening  up  all  the  2-year  and  3-year  Exchange  Fund  paper  for  subscription  by  retail  investors,  we 
intend to take account of market conditions and consult our Distributors in deciding on the timing and 
tenor for issues with a retail feature. Initially, one issue will be selected for non-competitive bids from 
retail  investors  in  each  quarter.  The  number  of  issues  per  quarter  may  be  increased  subsequently, 
subject to market response. This refinement may mean a reduction in the frequency of issues open to 
retail  investors  compared  with  the  experimental  period,  but  it  will  enable  the  allocation  of  a  larger 
portion of the selected issues for allotment to them. It will also facilitate more focused retail marketing 
for the relevant issues.  
The second refinement is the enhancement of price attractiveness for the retail investors. Exchange 
Fund Notes open to retail investors will be allotted to successful non-competitive bids at the lowest 
price, i.e. the highest yield, accepted at the competitive-bid tenders, rather than the average accepted 
price (or average accepted yield). In other words, the retail investors will be assured of getting the best 
price that institutional bidders are able to get. I am sure retail investors will welcome this.  
The third refinement is the strengthening of the distribution network. The number of Retail Exchange 
Fund Notes Distributors will be increased from three to seven. The extensive branch networks of the 
Distributor Banks and their sophisticated telephone and Internet banking facilities will, I hope, make it 
much easier for retail investors to gain assess to the primary market for Exchange Fund Notes. The 
large retail banks have in the past been criticised for not supporting the development of the retail debt 
market for fear of losing their retail deposits. Just by looking at the names of the magnificent seven 
you will realise how wrong that criticism has been. In alphabetical order, the magnificent seven are: 
Bank  of  China  (Hong  Kong),  DBS  Bank  (Hong  Kong),  Bank  of  East  Asia,  Hang  Seng  Bank,  The 
Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Banking  Corporation,  Standard  Chartered  Bank,  and  Wing  Lung  Bank.  I 
thank them sincerely for their participation as Retail Exchange Fund Notes Distributors.  
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
Access for retail investors to the primary market of debt, not necessarily restricted to Exchange Fund 
Notes, is, of course, only part of our continuing efforts. To increase and sustain retail investor interest 
in bond products in general, we need also to provide convenient access to the secondary market at 
low transaction costs and reliable market information. But this is a subject for another occasion, after 
ideas, just recently discussed and endorsed by the new Financial Infrastructure Sub-Committee of the 
Exchange Fund Advisory Committee, mature and arrangements put in place, in collaboration with the 
industry.  
Allow me to conclude with a commercial targeted at retail investors.  
The  Exchange  Fund  Notes  are  a  very  safe  investment  –  you  are  putting  your  money  with  the 
Exchange Fund, which is managed by the HKMA.  
The Exchange Fund Notes provide you with a steady stream of fixed-interest income that is higher 
than interest on bank deposits.  
The  Exchange  Fund  Notes  are  highly  liquid  –  you  can  sell  them  any  time  you  want.  There  are 
26 market-makers appointed by the HKMA to make a market in Exchange Fund paper.  
The Exchange Fund Notes have a transparent and efficient price discovery system – up-to-date prices 
and yields can be easily found in newspapers and the financial media.  
But we all should not forget, of course, that the prices of Exchange Fund Notes can go up as well as 
down, depending on the level of interest rates.  
End of commercial.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
