Nicholas Le Pan: Implementation of Basel II 
Inaugural address by Mr Nicholas Le Pan, Superintendent, Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions, Canada; Chairman of the Basel Accord Implementation Group; and Vice Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the 6th Annual Global Association of Risk Professionals 
2005, New York, 1 February 2005. 
 Introduction  
Thank you and good morning. I am delighted to have this opportunity to speak to you about what has 
become one of my favorite topics - Basel II.  
Basel II, of course, is the framework for assessing capital adequacy that the Basel Committee agreed 
to  in  June  of  last  year.  It  embraces  a  comprehensive  approach  to  risk  management  and  bank 
supervision. It sets out details for adopting more risk-sensitive minimum capital requirements and, in 
its advanced approaches to credit and operational risk, reinforces these risk-sensitive requirements by 
laying out minimum risk management and corporate governance standards that banks are expected to 
adhere to as a prerequisite for being allowed to use their internal assessments of risk.  
I  am  enthusiastic  about  the  new  Basel  framework.  I  recognize  that  it  is  not  perfect  and  that  both 
regulators and banks have a lot of work to do before it can be implemented effectively. Nevertheless, I 
am enthusiastic because I think it conveys the right message.  
In  particular,  the  framework  focuses  on  risk.  Its  purpose  is  to  encourage  strong  risk  management 
practices  and  procedures,  which  is  why  I  am  particularly  delighted  to  speak  with  you  -  the  Global 
Association of Risk Professionals.  
First, I would like to acknowledge the contribution that many of you made to Basel II. In developing the 
framework,  supervisors  met  individually  and  in  groups  with  risk  managers  in  leading  domestic  and 
international  banks.  You  listened  to  our  concerns  and  expressed  some  of  your  own,  you  explained 
best practices and you provided ideas for how we could incorporate risk management practices into 
the new framework. The Basel II process has introduced a new level of dialogue between banks and 
supervisors.  If  we  consider  even  just  the  new  channels  of  communication  established,  we  can 
conclude that the Basel II process has already achieved an important success. 
But as I said earlier, there is still a lot of work to be done and today I will be talking to you primarily 
about the implementation of Basel II. I will talk to you about the approach we have organized amongst 
supervisors to facilitate the implementation process. I will also talk to you about the key role you as 
risk professionals will play.  
I always begin my talks on this subject by emphasizing that Basel II is much more than a compliance 
exercise. Simply enacting new rules and checking periodically to ensure that they are respected is not 
enough. Basel II puts the onus on banks’ boards and management to focus more on the measurement 
and management of risks and to better relate risks to capital. It is very important that they incorporate 
this approach into their governance mentality and actively manage their institutions with this risk focus 
in mind.  
I would also like to emphasize that risk management is not just a quantitative exercise. I am sure that 
this  audience  understands  that  while  great  strides  have  been  made  in  the  quantification  of  risk  in 
recent  years,  risk  measurement  is  not  just  arithmetic  -  it  is  also  a  matter  of  expert  knowledge  and 
judgment. Without a doubt, the qualitative aspects of risk management are more important than the 
quantitative ones. Without them, quantitative aspects make no sense, or worse, can be misleading. It 
is  important  that  we  not  depend  solely  on  models  to  make  decisions.  Management  judgment  and 
experience  must  be  exercised  in  each  step  of  the  process,  including  in  designing  the  models  that 
support risk management and in deciding what to do with the model results. 
It is important for me to add that Basel II is not a compliance exercise for supervisors either. Basel II 
puts onus on supervisors to react to bank’s processes and assessments and focus their supervisory 
efforts. Effective supervision is also a matter of knowledge and expertise, and we too cannot rely so 
   1/6 
much  on  models  that  we  fail  to  exercise  prudent  discretion.  Today  I  want  to  tell  you  about  the 
processes  we  as  supervisors  are  putting  in  place  at  the  international  level  to  help  us  implement 
Basel II. In doing so I will talk about a number of initiatives that we have undertaken to address issues 
raised by banks and to improve international cooperation and convergence. 
Accord Implementation Group  
Some of you will already have heard of the Accord Implementation Group, or AIG, which I Chair. The 
Basel  Committee  established  the  AIG  about  three  years  ago.  While  its  membership  includes 
representatives from Basel Committee countries, we have also involved non G-10 countries by having 
them participate on working groups and providing regional sessions to discuss issues related to Basel 
II. We meet more formally with key non G-10 countries several times a year. In addition, we have tried 
to have an ongoing dialogue with the banking industry to identify critical implementation issues.  
The purpose of the AIG is to share information and thereby promote consistency in the implementation 
of the new Basel framework. While in some instances the AIG may propose elaboration or guidance 
for the Basel Committee’s consideration, I should emphasize that the primary function of the AIG is 
neither to develop new rules nor to guarantee uniformity in application of the new framework.  
National discretion  
As you are probably aware, Basel II allows for the exercise of national discretion in several areas. One 
of  the  questions  I  am  most  often  asked  is  -  how  can  we  find  out  what  differences  exist  between 
countries in how they interpret the rules? Last year the AIG surveyed Basel Committee countries and 
a few non-G10 countries on how they intend to implement Basel II, in particular how they intend to 
address issues of national discretion. We shared the results of the preliminary survey with supervisors, 
hoping  that  this  would  encourage  more  consistency  between  members.  The  survey  is  now  being 
updated and expanded to include more non G-10 countries. 
It  is  surprising  how  sharing  and  discussing  answers  to  the  survey  has  sharpened  the  supervisory 
focus  on  the  issues  of  national  discretion.  I  believe  it  has  led  to  more  convergence  and,  where 
supervisors make different choices, the rationale for the differences is better understood.  
We have not been able to share the results of this survey outside of the AIG because a number of 
countries are still engaged in national rule making processes. Once these processes, such as the US 
NPR,  are  sufficiently  advanced,  we  intend  to  share  our  survey  results  more  broadly  with  all 
supervisors  and  the  industry.  We  hope  this  will  help  risk  managers  identify  systems  requirements, 
especially where they have responsibilities beyond national borders within their financial institutions. 
Cross border issues  
This  leads  me  into  the  second  topic  I  wish  to  discuss.  It  pertains  to  cross-border  and  home/host 
issues. When I talk about home/host issues, I’m referring to the responsibilities of the supervisor of the 
consolidated  parent  bank  (the  home  supervisor)  in  relation  to  the  supervisor  of  foreign  subsidiaries 
and branches of that bank (host supervisors). Of course home/host issues are not new, but for Basel II 
to be most effective, home/host arrangements need to be strengthened. This is one of the AIG’s main 
priorities, and we were instrumental in the Basel Committee’s release of high level principles related to 
cross  border  implementation  issues.  One  of  those  principles  concerns  avoiding  unnecessary 
duplicative work.  
Both the 1988 Accord and Basel II were developed for internationally active banks. What is important 
to  remember  is  that  while  these  banks  are  active  internationally,  they  are  supervised  on  a  national 
basis with limited interdependence between supervisors for capital purposes. This may, or more likely 
may not, correspond with how banks are managed. 
Ideally, banks would like to deal with only one supervisor. This is understandable - but unrealistic. For 
example,  I  have  heard  banks  suggesting  that  they  ought  to  deal  exclusively  with  their  home 
supervisor. It may be efficient from the banks' point of view, but I doubt it is acceptable from the host 
supervisors'  point  of  view.  Within  those  banking  organizations,  however,  it  turned  out  that  local 
management had virtually no knowledge of the Basel II implementation approach to be adopted by the 
bank. 
   2/6 
Imagine the situation of a host supervisor who communicates with the bank’s local management and 
is  unable  to  get  even  the  most  rudimentary  sense  of  what  the  bank’s  approach  to  Basel  II 
implementation  will  likely  be.  Imagine  further  that  the  bank  is  a  significant  player  in  that  country’s 
economy. 
In such a scenario, it would be natural for that supervisor to then approach the bank’s head office to 
try to understand what the bank’s plans are. Multiple detailed requests of that nature would clearly be 
a head office nightmare and would not lead to cost-effective implementation. Banks need to recognize 
that if they want to implement Basel II efficiently, they must invest time in keeping local management 
and host jurisdictions adequately informed.  
Banks  should  understand  that  subsidiaries  with  a  significant  share  of  total  banking  assets  or 
operations in a given market - not just those that are significant in the context of the overall banking 
group  -  merit  special  attention.  Host  supervisors  have  legal  obligations  they  must  satisfy  relative  to 
foreign banks operating in their jurisdictions, and they may feel it is even more important to exercise 
effective  oversight  where  foreign  banks  are  systemically  important.  But  hosts  can’t  just  fully  repeat 
what home’s have done. I’m encouraging host countries in these cases to focus on what they really 
need from the home or the bank. Similarly, home country supervisors are encouraged to pay particular 
attention to the information needs of host supervisors in these situations.  
Within the AIG, we have agreed to accelerate discussion between supervisors, and between banks 
and  supervisors  on  the  cross-border  implementation  plans  of  the  major  banking  groups.  After 
experimenting with some live situations (or what we have called “real case studies”), we shared views 
in a document released last fall on what seemed to work and what didn’t work so well. I have always 
been keen to engage non-G10 supervisors in this dialogue as well, and at my next meeting with the 
members  of  the  Committee’s  non  G-10  liaison  group,  later  this  month,  I  hope  we  can  advance 
discussion of information needs, especially from the perspective of the host supervisor.  
Our initial case studies involved a few internationally active banks. The home supervisor for each bank 
arranged meetings with key host supervisors and with bank management. During the meetings they 
discussed  the  bank’s  plans  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II,  what  the  bank  needed  from  the 
supervisors  in  terms  of  direction,  and  what  the  supervisors  wanted  from  the  banks  and  from  each 
other. 
We  hope  this  approach  will  be  an  effective  way  to  promote  more  effective  cross-border 
implementation.  We  are  encouraging  home  supervisors  for  the  largest  banks  to  arrange  similar 
meetings along the lines suggested by the AIG. Nevertheless we know that we must remain flexible. 
Just as each banking organization is unique, so too is each supervisory agency, not to mention the 
working arrangements among supervisors. 
What  is  important  is  that  home  and  host  supervisors  establish  clear  communication.  The  nature  of 
supervisory cooperation will differ depending on a bank’s implementation plans and the needs of the 
relevant home and host supervisors. Up until now, information has tended to flow one way: from host 
to home supervisors. For Basel II to be most effective, however, there will be a greater need for two-
way  information  flows.  Consequently,  home  supervisors  are  being  encouraged  through  the  AIG  to 
discuss  how  they  can  most  effectively  communicate  the  results  of  their  work  to  host  supervisors  in 
order to give hosts a basis for relying in whole or in part on home supervisor assessments. Likewise, 
host supervisors are being encouraged to think carefully about the information that they really need 
from the bank and the home supervisor in order to most effectively and efficiently assess the capital 
adequacy of subsidiaries in their jurisdictions. 
The  good  news  is  that  significant  progress  is  being  made  in  this  area.  Indeed,  AIG  members  are 
clearly  moving  from  case  studies  into  actual,  tangible  implementation  planning.  However,  given  the 
Basel II timetable, this work will need to accelerate. In this regard, the ability of supervisors to develop 
detailed supervisory arrangements depends to a large extent on banks’ having internal implementation 
and rollout plans. These plans will allow the banks and supervisors to work together more efficiently.  
Op Risk  
The AIG is also beginning to focus more on the capital requirement for operational risk, particularly 
with regard to the application of the advanced measurement approaches, or AMA, on a cross-border 
basis. An AIG Op Risk subgroup has been established to share supervisory views on challenges to 
   3/6 
implementation  of  the  AMA.  This  group  has  developed  a  catalogue  of  issues  and  has  set  up  three 
subgroups to look at specific areas: 
Corporate Governance, Data Issues, and Quantification/Modeling. The subgroups will develop a range 
of acceptable practices on how these issues can be resolved, taking into account the experiences of 
banks. 
The subgroup intends to make communication with the industry a standing agenda item. Contact with 
the  industry  will  include  discussions  with  industry  associations  as  well  as  bilateral  discussions  with 
banks as necessary to help inform our work on a particular topic.  
My discussion of home/host issues applies equally in the operational risk context. The biggest cross-
border  issue  related  to  the  implementation  of  an  AMA  is  the  definition  of  significance:  what  is  a 
significant subsidiary and when is an allocated AMA permissible. This issue will benefit greatly from 
discussions at the AIGOR.  
I do not believe a formula based definition of this will be a useful way forward.  
AIG/CTF Joint working group  
There are several other issues we are addressing. For example, the AIG and the Capital Task Force, 
which was the main body that developed Basel II, recently created a joint group to consider the issue 
of  loss  given  default  estimates and related  issues of  stress  testing  under  Pillar  1 and 2  of  the  new 
framework. We will continue to interact extensively with industry to understand current practices on 
that front and how those practices might evolve. 
Validation  
Let me turn to another important topic - validation. One of the greatest challenges - of the new Basel 
framework is the need for banks to validate and for the supervisors to review banks’ validation of the 
systems  used  to  generate  the  parameters  that serve  as  inputs into  the  internal  ratings-based  (IRB) 
approach to credit risk.  
Ratings  reflect  a  bank’s  assessment  of  a  borrower’s  ability  to  perform  despite  adverse  economic 
conditions. Because banks also use ratings to determine the amount of capital the bank should hold, 
there will always be a need to ensure integrity, objectivity, accuracy, stability, and an appropriate level 
of conservatism.  
Internal ratings and default and loss estimates must play an essential role in the credit approval, risk 
management, internal capital allocation, and corporate governance functions of banks using the IRB 
approach.  Basel  II  recognises  that  bank  management  is  responsible  for  validating  the  inputs  to  the 
IRB approach, while supervisors have responsibility for assessing compliance of banks’ validation of 
rating  systems  and  their  inputs  with  the  minimum  standards  of  the  IRB  framework  for  credit  risk. 
Supervisors must ensure that the Basel II requirements are being met not only on Day One, but also 
on a continuing basis. However, it should be noted that supervisors will focus on compliance with the 
minimum  requirements  as  a  means  of  ensuring  the  overall  integrity  of  a  bank’s  ability  to  provide 
prudential inputs to the capital calculations and not as an end in itself. 
The AIG has established a subgroup to examine issues related to validation. I should note that the 
Validation Subgroup is focusing primarily on the IRB approach.  
I  should also  note  that while  the  Subgroup  is made up  of supervisors  from  both  G10  and non-G10 
countries, it has already held several meetings with banks to gather their views and experiences in this 
area and has plans to meet with more banks from a range of jurisdictions. 
So  far  the  Subgroup  has  identified  six  principles  that  it  feels  will  underlie  its  future  work.  We  have 
recently made this available in communication to industry. These are: 
Principle 1: Validation is fundamentally about assessing the predictive ability of a bank’s risk 
estimates and the use of ratings in credit processes  
A bank’s IRB estimates are intended to be predictive. While grounded in historical experience, they 
should be forward-looking. If the processes that are used in assigning risk estimates are not accurate, 
   4/6 
then  these  estimates  may  not  be  sufficiently  predictive  and  may  under-  or  over-state  required 
regulatory capital. Consequently, validation should focus on assessing the forward-looking accuracy of 
the bank’s risk estimates, the processes for assigning those estimates, and the oversight and control 
procedures  that  are  in  place  to  ensure  that  the  forward-looking  accuracy  of  these  estimates  are 
preserved going forward.  
Principle 2: The bank has primary responsibility for validation  
Supervisors do not have the primary responsibility for validating bank-rating systems. Rather, a bank 
has the primary role. A bank must validate its own rating system to demonstrate how it arrived at its 
risk estimates and confirm that its processes for assigning risk estimates are likely to work as intended 
and continue to perform as expected. The role of supervisors is to then review the bank’s validation 
processes and outcomes. In so doing, supervisors may need to rely upon additional processes, either 
of  its  own  design  or  of  third  parties,  in  order  to  have  the  required  level  of  supervisory  comfort  or 
assurance.  
Principle 3: Validation is an iterative process  
Validation  is  likely  to  be  an  ongoing  process  in  which  banks  and  supervisors  periodically  refine 
validation tools in response to changing market and operating conditions. We will therefore need to 
engage in a continuing dialogue on strengths and weaknesses of particular rating systems.  
Principle 4: There is no single validation method  
While  some  validation  tools,  such  as  backtesting  and  benchmarking,  may  prove  especially  useful, 
there is no universal tool that can be used for all portfolios in all banks. Backtesting, for example, may 
prove difficult for portfolios where there is a low level of historical defaults. Validation techniques may 
converge  over  time,  but  in  practice  there  will  likely  be  differences  in  validation  techniques  across 
portfolios and across markets. 
Principle 5: Validation should encompass both quantitative and qualitative elements  
Coming back to a theme I highlighted at the beginning of my remarks, it might be tempting to think of 
validation as a purely technical exercise in which outcomes are compared to estimates using statistical 
techniques.  Indeed,  in  some  circumstances  such  technical  tools  may  play  a  critical  role  in  such 
assessments.  But  it  will  not  be  enough  to  focus  solely  on  comparing  predictions  and  outcomes.  In 
assessing the overall performance of a rating system, it is also important to assess the components of 
the rating system, such as data and models, as well as the structures and processes around the rating 
system.  This  should  include  an  assessment  of  controls  (including  independence),  documentation, 
internal use, and other relevant qualitative factors.  
Principle 6: Validation processes and outcomes should be subject to independent review 
Bank validation processes and results should be reviewed by parties within the banking organization 
that are independent of those responsible for the design and implementation of the validation process. 
This independent review may be accomplished using a variety of forms. The review process may be 
distributed across multiple units or housed within one unit, depending on the varying management and 
oversight  frameworks  of  banks.  As  an  example,  internal  audit  could  undertake  this  review  process 
using internal technical experts or third parties independent from those responsible for building and 
validating the bank's rating system. Regardless of the bank's control structure, internal audit has an 
oversight  responsibility  to  ensure  that  validation  processes  are  implemented  as  designed  and  are 
effective. 
Given those six principles that will underlie its work, the Subgroup has identified some specific issues 
for discussion. These include: 
• 
• 
• 
Rating System Design;  
Risk Quantification;  
Risk Rating System Operations; 
   5/6 
Oversight and Control Functions;  
Use of Ratings; and  
Specific Portfolio Issues.  
• 
• 
• 
In  particular,  the  Subgroup  will  explore  tools  and  techniques  that  banks  use  in  validating  their  own 
rating  systems  and  that  supervisors  use  in  reviewing  bank  validation  processes  and  outcomes.  In 
response  to  industry  concerns,  the  Subgroup  will  also  explore  issues  related  to  portfolios  with  low 
levels of historical default, as well as the use of pooled data. Of course, the work that we can do will 
depend to a large extent on how far work has progressed in banking organizations.  
I  should  emphasize  that  the  Subgroup  is  not  responsible  for  developing  a  uniform,  prescriptive 
approach to validation. Rather, it will serve as a clearinghouse for sharing and cataloguing information 
on tools or techniques. Interaction with industry representatives on practical approvals is underway.  
Conclusion  
I hope this has given you a flavour for the work we are undertaking in implementing Basel II. Let me 
emphasize that this is just a smattering of what is going on in the supervisory community. 
As we approach each issue of implementing Basel II - when, how and so on - I think it is important to 
keep in mind not only the challenges but also the benefits. Better relating capital to risk, promoting 
enhanced  risk  measurement  and  management  practices  in  internationally  active  banks,  and  further 
enhancing supervisory focus all present huge opportunities - for banks, for supervisors, and for our 
markets and economies. 
While  there are challenges,  and  while implementation won’t  be perfect,  I  believe  that  with  goodwill, 
good feedback and ongoing communication, Basel II can be implemented well. 
I look forward to that result.  
Thank you. 
 
   6/6 
