European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Berlin, 4 May 2005. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  press 
conference  here  in  Berlin.  Today  is  the  11th  time  that  the  Governing  Council  has  met  outside 
Frankfurt,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  President  Weber  for  his  invitation  and  hospitality.  Let  me  also 
express  our  gratitude  to  the  staff  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  for  their  excellent  organisation  of 
today’s meeting.  
Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting,  which  was  also  attended  by  Commissioner 
Almunia.  
On  the  basis  of  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  continue  to  see  no  significant 
evidence of a build-up of underlying domestic inflationary pressures in the euro area. Accordingly, we 
have left the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The exceptionally low level of interest rates across 
the entire maturity spectrum provides considerable support to economic activity in the euro area. At 
the same time, continued vigilance with regard to upside risks to price stability is warranted.  
Allow me to elaborate on our decision, turning first to the economic analysis. Regarding the current 
situation and the short-term outlook for economic activity, recent data and survey indicators are, on 
balance,  on  the  downside.  Some  of  the  downward  risks  to  economic  growth  identified  earlier,  in 
particular those related to persistently high oil prices, appear to have partially materialised over the 
past few months.  
At the same time, when looking beyond the short term, conditions remain in place for stronger real 
GDP  growth.  On  the  external  side,  euro  area  exports  should  continue  to  be  supported  by  foreign 
demand.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  benefit  from  the  very  favourable  financing 
conditions,  the  robust  corporate  earnings  currently  being  observed  and  ongoing  improvements  in 
corporate efficiency. Consumption growth should evolve broadly in line with expected developments in 
disposable  income.  Downside  risks  to  economic  growth  continue  to  be  related  to  oil  price 
developments and global imbalances.  
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.1% 
in  April,  unchanged  from  March.  Over  the  coming  months,  annual  HICP  inflation  rates  are  likely  to 
remain around these levels. Wage increases have remained contained over recent quarters and, in 
the context of moderate economic growth and weak labour markets, this trend should continue for the 
time  being.  Overall,  when  looking  ahead,  we  see  no  significant  evidence  of  underlying  domestic 
inflationary pressures building up in the euro area so that inflation rates should develop in line with 
price stability.  
However, there continue to be upside risks to price stability, relating mainly to oil price developments 
and their potential to lead to second-round effects stemming from wage and price-setting behaviour. In 
order to avoid this, it is important that the social partners continue to assume their responsibilities. 
As  regards  the  monetary  analysis,  monetary  and  credit  growth  remain  strong  despite  some 
moderation over the recent past. These developments mainly reflect the stimulative effect of the low 
level of interest rates in the euro area. As monetary dynamics over the past year have mainly been 
driven by developments in the most liquid components of M3, this continues to signal upside risks to 
price stability in the medium to longer term.  
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  suggests  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained. However, upside risks to price stability over the medium term need to be monitored closely. 
Cross-checking with the monetary analysis supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to 
the materialisation of such risks. Against this background, longer-term inflation expectations need to 
be monitored closely. 
As regards fiscal policies, recent information and forecasts suggest little progress in reducing fiscal 
imbalances  in  the  euro  area.  A  timely  and  full  implementation  of  consolidation  commitments  is 
essential.  This  will  strengthen  the  confidence  of  investors  and  consumers  in  the  soundness  of 
economic policies. At the same time, it is essential to implement, in a strict and timely manner, the 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
revised Stability and Growth Pact procedures, which are soon to enter into force, so as to underpin the 
credibility of the EU fiscal framework. 
The Governing Council has repeatedly argued in favour of structural reforms to improve the potential 
for  higher  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Authorities  are  aware  of  the  structural  obstacles  and 
have  taken  important  measures  to  address  them,  but  continued  reforms  will  be  needed  in  order  to 
keep up with the unavoidable challenges arising from an ongoing deepening in the division of labour at 
the  global  level,  rapid  technological  change  and  population  ageing.  It  is  important  to  explain  to  the 
general  public  that  these  reforms  will  progressively  deliver  higher  growth  and  lead  to  more  job 
creation,  and  that,  as  a  result,  our  societies  will  be  better  off.  Over  recent  years,  uncertainties 
surrounding the structural reform agenda in some euro area countries appear to have hindered the 
necessary  improvement  in  the  confidence  of  consumers  and  entrepreneurs.  A  clear  commitment  to 
implementing the reforms and the explanation of their benefits will help to reduce such uncertainties 
and thereby make a considerable contribution to improving the economic outlook for the euro area. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
