Jean-Claude Trichet: Financial markets integration in Europe: the ECB’s view 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  9th  European 
Financial Markets Convention Federation of European Securities Exchanges, Brussels, 26 May 2005. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  accepted  with  great  pleasure  your  invitation  to  speak  this  evening  at  the  9th  European  Financial 
Markets Convention.  
I have to say that I particularly like the fact that tonight’s dinner is being held here in the CBBD (Centre 
Belge de la Bande Dessinée) as it is a remarkable place in two respects. First, it is a fascinating art 
nouveau building that was built by Victor Horta in 1903. Second, it was here that I had confirmation 
that the first expedition to the moon was not engineered by Americans, but by Belgian citizens. There 
is a model here of the rocket that Belgium’s intrepid heros, Tintin et Milou, Tintin and Snowy, used to 
go to the moon well before Armstrong. 
The title of this year’s Convention is “Towards true integration by 2009”. Given that the integration of 
the financial system in Europe, in particular in the euro area, is of utmost importance to the ECB, I 
would like to present our views on the process of European financial integration.  
I will start by highlighting the economic benefits of financial integration. I will then briefly summarise the 
state of financial integration in Europe, paying particular attention, given the specific event, to recent 
developments in the EU securities markets, especially in the field of securities regulation. Finally, I will 
outline  prospects  for  the  future,  taking  into  account  the  recent  publication  of  the  European 
Commission’s Green Paper on Financial Services Policy in 2005-2010.  
The economic benefits of financial integration 
The Lisbon strategy was defined in 2000 to enhance structural reforms, which Europe urgently needs. 
Structural reforms raise the growth potential of the European economy. And one such structural reform 
is the process of European financial integration. 
It is generally accepted that financial integration fosters financial development, which in turn creates 
potential for higher economic growth. In a nutshell, the link is as follows. Financial integration enables 
the realisation of economies of scale and increases the supply of funds for investment opportunities. 
The  actual  integration  process  also  stimulates  competition  and  the  expansion  of  markets,  thereby 
leading to further financial development. In turn, financial development can result in a more efficient 
allocation of capital as well as a reduction in the cost of capital. In other words, the European economy 
grows more, the more integrated its financial system is. For example, according to a study (London 
Economics, 2002)1 additional growth – resulting from financial integration of the European bond and 
equity markets – of 1.1% over a period of ten years is estimated. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  ECB  strongly  supports  the  Commission’s  policy  of  pushing 
forward the Lisbon strategy by focusing reform efforts, at the national level and the European level, on 
“delivering stronger, lasting growth, and creating more and better jobs”. 
One of the ECB’s most effective contributions to these efforts is to continue to act as a strong and 
reliable  anchor  for  safeguarding  monetary  stability,  thus  providing  a  vital  element  for  promoting 
sustainable output growth.  
However,  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  structural  reforms  like  European  financial 
integration is reciprocal, in the sense that the elements are mutually beneficial. Most importantly, an 
integrated  financial  system  promotes  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
throughout the euro area.  
                                                      
1 
London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
Furthermore, I would like to mention that the integration of the financial system is highly relevant to our 
task of maintaining financial stability. Deeper financial integration, on one hand, has a higher capacity 
to absorb economic shocks than individual countries. It can also offer more possibilities for financial 
institutions to manage and diversify their relevant risks and realise economies of scale, which leads to 
greater  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  On  the  other  hand,  deeper  financial  integration  is 
transforming the nature of the risks all over Europe, particular attention being given to systemic risk 
stemming from contagion through intensified cross-border links (for instance infrastructure, interbank 
exposures,  shareholdings  and  participation)  and  to  moral  hazard  issues  resulting  from  much  larger 
institutions posing as a consequence much larger risks in case of failure. Therefore, the interaction 
between financial integration and financial stability deserves thorough analysis and consideration.  
Having  discussed  the  economic  benefits  of  financial  integration,  let  me  now  talk  about  the  actors 
involved as well as the state of financial integration in Europe.  
The actors involved and the state of financial integration in Europe  
The  main  actors  involved  in  the  process  of  financial  integration  are  the  public  authorities  and  the 
private sector. 
Financial  integration  is  a  prime  objective  of  the  general  economic  policies  of  the  European  Union. 
Charlie McCreevy, the European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services, has explained the 
Commission’s proposed line of action, as contained in the recent Green Paper on the priorities of the 
so-called  post-FSAP  strategy.  The  ECB  will  certainly  give  its  advice  on  the  main  priorities  to  be 
pursued in order to complete the Single Market for financial services, and I will mention some of the 
core aspects of this later on.  
However, although the public authorities can, and must, provide an adequate framework conducive to 
financial integration, financial integration is ultimately a process driven by market forces and decisions 
taken by the private sector. In my view, policies relating to the regulatory and supervisory framework 
should  also  be  complemented  by  and  closely  coordinated  with  other  policies  relevant  to  financial 
services, in particular competition policy.  
Let me turn to the role of the ECB in fostering financial integration. We generally distinguish between 
four types of activities. First, as I have just said, the ECB can act as a catalyst for collective private 
sector initiatives. We assist, if you like, Adam Smith’s invisible hand of the private market in order to 
achieve financial integration. This function is particularly important in the European context as private 
market participants still need to develop further the coordination of their joint interests, for example in 
the setting of standards. In this regard, I would like to mention the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) 
initiative as well as the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project, both of which we support by acting 
as a catalyst for private sector activities. 
The  second  type  of  activity  involves  the  provision  of  central  banking  services.  Whereas  the  main 
purpose  of  this  activity  is  related  to  the  basic  tasks  of  central  banking,  the  specification  of  these 
services can also be conducive to fostering financial integration. The most prominent example of this 
is  probably  the  TARGET  system  and  its  current  consolidation  into  TARGET2.  Today,  TARGET 
represents around 90% of the total traffic in large-value payments in euro. And with EUR 1.7 trillion 
settled  every  day,  TARGET  is  one  of  the  two  largest  wholesale  payment  systems  in  the  world, 
alongside  Fedwire  in  the  United  States.  Moreover,  TARGET2,  due  to  got  live  in  2007,  will  foster 
financial integration even more. It will be based on a single technical platform, it will increase the cost 
effectiveness and it will put in place a single price structure for domestic and cross-border payments. 
We expect TARGET2 to be one of the most efficient and sophisticated payment systems in the world. 
Thirdly, we provide advice on the shaping of the legislative and regulatory framework of the financial 
system.  At  this  juncture,  I  would  mention,  in  particular,  the  views  we  provided  on  the  design  and 
implementation of the Lamfalussy approach as well as on specific draft Community legislation such as 
the  four  directives  relating  to  the  securities  markets  (Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive 
(MiFID), Prospectus, Market Abuse, and Transparency).  
The  fourth  major  activity  concerns  the  research  we  conduct  on  all  aspects  of  European  financial 
integration  and  our  monitoring  –  in  collaboration  with  the  European  Commission  –  of  the  financial 
integration process by means of quantitative and qualitative indicators. Through this, it is our aim to 
raise awareness of the need for financial integration and the means by which it can be achieved. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
This leads me to give a brief overview of the state of integration in the European financial markets. 
Generally speaking, the degree of integration differs quite significantly between the market segments, 
and it is greater the nearer the respective financial market segment is to the single monetary policy. As 
a broad assessment of the level of integration in the wholesale markets, I would say that it is almost 
perfect in the money market, including its related interest rate derivatives markets, very well advanced 
in  the  government  bond  market,  fairly  high  in  the  corporate  bond  market,  and  least  advanced,  but 
increasing,  in  the  equity  market.  As  concerns  the  securitisation  markets  in  Europe,  there  still  exist 
obstacles to cross-border securitisation.  
Finally, as regards banking markets, integration is fairly well advanced in wholesale (or interbank) and 
capital market-related activities, including trading and sales, asset management, agency services and 
syndicated lending. In retail banking, however, it is clearly lagging behind. In its Green Paper on the 
post-FSAP strategy, the European Commission identified this area as one requiring initiatives to foster 
integration,  and  it  plans  to  issue  this  summer  a  separate  Green  Paper  on  integration  of  European 
mortgage markets. 
But before turning to the broader subject of the post-FSAP strategy, let me focus for a while on the 
field of securities markets and regulation.  
Development of EU securities markets and securities regulation 
I surely do not have to remind you of the significance of securities markets from the ECB’s point of 
view. Efficient securities trading platforms and clearing and settlement institutions are of fundamental 
importance for the functioning of the financial market. In addition, the ECB has a specific interest in 
integrated securities markets and infrastructures because all central banking credit operations need to 
be fully collateralised. 
Tonight, I would like to talk about developments in the EU securities markets and about what I believe 
the role of regulation should be. 
As a general feature of the euro area’s financial system structure, non-bank intermediated and market-
based  instruments  have  become  more  important  in  the  past  decades.  Indeed,  firms  in  continental 
Europe are increasingly turning to the capital markets to fulfil their external funding needs. As for the 
corporate bond market, growth has been very robust since the launch of the euro. In terms of issues 
by non-financial corporations, the average annual growth rate in the euro area between January 1999 
and December 2003 was around 10 percentage points higher than in the United States, which is the 
converse of the situation prevailing before the introduction of the euro. Nonetheless, corporate bond 
markets  in  the  euro  area  are  still  comparatively  small,  as,  for  example,  the  outstanding  volume  of 
bonds issued by non-financial corporations is around EUR 600 billion in the euro area compared to 
USD 2.9 trillion in the United States. 
The euro area stock market capitalisation also has increased perceptibly over the last years, namely 
from 21% of GDP at the end of 1990 to 45% of GDP at the end of 2003. Furthermore, the number of 
listed companies in the euro area grew from around 4,300 at the end of 1990 to around 6,700 at the 
end of 2003. There are also clear signs that integration in the European markets will accelerate in the 
future and that further consolidation of European trading and the post- trading infrastructure is on its 
way. 
The factors that have stimulated the growth of financial markets are manifold. These include, among 
other things, advancements in technology, deregulation, increasing wealth and demographic changes 
that  boosted  the  demand  for  private  pension  schemes.  In  addition,  the  launch  of  the  euro  further 
bolstered  capital  market  growth  in  the  euro  area,  mainly  through  substantially  improved  market 
liquidity.  Technological  and  regulatory  changes  also  aid  the  removal  of  barriers  to  the  cross-border 
provision of services and create the right conditions for consolidation of market infrastructure. I believe 
that this growth in the EU financial markets has been spurred by the increased efforts to strengthen 
the legal and regulatory framework at the EU and the national level, particularly through the launch of 
the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP).  
Indeed,  the  FSAP  has  addressed  those  parts  of  the  EU  regulatory  framework  that  needed  to  be 
upgraded in the light of new developments in the markets, or the newly perceived need to tackle the 
regulatory  barriers  to  cross-border  services.  Examples  of  such  changes  include  the  MiFID  and  the 
Prospectus  Directive.  In  addition,  existing  lacunae  in  the  EU  framework  have  been  addressed,  for 
example  with  the  Market  Abuse  Directive,  which  has  introduced  a  new  EU  regime  for  combating 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
market manipulation. The Commission and the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) 
are  currently  finalising  the  complex  layout  of  Level  2  measures  and  the  European  Securities 
Committee will be very busy over the coming months with the implementing measures of the MiFID. 
As  always,  “the  devil  is  in  the  details”  and  careful  drafting  is  highly  important.  The  ECB,  which 
participates in the meetings of the European Securities Committee, will provide its technical input on 
those matters deemed within its interest. 
I  have  just  mentioned  that  recent  research  has  shown  how  important  securities  regulation  and 
well-functioning  legal  systems  are  for  the  development  of  equity  markets.2  The  basic  idea  is  that 
well-functioning legal systems protect outside investors which in turn should improve firms’ ability to 
raise external finance and to exploit growth opportunities. We should not forget here the importance of 
initiatives for improving corporate governance mechanisms and the protection of shareholders. This 
conference rightly does not only cover securities regulation as it will also host a corporate governance 
session tomorrow. Following recent corporate scandal, a number of initiatives are on the way at the 
European and the international level.3 Of key importance is in my view the existence of a continuous 
dialogue among all regulatory authorities to promote a better mutual understanding and to reduce the 
risk of duplication of requirements.  
Regulation, however, is not a panacea and action by regulators cannot suffice on its own. The correct 
behaviour of market participants is also crucial to the efficiency of the securities markets. Institutional 
investors, auditors, analysts and rating agencies also play a key role in that they interpret disclosed 
information  and  assess  the  value  of  companies.  In  addition,  they  help  solve  the  collective  action 
problems of investors by researching and overcoming informational asymmetries. Particularly in the 
EU  context  regulation  should  remove  the  barriers  to  cross-border  services  and  ensure  that  nothing 
hinders the full implementation of the Single Market. 
Prospects for the future  
We are at a particularly crucial stage in terms of the regulation of EU securities markets and more in 
general financial regulation. When approaching a crossroad, it is natural to feel slightly uneasy before 
it becomes clear which road to take. This is especially the case when the crossroad is badly lit and 
there are no signs to indicate the way. In this case, however, I think that the crossroad is very well 
illuminated and there is no reason to worry.  
The Commission started to prepare the post-FSAP strategy in a transparent manner, timely involving 
all  interested  subjects  and  it  has  now  published  a  Green  Paper  for  public  consultation  in  order  to 
encourage debate on the post-FSAP strategy. 
The  ECB  will  reply  in  detail  to  this  consultation.  For  now,  let  me  make  a  number  of  preliminary 
suggestions as to what I believe to be amongst the main challenges ahead of us. 
First of all, I share the focus of the Green Paper on the consolidation of existing legislation, entailing 
that  a  rigorous  “better  regulation”  approach  will  be  applied  and  measures  that  do  not  deliver  the 
intended  benefits  have  to  be  amended  or  repealed.  Regulation  is  a  fundamental  tool  for  correcting 
market  failures  and  overcoming  barriers  to  the  realisation  of  the  Single  Market.  And  I  call  upon  all 
participants  to  deliver  responses  to  the  consultation  that  will  highlight  areas  in  which  the  public 
authorities  can  really  help  to  overcome  the  coordination  problems  that  remain  between  market 
participants. 
Second, I can fully support the notion underlying the whole Green Paper that every effort should be 
made  to  promote  a  more  consistent  implementation  at  the  national  level  of  existing  Community 
legislation. In this context, I recall the position expressed by the Eurosystem in relation to the review of 
the  Lamfalussy  process.4  The  Lamfalussy  approach  has  enormous  potentialities  to  favour  further 
convergence  of  national  regulations  that  still  have  to  be  fully  exploited.  More  specifically,  Level  2 
should provide the main set of technical rules to which financial institutions would be able to refer to. In 
                                                      
2   See inter alia R. La Porta, F. Lopez de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998), “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political 
Economy, 106, pp. 1113-55.  
3   For an overview, see ECB, “The evolving framework for corporate governance”, in ECB Monthly Bulletin, May 2005, pp. 89 
– 100. 
4   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/lamfalussy-reviewen.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
the same vein, I very strongly support the proposal in the Green Paper to launch a feasibility study on 
whether all rules at the national and the European level can be fused into a single body of consistent 
law, a “Financial services rulebook”. The “Financial services rulebook” would be the proof that we have 
a single market in the financial services and simultaneously a very efficient mean to deepen it.  
Finally,  I  think  that  a  lot  of  attention  should  be  addressed  to  achieve  the  objective  of  supervisory 
convergence which the Level 3 Committees have to deliver. This objective is crucial for reducing the 
compliance  costs  for  financial  institutions  operating  on  a  cross-border  basis.  It  is  also  relevant  for 
promoting  convergence  towards  best  supervisory  practices.  The  success  of  the  supervisory 
committees will be very largely measured in terms of their capability of actually delivering the objective 
concerned. 
Concluding remarks  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me, in conclusion, repeat my main messages as concisely as possible.  
First, now a new period begins with less emphasis on new regulation and much more emphasis on 
transposition and enforcement of existing measures.  
Second,  the  implementation  of  the  Lamfalussy  framework  is  a  unique  opportunity  to  achieve 
consistency in the regulatory and supervisory framework across Member States and therefore to have 
an effective level playing field for financial services.  
Third, the working of a “Financial services rulebook” is warmly and strongly supported by the ECB.  
And fourth, we will continue, as far as we are concerned, to work closely with the Commission, policy 
makers and market participants and will continue to play the role of catalyst of private sector initiatives 
where it appears appropriate.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 39/2005 
 5
