William Ryback: Launch of two-factor authentication for internet banking in 
Hong Kong 
Speech by Mr William Ryback, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
launch of two-factor authentication for internet banking, Hong Kong, 30 May 2005. 
 Good  afternoon,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  A  very  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  to  today’s  press 
conference,  which  marks  the  launch  of  two-factor  authentication  by  the  banking  industry  in  Hong 
Kong.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  that  I  am  joined  this  afternoon  by  Mr  He,  Chairman  of  the  Hong  Kong 
Association  of  Banks,  and  Mr  Man,  Senior  Superintendent,  Commercial  Crime  Bureau,  Hong  Kong 
Police Force. They will be sharing with you shortly about the benefits of two-factor authentication to 
bank  customers  and  its  effectiveness  in  combating  Internet  banking  frauds.  We  will  be  happy  to 
answer your questions afterwards. 
The acceptance of Internet banking services has been growing rapidly in Hong Kong over the past 
years. At the end of 2004, over 2.7 million personal Internet banking accounts (an increase of 23% 
from a year ago) and 107,000 business Internet banking accounts (an increase of 60% from a year 
ago) were established in Hong Kong. To date many of the banking services are available online. 
In view of the growing acceptance of Internet banking services and sophistication of Internet banking 
frauds  reported  locally  and  overseas,  the  banking  industry  in  Hong  Kong  reached  a  general 
consensus  last  year  to  strengthen  the  Internet  banking  security  by  implementing  two-factor 
authentication.  The  HKMA  endorsed  this  consensus  and  issued  a  circular  in  June  2004  requesting 
banks  to  implement  such  security  measure  by  June  2005  for  high-risk  retail  Internet  banking 
transactions (such as fund transfers to non-designated accounts). 
Two-factor  authentication  is  a  security  measure  recognised  by  the  information  security  industry  to 
combat Internet banking frauds. In addition to the normal login ID and password, a customer needs a 
second factor which is in his or her physical possession for additional identity verification. This second 
factor should be difficult to be stolen together with the customer’s login ID and password by fraudsters 
over the Internet. We believe that this is an effective way in tackling the latest Internet banking frauds 
such as fake bank websites, phishing e-mails and Trojan software. 
We understand that a number of banking supervisors in other financial markets are currently reviewing 
the  implication  of  the  latest  Internet  banking  frauds  and  consulting  their  banks  in  relation  to  the 
adoption of two-factor authentication for Internet banking. Hong Kong is one of the first places to offer 
such security measure to bank customers. 
So far the implementation of two-factor authentication has been progressing satisfactorily. All banks 
offering  high-risk  retail  Internet  banking  transactions  will  allow  customers  to  apply  for  two-factor 
authentication from next month. Individual banks may offer different two-factor authentication methods 
to customers. Three common methods being adopted by banks in Hong Kong are digital certificate, 
security  token-based  one-time  password  and  SMS-based  one-time  password.  To  help  you  better 
understand  the  various  methods,  we  will  have  a  brief  demonstration  to  illustrate  these  methods 
towards the end of the press conference. 
A series of promotional activities will be launched by the banking industry and individual banks from 
June 2005 onward to help customers to fully understand this security measure. Mr He will highlight the 
key features of the consumer education programme to you. 
Two-factor  authentication  strengthens  the  security  controls  of  Internet  banking  and  protects  bank 
customers  from  Internet  banking  frauds.  We  are  confident  that  with  the  joint  efforts  of  the  banking 
sector, bank customers, the Police and the HKMA, Internet banking will continue to flourish under a 
safe and sound environment in Hong Kong. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
