Stanley Fischer: A brief look at Israel’s economy and the challenges ahead 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  on  the  occasion  of  his 
appointment, at the President’s residence, Jerusalem, 1 May 2005. 
 Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, members of the Government, members of the 
Knesset Finance and Economic Committees, members of the Bank of Israel Advisory Council, past 
Governors  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  leaders  of  Israel's  banking  industry  and  of  the  business  sector, 
colleagues from academia, the management of the Bank of Israel - and here special thanks to Dr. Meir 
Sokoler and the management team of the Bank of Israel who served admirably in the transition period 
-  Mr.  Ambassador  of  the  United  States  of  America,  representatives  of  the  Bank  of  Israel, 
representatives of the media, the many members of my family, friends, distinguished guests: 
On an occasion such as this it is natural to look to the future, but it is also worthwhile looking back to 
understand where we are now and how we got here. 
When  I  look  at  the  history  of  Israel's  economy,  I  see  a  considerable  success  story.  Since  the 
establishment of the State, the rate of growth has averaged 6.5 percent a year; the population has 
increased to over six million; exports have increased by 11.4 percent a year, and constitute one of 
Israel's  most  impressive  achievements.  Per  capita  income  is  close  to  the  levels  of  the  leading 
industrialized economies. 
On the monetary side, inflation is very low, and in practice price stability prevails; and the interest rate 
is at its lowest level ever. 
I could go on, but the main point is simple: Israel's economy – we - have important achievements to 
our credit which contribute to the quality of life of every Israeli and to the strengthening of the country. 
These gains were achieved despite the long-lasting dispute with our neighbors, a fact that puts the 
success in even clearer relief. 
I am delighted that present here today are several previous governors of the Bank who contributed 
importantly to Israel's economic policy, especially my friend of 35 years, Professor Jacob Frenkel, and 
Dr. David Klein. At this moment my thoughts turn also to another past governor and good friend, the 
late Professor Michael Bruno; and here I would like also to mention my teacher and friend the late 
Professor Dan Patinkin, from whom I learned so much, and who was also the teacher of other past 
governors of the Bank. 
The  modern  development  of  the  economy  was  accompanied  by  Israel's  integration  into  the  global 
economy. Initially this occurred with regard to trade in goods and services. In the last fifteen years the 
emphasis switched to international integration in the financial sphere. Today Israel is completely open 
to  capital  flows,  and  despite  the  concerns  of  several  experts,  exchange-rate  stability  has  been 
achieved. Israeli companies are very active not only in the import and export of goods and services, 
but also in the international financial markets; for example, on the US Nasdaq, Israel is in third place in 
terms of the number of companies traded. 
To describe Israel's successes is not to imply that no challenges - even problems - remain, including 
the high unemployment rate. 
The overall challenge facing us is to build on past successes in order to come closer to achieving the 
economy's full potential, to reach the standard of living of the most advanced economies. The general 
approach  is  clear:  Israel's  economy  is  part  of  the  global  economy,  and  globalization  offers  a  small 
economy such as Israel's enormous opportunities. And Israel's comparative advantage is quite clearly 
its levels of technological knowledge and human capital. 
What is required? 
As  far  as  the  Bank  of  Israel  is  concerned,  it  has  two  major  goals.  In  monetary  policy  its  role  is  to 
preserve  the  purchasing  power  of  the  sheqel,  i.e.,  to  maintain  price  stability  so  that  inflation  and 
expected inflation remain low and do not deviate from the target set by the government. 
The Bank's second main objective is to preserve the robustness of the financial system and help make 
it more efficient. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
For the Bank to be able to fulfill its functions efficiently, a new Bank of Israel Law is needed, one that 
will  preserve  the  Bank's  independence  and  provide  a  modern  legal  basis  to  its  activities. 
Independence  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  responsibility  and  with  a  system  of  public  checks  and 
balances. 
With regard to macroeconomic policy, a responsible fiscal policy is also required, one that will reduce 
the tax burden and the debt burden, while carrying out the vital positive roles of the government in the 
economy. 
In passing let me mention that in many economies there is a tradition of public dispute between the 
Treasury  and  the  central  bank.  In  this  sense  Israel  is  very  traditional.  I  sincerely  hope  that  in  this 
respect we can become a little less traditional in the future. 
In the microeconomic sphere, despite the advances made in the last few years, much remains to be 
done. The flexibility, efficiency and competitiveness of the economy - including in the financial markets 
- are not yet sufficiently strong, and much effort needs to be invested to ensure that the necessary 
reforms  are  implemented,  and  here  I  must  mention  the  important  recommendations  of  the  Bachar 
Committee. 
At  the  same  time  close  attention  must  be  focused  on  social  issues.  I  state  this  with  the  clear 
recognition that ongoing growth is the sine qua non for substantial improvements in the standard of 
living and welfare. Social policy must concentrate on dealing with the needy sections of the population, 
such as the elderly, the infirm or the disabled, while encouraging those capable of working to enter the 
labor force. 
The right economic policy is essential for the economy's ability to grow rapidly. There are, however, 
other factors outside the area of economic policy that affect growth, in particular the peace process. 
Economic  history  has  shown  that  Israel's  economy  can  grow  faster  than  the  most  advanced 
economies, even in the absence of calm in the region. But as we all know, to achieve our full potential, 
a realistic prospect of peace is needed. 
To conclude, I would like to say a few words about the path that brought Rhoda and me to this point 
and this place, the home of the President of Israel, in Jerusalem. All our lives we have understood and 
felt the importance of the existence of the State of Israel to the survival and success of the Jewish 
people. We have felt the pride that so many Jews in the world take in the successes of Israel, and also 
the disappointments that they feel when Israel does not live up to its ideals. These feelings have been 
central to our families for as long as we can remember. 
It is good and important to support Israel from outside. But the opportunity to try to contribute to the 
State  as  an  Israeli  is  even  more  meaningful.  My  appointment  is  a  privilege  and  an  honor  which  I 
appreciate to an extent that I cannot express in words, neither in Hebrew nor in English. I would like to 
thank the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance for offering me the post, and all those who helped 
us during the last few months. It is an honor and privilege to stand here as a citizen of Israel, and to 
accept,  with  great  pleasure  and  emotion,  the  leadership  of  one  of  the  country's  most  important 
institutions, as Governor of the Bank of Israel. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
