Kishori J Udeshi: Are banks serving the common man? 
Speech by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Lions Club of 
Bombay, Bombay, 26 April 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen of the Lions Club of Bombay,  
Thank you very much for giving me an opportunity to share my thoughts with you all. Only Lions would 
be courageous enough  to  listen  to  a  talk on  the  subject of  banking which  is dry  and  devoid  of  any 
humour. But if you keep in mind that banks deal with your hard-earned savings, what I have to say 
may be of interest to you. 
The Reserve Bank has been trying to discipline banks with regard to the quality of customer service 
rendered by them since 1975. You may recall, the times when we had to wait for 20-30 minutes to 
withdraw cash; at least 2 days to get a cheque book; 4 hours to get a demand draft; at least 1 week to 
get a local cheque cleared and 4-6 weeks for an outstation cheque to get cleared; to face bank staff 
who were reluctant to update your passbook on the spot and offered least information on the bank’s 
products or their banking practices. Look at today’s banking services: at the flick of the card you get 
cash from an ATM and if the ATM is in a shared network, it is even better because then you don’t 
need  to  hunt  for  your  bank’s  ATM;  if  your  bank  has  a  phone  banking  service,  you  can  get  cheque 
books delivered and cheques collected from your doorstep; a local cheque gets credited on the third 
day and an outstation cheque on the fifth day if it is covered under intercity MICR processing, but let 
me  add  that  for  both  local  and  outstation  cheques,  you  can  get  immediate  credit  if  the  amount  is 
Rs.15000/-. Banks evolve their own Board approved policy for immediate credit of local / outstation 
cheque,  timeframe  for  collection  of  local  /  outstation  cheques  and  interest  payment  for  delayed 
collection. There is no more fear of pilfered dividend and interest warrants as you can get these sums 
credited directly to your bank account; you can effect funds transfers almost instantly by EFT. Further, 
internet banking and mobile banking have completely revolutionised the way banking transactions are 
committed;  this  is  the  epitome  of  embedding  technology  with  banking  –  though  I  am  personally 
saddened by the lack of human interaction between bank personnel and their customers – now their 
customers  are  faceless  telephones  and  mobile  calls  and  clicks  of  the  mouse!  Now  it  is  not  just 
borrowers  who  choose  the  bank  which  offers  a  competitive  price  but  even  depositors  who  call  for 
tenders for placing Term Deposits! We have indeed come a long way. 
In the area of foreign exchange, almost all needs of foreign exchange can be met by banks, without 
requiring RBI’s approval. In fact now that we are so liberal we find very few takers. But we at RBI are 
constantly  reviewing  the  quality  of  service,  rendered  by  banks  in  order  to  bring  about  more 
improvements. Therefore, to address the issue of banking services to the common man in particular, 
RBI recently appointed a Committee, styled as Committee for Procedures and Performance Audit of 
Public Services (CPPAPS) under the Chairmanship of Shri S.S. Tarapore, a former Deputy Governor 
of RBI – some of you might be well aware of his contribution in the field of banking and finance in 
India,  especially  his  contribution  as  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Capital  Account  Convertibility  – 
which till date remains a bible for capital account convertibility. The Committee observed that there is a 
wide gap between the intent with which policies are formulated and the procedures followed by banks 
which totally derail the intent of the policy. This Committee was unique in many ways. First, it focussed 
solely on the services rendered by banks to the common man. Secondly, in its evaluation of services it 
started from the customer-end. The Committee undertook incognito visits to bank branches including 
RBI’s offices for a first hand experience of difficulties faced by the public at large. Thirdly, it observed 
that issuance of instructions by banks to its branches and their implementation at the grassroots level 
were two different things.  
The RBI has initiated action on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee. To illustrate, let 
me mention a few of them : 
• 
Let  me  begin  with  the  RBI  itself.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  a  standardised 
application form for Government of India Savings Bonds popularly known as RBI Bonds. The 
application  form  also  includes  rights  and  responsibilities  of  applicants.  It  clearly  indicates 
within how much time customer should expect the bond to be delivered to him and also to 
whom one should approach if appropriate service is not provided.  
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
   The Reserve Bank has introduced OLTAS to render more efficient tax collection. 
Banks  have  been  advised  to  review  their  existing  policies  and  procedures  with  regard  to 
delivering of cheque book over the counters, introduction of drop box facility for cheques and 
acknowledgement  of  receipts/cheques  through  regular  collection  at  branches,  issue  of 
statement of accounts at monthly intervals with details of various transactions, to provide at 
least one month’s advance information in case of any change in minimum balance in Saving 
Accounts and charges of non-maintenance thereof; etc.  
The  Committee  had  commended  the  Clean  Note  Policy  of  the  RBI  and  RBI  is  striving  to 
vigorously pursue a largely successful Clean Note Policy; 
The RBI Note Refund Rules are now in the public domain. 
Banks  are  now  required  to  have  a  Customer  Service  Committee  of  the  Board  so  that  the 
subject  gets  special  focussed  attention.  We  in  RBI  are  hopeful  that  such  an  institutional 
arrangement will go a long way in improving services of banks. 
Any  debate,  any  talk,  any  deliberations  about  the  customer  service  in  banking  would  remain 
incomplete  without  reference  to  the  late  Shri  M.R.  Pai,  who  pioneered  the  consumer  protection 
movement in the banking sector. His contribution through the All India Bank Depositors Association in 
educating  bank  depositors  is  path  breaking.  I  quote  Shri  Pai’s  words,  “the  biggest  asset  on  the 
balance sheet of banks today is the ignorance of customers of their rights and their reluctance to fight 
for them”.  
On conceptual ground quality of service is two dimensional. First dimension is the technical quality and 
the  other  is  the  functional  quality.  Technical  quality  depends  on  the  contents  of  the  service,  i.e., 
authenticity  of  the  service,  if  the  information  given  to  the  customer  is  technically  correct  or  not  and 
frequency of information dissemination, while the functional quality deals with how service is rendered. 
This in common parlance is “Service with a Smile”. It would appear that banking services in India need 
to improve on both counts. Often customers do not get correct information in banks and more often a 
customer gets service as if he was being obliged. 
Banking  services  are  unique  in  the  sense  that  diverse  customers  have  multi  facet  needs  and, 
therefore, benchmarking of banking services becomes a difficult task. No doubt, a system of Citizens’ 
Charter  has  been  introduced  in  various  banks  but  this  only  deals  with  the  time  limit  within  which  a 
service would be rendered to the customers. This does not assure quality of service. 
Indian  Banks’  Association  (IBA)  has  also  played  a  complementary  role  in  efforts  for  improving 
customer service in banks. Last year, with RBI initiative IBA has come out with a model Fair Practices 
Code. The Code is a public document that enlists what all a customer can expect from his bank. It also 
indicates the responsibilities of banks while giving different kinds of banking services. IBA has further 
come out with a Model Deposit Policy as each bank is adopting its own policy. The purpose of the 
policy is that banks should deliver to depositors what they had promised at the time of taking deposit. 
It is after all depositors’ money that banks primarily use for lending and further their banking activity. 
Therefore, in the real sense it is the depositor who is the true and real owner of the bank rather than 
the shareholder. 
Any  customer  of  a  bank  whose  grievance  with  reference  to  deficiency  in  banking  service  is  not 
addressed to his/her satisfaction by the bank can approach the Banking Ombudsman within a period 
of two months. The deficiencies that are covered include a variety of banking services, such as, non-
payment/inordinate delay in the payment or collection of cheques, drafts, bills, non-issue of drafts to 
customers,  non-adherence  to  prescribed  working  hours  by  branches  etc.  Banking  Ombudsman 
functions as an arbitrator in respect of any dispute with mutual consent of both the parties provided 
that the value of the claim in such dispute does not exceed Rupees ten lakh. Banking Ombudsmen 
have been appointed at 15 centres covering all States and Union Territories in India.  
There are equally important issues that most of us are concerned with which, while the regulator tries 
to address, we, as citizens, also should be aware of our own rights in the matters, such as: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Intrusion of privacy. 
Anti-tying. 
Collection of unnecessary information for commercial reasons. 
Negligence with reference to customer data. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
Credit card charges. 
Changes of interest rates and charges and fine print. 
Death of depositor. 
Appointment of recovery agents who are questionable practitioners.  
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
The Lions Club has been involved in many social projects and today in arranging this talk it has helped 
in spreading the awareness of rights and responsibilities of a bank customer. Let me end by saying 
that the Reserve Bank will continue to strive in its efforts to get banks to provide efficient and quality 
customer services and would welcome any suggestions for improvement.  
BIS Review 31/2005 
 3
