Peter Pang: Hong Kong’s retail bond issues 
Opening remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the signing ceremony for the retail bond issue under HKMC’s retail bond issuance programme, Hong 
Kong, 18 July 2005. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation, I welcome you all to this signing ceremony for the 
retail bond to be offered to the public tomorrow. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  since  the  introduction  of  the  current  offering  mechanism  through  placing 
banks in October 2001, HKMC retail bonds have been warmly welcomed by retail investors. So far, we 
have issued seven retail bonds for a total amount of HK$10.4 billion. 
The success of the Mortgage Corporation’s debt issues has been attributed to its high credit ratings 
(which are the same as those of the Hong Kong SAR Government) and to the wide range of notes, 
which can meet the different investment needs of retail investors. 
The upcoming issue has both Hong Kong Dollar and US Dollar denominated notes. This is the first 
time that the HKMC issues US Dollar notes. Apart from diversifying its funding sources, the HKMC’s 
issuance  of  USD  retail  bonds  also  serves  to  provide  an  additional  investment  channel  for  retail 
investors  in  Hong  Kong.  The  minimum  subscription  amount  for  our  USD  bonds  is  only  US$5,000, 
setting a reasonable threshold to make our debt accessible to a large segment of retail investors. 
This move by the HKMC to issue USD denominated bonds fits very well into the efforts by the Hong 
Kong Monetary Authority to promote the development of a safe and efficient financial infrastructure for 
Hong Kong, based on a multi-currency, multi-dimensional platform. 
In Hong Kong’s banking system, we have around HK$2 trillion in HK Dollar deposits. Our banks also 
have the equivalent of over HK$1.8 trillion in foreign currency deposits. About 70% or US$164 billion 
are US Dollar deposits. 
The loan-to-deposit ratio for Hong Kong Dollar deposits is 87%; the equivalent for US Dollar is only 
around 26%. We reckon that a significant portion of the sizable US Dollar deposits is held by retail 
investors and some would wish to diversify and look for investment products to increase their return. 
One  could  of  course  look  for  opportunities  overseas  but,  as  an  international  financial  centre,  Hong 
Kong should also try to provide more such investment products locally. 
In the past there have been very few local issues of US Dollar retail bonds, and the most recent one 
appears  to  have  been  issued  as  far  back  as  in  September  2003.  Today’s  HKMC  US  Dollar  bond 
issuance would help to meet part of such investment demand. Perhaps in times to come there will be 
more foreign currency bond issuance in Hong Kong. This bond issuance would add to the diversity of 
financial intermediation channels and complement the HKMA’s effort to promote the development of a 
multi-currency, multi-dimensional financial system in Hong Kong. 
Finally, I am pleased to see many old friends of the HKMC supporting this new issue. I would like to 
thank the HSBC and Bank of China (Hong Kong) for underwriting a portion of the bond issue as well 
as  placing  the  notes.  Taking  this  opportunity,  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  other  placing  banks, 
namely, Bank of America (Asia), Bank of Communications, Bank of East Asia, Chiyu Bank, CITIC Ka 
Wah Bank, Dah Sing Bank, DBS Bank, Hang Seng Bank, Fubon Bank (Hong Kong), Liu Chong Hing 
Bank,  Nanyang  Commercial  Bank,  Shanghai  Commercial  Bank,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  (Hong 
Kong), Wing Hang Bank and Wing Lung Bank, for their participation in this bond issue. 
With their extensive branch networks, and sophisticated telephone banking and the Internet banking 
facility, I look forward to another successful retail bond issue by the HKMC. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 55/2005 
 1
