John Hurley: Some perspectives on Ireland’s and Europe’s economic 
performance 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
to the Cork Chamber of Commerce Business Breakfast, Cork, 28 January 2005. 
 Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to speak to you today. I should first of all like to wish you every success in 
your  year  as  the  European  Capital  of  Culture.  The  formal  launch  of  this  on  8  January  was  a  most 
impressive spectacle. 
Like many other areas of the country and, indeed, like the country as a whole, Cork has witnessed a 
great economic transformation over the past decade or two. The Cork area is now widely known for its 
thriving chemicals and pharmaceuticals sector and other high technology businesses. Of course, the 
county of Cork continues to be a major producer of agricultural products and this broad sector has 
adjusted well to changing circumstances. The great modernisation of infrastructure in the Cork region 
is also a clear indicator of very impressive progress. 
Irish economic growth 
The Irish economy’s performance over the past decade or so has been very satisfactory. The annual 
average growth in Gross National Product, the best measure of our living standards, has been about 
6½ per cent a year. This excellent performance has brought our living standards up to those of other 
developed countries. On a Gross Domestic Product basis, our living standards would be among the 
highest in the world. However, this is a not a true measure of our living standards, since a significant 
part  of  our GDP  is repatriated  overseas.  This  reflects  the  relatively  large  presence of  multi-national 
companies in the Irish economy compared with elsewhere. When based on GNP, our living standards 
are  slightly  above  the  European  average  and  rank  sixth,  for  example,  among  the  twelve  euro  area 
countries. 
Economic growth results from increased employment and productivity growth. During the past decade 
or so, we boosted our employment rate substantially. As a proportion of the working age population, 
the employment rate increased by about a third from around 50 per cent to the present rate of 66 per 
cent. This has been a major achievement. Ireland’s principal economic problem in the past has been 
our inability to provide employment for a sufficiently large fraction of the population. As a result, we 
suffered  from  large-scale  involuntary  emigration.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that,  as  recently  as  the  early 
1990s, our unemployment rate was in the 15 to 16 per cent range.  
Our  excellent  employment  performance  has  enabled  us  to  reduce  unemployment  to  its  current  low 
rate of 4½ per cent. This provided greatly enhanced employment opportunities for those who had not 
been in the work force before. It facilitated the employment of a continuing movement of labour out of 
the  agricultural  sector.  It  also  supplied  off-farm  income  opportunities  for  farmers.  Immigrants,  both 
returned  Irish  and  others,  were  readily  absorbed.  Over  the  past  decade  or  so,  employment  has 
increased by about 50 per cent - around 4 per cent a year. Increased part-time working and a shorter 
working week reduced this annual increase in labour producing goods and services to 3 per cent. With 
regard to the second element in economic growth - productivity - our improvement, while somewhat 
less  spectacular,  is,  nonetheless,  quite  satisfactory.  The  average  annual  increase  in  productivity, 
calculated  on  a  GNP  basis,  was  about  3½  per  cent.  This  was  a  good  performance  compared  with 
most  industrial  countries;  for  example,  the  corresponding  figure  for  the  euro  area  was  only  about 
1¼ per cent per cent a year. 
It is clear, looking ahead, that it would be unrealistic to expect a continuation of the growth rates of the 
past decade, particularly the more than 8 per cent GNP growth rate in the Celtic Tiger period between 
1994 and 2000. The reason for this is that we have largely absorbed into employment those who in 
the  past  were  either  unable  to  find  employment  or  were  discouraged  from  seeking  employment  by 
apparently poor job prospects.  
BIS Review 6/2005 
 1
However,  there  is  still  some  scope  for  raising  our  employment  rate.  For  example,  there  is  still  a 
significant gap between Ireland’s employment rate and that of Scandinavian countries and the US; the 
employment rate in the US is about 71 per cent compared with 66 per cent for Ireland. Apart from 
raising  the  employment  rate  to  such  a  level,  the  potential  growth  in  employment  depends  on  the 
natural increase in the labour force and the level of immigration. This would permit employment growth 
of the order of 2 to 2½ per cent in the coming years. 
Both economic analysis and international experience show that productivity growth is determined by 
increased capital per worker and technical progress. The advance of technology was seen in the past 
as developing generally in response to influences that were outside the scope of economic policies. 
More recent insights into economic growth processes show that the advance of technical progress can 
be aided by sound, purposive policies. It is now widely accepted that an environment that is favourable 
to investment and innovation promotes growth. Both economic theory and experience make it clear 
that  such  an  environment  requires  two  elements  -  a  stable  macroeconomic  setting  and  a 
well-functioning market economy. 
In the macroeconomic sphere, it is clear that a framework of price stability and sound public finances 
provides  the  best  basis  for  growth.  As  a  central  banker,  I  would  place  major  emphasis  on  the 
importance of price stability. Our inflation rate is currently running at about 2¼ per cent a year. After a 
long  period  of  relatively  low  inflation,  we  may  have  forgotten  its  importance  for  economic  progress. 
High inflation results in high nominal interest rates, and, from an economic growth and development 
perspective, it is detrimental to long-term investment. It also erodes the real value of fixed incomes. 
These are just a few examples of the distortions and inefficiencies caused by inflation. It is now well 
established  and,  I  think,  very  widely  accepted,  that  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  good 
economic performance. That is why the European Central Bank and, indeed, central banks generally 
attach so much importance to ensuring price stability.  
Fiscal policy is also a major element of macroeconomic policy. We know from our own experience that 
sound fiscal policy minimises the risk of overheating and inflation. It also limits the pressure that could 
otherwise  be  placed  on  the  monetary  authorities  to  maintain  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment. 
Sound fiscal policy also enables the tax burden to be kept to a reasonable level. An important aspect 
is  that  it  leaves  Government  in  a  better  position  to  finance  the  investment  in  infrastructure  that  is 
necessary  for  economic  growth.  All  things  considered,  Ireland  has  done  generally  well  in  the 
macroeconomic area - both in terms of inflation and fiscal policy - over the past decade or so, and this 
has undoubtedly contributed greatly to our good economic performance. 
Complementary to macroeconomic stability, well-functioning markets are also a pre-requisite for good 
economic  performance.  This  boils  down  in  practice  to  the  need  to  ensure  that  product,  labour  and 
financial  markets  are  characterised  by  competition and  that  they  are  adaptable  and  flexible.  A  very 
important aspect of this is to ensure that the forces of competition can operate effectively. Where this 
is not the case, firms produce less than with the presence of competition and prices will be higher. The 
absence of competition in sectors of the economy also tends to induce complacency in incumbents. 
This leads to a lack of dynamism and slowness to embrace innovation, which represents a drag on 
economic performance and, in particular, on productivity growth. 
The European dimension 
Before  I  address  these  issues  in  some  more  detail,  I  think  it  is  useful  to  put  them  in  a  European 
context.  What  is  most  relevant  here  is  the  Lisbon  Agenda.  This  has  been  focussed  on  improving 
economic performance in Europe over the past few years. It has been motivated by Europe’s generally 
poor  record,  apart  from  a  few  countries  including  Ireland,  in  regard  to  both  employment  and 
productivity growth. Moreover, in recent years, the growth performance of the European economy has 
been disappointing, with the economic upturn in Europe much weaker than in the US and Asia.  
The longer term trend is also worrying - the European economy has grown less quickly than the US 
over the last decade, during which time Europe has moved from having a higher rate of productivity 
growth than the US, to a lower one. The problem, however, is not simply the comparison with the US - 
productivity growth in Europe has deteriorated with respect to its own past. The net result has been a 
slowdown in the rate of growth of output per head, the main determinant of living standards. Relative 
to the US, in terms of the improvement in living standards, Europe is now losing ground. 
These  developments  have  raised  questions  as  to  whether  Europe’s  economic  structures  are  less 
favourable for economic growth. In particular, it would appear that structural rigidities have meant that 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2005
the European economy has been slow to adapt to the increasing pressures of globalisation and rapid 
technological change. International competition is intensifying and Europe faces a dual challenge from 
the US and Asia. For Europe to prosper, it needs to have an appropriate economic base, recognising 
that in the decades ahead competition in global markets is going to be intense.  
It was for these reasons that, in Lisbon in March 2000, the then 15 EU leaders agreed that the EU 
should  commit  to  raising  the  rate  of  economic  growth  and  employment.  In  the  Lisbon  strategy 
European  leaders  committed  the  EU  to  become  by  2010  “the  most  dynamic  and  competitive 
knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better 
jobs”. However, so far, progress in achieving the Lisbon objectives has been poor. There are various 
reasons for this. In terms of the economic environment, the last four years have not been helpful to the 
chances  of  achieving  the  Lisbon  goals.  Many  countries  have  found  themselves  in  a  dilemma  - 
because of structural weakness and weak demand, national economic performance has been poor. As 
national  economic  performance  has  been  poor,  it  has  been  more  difficult  to  implement  the  Lisbon 
agenda.  
However, the problems in delivering on Lisbon objectives have not been solely or even largely due to 
outside circumstances. There is the problem that the strategy itself has become too broad. In order to 
improve the chances of achieving the Lisbon objectives, the coherence and consistency of structural 
reform policies need to be improved, as does the process of delivery. Success of the reform agenda is 
essential if Europe is to generate more growth and more employment in an environment of increasing 
global competition, population ageing and enlargement. 
In keeping with the principle of subsidiarity in the EU, it is the responsibility of each country to take the 
structural reform measures to improve its economic performance. However, it is clear at the half-way 
stage of the ten year period for the Lisbon Agenda that, across Europe in general, progress has been 
very poor. With the new EU Commission, steps are being taken to relaunch the Agenda, and this is 
now underway. It seems likely that this will involve a more focused approach with a clearer statement 
of where responsibilities lie for making progress.  
Ireland and the Lisbon Agenda 
While, as I have indicated, progress with the Lisbon Agenda has been very poor across Europe as a 
whole, particularly in the larger continental countries, Ireland’s record has been relatively good. It may 
be useful to consider in broad terms some of the major structural reform issues in the Lisbon Agenda, 
and to briefly assess how Ireland has performed.  
Promoting the knowledge economy 
The  objective  in  relation  to  the  knowledge  economy  is  to  adopt  policies  that  promote  research  and 
development  and  the  application  of  information  technology  and  innovation  generally  with  a  view  to 
improving  productivity  and  growth.  While  there  is  a  role  for  direct  participation  by  Government 
agencies in research and development activities, it can arguably best facilitate private R&D activities 
by creating the appropriate framework conditions for such activities. In particular, the strengthening of 
academic-industry  links  and  ensuring  adequate  intellectual  property  rights  are  important.  Most 
Governments, including our own, are conscious of the need to distinguish between inputs and outputs 
in this regard. A careful evaluation of the effectiveness of schemes is necessary. Foreign investment 
inflows can be an important and efficient channel for disseminating new technologies, and Ireland has 
benefited significantly from this. It is also necessary to ensure that an adequate skilled workforce is 
available both to conduct research work and to apply the new technologies. In particular, an adequate 
supply of scientists and engineers is of fundamental importance. On most counts, Ireland has done 
well in this broad area. The data show, however, that private R&D activities are conducted on a fairly 
modest scale here, and would need to be stepped up. 
Ensuring more competition 
In recent years, more competition has been evident in the economy. Being a very open economy has 
meant that Ireland is very much affected by international competitive forces. The EU internal market 
and the wide range of measures taken to implement it are a strong influence. At home, the powers of 
the  Competition  Authority  have  been  strengthened  and  it  has  been  quite  active  and  effective  in 
pursuing its agenda. Nonetheless, there is scope for considerable progress.  
BIS Review 6/2005 
 3
There are a number of areas, common to Ireland and a large number of other European countries, 
where such progress could be made. The National Competitiveness Council has drawn attention to 
our  very  high  utilities’  prices  in  its  reports.  Because  of  their  structure  and  characteristics,  utilities 
sectors  are  highly  concentrated,  and  their  operations  must  be  subject  to  special  competition  and 
regulatory  arrangements.  We  also  have  a  long  way  to  go  in  introducing  more  competition  to  the 
services area generally. In its assessment of Ireland’s progress with the EU’s Broad Economic Policy 
Guidelines, the EU Commission has drawn attention to the need to foster competition in professional 
services,  retail  distribution  and  insurance.  There  still  are  significant  barriers  to  entry  in  many 
professional services in particular, and, as a consequence, prices here are very high by international 
standards.  
Fostering entrepreneurship 
A  dynamic  economy  requires  an  environment  that  is  supportive  of  entrepreneurship.  There  are  a 
number  of  aspects  to  this.  At  one  level,  the  administrative  burden  of  establishing  and  running  a 
business  should  be  kept  to  a  minimum;  “red  tape”  should  be  eliminated  where  possible.  Where 
necessary, public sector efficiency should be improved. Educational policies should be supportive of 
entrepreneurship, and there may be a need to improve access to finance. Ireland would seem to score 
well in this area. Although there is, no doubt, always room for improvement, the OECD has confirmed 
that the regulatory burden on business in Ireland is low. There is also the fact that our business taxes 
are  low  by  international  standards.  The  expansion  of  the  economy,  new  business  start-ups  and 
employment growth are indicative of our positive performance in this area. 
Promoting employment and greater social cohesion  
The EU ECOFIN Council last year emphasised the importance of a number of labour market reforms. 
These  highlighted  the  need  for  greater  flexibility  of  labour  markets,  to  adapt  employment  protection 
where  necessary  to  improve  employability,  and  to  adapt  tax  and  benefit  systems  to  improve  work 
incentives.  It  was  recognised  that  employment  was  the  best  way  to  ensure  social  inclusion.  Wage 
flexibility and adequate infrastructure were seen as desirable for coping with regional differences, and 
the social partners were urged to balance the interests of both insiders - the employed - and outsiders 
- the unemployed.  
In general, Ireland performs well against these recommendations. This is evident from our very good 
labour market record in the face of general economic weakness in the past few years.  
Ensuring long-term sustainability of the public finances 
The fifth and final area that I would mention in regard to the Lisbon Agenda is the issue of pensions 
and  the  related  risks  that  this  may  pose  for  the  public  finances  in  the  years  ahead.  If  appropriate 
measures for dealing with this are not taken in good time, there could be very substantial additional 
claims  on  the  public  finances  as  well  as  the  risk  of  pensions  being  inadequate  for  a  significant 
proportion of pensioners. All European countries are going to experience a substantial ageing of the 
population over the next twenty to thirty years. There will be more elderly people and fewer people of 
working  age.  There  is  a  three-pronged  approach  for  dealing  with  this:  increasing  employment  rates 
and  improving  productivity  performance,  reducing  public  debt  before  the  problem  becomes  less 
manageable and, thirdly, reforming pension systems. Governments are currently grappling with these 
big  issues.  In  our  own  case,  we  are  relatively  well  placed  for  coping  with  these  issues.  Firstly,  the 
ageing of our population is relatively limited compared with countries like Italy and Spain. Secondly, 
some provision for public pensions is being made through building up the National Pension Reserve 
Fund by setting aside each year 1 per cent of Gross National Product.  
In addition, our economic growth potential is good relative to many other countries, and this increases 
the capacity for dealing with the issue. Nonetheless, there is no scope for complacency for a number 
of reasons. First, about 40 per cent of the workforce, comprising nearly half of private sector workers, 
is at present not covered by an employment-related pension or an individual pension. Those not so 
covered  will  be  reliant  on  the  state  pension,  which  provides  a  basic  level  of  retirement  income.  A 
recent estimate of the Minister for Social, Community and Family Affairs indicated that only about one 
quarter of private sector workers have near-adequate pensions. Consequently, the whole issue must 
and is being kept under review to ensure that we are in a strong position to deal with the ageing of the 
population. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2005
Conclusion 
The  Irish  economy  has  performed  very  well  over  the  past  decade  or  so.  Our  living  standards  have 
caught  up  with  those  of  other  advanced  countries.  This  convergence  was  telescoped  into  the  past 
decade, whereas other developed countries raised their living standards over a much more prolonged 
period since the Second World War. One result of this more concentrated convergence process has 
been pressure on the country’s infrastructure. This is currently being addressed in a very substantive 
way, although it is not something that can be done overnight. 
Of course, our economic progress has not been without its ups and downs. We were affected quite 
significantly by the downturn in the Information Technology sector in 2001, for example, and by the 
variations in oil prices and exchange rates. At the same time, we have experienced a rate of business 
closures and layoffs that is an inevitable, if sometimes painful, feature of modern, open economies in 
the  light  of  changing  consumer  tastes  and  technological  change.  In  the  face  of  this,  the  important 
objective is that other opportunities are created and that the workforce is sufficiently flexible and skilled 
to be quickly re-employed. We have been quite successful at this. 
Looking ahead, we must continue to tailor our policies to promote growth and employment. We must 
ensure  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and  continue  with  our  successful  supply-side  policies 
and structural reform. This will leave us well placed to deal with the inevitable unforeseen shocks that 
will arise. It is also important that we are realistic in our expectations, whether in regard to incomes or 
what we expect to be delivered by way of public services. At present, while our inflation rate is low, our 
price levels are high relative to those of most European countries, so that it is especially important that 
we  do  not  exacerbate  this.  If  we  remain  conscious  of  this  and  continue  with  the  generally  sound 
policies that have delivered such good results over the past decade, there is no reason why we should 
not be optimistic about our future economic prospects.  
However,  I  have  to  add  a  few  important  caveats  regarding  future  prospects.  First,  on  the  domestic 
front, developments in house prices and the rapid increase in mortgage credit pose some concerns. I 
continue to believe, however, that a soft landing in this market is the most likely scenario, although 
there is no room for complacency. Secondly, as a very open economy, we are vulnerable to adverse 
developments in the global economy. The biggest risk is a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances, 
especially the twin deficits in the US. If this were to occur, we could experience a rapid decline in the 
US dollar and a sharp euro appreciation, which would impinge on our competitiveness. The other main 
external risks are developments in energy markets and the uncertain geopolitical situation. 
To conclude, I feel that our main challenge is to maintain international competitiveness so that we can 
continue to ensure sustainable economic growth over the medium- to long-term. 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 5
