Axel A Weber: Challenges to convergence in the larger EU  
Statement  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Conference 
“Governance and Structure of European Finance after EU Enlargement”, Frankfurt, 9 March 2005.  
 Introduction  
1  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  important  conference.  In  fact,  all  three  roundtable  topics  highlight 
major aspects of the further integration of the European economies, of progress in terms of the Lisbon 
Agenda and, ultimately, of successful enlargement of monetary union.  
EU  enlargement  last  year  was,  above  all,  an  administrative  and  political  challenge.  The  economic 
challenge of the EMU enlargement still remains to be tackled.  
European monetary union may be seen as a unique economic experiment surpassed, in terms of its 
historical importance, only by a handful of reforms.  
One  such  reform  project  which  is  of  even  greater  historical  importance  is  the  vast  international 
experiment  involving  the  simultaneous  transformation  of  more  than  30  former  centrally  planned 
economies into market economies. And now eight of them are members of the EU and are aiming to 
become members of monetary union as well.  
And it is our task as central bankers to lay the groundwork for this further historical step of monetary 
unification through growing monetary integration.  
State of convergence  
2  
At the core of our preparations is a uniform analytical framework for assessing the state of economic 
convergence.  This  framework  has  already  been  applied  to  the  current  member  states  of  the 
Eurosystem.  
The  rationale  behind  the  convergence  criteria  which  are  to  be  assessed  every  other  year  by  the 
Eurosystem  is  that  countries  may  join  the  euro  area  only  if  their  participation  is  conducive  to  the 
maintenance of price stability and the viability of EMU. The convergence criteria form a coherent and 
integrated whole, so all of them must be met.  
Looking  at  nominal  convergence,  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  the  new  member  states  have  made 
considerable progress over the past few years. However, they still have a long way to go before they 
finally achieve entry into the euro area.  
None of the countries in question formally meets the exchange rate criterion of participation in ERM II 
for 2 years at the moment. Three new member states have been participating in ERM II since 28 June 
2004 on the basis of a unilateral commitment.  
The  aim  of  having  a  high  level  of  sustained  nominal  convergence  is  not  only  a  precondition  for 
entering monetary union, it is also in the interests of every individual state.  
It  will  also  remain  in  their  interests  after  entry  into  monetary  union.  We  experienced  the  positive 
momentum  generated by  the systematic  and credible  consolidation  of government  budgets  and  the 
anchoring of inflation expectations at a low level prior to monetary union.  
The new member states are just in the process of experiencing this. But the “convergence dividend” 
cannot be perpetuated by a declaration of political will. Entry into European monetary union has to be 
prepared in a credible manner.  
In  saying  that,  country-specific  differences  are  possible  and,  given  the  great  diversity  that  exists, 
necessary, too. Four of the ten new member states are practising active inflation targeting. Three are 
already members of ERM II. Two other countries are gearing their monetary policy to an exchange 
rate peg (to the euro and to a basket of currencies).  
Ultimately, the crucial need is to pursue a credible stability-oriented policy. Falling inflation rates – and 
even  falling  inflation  expectations  –  lead  to  a  growing  “convergence  dividend”  of  lower  long-term 
interest rates and greater investment certainty for enterprises.  
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
Besides  nominal  convergence,  it  is  also  important  to  assess  the  degree  of  real  convergence.  This 
covers such topics as business cycle synchronisation, the degree of trade and financial integration, 
factor mobility as displayed in wage and price flexibility, and the risk of asymmetric shocks and the 
capacity to absorb them.  
Interlinkages between monetary and fiscal policies  
3  
It is not least fiscal policy that benefits very considerably from the “convergence dividend”. Increased 
growth and a declining interest rate burden significantly widen the scope of fiscal policy action.  
Fiscal policy thus benefits directly from a stability-oriented policy. But fiscal policy can and must also 
contribute to a stability-oriented policy.  
Allow me to bring to mind the three fundamental reasons for limiting the general government deficits 
under the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
(1) 
In the long run, stable money can only exist if there are stable public finances. That applies, 
above all, to a monetary union in which the stability costs of government debt and deficits 
also have to be borne by others.  
Only budgets which are on average over the cycle balanced in surplus provide scope for the 
steadying influence of the automatic stabilisers and at the same to reduce long term debt 
levels.  
Not least, we have to counter the growing costs of government debt at an early stage. I am 
referring here to the existing explicit and implicit debt and to the fact that due account has to 
be taken of the dramatic demographic trends in an aging society. 
(2) 
(3) 
Sound fiscal consolidation contributes directly to credible macroeconomic stabilisation.  
If  we  look  at  the  new  member  states,  only  two  of  them,  in  fact,  show  a  level  of  debt  above  the 
reference value, but no fewer than six countries exceed the reference value for the budget deficit.  
On  top  of  this  we  have  wittnessed  a  marked  expansion  of  the  level  of  public  debt  in  most  of  the 
countries over the past eight years. If the current overall and primary deficit ratios were maintained, 
the two high debt new member countries referred to above would move even further away from the 
60% reference value. Three others would break the ceiling very soon. In the case of the remaining 
new member countries a continuation of the present deficit ratios would lead to a further rise in the 
debt ratio, even so they are today still comfortably below the reference value.  
It should also be pointed out that, on average, the new member states already maintain quite sizeable 
public sectors in relation to their levels of income. Possible pressure for additional government activity, 
given growing prosperity, would be likely to run counter to the countries’ stability policy needs.  
But we do not want to abandon hope. History, especially economic history, is an open process. Over 
the past 15 years, the new member states have achieved remarkable reforms. Even now, they are 
benefiting  quite  considerably  from  the  “convergence  dividend”,  which  is  based,  not  least,  on  the 
expectations of the international financial markets that with the prospect of joining EMU long run price 
stability can be achieved.  
It is all the more regrettable that some of the existing members of monetary union are tending to set a 
bad example in terms of government deficits. Not only are they breaking the rules: even worse, having 
broken the rules, they now want the rules to be modified so that they can exonerate themselves.  
This  development  may  have  a  knock-on  effect  on  monetary  union’s  image  and  its  credibility  by 
undermining its institutional framework. EMU member states are about to risk the unexpected fiscal 
consolidation success of the convergence process in the years leading up to monetary union.  
As you all know the ongoing discussions about the Stability and Growth Pact are reaching their final 
stage  in  these  days.  The head  of states  and governments  and  the  finance  ministers  of  the  EU  are 
planning  to  finalise  the  so  called  "reform  package"  until  the  end  of  this  month.  In  my  view  the 
discussions  need  to  be  brought  to  a  convincing  conclusion  with  an  outcome  that  safeguards  fiscal 
discipline.  
I do not want to comment on the ever changing proposals that have been circulated in Brussels during 
the  last  days.  But  let  me  emphasise  that  the  Governing  Council  takes  note  of  the  assessment  of 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
ministers  that  the  preventive  arm  of  the  pact  and  the  governance  structure  of  the  pact  could  be 
strengthened. The implementation of changes in the preventive arm, however, needs to remain clear 
and transparent so as to preserve fiscal discipline and equal treatment across countries.  
The  Governing  Council  is  concerned  about  the  changes  to  the  corrective  arm.  By  allowing  a  more 
lenient implementation of the Excessive Deficit Procedure, there is a risk that the 3% nominal deficit 
limit will be diluted. This could undermine confidence in sound public finance in the euro area Member 
States. The credibility of the excessive deficit procedure needs to be fully preserved. It is essential that 
Member  States  pursue  fiscal  policies  that  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public  finances.  The  fiscal 
framework enshrined in the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact is a cornerstone of Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  and  thus  key  for  anchoring  expectations  of  fiscal  discipline.  It  must  be 
maintained.  
The  public can  be  assured  that  the  Governing  Council  remains staunchly  committed  to  maintaining 
price stability.  
General challenges ahead  
4  
I  hope  that  the  new  member  states  will  not  be  perturbed  by  this.  They  must  not  weaken  in  their 
convergence  efforts.  As  positive  as  the  impact  of  the  “convergence  dividend”  is  (reinforced  by  the 
convergence  expectations),  it  should  be  absolutely  clear  to  new  member  states  that  a  divergence 
penalty reflecting divergence expectations and the fear of fiscal laxity would have an equally negative 
and devastating impact on economic performance.  
There are considerable challenges facing the new member states in the non-fiscal sector, too.  
Inflation rates will probably be put under upward pressure by the Balassa-Samuelson effect owing to 
the process of catching-up with the other member states and by further convergence of administered 
prices to market levels.  
Macroeconomic  instabilities  may  also  result  from  the  high  level  of  unemployment,  which  is  largely 
structural,  as  well  as  high  and  rising  unit  labour  costs.  These  factors  deserve  attention  since  the 
sustainability  of  the  process  of  convergence  hinges  on  a  sound  starting  position  and  the  policies 
pursued thereafter, which both influences the sustainability assessment of current policies.  
In this context, let me briefly mention exchange rate policies. ERM II lends credibility to new member 
countries  owing  to  the  implied  protection  of  the  Eurosystem.  However,  vulnerabilities  for  the  new 
member states remain.  These  stem  mainly  from  rapid  credit  growth,  the  large  debt denominated  in 
foreign  currencies,  the  current  account  deficits  and  the  rapid  worsening  of  their  international 
investment position. Therefore, in tackling exchange rate risks, new member states should be keen to 
ensure sound public finances, stable financial systems, and macroeconomic stability.  
Summing up,  I  would  like to  point out  that  successfully  coping with  the  growing  diversity of  the  EU 
economy  after  enlargement  requires  that  monetary,  fiscal  and  economic  policy fulfil  their  respective 
tasks. To my mind, the large burden of public finances and the excessive deficits deserve our special 
attention and decisive action by fiscal authorities.  
Countries inside and outside EMU must adhere to the Stability and Growth Pact. I do hope that the 
continuing fiscal laxity and reluctance to undertake structural reforms in the current euro area will not 
undermine the discipline needed for convergence in the hitherto successful new member states.  
BIS Review 15/2005 
 3
