Joseph Yam: Can the euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation? 
Remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the keynote 
discussion:  “The  euro:  a  stabilising  factor  of  the  international  monetary  system.  Can  the  euro  be  a 
benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation?” before the Paris Europlace Financial Forum: the euro 
markets in a global investment strategy, Hong Kong, 21 March 2005. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here this morning to take part in this keynote discussion on the euro hosted 
by  Paris  Europlace.  One  of  the  great  benefits  of  living  in  an  international  financial  centre  is  the 
opportunity to share something of the life and culture of other parts of the world without leaving one's 
own city. We have always been fortunate in Hong Kong in our enjoyment of the fruits of European - 
and  particularly  French  -  civilisation.  We  are  currently  enjoying,  as  part  of  "The  Year  of  France  in 
China", the superb Impressionism exhibition at the Hong Kong Museum of Art: together with all of the 
excellent performances in our international Arts Festival, and the growing popularity of al fresco dining, 
this is helping to create a very European atmosphere in Hong Kong this spring. And, from what I see 
on  the  streets,  I  do  not  get  the  impression  that  the  strong  euro  is  having  any  effect  on  sales  of 
European fashion.  
Today's forum therefore seems to fit in very well with the European spirit now sweeping Hong Kong, 
and  I  congratulate  the  organisers  on  putting  together  a  very  lively  and  topical  programme.  It  is  a 
particular pleasure to be presenting together with Christian Noyer, Governor of the Banque de France. 
He has made some very thoughtful remarks on the first question for discussion. I intend to comment 
on the second question: "Can the euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation?"  
But  before  I  address  this  question,  we  need  to  ask  another  question:  how  ready  is  Asia  for  closer 
monetary  co-operation?  We  are,  I  think,  all  aware  of  the  considerable  differences  in  the  political 
systems, the cultures, the historical backgrounds, and the economic, financial and monetary systems 
of the countries in this region. I think it is largely accepted that these differences are greater than the 
differences between the various economies that make up the euro zone. Nevertheless, it is important 
not to overstate them. Nor should we overlook the regional integration already in progress in the trade, 
financial and monetary spheres. Let me briefly outline these three forms of integration.  
About half of total trade in the Asia region is intra-regional trade. Trade integration has been largely 
market-driven,  and  the  process  has  stimulated  the  signing  of  various  free  trade  agreements,  which 
will, in turn, encourage further trade integration in the region. Now it is true that slightly over half of 
trade within non-Japan Asia is processing trade geared towards meeting import demand outside of the 
region,  in  particular  in  the  developed  economies.  But  this  reliance  on  demand  from  the  developed 
economies  has  been  decreasing,  and  is  likely  to  continue  to  decrease.  Trade  integration within  the 
region is therefore likely to grow.  
Financial  integration  in  the  region  shows  a  more  mixed  picture,  and  can  be  said  to  be  high  or  low 
depending on what exactly is meant by financial integration, which is not at all clear. In terms of foreign 
direct investment, the degree of regional integration seems high if we look at the available figures on 
the  sources  and  destinations  of  FDI  within  the  region.  The  most  striking  examples  are  the  various 
economies in the region as a source of FDI for China, and as destinations for FDI from Japan. But in 
terms of financial intermediation within the region - meaning the flow of savings into investments, other 
than FDI, through the banking, debt and equity channels - the degree of financial integration is not 
high  at  all.  The  very  substantial,  and  growing,  volume  of  domestic  savings invested  overseas  goes 
mainly, on a gross basis, to the developed rather than the regional markets. There is, of course, traffic 
in the other direction, but this is of a much more volatile, potent, demanding, and at times predatory 
nature, and it can sometimes - as we saw in the late 1990s - be difficult to cope with, to put it mildly.  
There  is  now  a  common  desire  among  economies  within  the  region  to  reduce  dependence  on  the 
recycling  of  domestic  savings  through  the  developed  markets,  and  therefore  reduce  vulnerability  to 
financial  shocks,  by  promoting  greater  regional  financial  intermediation.  A  number  of  regional 
initiatives  are  being  implemented,  the  most  notable  of  which  is  the  Asian  Bond  Fund  project,  a 
collective initiative of 11 central banks and monetary authorities to develop bond markets in the region. 
A  great  deal  of  emphasis  is  also  being  placed  on  getting  one's  own  house  in  order,  by  practising 
sound macro-economic policies and building robust institutions. Some attempts have been made at 
financial infrastructure integration: in Hong Kong, in particular, we have been operating US dollar and 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
euro clearing systems and opening linkages with other jurisdictions and international systems. But it 
has to be said that, so far, these facilities have been serving domestic needs far more than regional 
needs. This is, I think, a reflection of the rather moderate level of financial system integration in the 
region. To take banking as an illustration, there may well be quite considerable integration across the 
borders of immediate neighbours: between Hong Kong and Mainland China, for example, or between 
New Zealand and Australia. But, for the region as a whole, this kind of integration is less striking than 
the presence of banks from the developed markets. For example, the number of US and European 
banks in Hong Kong roughly equals that of banks from the region. Similar observations may be made 
about the equity markets.  
In declining order, we now come to monetary integration. There have, in fact, been some recent efforts 
at monetary co-operation. These began in 1995 with the collection of EMEAP bilateral swap facilities 
that provide US dollar liquidity secured against US Treasury securities. In 1997 the idea of an Asian 
Monetary  Fund  was  aired,  but  it  came  to  nothing.  Then,  in  1999,  came  the  collection  of  ASEAN+3 
bilateral swap arrangements under the Chiang Mai Initiative. These cannot be said to amount to efforts 
towards  monetary  integration.  And,  in  fact,  while  ideas  may  have  been  thrown  around  from  time  to 
time,  there  has  not  really  been  any  formal  discussion  among  Asian  authorities  that  I  am  aware  of 
towards monetary union.  
Why is this the case? I think it is mainly because the obstacles to union appear to be so daunting, and 
that  the  special  considerations  that  apply  to  the  Asian  case  throw  up  so  many  difficult  questions. 
These "special considerations" are big matters, and they can be conveniently divided into three broad 
categories: economic, technical and political. Let me give a brief outline.  
The  economic  issues  concern  the  viability  of  an  Asian  monetary  union.  This  would  involve  the 
replacement of regional currencies with a single one, implying a single monetary policy for participant 
states.  A  key  concern,  therefore,  is  whether  it  would  work.  Or  whether  the  pressures  would  be  so 
intense as to make an Asian monetary union unworkable from the outset. At the heart of this question 
is the degree of real economic convergence between potential members. Using the Maastricht criteria 
as a reference point for the degree of nominal convergence among Asian economies suggests that 
Asia is far from ready to cope with a single monetary policy. In 2003 only six Asian economies were 
able to keep their budget deficits below 3% of GDP, and only five had government debt levels of less 
than 60% of GDP. Only five economies had inflation rates within 1.5% of the three economies with the 
lowest rates. As for long-term interest rates, only six had bond yields within 2% of the three economies 
with the lowest interest rates.  
Perhaps more fundamentally, the degree of real economic convergence among Asian economies is a 
lot  lower  than  it  was  between  European  economies  prior  to  the  formation  of  monetary  union.  One 
measure of this is income dispersion, in 2003, the per capita GDP of Japan was about US$34,000, 
while  that  in  the  Philippines  was  less  than  US$1,000.  Real  convergence  matters  because 
complementarity  and  similarity  in  production  and  economic  structure  reduces  the  likelihood  of 
so-called  "asymmetric"  shocks,  or  shocks  that  hit  all  member  states  in  a  different  way  calling  for 
different  monetary  policy  responses  -  something  that  is  not  possible  under  a  monetary  union.  For 
emerging  market  economies,  financial  disturbances  are  an  increasingly  prevalent  source  of 
asymmetric  shocks:  the  best  illustration  of  this  in  recent  years  is  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  and  the 
differing effects - and the variety of responses - among the economies in the region may, for some, be 
the main argument against union.  
It is tempting to conclude that the lack of nominal and real convergence among Asian economies is a 
serious  barrier  to  a  viable  Asian  monetary  union.  However,  it  has  been  suggested  that  full 
convergence is not a necessary pre-requisite to successful monetary union, and that the act of forming 
a monetary union will, by itself, force greater convergence among its members. As Governor Noyer 
has just said in his presentation, the introduction of the euro has increased the correlation between the 
business cycles of European economies, and has led to a more homogenous monetary transmission 
mechanism.  
While  the  lack  of  economic  convergence  among  Asian  economies  may  make  an  Asian  Monetary 
Union a more challenging prospect, it is interesting to note that quite a number of governments in this 
region have already chosen to sacrifice some monetary policy autonomy for exchange rate stability. 
Hong  Kong,  Mainland  China,  and  Malaysia  choose  to  fix  their  exchange  rates  against  an  external 
currency, the US dollar, while other regional economies operate managed floats. There are indications 
that  some  economies  are  considering  using  the  renminbi  as  a  reference  currency  in  their  currency 
regimes, although a hard peg to renminbi is still not possible until full convertibility is achieved. It might 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
also be the case that, while Asian economies are more diverse than European economies, they are 
flexible in ways that can compensate for the loss of independent monetary policy, for example, in their 
high degree of price flexibility and fast adjustment to economic shocks.  
It may seem premature to turn now to the technical issues surrounding Asian monetary union, but the 
devil is in the detail. 
The first set of technical issues involves the exchange rate arrangements themselves, including the 
transitional arrangements prior to the introduction of a single currency. For example, would Asia adopt 
a  basket  peg  or  choose  an  anchor  currency?  If  a  basket,  what  would  be  the  weights  for  individual 
currencies,  and  would  the  basket  include  external  currencies,  such  as  the  US  dollar?  If  a  regional 
currency is chosen as the anchor, in the same way that the deutschmark was effectively the anchor for 
exchange  rate  arrangements  leading  up  to  European  monetary  union, would  this be  the  yen  or  the 
renminbi?  
Alternatively, could Asia move straight to a single currency? It is increasingly argued that, in a world of 
liberalised  markets,  the  only  viable  exchange  rate  system  is  either  a  hard  peg  (like  Hong  Kong's 
Currency Board) or a free float. Soft pegs by their nature are vulnerable to self-fulfilling speculative 
attacks, as was demonstrated in Europe in 1992, Mexico in 1994-5, and Asia in 1997-8. Europe was 
able  to  move  gradually  to  a  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  with  capital  controls  prior  to  the 
introduction  of  a  single  currency.  But  the  high  degree  of  capital  mobility  in  a  number  of  key  Asian 
economies would make gradual transition in this way more difficult.  
A further set of technical issues concerns the setting up of, and mandate for, an Asian central bank. 
This would require agreement on the monetary policy objective, country representation, and decision-
making process of the central bank. Most important, the institution would need to be designed so that 
national interests are kept in check in order to deliver efficient monetary policy making at the regional 
level. The lesson from Europe is that agreement can be reached, but I have to say that the issues are 
quite daunting.  
Related  to  this  is  the  question  of  whether  Asian  governments  have  the  political  will  to  devolve 
monetary  policy  to  a  single  central  monetary  authority.  Asia  is  more  disparate  than  Europe  in  its 
political systems, and it has often been noted that there is less of a tradition of cross-border institution-
building here than there is in other regions. It is quite striking, for example, that the approach to free 
trade agreements so far has been rather piecemeal, where in Europe they have grown and developed 
from a strong and centralised common market. Indeed, one serious political obstacle that has often 
been pointed out is the lack of embryonic supranational bodies within Asia from which to launch Asian 
monetary union efforts. These disadvantages must, of course, be recognised. But, on the other hand, 
it should be remembered that European monetary union has been a unifying force - a common interest 
that has brought countries together.  
All of these "special considerations" point to the  conclusion that Asia is not yet ready to implement 
monetary union. In the process of discussing them, it may well turn out that Asian monetary union is a 
non-starter. But that does not mean that we are not yet ready to talk about monetary union. After all, it 
took Europe about half a century to move from the idea of monetary union to the reality. Despite the 
general  consensus  that  the  obstacles  to  union  in  this  region  now  are  greater  than  they  were  for 
Europe 50 years ago, I have a feeling that Asia will not take quite so long. I am not offering to make a 
bet on this, mainly because I do not think that many of us in this room will be around long enough to 
see how many years it really does take. But one reason that makes me think that Asia will not take so 
long is that we have a successful model to look to, which brings me to the main question: "Can the 
euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation?". My answer to this question is a resounding 
"yes".  The  creation  of  the  euro  has  shown  that  effective  monetary  union  can  be  achieved  in  a 
voluntary and co-operative way by countries with different economic, political and cultural traditions. 
While, as I have suggested in the discussion about  "special considerations", there may be different 
ways of achieving a similar goal in Asia, the euro provides a precedent, a point of reference, a large 
realm of experience and expertise, and - I would certainly agree - a benchmark for any enterprise in 
monetary co-operation that we might wish to embark on in this region.  
BIS Review 19/2005 
 3
