Alan Bollard: Bank regulation and supervision in New Zealand - recent and 
ongoing developments 
Address  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Australasian 
Institute of Banking and Finance, Sydney, 23 March 2005. 
 Vigilance and reinvigoration 
The  New  Zealand  economy  has  experienced  a  very  good  period  of  growth  over  the  last  ten  or  so 
years, averaging 3.4 per cent GDP growth per annum. In the last five years, with growth averaging 3.8 
per cent per annum, New Zealand has been one of the fastest growing economies in the OECD even 
ahead of Australia. New Zealand's unemployment rate is now at a multi year low of 3.6 per cent.  
The banking sector has played a significant role in this economic growth, being the main intermediator 
of peoples' savings into investment and gateway for foreign investment funds. At around 74 per cent, 
banks account for the lion's share of financial system assets in New Zealand. In comparison, banks 
account for about 50 per cent of financial system assets in Australia.  
Bank  balance  sheet  growth  has  been  exceptional  for  several  years,  dominated  by  lending  to 
households. What is pleasing to date is that the soundness of the banking sector has also remained 
intact. Banks are experiencing a period of very low loan default and strong profitability.  
However,  it  should  never  be  forgotten  that  despite  our  impressive  growth,  New  Zealand  remains  a 
small,  open,  and  indebted  economy.  We  have  also  been  benefiting  from  a  strong  terms  of  trade 
upswing, and a structural rise in households' debt appetite, neither of which will be sustained forever.  
The  potential  vulnerabilities  of  our  economy  are  reflected  in  the  banking  sector.  Over  half  of  New 
Zealand's foreign borrowings are sitting on banks' balance sheets, with New Zealand's private sector 
relative indebtedness the highest in the OECD.1 What's more, our banking sector displays amongst 
the highest levels of foreign ownership in the world - foreign banks own 98 per cent of New Zealand 
banking system assets, with 85 per cent being Australian-owned.  
Despite the benefits that foreign ownership and capital bring, these features mean that any banking 
crisis New Zealand faces is as likely to be caused by external influences as it is internal. The New 
Zealand  financial  system  is  vulnerable  to  shocks  within  the  banking  system  (such  as  the 
mismanagement of a local bank), outside of the banking system (such as a wider economic threat), as 
well as shocks in other countries, especially Australia, that may be transmitted through our banking 
system.  The  serious  mismanagement  of  an  Australian  bank,  or  a  major  shock  to  the  Australian 
economy,  could  have  serious  negative  repercussions  for  the  New  Zealand  banking  sector  and 
financial system.  
It is awareness of these potential vulnerabilities that motivates the RBNZ's vigilance, and that has led 
to a particular focus over the last couple of years in assessing and reinvigorating how we go about 
regulating and supervising banks, as well as driving trans-Tasman policy harmonisation.  
The RBNZ's responsibility to supervise banks in New Zealand is prescribed in the Reserve Bank of 
New  Zealand  Act.  This  Act  requires  us  to  use  the  powers  it  gives  to  the  Bank  to  promote  the 
soundness and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system, and to avoid significant damage to the 
financial  system  that  could  be  caused  by  the  failure  of  a  registered  bank.  For  some  time  now  the 
RBNZ has taken a three pillars approach, based on a regulatory culture of self, market and regulatory 
discipline. This approach places risk management largely in the hands of those closest to it, and lays 
responsibility for outcomes with boards of directors, management, and creditors - that is, those who 
have the most to lose from a mismanaged bank.  
The  first  pillar  is  self-regulation.  This  is  all  about  the  policies  and  structures  that  promote  effective 
governance  by  banks'  boards  of  directors,  including  effective  oversight  by  local  boards  of  the  local 
banks'  managements.  We  expect  high  standards  of  corporate  governance  from  the  boards  of  New 
Zealand  banks,  and  this  expectation  is  reinforced  by  some  quite  severe  penalties  that  could  apply 
                                                      
1   According to IIP data as at September 2004. 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
should a bank's directors fail to properly discharge their responsibilities. In the wake of the Enron-type 
corporate  governance  scandals  and  subsequent  numerous  reviews,  the  importance  of  good 
self-regulation has gained a lot more recognition recently with the passing of such legislation as the 
Sarbanes Oxley Act. In its Basel II recommendations, the Basel committee has also put a lot more 
weight on the importance of good self-regulation for ensuring bank stability than it did previously.  
The second pillar is market discipline. For many years, banks in New Zealand have been subject to 
obligations to make quite comprehensive quarterly financial and prudential disclosures to the market-
place.  These  disclosures,  combined  with  a  policy  of  not  bailing  out  failed  institutions,  help  to 
strengthen market scrutiny of banks, and the market disciplines that go with that. 
The  third  pillar  consists  of  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  requirements.  Although  our  regulatory 
framework is somewhat less intrusive than that of many countries, it nonetheless contains most of the 
standard  features,  the  centre-piece  of  which  is  the  requirement  that  banks  in  New  Zealand  be 
adequately capitalised.  
In its Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) review of the New Zealand financial system 
last year, the IMF confirmed that we have a good model for host country supervision.  
Fulfilling  the  second  element  of  our  statutory  responsibilities  -  to  avoid  significant  damage  to  the 
financial system that could be caused by the failure of a registered bank - requires the Reserve Bank 
to have a crisis management strategy. That is, we must be ready with a range of tools and options that 
would enable us to step in should a bank get into serious difficulties.  
What has reinvigoration involved? 
The Bank has been reassessing and testing each of the pillars described above, and at the same time 
putting a lot of effort into developing its crisis management capabilities. 
Maintaining and encouraging soundness and efficiency 
We strengthened the first pillar of self discipline, in the middle of last year, by implementing a policy of 
"fit and proper" review of appointees to positions as senior managers or directors of registered banks. 
Recruitment into these positions is still the sole responsibility of the banks' respective boards. The `fit 
and  proper'  policy  simply  means  that  the  Reserve  Bank  seeks  a  "negative  assurance"  when 
appointments to senior management or boards are made. In no way does this relieve boards of their 
responsibilities.  
Our  outsourcing  and  local  incorporation  policies  also  reinforce  that  a  bank's  board  must  act  in  the 
interest of the New Zealand bank. The use of parent-bank systems, tools and techniques is of course 
permitted, but only with the full understanding and ownership of the local bank and board. The local 
bank board is responsible and accountable for all aspects of bank operations 
Some  minor  changes  to  the  second  pillar  will  take  place  at  the  end  of  March  when  several 
amendments  to  our  disclosure  requirements come into  force.  The amendments  will  facilitate  banks' 
adoption of international financial reporting standards and make a number of other changes relating to 
earlier changes to banking supervision policy and the disclosure regime.  
Basel II capital requirements have led to us reassessing aspects of the third pillar. We have decided to 
increase our emphasis on harmonisation with APRA when implementing the capital requirements of 
Basel II. Banks operating in New Zealand, and meeting certain criteria, will have the option to use the 
Internal Ratings Based and Advanced Measurement Approaches to calculating regulatory capital. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  also  developing  a  framework  that  will  help  it  understand  in  more  detail  how 
banks are fulfilling their regulatory and supervisory requirements. Section 95 of the RBNZ Act gives 
the  Reserve  Bank  the  power  to  require  a  bank  to  provide  us  with  a  report  by  a  Reserve  Bank-
approved, independent person. These reviews, the cost of which will be met by the banks themselves, 
are  likely  to  investigate  such  issues  as  risk  management,  operational  systems,  and  the  nature  of 
outsourcing. We have already exercised our section 95 powers in relation to one bank's outsourcing 
arrangements. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
Crisis management 
It is very important that, when dealing with a troubled bank, the New Zealand authorities should have a 
range of options available that can prevent a wider systemic crisis. These can range from the power to 
give  directions,  through  statutory  management,  through  to  liquidation  or  a  full-blown  rescue.  To 
exercise any of these options, it is essential that the bank in question have the records, people and 
systems it needs to operate on a stand alone basis - that is, it must be a bank, not a shell of a bank.  
We are putting a considerable amount of effort into securing our ability to manage a crisis, both by 
developing the Reserve Bank's crisis management capabilities, and by ensuring that there exists the 
legal  and  practical  ability  to  continue  to  operate  a  failed  bank  via  our  local  incorporation  and 
outsourcing policies.  
Simply  stated,  our  local  incorporation  and  outsourcing  policies  require  that  systemically-important 
banks in New Zealand be incorporated locally, and that they maintain the capacity to function on a 
stand-alone  basis,  if  required.  Without  that  capacity,  there  is  a  material  risk  of  the  banking  system 
becoming dysfunctional in a banking crisis. The measures we are introducing to counter that risk have 
recently been affirmed by Standard and Poor's, who noted that they "could well enhance the strength 
of the New Zealand banking sector and its ability to withstand a period of financial stress".2 
Outsourcing  is  a  reality  in  today's  world,  where  national  borders  are  permeable  and  the  business 
environment  highly  specialised.  However,  where  systemically  important  banks  are  concerned,  the 
Reserve Bank needs to be satisfied that any outsourcing undertaken does not compromise their legal, 
operational,  or  financial  ability  to  meet  their  obligations.  Although  it  has  not  been  an  issue  to  date, 
outsourcing could well become more of an issue for Australia over the next few years.  
In  November  last  year  we  released  a  paper  for  consultation,  setting  out  the  RBNZ's  proposed 
outsourcing  policy.  We  had  already  established  principles  for  our  proposed  outsourcing  policy  and 
applied those to ANZ National Bank upon approval of its merger. The consultation paper formalised 
these principles and set out a policy framework for application to all systemic banks and some other 
categories of banks. Submissions on the discussion paper closed at the end of February and bank 
staff are currently working their way through those submissions. 
The outsourcing policy is very much outcomes-focussed, so individual banks can tailor a solution that 
best  suits  their  situation  and  needs,  while  meeting  our  requirements.  In  this  way  costs  can  be 
minimised and a level playing field maintained. We intend to work closely with banks as they go about 
implementing the policy. 
There is no doubt that banks will incur some operational costs due to the outsourcing policy. However, 
we  think  these  costs  will  be  small  and  manageable,  especially  relative  to  Australian  banks'  annual 
gross revenue, profits, and the potential costs of a bank failure, despite the claims in the media to the 
contrary.  
Much of the public debate around the outsourcing policy has focussed on direct operational costs and 
thus the relatively small loss in productive efficiency that may occur. However, there are other aspects 
to  efficiency  to  consider  also,  including  allocative  and  dynamic  responses.  For  example,  our 
outsourcing policy could lead to better capital allocation due to more local decision making capacity, 
as well as systems that are more flexible and responsive to local needs. These aspects are especially 
important for the growth of small to medium size enterprises that dominate the New Zealand business 
landscape. Such benefits could accrue to bank shareholders and customers, as well as the wider New 
Zealand economy. 
At  the  heart  of  the  Reserve  Bank's  crisis  management  work  is  the  development  of  a  crisis 
management toolkit that will provide tools, policies and procedures to guide the high-stakes decisions 
supervisors would have to make under very tight time frames.  
Crisis  management  can  be  thought  of  as  having  two  phases.  Phase  one  is  the  very  short  period, 
perhaps a day or two, immediately following the discovery that a bank is in severe distress. It involves 
decisions  around  whether  and  how  to  get  the  bank  solvent  and  operating  again.  Phase  two  is  the 
potentially lengthy subsequent period, during which it must be decided what to do with the bank over 
                                                      
2   Standard and Poor's Ratings Direct, "Robust local operations and strong parents fortify credit quality of New Zealand banks, 
despite profit moderation", 28 July 2004. 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 3
the long term. It involves decisions around the bank's value and long term ownership. It is important to 
have options for the initial phase that avoid destroying future economic value or squandering tax-payer 
money, or that ultimately reduce the options in phase two.  
Perhaps  the  most  original  of  the  tools  we  have  been  exploring  for  phase  one  is  Bank  Creditor 
Recapitalisation or BCR, which could enable the Reserve Bank to respond to a bank failure in a way 
that avoided or minimised costs to the taxpayer, while still maintaining systemic stability. Essentially, it 
involves  applying  a  "haircut"  to  depositors  and  other  creditors  to  recapitalise  the  bank,  and  then 
quickly making available to depositors the non-haircut portion of their deposits.  
BCR addresses some of the same issues as deposit insurance, which is currently receiving attention 
in  Australia,  in  that  it  quickly  restores  liquidity  for  depositors.  However,  with  BCR  the  costs  of 
imprudent risk management and monitoring are borne by depositors, management and shareholders, 
thus reinforcing the market and self-discipline that underpins our regulatory culture. 
Much has been done to advance this project, including pilot testing of some IT prepositioning at one of 
the major banks. We are confident that, from an IT technical perspective, a BCR approach is likely to 
be  feasible.  However,  substantial  work  remains  to  be  done  and  no  decision  has  yet  been  taken  to 
formally adopt it as a crisis management tool.  
Regarding the bank `work out' phase, we are developing our thinking on other failure management 
options,  such  as  good  bank/bad  bank  split,  partial  sale  of  failed  banks'  assets  and  liabilities, 
government  bail-out,  and  industry  support.  Although  these  are  well  known,  almost  garden  variety, 
options for dealing with a bank failure, putting in place the decision-making frameworks, policies and 
procedures that will facilitate effective, low cost management of a bank crisis is a big job.  
The trans-Tasman dimension 
As I made mention of at the beginning, New Zealand is very dependent on foreign capital, and the 
bulk of this foreign capital is intermediated through a predominantly Australian-owned banking sector. 
This  industry  and  geographic  concentration  of  foreign  ownership  in  one  country  makes  the  New 
Zealand banking sector quite unique.  
As  you  will  be  aware,  home  and  host  countries  undertake  their  banking  supervision  roles  and 
responsibilities  within  the  framework  of  home-host  supervision  set  out  in  the  Basel  Concordat.  The 
Concordat  emphasises  the  general  responsibility  of  home  country  authorities  to  supervise  banks' 
worldwide consolidated activities, as well as the host country responsibility to supervise foreign bank 
establishments in their territories as individual institutions.  
Our  emphasis  on  market  and  self  discipline  and  our  less  prescriptive  regulation  has  led  to  New 
Zealand's supervisory and regulatory activity neatly complementing that of APRA and the other home 
supervisors  with  whom  we  share  banks.  In  fact,  we  feel  that  New  Zealand  leads  the  world  in 
home/host  dovetailing  from  the  host  viewpoint  within  the  very  general  framework  provided  by  the 
Basel concordat.  
When it is done well, both home and host supervisors can benefit in obvious ways from each other's 
supervision.  In  New  Zealand,  we  openly  acknowledge  the  benefit  that  our  financial  system  derives 
from the role played by APRA, and the other home-country regulators. However, we are also keenly 
aware that the interests of home and host supervisors can and do diverge, and that these divergences 
lead  to  differences  in  the  style  and  substance  of  supervision  and  regulation.  Moreover,  these 
differences are likely to manifest themselves most sharply in the very pressured circumstances that a 
distressed bank brings. Such differences include: 
• 
Different  statutory  objectives.  For  example  some  supervisors  have  depositor  protection  as 
their main objective, while others have soundness and stability.  
How  capital  should  be  allocated.  Each  supervisory  authority  would  like  to  see  as  much 
capital reside within its own jurisdiction as possible.  
How risk should be allocated. Each supervisory authority would prefer that the risk resides 
outside its own system.  
Each supervisory authority is only responsible  for financial stability in its own system. The 
effects on the financial systems of other jurisdictions of any actions taken to manage a bank 
failure in one's own jurisdiction are likely to be considered second order.  
BIS Review 20/2005
   4 
  Different views on appropriate techniques for responding to bank stress.  
Different perceptions of when a crisis is systemic - a particular risk when the subsidiary plays 
a much larger role in the host system than the parent plays in the home system.  
Each system may also be subject to different destabilising influences. 
• 
These  differences  are  not  straightforward  to  resolve  when  there  is  a  largely  bilateral  relationship 
between home and host countries, of the kind faced by New Zealand. For these reasons, and in the 
absence of any fair and formalised, operationally and legally robust, international framework, a host 
authority  would  not  purely  rely  on  the  home  authority  to  protect  the  host  financial  system.  All 
supervisors' actions  are  ultimately  bounded  by  the  legislation  under which  they  operate.  And  in  the 
midst of a crisis situation there is no room to negotiate legal boundaries. 
That said, we also recognise that the most effective response to a cross-border crisis would desirably 
involve very close cooperation and coordination between the home and host authorities. To this end 
the  RBNZ  has  been  active  in  pursuing  closer  cooperation  with  APRA.  We  have  had  for  some  time 
Memoranda of Understanding with APRA and the Financial Services Authority in the UK that allow for 
the sharing of supervisory information. However, a number of other cooperative measures have been 
undertaken recently: 
• 
We have initiated a secondment strategy of senior staff members between APRA and the 
Bank. We believe that we can learn from one another.  
We have established a terms of engagement with APRA so that we can dovetail our Basel II 
implementation initiatives.  
We are assessing all of our requirements of banks under the Basel Core Principles (BCP) so 
as to best ensure we have a single set of regulatory `rules' where possible and sensible.  
We have agreed to share visits to Australian-owned banks on either side of the Tasman with 
APRA staff. 
   The RBNZ has agreed with APRA a Terms of Engagement for Basel II implementation. The Terms of 
Engagement sets out the RBNZ's and APRA's intent to implement Basel II in a such a way that each 
supervisor's  right  to  set  its  own  minimum  levels  of  capital  is  maintained,  while  at  the  same  time 
seeking  to  reduce  compliance  costs  where  possible.  It  also  requires  that  the  RBNZ  and  APRA  will 
conduct supervisory reviews of banks operating in both jurisdictions in a way that makes use of each 
supervisor's comparative advantage. This will involve joint sharing of information on, and recognition 
of, supervisory tools used and reviews undertaken.  
In February, New Zealand's Minister of Finance and the Australian Treasurer announced the formation 
of a Trans-Tasman Council on Banking Supervision to consist of the respective Reserve Banks and 
Treasuries,  and  APRA.  This  council  will  be  represented  at  the  highest  level  within  the  member 
institutions. Its main role will be the monitoring and coordinating of trans-Tasman home-host regulatory 
issues.  
The  council  is  not  based  on  statute.  Rather  its  role  is  that  of  monitoring  and  advice,  with  reporting 
duties to the relevant Ministers. A key goal for the Council is to promote the maximum coordination, 
cooperation  and  harmonisation  of  trans-Tasman  bank  regulation  where  sensible,  so  as  to  best 
minimise compliance costs. 
Preliminary work is underway at the moment for the first meeting of the council, which is scheduled to 
happen soon. The first key output of the Council is to report to Ministers in late May on any legislative 
changes that may be required to ensure APRA and RBNZ can support each other in the performance 
of their current regulatory responsibilities at least regulatory cost.  
There are other significant early gains that could be made for the Council over the coming year. For 
example, we anticipate good progress on the home-host coordinated implementation of Basel II that I 
outlined in the Terms of Engagement earlier. We also think good progress can be made on gaining a 
clearer understanding of trans-Tasman bank failure management strategies and coordination. 
We  look  forward  to  building  the  trans-Tasman  regulatory  community  based  on  the  principles  of 
cooperation and harmonisation. But, we will also work diligently to continue developing the capacity to 
preserve New Zealand's systemic financial interests.  
BIS Review 20/2005 
 5
Conclusion 
Overall, the strong presence of foreign banks has brought many benefits to New Zealand in terms of 
soundness  and  efficiency.  It  has  enhanced  risk  management  capacity  within  the  banking  system, 
facilitated  the  entry  of  new  banking  products  and  services,  and  reduced  the  financial  system's 
vulnerability to domestic economic shocks. However, along with the many benefits it brings, having an 
open,  foreign-owned  banking  system  also  increases  the  chances  of  our  financial  system  being 
adversely impacted by off-shore developments.  
The  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  is  developing  and  maintaining  the  ability  to  deal  with  troubled 
banks in a way that is fiscally responsible, and that causes minimal disruption to real activity.  
We  are  also  actively  engaging  with  our  trans-Tasman  counterparts,  and  are  optimistic  about  the 
opportunities the trans-Tasman Council and further harmonisation might offer.  
6 
 BIS Review 20/2005
