Jarle Bergo: The outlook for the Norwegian economy and the challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank of  Norway), at  Norges 
Bank, Bodø, 25 August 2005.  
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 11 August, Inflation 
Report 2/05 and on previous speeches.  
The references and the 
Charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The economic situation 
The Norwegian economy is in an upturn and is now expanding at a brisk pace. Inflation remains low, 
but has edged up since last year. The risk of a fall in the level of prices and markedly lower inflation 
expectations has diminished. At the same time, there appears to be little risk that inflation will rapidly 
move up to a level that is too high.  
The reduction in the interest rate through 2003 and into 2004 has resulted in low real interest rates. 
For a period, the real interest rate has been considerably lower than normal. The low level of interest 
rates is supporting the high activity level in the Norwegian economy.  
The economic upturn is broad-based. At the beginning of the recovery, activity was primarily fuelled by 
private  consumption,  traditional  exports  and  petroleum  investment.  In  addition,  growth  in  mainland 
fixed investment has gradually gained considerable momentum.  
The  easing  of  monetary  policy  and  low  inflation  have  resulted  in  strong  growth  in  household  real 
disposable  income.  Private  consumption  and  housing  investment  have  risen  sharply.  House  prices 
have continued to rise. Debt growth remains high. We expect that growth in household demand will 
continue this year and next.  
Mainland  business  fixed  investment  expanded  sharply  in  the  last  quarters  of  2004.  Moderate  wage 
growth,  low  interest  rates  and  rising  demand  have  improved  corporate  profitability.  Reports  from 
Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  point  to  a  continued  increase  in  corporate  profitability.  There  are 
prospects of continued high growth in investment ahead.  
Higher  prices  for  many  Norwegian  export  goods  and  solid  global  growth  have  generated  growth  in 
traditional merchandise exports. High export prices have contributed to an increase in capacity and 
higher exports from the processing industry. Some moderation in global growth is expected to result in 
somewhat slower growth in Norwegian exports of traditional goods ahead.  
Import growth has been strong in recent years  and picked up last year. Brisk demand for imported 
goods and services reflects strong growth in the Norwegian economy and a low rise in prices for some 
imported goods. In addition, a larger share of demand growth, for example in the construction industry, 
has probably been satisfied by increased imports of services.  
The economic upturn is expected to continue this year. High petroleum investment, the international 
upturn  and  higher  commodity  prices  have  boosted  production  and  earnings  in  the  manufacturing 
sector.  Statistics  Norway’s  business  tendency  survey  points  to  continued  favourable  prospects  for 
Norwegian  manufacturing.  Service  industries  and  the  construction  sector  expect  that  continued  low 
interest rates and strong growth in household demand will contribute to further increasing activity in 
the near term.  
As estimated here, capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is now close to a normal level. In 
manufacturing,  capacity  utilisation  has  been  close  to  its  historical  average.  According  to  Norges 
Bank’s regional network, about 40 per cent of enterprises will have some or considerable difficulty if 
production must be increased.  
The  situation  in  the  labour  market  does  not  indicate  a  build-up  of  substantial  pressures  in  the 
Norwegian economy as a whole, even though growth has been high for a fairly long period. So far, the 
rise in the number of employed has been fairly moderate in relation to output growth. This may be due 
to lagged effects of the sharp fall in sickness absence through 2004. Many companies have probably 
not  fully  utilised  the  large  increase  in  available  person-hours.  A  considerable  share  of  production 
growth  so  far  this  year  may  be  the  result  of  an  improved  utilisation  of  the  existing  workforce.  In 
addition, productivity, measured in terms of value added per person-hour, increased at a fairly brisk 
pace in the last couple of years.  
In addition to high productivity growth and a reduction in sickness absence, it appears that the use of 
foreign  labour  has  increased  recently.  The  level  is  relatively  moderate,  but  appears  nonetheless  to 
have reduced bottleneck tendencies in some industries where demand has increased sharply.  
Many  foreign  workers  who  come  to  Norway  find  employment  in  Norwegian  enterprises.  This 
represents an increase in the supply of labour in Norway. Employment will thus be able to increase to 
a further extent than would otherwise have been the case without the emergence of labour shortages. 
In isolation, an increased supply of labour from new EU countries may lead to a higher-than-normal 
increase in potential output for a period.  
Many  of  the  foreign  workers  work  for  a  shorter  period  in  Norway  without  being  employed  in  a 
Norwegian enterprise. Examples are foreign contractors and self-employed in the construction industry 
who carry out various building projects in Norway. An increase in the use of these short-term contracts 
will  appear as  an  increase  in  Norway’s  services  imports,  and  contribute  to  increasing  the supply  of 
goods and services without drawing on domestic resources.  
Inflation  decelerated  markedly  from  summer  2003  and  continued  to  fall  in  the  beginning  of  2004. 
Subsequently, consumer price inflation has picked up, albeit at a gentle pace. In July, the year-on-year 
rise in consumer prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products was 1.1 per cent.  
Prices for imported consumer goods have continued to fall. The price fall may reflect high productivity 
growth  in  the  production  of  some  goods  and  large  investments  to  increase  production  capacity, 
particularly  in  China.  This  has  led  to  strong  competition  and  a  low  rise  in  prices  for  internationally 
traded goods. The shift in imports, for example clothing imports, towards low-cost countries seems to 
be substantial again this year.  
Prices for domestically produced goods and services rose by 2.1 per cent in the twelve months to July 
this  year.  Higher  capacity  utilisation  is  providing  the  basis  for  higher  margins  in  some  industries. 
Service prices, which showed little rise last year, have increased again this year. In many industries, 
including the airline industry, where price competition is strong, low profitability has led to an increase 
in prices. High oil prices have also resulted in price increases, for example in the transport industry.  
On  the  basis  of  the  pay  increases  agreed  upon  in  this  year’s  wage  settlement,  combined  with  the 
estimates for wage drift and wage carry-over, annual wage growth is projected at around 3½ per cent 
this year. Lower-than-projected wage growth may be related to the fact that there were few signs of 
improvement  in  labour  market  conditions  prior  to  this  year’s  wage  settlement.  Lower-than-projected 
consumer price inflation last year may also have contributed to restraining wage demands this year. 
Low wage growth will contribute to dampening the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and 
services.  
Information  from  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  is  important  for  Norges  Bank’s  analysis  of  the 
Norwegian economy. Information about the state of the Norwegian economy is available earlier than 
information provided by official statistics, and it is informative to have closer contact with the labour 
market and business and industry.  
The  situation  in  Region  North,  as  in  the  rest  of  the  country,  is  favourable.  In  the  May  round  of 
interviews, all sectors in the region reported continued growth. Expectations concerning the next six 
months indicate accelerating growth for domestically oriented industry and continued solid growth for 
the export industry. Higher growth is also expected in both household and corporate services.  
The solid growth in retail trade is expected to continue in Region North, while growth in the building 
and construction sector appears to be slowing somewhat.  
According  to  our  regional  network  contacts  in  the  region,  employment  has  fallen  somewhat  in  the 
manufacturing and public sectors. In the near term, employment in building and construction and the 
service sector is expected to increase, while employment in all other sectors is expected to remain 
unchanged.  
The  supply  of  qualified  labour  in  the  region  is  satisfactory,  and  growth  in  profitability  is  solid,  but 
moderating.  
The global economy 
Global economic growth is expected to be somewhat lower this year than in 2004. In the US, growth 
was solid during the first half of 2005, and it appears that this trend will persist. In the longer term, 
growth is expected to moderate somewhat. In the euro area, growth is expected to remain fairly weak 
during  the  next  couple  of  years.  In  the  UK,  growth  has  slowed  markedly  and  is  expected  to  be 
moderate in the period ahead. In Sweden, growth has edged up following a couple of weak quarters 
and is expected to remain at approximately the same level. In Japan, there was a marked decline in 
growth from the first to the second quarter, and growth is expected to be fairly moderate in the period 
ahead. Growth remains high in China.  
Growth  among  trading  partners  is  expected  to  slow  this  year.  In  the  years  ahead,  we  expect  that 
growth will be relatively stable. Uncertainties that may contribute to weaker developments include high 
oil prices and the possibility of weaker housing markets in a number of countries. On the other hand, 
solid  business  sector  profitability  in  many  countries  may  result  in  stronger  investment  growth  than 
assumed.  
The outlook for growth in different regions indicates that the imbalances in the global economy, with a 
large deficit in the US and large surpluses in a number of other countries, will persist. Low growth in 
the euro area and Japan is weakening the prospect of a gradual correction. This increases the risk 
associated with these imbalances. Increased imbalances in addition to high oil prices and volatile oil 
markets are contributing to the uncertainty surrounding developments in the global economy.  
There are particularly large imbalances both in the US balance of trade and current account. This is 
partly due to the federal budget deficit. Moreover, US households have a high level of consumption 
and a low level of saving. Strong demand in the US has sustained growth in the world economy. The 
deficit in the US is offset by surpluses in Europe and Asia.  
Persistent deficits have pushed up US foreign debt to a high level.  
The US population is growing faster than that of other OECD countries. This may suggest that saving 
in the US is somewhat lower and investment somewhat higher, but the impact is now considerably 
greater than implied by demographic factors alone.  
The  imbalances  may  persist  for  a  period.  International  capital  markets  are  deep  and  liquid  with  an 
ample supply of credit for US borrowers. If creditors begin to fear a fall in prices and withdraw from the 
market, substantial corrections may nevertheless be triggered. This may lead to higher interest rates 
and perhaps also a fall in US equity markets that spills over to other countries’ financial markets. In 
that case, the dollar will also depreciate. The household debt burden in the US may be another source 
of instability if households abruptly reduce both housing demand and consumption.  
We assume that growth will moderate somewhat in the US in the period ahead. A more pronounced 
downturn in the US cannot be ruled out, however. An abrupt and pronounced downturn in the US will 
lead quite rapidly to falling growth rates in the entire OECD area.  
The US is not the only source of trade imbalances. They also reflect very low growth in continental 
Europe  and  the  largely  export-based  growth  in  Asian  countries.  Countries  other  than  the  US  must 
therefore also contribute in order to prevent growth in the global economy from faltering.  
With limited domestic growth capacity and high unemployment, many industrial countries are poorly 
equipped to cope with a weaker dollar and lower US demand. The challenges are perhaps particularly 
demanding in Japan and some large European countries.  
There is also a risk that large imbalances in world trade and low employment in Europe will trigger 
protectionism, which could reduce growth capacity even further.  
A pronounced slowdown in growth in the entire OECD area is also likely to lead to markedly slower 
growth  in  China  and  emerging  economies  in  Asia  because  exports  are  an  important  driving  force 
behind  growth  in  the  region.  This  could  lead  to  an  appreciable  fall  in  prices  for  oil  and  other 
commodities  and  slackening  activity  in  the  shipping  industry.  In  the  same  way  that  Norway  has 
benefited strongly from the sharp international upswing in recent years, the Norwegian economy could 
be relatively hard-hit by such a downturn. For example, activity in the petroleum industry might decline 
considerably.  
The change in China’s exchange rate regime and the revaluation of the Chinese currency by 2 per 
cent  will  probably  not  cause  substantial  changes  in  the  imbalances  in  world  trade.  However,  the 
gradual occurrence of major changes in the same direction cannot be ruled out. This would reduce 
demand for the US dollar. Subsequent developments will depend in part on whether the fall in demand 
for the US dollar is abrupt or gradual.  
Structural changes in world trade have been important for the Norwegian economy, not least for the 
rise  in  prices  for  imported  goods  and  services.  The  shift  in  imports  towards  low-cost  countries  has 
come gradually since 2001. In the Inflation Report projections, we assume that the import pattern will 
gradually become more stable. If the shift continues, the price-dampening effects of increased imports 
from low-cost countries in Asia and Central and Eastern Europe will persist longer than assumed.  
The change in China’s exchange rate regime and the revaluation of the Chinese currency will probably 
not cause noticeable changes in price developments for imported consumer goods.  
Partly  due  to  very  high  growth  in  demand  for  oil,  the  average  price  of  Brent  Blend  rose  to  almost  
USD- 40 per barrel in 2004. Strong economic growth, particularly in the US and China, has resulted in 
high energy consumption. In the first half of this year, the price of Brent Blend has generally fluctuated 
between USD 45 and USD 55 per barrel. Oil prices have risen further this summer and have been 
more than USD 60 per barrel in August.  
Prices for oil futures have also increased.  
Rising or persistently high oil prices may gradually dampen growth among our most important trading 
partners. The slowdown may occur gradually, and will not necessarily be particularly pronounced.  
As long as oil prices remain high and there is robust growth in other parts of the world, as in China, 
other commodity prices and shipping activity will remain buoyant. Activity may then remain high in key 
sectors of the Norwegian economy, such as petroleum-related industries and the shipbuilding industry. 
At the same time, higher oil prices and lower external interest rates may, other things being equal, 
lead to an appreciation of the Norwegian krone, which will contribute to keeping domestic inflation low. 
Over time, a strong krone and weak demand among major trading partner countries will probably have 
a dampening impact on activity in Norway.  
Little excess production capacity in OPEC countries, combined with the prospect of lower production 
in non-OPEC countries, has probably influenced oil prices. At the same time, there are prospects of 
continued strong demand growth in important oil-importing countries, such as China and some other 
emerging economies.  
More on the oil market 
The IMF has analysed supply and demand in the oil market for the period ahead in the latest issue of 
“World Economic Outlook”, published in April of this year.  
Assuming  an  annual  global  GDP  growth  of  approximately  3  per  cent  and  an  oil  price  in  line  with 
market expectations in February 2005,1 demand for oil is expected to increase by around 2 per cent 
per year until 2030. Price expectations are higher now, but according to IMF calculations, the demand 
for oil in the long-term reacts relatively little to price changes.  
The  growth  in  demand  primarily  reflects  higher  demand  for  fuel  for  motor  vehicles,  particularly  in  
non-OECD  countries.  An  increase  in  per  capita  income  in  China  will  in  particular  lead  to  a  sharp 
increase in car use.  
Output in non-OPEC countries will peak in the not-too-distant future – in 5 years, according to IMF 
estimates.  Higher  demand  will  require  higher  output  in  OPEC  countries.  These  countries  have 
substantial  oil  resources  but  are  currently  producing  close  to  capacity.  Production  capacity  must 
therefore be increased.  
Higher demand can thereby be met by non-OPEC oil producers operating at full capacity while OPEC 
passively satisfies any remaining demand by increasing its production capacity. Alternatively, OPEC 
can take a more active position and push up oil prices even further by restraining production.  
Not many years ago, it was normal to assume that the long-term price of oil was around USD 20 to 
USD 25 (in real value) per barrel. Analyses such as the one presented by the IMF suggest that the 
long-term oil price level may be considerably higher than this.  
                                                      
1   An average of USD 45 per barrel in 2005 and falling to USD 34 per barrel in 2010 and the years following. 
As a result of persistently high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high, investment in 
the  petroleum  sector  may  reach  record  levels  this  year.  The  investment  intentions  survey  for  the 
petroleum  sector  points  to  very  high  growth.  The  level  is  expected  to  remain  high  throughout  the 
projection period. Activity in the petroleum sector will have spillover effects on the mainland economy, 
initially on the shipbuilding industry and the building and construction sector.  
The  scale  of  petroleum  investment  and  its  spillover  effects  are  highly  uncertain.  The  last  time 
petroleum investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than 
had  been  assumed.  At  the  same  time,  the  rest  of  the  Norwegian  economy  was  experiencing  an 
upturn. The unexpected increase in petroleum investment contributed to an economic upturn that was 
substantially stronger than projected. If oil prices rise further or remain at the current high level for a 
long  period,  petroleum  investment  may  again  amplify  the  cyclical  upturn  to  a  greater  extent  than 
projected.  
Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy 
The analyses in Inflation Report 2/05 are based on a baseline scenario where the key rate until 2007 
follows  forward  interest  rates,  and  then  rises  somewhat  faster.  Forward  rates  on  24  June  indicated 
expectations that the key rate would increase to approximately 2¼ per cent towards the end of 2005 
and to 2¾ per cent at the end of 2006. The krone exchange rate is assumed to shadow the forward 
exchange rate, which remains broadly unchanged over the next three years.  
Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is expected to increase this year and next and exceed 
its normal level. There are prospects that inflation will gradually pick up and be close to 2½ per cent at 
the  three-year  horizon.  Monetary  policy  that  gradually  becomes  less  expansionary  will  stabilise  the 
economy  over  time,  thereby  curbing  inflation  and  preventing  it  from  overshooting  the  target.  New 
information since the publication of the last Inflation Report does not provide grounds for changing the 
assessment of developments in the real economy. Nor has there been any substantial change in the 
inflation outlook.  
Monetary  policy  cannot  fine-tune  economic  developments,  but  it  can  seek  to  hamper  the  most 
significant effects of disturbances to the economy.  
The  objectives  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  the  target  of  2½  per  cent  and  anchoring  inflation 
expectations  imply  a  continued  low  interest  rate.  The  krone  exchange  rate  appreciated  somewhat 
following the interest rate increase in June.  
On the other hand, output growth is high. The objective of stabilising developments in output may, in 
isolation, imply a higher interest rate. High capacity utilisation may generate a continued sharp rise in 
property prices and household borrowing. This could be a source of instability in demand and output in 
the somewhat longer run.  
The  Executive  Board’s  assessment  in  the  June  Inflation  Report  was  that  the  interest  rate  may 
gradually – in small, not too frequent steps – be brought up towards a more normal level if economic 
developments  are  approximately  as  projected  in  the  Report.  Such  an  interest  rate  path  was 
considered to provide a reasonable balance between the objective of stabilising inflation at target and 
the objective of stabilising growth in output and employment. It was the Executive Board’s assessment 
that the sight deposit rate should lie in the interval 1¾ - 2¾ per cent in the period to the publication of 
the next Inflation Report on 2 November. At the monetary policy meeting of 30 June, the sight deposit 
rate was increased by ¼ percentage point to 2 per cent.  
At the monetary policy meeting of 11 August, the Executive Board stated that new information since 
the previous monetary policy meeting does not suggest that we should deviate from the interest rate 
path envisaged in the June Inflation Report.  
Monetary policy easing through 2003 and into 2004 has resulted in low real interest rates. Short-term 
real interest rates may now be considerably lower than the level that implies long-term balance in the 
economy – the neutral real interest rate. A low real interest rate, and expectations of a continued low 
real  interest  rate,  will  contribute  to  stimulating  activity  even  after  the  effects  of  the  interest  rate  fall 
unwind. Calculations may, on an uncertain basis, indicate that the neutral real interest rate for Norway 
lies between 2½ and 3½%. It has probably fallen somewhat in recent years.  
Although the projections are based on rising real interest rates, the real interest rate will be lower than 
the neutral rate during the entire period. The monetary policy stance is therefore expansionary. So far, 
the  effects  do  not  appear  to  be  stronger  than  expected,  but  we  have  little  experience  of  such  low 
interest  rates.  It  is  uncertain  how  quickly  prices  and  wages  will  react  when  growth  in  output  and 
employment picks up. There is also a risk that an interest rate that is kept low for a longer period may 
lead  to  expectations  of  a  persistently  low  interest  rate.  This  may  involve  a  risk  of  persistently  high 
capacity utilisation and inflation eventually overshooting the target.  
Household  debt  has  increased  at  a  faster  pace  than  income  in  the  last  ten  years.  Norges  Bank’s 
calculations indicate that the sharp rise in house prices in recent years may explain a large share of 
debt  growth.  Higher  house  prices  have  a  fairly  long-lasting  effect  on  household  debt  growth.  As  a 
result, credit growth will remain high for a fairly long period even though the rise in house prices is 
expected to slow. Given the assumptions underlying our projections, it is likely that debt will continue 
to grow at a faster pace than disposable income through the entire projection period.  
As a result of high credit growth, the household debt burden has increased over the past year. The 
debt  burden  is  currently  record  high.  Due  to  unusually  low  interest  rates,  the  interest  burden  is, 
nevertheless,  relatively  low.  A  normalisation  of  interest  rates  will  increase  households’  net  interest 
expenses, but according to the projections the interest burden will not be higher than it was at the end 
of the 1990s. If there are expectations of persistently low interest rates, there is a risk that the debt 
burden may increase more than assumed in the projections. Net interest expenses will then also be 
higher than assumed. In addition, households will be vulnerable if unexpected disturbances result in 
higher than expected interest rates.  
Challenges ahead 
Oil gives us an economic base that is not available to many other countries. But it also presents us 
with many challenges:  
First,  we  must  remember  that  our  petroleum  resources  are  part  of  our  national  wealth.  When  oil  is 
extracted  and  sold,  natural  assets  are  transformed  into  financial  wealth.  Norway’s  national  wealth 
belongs  not  only  to  our  generation,  but  also  to  future  generations.  This  means  that  our  petroleum 
wealth  must  be  equitably  distributed  between  generations.  The  authorities  must  therefore  exercise 
fiscal discipline, taking into account long-term considerations.  
Moreover,  the  size  of  the  cash  flow  from  petroleum  activities  varies  considerably.  If  petroleum 
revenues were to be used as they accrue, this would lead to considerable fluctuations in demand in 
the Norwegian economy, amplifying cyclical fluctuations as a result.  
Third, the use of petroleum revenues will have an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business 
and industry. A high level and wide fluctuations in the use of petroleum revenues will have a negative 
impact  on  the  operating  parameters  for  internationally  exposed  industries.  It  is  important  that  we 
succeed in maintaining an industry structure that promotes learning, innovation and development.  
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  established  in  1990  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  long-term 
considerations in the use of petroleum revenues. In March 2001, the fiscal rule and new guidelines for 
monetary  policy  were  introduced.  The  fiscal  rule  implies  that  the  central  government  budget  deficit 
shall be equivalent over time to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. The new 
guidelines for economic policy received broad support in the Storting.  
The  rule  specifying  that  only  the  real  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund  is  to  be  used  means  that  the 
capital in the Fund shall not be depleted. The capital in the Petroleum Fund will increase as long as 
there  is  a  positive  cash  flow  (to  the  central  government)  from  petroleum  activities.  When  the 
conversion from petroleum revenues to financial wealth has been completed, the objective will still be 
to  restrict  withdrawals  so  that  the  real  value  of  the  Fund’s  capital  is  maintained  -  in  principle, 
indefinitely.  
The fiscal rule thereby provides a long-term anchor for fiscal policy. It provides a stable framework that 
contributes to curbing fluctuations in the Norwegian economy that are caused by converting petroleum 
revenues into investments at home and abroad.  
The fiscal rule for the budget implies that the government can use 4 per cent of the Fund over time. 
This year, around 6 per cent is being used. The deviation partly reflects an unexpected shortfall in tax 
revenues in recent years. The government budget deficit is the difference between total revenues and 
total  expenditure.  They  each  account  for  about  half  of  total  GDP  in  Norway.  Even  small  deviations 
from  expenditure  and  revenue  projections  can  have  a  major  impact  on  the  deficit.  Exchange  rate 
changes will also lead to fluctuations in the value of the Petroleum Fund. For these reasons alone, the 
use  of  petroleum  revenues  may  in  periods  deviate  from  the  4  per  cent  rule.  Spending  was  also 
increased in response to the economic downturn. We can, therefore, safely affirm that the fiscal rule 
has been normative for fiscal policy.  
The  new  guidelines  have  changed  the  interaction  between  the  different  components  of  economic 
policy. Monetary policy has been given a clearer role in stabilising economic developments. A clear 
monetary  policy  objective  is  a  necessary  complement  to  the  fiscal  rule  for  ensuring  reasonable 
macroeconomic stability. The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is 
inflation of close to 2½ per cent over time. The inflation target provides an anchor for economic agents’ 
choices concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. Households, businesses, public entities, 
employees and employers can base decisions on the assumption that inflation in Norway will be 2½ 
per cent over time.  
High  oil  prices  have  a  different  impact  in  Norway  than  in  oil-importing  countries.  When  oil  prices 
increase, the value of Norway’s national wealth rises. The idea behind the Petroleum Fund is that the 
cash flow from an increase in oil prices should accrue to the Fund and be invested abroad and should 
not be included directly in the government budget. As a result, the increase in the cash flow will not 
immediately affect the domestic economy. The effect of higher oil prices will gradually be seen when 
the real return on the Fund measured in NOK increases. Thus, the government authorities will be able 
to budget a higher deficit in the years ahead. Likewise, a fall in oil prices will not have an immediate 
impact on the domestic economy, but result in a lower accumulation of foreign assets.  
Even though the Petroleum Fund and the fiscal rule shield the Norwegian economy to a certain extent 
from fluctuations in the oil market, the Norwegian economy will still be affected by developments in oil 
prices.  If  changes  in  oil  prices  influence  growth  in  the  global  economy,  this  will  in  turn  impact 
Norwegian  exports  of  traditional  goods  and  services.  Petroleum  investment  on  the  Norwegian 
continental  shelf  is  another  important  channel.  Fluctuating  oil  prices  contribute  to  wide  variations  in 
petroleum investment. This has spillover effects on the mainland economy.  
The value of the Petroleum Fund, measured as a percentage of GDP, will rise in the years ahead. On 
the  other  hand,  Norway,  like  many  other  countries,  is  facing  substantial  fiscal  challenges.  The 
expected dependency ratio, i.e. the ratio of persons over the age of 67 to persons aged 20 to 66, will 
rise sharply in the years ahead. The National Insurance Scheme’s spending on old age and disability 
pensions, based on current social security rules, is increasing.  
The return on the Petroleum Fund can only cover a small portion of the higher pension expenditure. 
According to Ministry of Finance calculations, funding needs equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP will still 
be uncovered in 2060 given an oil price of NOK 230 (2005 prices) or around USD 35 per barrel. Oil 
futures  six  to  seven  years  ahead  are  now  higher  than  this.  If  oil  prices  remain  as  high  for  the 
foreseeable  future,  the  funding  requirement  will  be  somewhat  lower.  To  base  decisions  on  this, 
however, would be a very risky strategy.  
Even though Norway’s petroleum wealth is substantial, it is our human resources that account for most 
of  our  national  wealth.  Even  a  small  increase  in  the  “return”  on  human  capital  might  generate 
considerable  gains.  The  return  on  this  capital  partly  depends  on  our  pension  schemes  and  the 
application  of  social  security  rules.  These  should  be  designed  in  such  a  way  that  they  provide 
incentives  and  opportunities  to  work.  Labour  market  legislation  must  also  promote  production  and 
employment.  
In  May,  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  deliberated  the  Pension  Commission’s  proposals  for 
reforming  the  national  insurance  system.  There  was  agreement  on  the  main  points  but  the  specific 
design remains. If we succeed in reducing the growth in pension expenditure through a modernised 
national insurance system and other reforms, this will be an important contribution to addressing the 
fiscal challenges we are facing.  
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
