Alan Greenspan: Budget process reforms 
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Budget Committee, US Senate, Washington DC, 21 April 2005. 
 Mr.  Chairman,  Senator  Conrad,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to 
offer my views on the federal budget and related issues. I want to emphasize that I speak for myself 
and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. 
The U.S. economy delivered a solid performance in 2004, and thus far this year, activity appears to be 
expanding at a reasonably good pace. However, the positive short-term economic outlook is playing 
out  against  a  backdrop  of  concern  about  the  prospects  for  the  federal  budget,  especially  over  the 
longer  run.  Indeed,  the  unified  budget  ran  a  deficit  equal  to  about  3-1/2  percent  of  gross  domestic 
product in fiscal 2004, and federal debt held by the public as a percent of GDP has risen noticeably 
since it bottomed out in 2001. To be sure, the cyclical component of the deficit should narrow as the 
economic expansion proceeds and incomes rise. And the recent pace of the ramp-up in spending on 
defense and homeland security is not expected to continue indefinitely. But, as the latest projections 
from the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office suggest, our budget position is unlikely 
to improve substantially in the coming years unless major deficit-reducing actions are taken. 
In my judgment, the necessary choices will be especially difficult to implement without the restoration 
of a set of procedural restraints on the budget-making process. For about a decade, the rules laid out 
in  the  Budget  Enforcement  Act  of  1990  and  in  the  later  modifications  and  extensions  of  the  act 
provided a framework that helped the Congress establish a better fiscal balance. However, the brief 
emergence of surpluses in the late 1990s eroded the will to adhere to these rules, which were aimed 
specifically at promoting deficit reduction rather than at the broader goal of setting out a commonly 
agreed-upon standard for determining whether the nation was living within its fiscal means. Many of 
the provisions that helped restrain budgetary decisionmaking in the 1990s - in particular, the limits on 
discretionary spending and the PAYGO requirements - were violated ever more frequently; finally, in 
2002, they were allowed to expire.  
Reinstating a structure like the one provided by the Budget Enforcement Act would signal a renewed 
commitment to fiscal restraint and help restore discipline to the annual budgeting process. Such a step 
would be even more meaningful if it were coupled with the adoption of a set of provisions for dealing 
with unanticipated budgetary outcomes over time. As you are well aware, budget outcomes in the past 
have  deviated  from  projections  -  in  some  cases,  significantly  -  and  they  will  continue  to  do  so. 
Accordingly, a well-designed set of mechanisms that facilitate midcourse corrections would ease the 
task of bringing the budget back into line when it goes off track. In particular, you might want to require 
that existing programs be assessed regularly to verify that they continue to meet their stated purposes 
and  cost  projections.  Measures  that  automatically  take  effect  when  costs  for  a  particular  spending 
program or tax provision exceed a specified threshold may prove useful as well. The original design of 
the Budget Enforcement Act could also be enhanced by addressing how the strictures might evolve if 
and when reasonable fiscal balance came into view.  
I do not mean to suggest that the nation's budget problems will be solved simply by adopting a new 
set of rules. The fundamental fiscal issue is the need to make difficult choices among budget priorities, 
and  this  need  is  becoming  ever  more  pressing  in  light  of  the  unprecedented  number  of  individuals 
approaching retirement age. For example, future Congresses and Presidents will, over time, have to 
weigh the benefits of continued access, on current terms, to advances in medical technology against 
other spending priorities as well as against tax initiatives that foster increases in economic growth and 
the revenue base. 
Because the baby boomers have not yet started to retire in force, we have been in a demographic lull. 
But this state of relative stability will soon end. In 2008 - just three years from now - the leading edge 
of  the  baby-boom  generation  will  reach  62,  the  earliest  age  at  which  Social  Security  retirement 
benefits can be drawn and the age at which about half of those eligible to claim benefits have been 
doing  so  in  recent  years.  Just  three  years  after  that,  in  2011,  the  oldest  baby  boomers  will  reach 
65 and  will  thus  be  eligible  for  Medicare.  Currently,  3-1/4  workers  contribute  to  the  Social  Security 
system  for  each  beneficiary.  Under  the  intermediate  assumptions  of  the  program's  trustees,  the 
number  of  beneficiaries  will  have  roughly  doubled  by  2030,  and  the  ratio  of  covered  workers  to 
BIS Review 27/2005 
 1
beneficiaries will be down to about 2. The pressures on the budget from this dramatic demographic 
change will be exacerbated by those stemming from the anticipated steep upward trend in spending 
per Medicare beneficiary. 
The combination of an aging population and the soaring costs of its medical care is certain to place 
enormous  demands  on  our  nation's  resources  and  to  exert  pressure  on  the  budget  that  economic 
growth alone is unlikely to eliminate. To be sure, favorable productivity developments would help to 
alleviate the impending budgetary strains. But unless productivity growth far outstrips that embodied in 
current budget forecasts, it is unlikely to represent more than part of the answer. Higher productivity 
does, of course, buoy revenues. But because initial Social Security benefits are influenced heavily by 
economywide  wages,  faster  productivity  growth,  with  a  lag,  also  raises  benefits  under  current  law. 
Moreover, because the long-range budget assumptions already make reasonable allowance for future 
productivity  growth,  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  productivity  growth  will  fall  short  of 
projected future averages. 
In fiscal year 2004, federal outlays for Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid totaled about 8 percent 
of GDP. The long-run projections from the Office of Management and Budget suggest that the share 
will  rise  to  approximately  13 percent  by  2030.  So  long  as  health-care  costs continue  to  grow  faster 
than the economy as a whole, the additional resources needed for these programs will exert intense 
pressure on the federal budget. Indeed, under existing tax rates and reasonable assumptions about 
other spending, these projections make clear that the federal budget is on an unsustainable path, in 
which  large  deficits  result  in  rising  interest  rates  and  ever-growing  interest  payments  that  augment 
deficits in future years. But most important, deficits as a percentage of GDP in these simulations rise 
without limit. Unless that trend is reversed, at some point these deficits would cause the economy to 
stagnate or worse. 
The broad contours of the challenges ahead are clear. But considerable uncertainty remains about the 
precise dimensions of the problem and about the extent to which future resources will fall short of our 
current statutory obligations to the coming generations of retirees. We already know a good deal about 
the size of the adult population in, say, 2030. Almost all have already been born. Thus, forecasting the 
number  of  Social  Security  and  Medicare  beneficiaries  is  fairly  straightforward.  So  too  is  projecting 
future  Social  Security  benefits,  which  are  tied  to  the  wage  histories  of  retirees.  However,  the 
uncertainty about future medical spending is daunting. We know very little about how rapidly medical 
technology  will  continue  to  advance  and  how  those  innovations  will  translate  into  future  spending. 
Consequently,  the  range  of  possible  outcomes  for  spending  per  Medicare  beneficiary  expands 
dramatically  as  we  move  into  the  next  decade  and  beyond.  Technological  innovations  can  greatly 
improve  the  quality  of  medical  care  and  can,  in  some  instances,  reduce  the  costs  of  existing 
treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential 
to  add  to  overall  spending  -  in  some  cases,  by  a  great  deal.  Other  sources  of  uncertainty  -  for 
example, the extent to which longer life expectancies among the elderly will affect medical spending - 
may  also  turn  out  to  be  important.  As  a  result,  the  range  of  future  possible  outlays  per  recipient  is 
extremely wide. The actuaries' projections of Medicare costs are, perforce, highly provisional.  
These uncertainties - especially our inability to identify the upper bound of future demands for medical 
care - counsel significant prudence in policymaking. The critical reason to proceed cautiously is that 
new programs quickly develop constituencies willing to fiercely resist any curtailment of spending or 
tax  benefits.  As  a  consequence,  our  ability  to  rein  in  deficit-expanding  initiatives,  should  they  later 
prove to have been excessive or misguided, is quite limited. Thus, policymakers need to err on the 
side of prudence when considering new budget initiatives. Programs can always be expanded in the 
future should the resources for them become available, but they cannot be easily curtailed if resources 
later fall short of commitments. 
I fear that we may have already committed more physical resources to the baby-boom generation in its 
retirement  years  than  our  economy  has  the  capacity  to  deliver.  If  existing  promises  need  to  be 
changed, those changes should be made sooner rather than later. We owe future retirees as much 
time as possible to adjust their plans for work, saving, and retirement spending. They need to ensure 
that  their  personal  resources,  along  with  what  they  expect  to  receive  from  the  government,  will  be 
sufficient to meet their retirement goals. 
Crafting a budget strategy that meets the nation's longer-run needs will become ever more difficult the 
more  we delay.  The one certainty  is  that  the  resolution  of  the nation's unprecedented  demographic 
challenge will  require  hard  choices  and  that  the  future performance of  the  economy will  depend  on 
those choices. No changes will be easy. All programs in our budget exist because a majority of the 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2005
Congress  and  the  President  considered  them  of  value  to  our  society.  Adjustments  will  thus  involve 
making  tradeoffs  among  valued alternatives.  The Congress must  choose which  alternatives  are  the 
most valued in the context of limited resources. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the 
distributional  effects  of  policy  changes  but  also  the  broader  economic  effects  on  labor  supply, 
retirement  behavior,  and  national  saving.  The  benefits  to  taking  sound,  timely  action  could  extend 
many decades into the future.  
BIS Review 27/2005 
 3
