Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy in EMU - views and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Zentrum  für 
Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung (ZEW), Mannheim, 24 June 2005. 
 Introduction 
The subject which the organisers have chosen for this conference, namely “Competition in Europe - 
Europe facing international competition” is not only very topical, but also very challenging. While my 
presentation today will not focus directly on these issues, I will address them both in my discussion of 
economic differentials within the euro area and in my concluding remarks.  
My  main  message  today  is  that  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  is  beneficial  to  all  of  the 
individual countries which comprise the euro area. I will begin by presenting some key macroeconomic 
developments which show the great success of the EMU project, not only in terms of price stability and 
low inflation expectations, but also with respect to the low macroeconomic volatility in the euro area. 
I will argue that a high degree of credibility, transparency and predictability on the part of monetary 
policy are key conditions for this success. Nevertheless, it is not the stability-oriented monetary policy 
of the ECB alone that has made the success of the euro possible. During the transition to the euro 
fiscal policies have been more disciplined than before. Moreover, some structural reforms have been 
implemented  and  social  partners  have  contributed  via  wage  moderation.  One  should  not  overlook 
these contributions to macroeconomic stability and job creation simply because their positive effects 
have  been  diminished  by  uncertainties  and  hesitation  regarding  further  reform  projects  and  fiscal 
policy soundness. Major adverse supply shocks in recent years have also to be taken into account. 
Finally, I will discuss the issue of inflation and growth differentials within the euro area. I will explain 
that  these  divergences  are  of  a  similar  size  to  those  observed  within  the  United  States.  Moreover, 
inflation differentials are often a normal and welcome equilibrating mechanism within a large currency 
area.  Similarly,  persistent  real  growth  differentials  may  reflect  a  normal  and  healthy  catching-up 
process. However, they may also be caused by cross-country differences in economic structures and 
in the design of economic policies. 
The first years of the euro - price stability and well-anchored inflation expectations … 
When taking a closer look at those developments that can be influenced by monetary policy, there can 
be little doubt that the EMU project has been a great success, which is particularly remarkable against 
the  background  of  the  many  and  sizeable  economic  shocks  that  have  hit  the  euro  area  since  the 
introduction of the euro.  
When looking at the euro area as a whole, a regime shift towards greater monetary stability took place 
during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  This  was  associated  with  the  EMU  project  enshrined  in  the 
Maastricht Treaty, and in particular with the convergence process and the introduction of the euro.  
Since the ECB became responsible for monetary policy in the euro area in 1999, HICP inflation has 
averaged  2%.  This  is  very  near  to  the  “below  and  close  to  2%”  at  which  the  ECB  aims  over  the 
medium term. Let me remind you that during the 1980s and 1990s, the average inflation rate was 4%. 
Inflation expectations have also been remarkably stable in recent years. Average long-term consensus 
inflation  expectations  have  fallen  from 2.8%  in  the  1990s  (1990 to  1998)  to  1.8%  over  the  past  six 
years. This is fully in line with our definition of price stability.  
The very low levels of short-term and long-term  interest rates which we are currently observing are 
providing substantial support to favourable financial conditions. These low levels would be unthinkable 
without the successful stabilisation of inflation expectations. 
… have also contributed to low macroeconomic volatility 
A further remarkable feature of the change in economic performance is the strong decline in nominal 
macroeconomic  volatility.  With  the  convergence  process  during  the  1990s,  inflation  volatility  fell 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
strongly. The volatility of quarterly HICP inflation in the euro area (measured as the standard deviation 
over the previous six years) fell from around 0.6 percentage point during the late 1980s to less than 
0.3  percentage  point  in  the  mid-1990s.  Since  then,  inflation  volatility  has  stabilised  at  this  very  low 
level, in spite of major inflationary shocks. And the average volatility of long-term consensus inflation 
expectations  has  also  declined  substantially,  by  four-fifths,  from  almost  0.5  percentage  point  in  the 
1990s to around 0.1 percentage point in recent years. 
Lower  volatility  of  actual  and  expected  inflation  reduces  consumer  and  investor  uncertainty  and 
thereby enhances welfare. Stable inflation expectations and a high degree of confidence on the part of 
financial  market  participants  in  monetary  policy  should,  over  time,  also  lead  to  a  reduction  in  the 
volatility  of  longer-term  interest  rates,  and  thus  also  to  lower  risk  premia.  Indeed,  over  the  past  six 
years, there has been a substantial decline in the volatility of long-term interest rates as compared with 
that  recorded  in  the  past  decade.  In  the  1990s,  for  example,  the  standard  deviation  of  long-term 
interest rates (monthly data) was around 2 percentage points; in the past six years, this measure has 
fallen  to  a  little  more  than  ½  a  percentage  point.  It  is  striking  that,  while  the  volatility  of  long-term 
interest rates in the euro area was still around twice as high as that in the United States in the 1990s, 
the situation has reversed in the last six years, with euro area interest rate volatility now being below 
that observed in the United States. 
Anchoring inflation expectations is not only important for low medium- and long-term market interest 
rates.  It  is  also  crucial  for  reducing  macroeconomic  fluctuations  in  response  to  economic  shocks. 
There are some hints that the persistence of inflation in recent years has been lower than before. It is 
likely that this has resulted, at least partly, from the improved anchoring of inflation expectations which 
may,  in  turn,  have  led  to  a  more  forward-looking  behaviour  on  the  part  of  those  setting  prices  and 
wages. Less indexation of wages and prices to current and past inflation would tend to contribute to 
lower volatility of employment and output in response to macroeconomic shocks. 
Importantly, the achievements in the area of monetary stability have not come at the cost of higher 
unemployment. On the contrary, the unemployment rate has averaged around 8½% over the past six 
years and has therefore been more than one percentage point lower, on average, than in the 1990s. 
Annual employment growth (in terms of persons employed) has doubled from an average of around 
½% in the 1980s and 1990s to slightly above 1% since the start of the single monetary policy. Average 
real GDP growth has been 1.9% in the past six years, which is close to the average of 2.0% in the 
1990s (1990-1998). 
Moreover, there are no visible signs of costs in terms of higher real macroeconomic volatility; on the 
contrary, in recent years the volatility of some real variables has also declined relative to the averages 
observed  during  the  1980s  and  1990s.  For  example,  the  standard  deviation  of  quarter-on-quarter 
percentage changes of real GDP growth has fallen from around 0.5 percentage point in the 1990s to 
around 0.4 percentage point in the last six years. The volatility of employment growth has also fallen 
from over 0.3 percentage point to 0.2 percentage point.  
All in all, however, some encouraging structural reforms notwithstanding, the high degree of monetary 
stability achieved stands in contrast to the as yet insufficient flexibility and dynamism of some euro 
area  economies.  The  latter  phenomenon  explains  why  the  success  of  EMU  has  not  been 
accompanied by higher real growth. In particular labour productivity growth has been weak since the 
mid-1990s, and unemployment in many euro area countries is still far too high. These problems need 
to be addressed by stepping up structural reforms. An inflationary monetary policy would certainly not 
be of help - on the contrary, it would make things worse. 
The preconditions for credibility and anchoring of inflation expectations  
Let me now turn to the question of why we have been able to stabilise inflation expectations, and thus 
interest rates, at low levels. I discussed the convergence of long-term interest rates to very low levels 
in  the  late  1990s  in  a  recent  presentation1,  in  which  I  attributed  this  success  to  a  shift  to  a  more 
credible  policy  regime.  Several  institutional  provisions  enshrined  in  the  Treaty  as  well  as  strategic 
                                                      
1   See J.-C. Trichet, " Monetary Policy and Private Expectations”, Zolotas Lecture at the Bank of Greece, Athens, 25 February 
2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
decisions  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  have  been  necessary  preconditions  for  a  credible 
monetary policy and a successful anchoring of inflation expectations. 
With regard to the key institutional provisions, the ECB has been given a clear mandate, namely to 
pursue the primary objective of maintaining price stability, and its independence is fully guaranteed by 
the Treaty. Furthermore, rules for pursuing sound fiscal policies are enshrined in the Treaty in the form 
of the Maastricht criteria; the Stability and Growth Pact implements these principles via regulations. 
As regards the key strategic decisions, the Governing Council of the ECB has designed a stability-
oriented monetary policy strategy. This monetary policy concept is based on an arithmetic definition of 
price stability and on a two-pillar approach involving not only an economic pillar, but also a monetary 
pillar. Our commitment to monitoring monetary developments provides powerful support to anchoring 
long-term inflation expectations. The precise definition of price stability for the euro area showed full 
continuity with the national central banks’ earlier core definitions of price stability and thus ensured that 
inflation  expectations  for  the  new  currency  would  be  the  same  as  for  the  most  credible  national 
currencies immediately before the setting up of the euro.  
Finally, the ECB has opted for a high degree of transparency. From the very beginning, key features of 
the  monetary  policy  strategy  have  been  published.  Moreover,  almost  in  real  time,  the  monthly 
assessment  of  the  Governing  Council  and  the  reasons  for  the  interest  rate  decisions  taken  are 
presented  to  the  public  at  the  press  conferences  immediately  following  the  first  Governing  Council 
meeting of each month. 
All of these factors have contributed to the high degree of credibility enjoyed by the ECB’s monetary 
policy and thus to price stability and the successful anchoring of inflation expectations. But credibility is 
never  gained  once  and  for  all.  It  has  to  be  permanently  preserved  and  enhanced.  That  is  why,  for 
central  bankers,  vigilance  is  always  of  the  essence  and  why  the  ECB  pays  the  utmost  attention  to 
monitoring inflation expectations. 
Inflation and growth differentials among countries in the euro area are moderate … 
In  recent  months  there  has  been  a  renewed  interest  in  the  issue  of  economic  differentials between 
euro area countries. Regional differentials in growth and inflation are a standard feature of all large 
currency  areas  around  the  world.  In  the  euro  area  these  differentials  are  of  a  similar  size  to  those 
observed within the United States. Let me provide some figures. 
The  degree  of  inflation  dispersion  across  the  euro  area  countries  was  characterised  by  a  strong 
downward trend in the 1980s and 1990s and has broadly stabilised since the inception of the euro. 
Inflation dispersion among the euro area countries (measured as the unweighted standard deviation of 
annual HICP inflation rates) was around 6 percentage points in late 1990, while it amounted to slightly 
less  than  1  percentage  point  in  spring 2005.  The  average  inflation  dispersion  across  the  euro  area 
countries has been 1 percentage point since the launch of the euro. This figure is very close to the 
dispersion observed across the 14 US metropolitan statistical areas. 
The dispersion of real GDP growth rates in the euro area has, since 1999, remained very close to its 
historic average, without any signs of increased divergence having emerged so far. In the period from 
1999  to  2004,  the  average  dispersion  of  annual  real  GDP  growth  (measured  as  the  unweighted 
standard deviation) was around 2 percentage points, and thus very close to the average dispersion of 
real growth rates since the 1980s. By comparison, the dispersion of real growth across the US States 
fluctuated  around  an  average  of  2½  percentage  points  between  1990  and  2002,  while  the  average 
dispersion of the real growth rates was around 1½ percentage points across the eight US statistical 
regions. 
… and may reflect welcome adjustment processes  
In a monetary union, inflation and labour cost differentials across regions or countries are the natural 
means of adjusting relative prices in the face of asymmetric demand or supply developments.  
The fact that the single monetary policy cannot address specific circumstances in individual countries 
implies that flexible wages and prices are needed in order to deal with regional shocks or disparities in 
relative demand across regions. For example, regions facing a shortfall in demand relative to potential 
supply  or  a  loss  in  cost  competitiveness  need  to  exhibit  lower  prices  and  costs  for  domestically 
produced services and goods. If wages and prices are flexible and respond quickly, this will support 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
employment and purchasing power and thus contribute to closing the demand shortfall. In addition, 
price and wage changes below the euro area average imply that the competitiveness of the country 
would increase vis-à-vis the other regions and, as a result, that external demand would also contribute 
to  closing  the  gap  between  actual  and  potential  output.  If  labour  and  product  markets  are  rigid, 
however, the shortfall in demand will not lead to a swift and adequate decline in relative wages and 
prices, unemployment in the region will increase and the related regional disparities could persist for 
some time.  
In this context, I should like to make three remarks concerning the euro area.  
First, changes in relative prices within the single currency area have been larger and more frequent 
than  anticipated.  The  idea  that  the  euro  area  is  an  area  in  which  the  single  currency  prevents 
adjustment  of  relative  prices  has  been  clearly  refuted.  For  instance,  the  capacity  of  the  German 
economy to catch up rapidly with the average of the euro area in terms of cost competitiveness after 
the loss of competitiveness associated with German reunification has been very impressive. Strong 
increases in relative unit labour costs during the first half of the 1990s contributed, with some lag, to 
higher unemployment. For example, between 1992 and 1998, unemployment in Germany increased 
by almost 2½ percentage points. In recent years, however, increases in unit labour costs have been 
very moderate, so that the conditions for job creation have clearly improved. This development also 
shows that wages and prices are more flexible than sometimes thought. From that point of view, the 
euro area is more flexible and adaptable than was anticipated by a number of observers.  
Second, the aforementioned process is symmetric. In some cases the existence of positive inflation 
differentials is the natural consequence for an economy that has been outperforming the average in 
terms of cost competitiveness and reached rather low levels of unemployment. For such economies 
inflation above the euro area average may be the natural way to adust towards a more normal price 
level  in  line  with  the  average.  This  problem  had  been  observed,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the 
Netherlands and is possibly still relevant for Ireland.  
Third, inflation differentials are not only the necessary means of achieving relative price adjustments 
within the euro area, as in the case of Germany, they are also a natural feature of some economies in 
the euro area in view of their gradual convergence and catching-up process with regard to the average 
European  GDP  per  capita.  Real  growth  differentials  may  be  welcome  if  they  reflect  such  a  healthy 
catching-up process on the part of less advanced economies. Indeed, since the mid-1990s, most of 
the countries which previously had GDP per capita levels significantly below the euro area average 
have  experienced  above-average  real  GDP  growth  rates.  This  is  particularly  true  for  Ireland,  Spain 
and Greece. A healthy catching-up process is not a zero sum game, it is a win-win situation, as those 
countries  which  are  already  more  productive  can  benefit  from  increased  trade  and  investment 
opportunities. Crucially, EMU increases the chances of achieving such a welcome outcome.  
A credible monetary policy anchors inflation expectations and increases market transparency, thereby 
facilitating  the  necessary  adjustment  of  relative  prices  across  different  countries  or  sectors  in  the 
presence of economic shocks. In addition to the positive effects of monetary stability, a single currency 
enhances  the  processes  of  financial  and  trade  integration  within  the  euro  area.  And  we  have  also 
observed increased risk-sharing between euro area countries. Thus, the euro and the single monetary 
policy contribute not only to the competitiveness of the euro area and to job creation, but also to real 
convergence.  
Cross-country differences may also signal the need for changes in national economic policies  
I  have  just  given  three  economic  reasons  why  cross-country  differentials  in  price  and  labour  cost 
changes reflect welcome adjustments in relative prices within a single currency area. However, there 
is one case in which such differentials are not advisable in terms of national economic policies: this is 
when an economy with an already relatively low level of cost competitiveness and high unemployment 
faces  further  deterioration  on  account  of  higher  price  and  cost  inflation.  In  that  case,  additional 
attention  must  be  given  to  increasing  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of  the  institutions  and  market 
structures in the national economy concerned in order to allow the appropriate adjustment mechanism 
to function, and to redress the relative deterioration of cost competitiveness.  
There are cases where lasting real growth differentials do not reflect welcome catching-up processes, 
but rather structural deficiencies in some countries, leading to low trend output growth and persistently 
high unemployment rates. Such divergences between different countries are independent of whether 
or not these countries share the same currency, and in any case cannot be addressed by monetary 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2005
policy. Countries that show a relatively poor performance in terms of longer-term trends of real growth 
and  job  creation  are  often  also  those  whose  domestic  economy  has  been  less  flexible.  For  these 
countries structural reforms are highly advisable. 
Measures  aimed  at  strengthening  product  market  competition,  labour  market  flexibility  and  thus  job 
creation would certainly be welcome. They would enhance the incentives for firms to both invest in real 
and human capital and offer new jobs. Close monitoring of unit labour cost and wage moderation are 
also, in such cases, essential to reduce excessively high unemployment.  
The more successful the structural measures are, the more jobs will be created at current wage levels 
and the less wage moderation will thus be needed in the long run. However, for those sectors and 
areas of qualification in which unemployment is high and/or the competitiveness of domestic workers 
is  threatened,  wage  moderation,  will  be  important  to  support  job  creation,  and  thus  consumption 
demand.  Let  me  stress  that  both  types  of  measure  -  reforms  and  wage  moderation  -  support 
employment even in a rather closed economy. Of course, both measures would tend also to enhance 
external competitiveness, but their positive effects do not depend on this latter channel.  
Sometimes a radically different equilibrating mechanism is suggested. It has been argued that a euro 
area  country  that  experiences  relatively  weak  aggregate  demand  should  increase  wages  more 
strongly  in  order  to  ensure  higher  demand  for  domestic  goods.  This  would,  however,  be 
counterproductive. Higher real wage and unit labour costs in areas where unemployment is too high 
would undermine job creation and thus reduce demand and supply even further. Of course, once full 
employment has been reached, real wages can and should grow in line with productivity increases.  
All countries and economies benefit substantially from EMU 
As I am speaking here in Mannheim, let me emphasise that the economies that had a very credible 
currency before the euro such as Germany are benefiting substantially from their integration into the 
euro area. The euro is as credible and stable as the Deutsche Mark before it. The purchasing power of 
German workers and consumers has been enhanced by relatively cheap imports from countries within 
Europe and beyond. Employment has been supported by strong export growth, not least to euro area 
and EU trading partners. Market interest rates and thus financing costs have not only been maintained 
at the previous low levels but they are at historically very low levels. The fact that in some economies 
inflation has been somewhat lower than the euro area average for some time should not be seen as a 
disadvantage. It supports the purchasing power of consumers, and it is a reflection of the increasing 
cost competitiveness of the production of these economies. The success of German exports offers a 
good illustration of that phenomenon. Some observers have argued that traditionally low interest rate 
economies are suffering as a result of EMU, as their interest rate comparative advantage relative to 
other countries was removed with the convergence process and the introduction of the euro. However, 
the fact that all euro area countries now enjoy stable prices, low inflation expectations and thus low 
financing costs is also beneficial for economies such as Germany, not least by enhancing trade and 
financial integration. On top of that the elimination of any exchange risk within the euro area is also 
beneficial for all euro area countries including for the traditionally low interest rate economies which 
have in the past suffered a lot from the materialisation of such risks. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my presentation by coming back to the subject of this conference. I have explained 
today  how  EMU  and  a  credible  monetary  policy  benefit  all  euro  area  countries  and  create  great 
opportunities for a dynamic economy and job creation. A good monetary policy is necessary and can 
achieve a lot - but cannot, alone, guarantee full success. Other conditions are also necessary. One 
cannot stress enough that a high degree of competition and a functioning market economy are crucial 
preconditions for job creation, high real wages and, more generally, high living standards.  
Laws or institutions that hinder competition between existing firms and the entry of new competitors 
and  thus  the  effective  working  of  market  mechanisms  tend  to  support  excess  prices,  incomes  and 
profits in those sectors that are protected. Of course, the costs of such protection have to be borne by 
consumers in the form of overly high prices and by the unemployed in the form of fewer opportunities 
for new jobs. However, it is not only the competitiveness of firms that is of great importance in our 
economies.  In  addition,  we  need  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  labour  markets  and  to  provide 
incentives for investing in human capital in order to ensure the “competitiveness of labour”. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 5
A single currency and identical policy rates across the euro area in a certain sense also enhance the 
possibility  to  better  compare  economic  performances  between  Member  States  and  to  draw  lessons 
from  national  experiences  in  terms  of  economic  structures  and  policies.  A  single  monetary  policy 
implies  that  lasting  divergences  in  unemployment  levels  and  real  growth  trends  are  caused 
predominantly  by  different  economic  structures  and  economic  policies  in  individual  countries. 
Moreover, income levels can more easily be compared across countries which use the same currency. 
Monetary  Union  thus  makes  it  easier  for  citizens  to  identify  best  practices  in  other  countries.  This 
benchmarking benefits all the citizens of the euro area - in much the same way as consumers benefit 
from increased competition between firms in the form of higher quality and/or less expensive products. 
Good and promising practices or policies can be better identified and more widely implemented, while 
less successful or ill-designed economic policies are easier to recognise. 
I  am  fully  aware  that  it  is  not  easy  to  implement  structural  reforms  and  consolidate  government 
budgets because of the fact that the public opinion is sometimes not fully convinced that everybody 
would benefit from these reforms. The ECB, for its part, is not lecturing anybody, but considers itself 
part of the necessary process of awareness raising, of tireless explanation. We all need to explain to 
the  citizens  of  Europe  that  policies  which  enhance  competition,  competitiveness  and  flexibility 
contribute  to  higher  employment  and  will  ultimately  improve  prospects  for  real  wage  developments, 
growth and consolidation of government budgets.  
6 
 BIS Review 49/2005
