Svein Gjedrem: Dialogue with boundaries 
Introduction  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
conference “Dialogue without boundaries”, Karlstad, Sweden, 9 March 2005. 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
The 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain new assessments 
of the economic situation or of current interest rate setting. 
 Introduction 
This  year,  Norway  is  commemorating  the  centenary  of  the  disolution  of  the  union  with  Sweden.  In 
retrospect, the dissolution was a painless process. Norway’s internal affairs were not affected by the 
union with Sweden. Historically, a national monetary system and central bank have been an important 
part  of  nation-building.  The  Norwegian  Constitution  of  17  May  1814  did  not  provide  for  a  national 
monetary system. This was first included in the Constitution in November 1814 because of fears that 
the union with Sweden would bring the work on a national monetary system to a halt1. In 1875, the 
Storting  decided  to  join  the  currency  union  that  Denmark  and  Sweden  had  established  two  years 
earlier. Danish, Swedish and Norwegian notes and coins circulated and were used as legal tender in 
all three countries.  
Open  financial  markets,  close  trade  ties  and  a  common  labour  market  provided  then  as  now 
opportunities for high economic growth and prosperity. An example is the Norwegian company Norsk 
Hydro, which was established the same year as the dissolution of the union. Substantial investments 
were  required  and  foreign  capital  was crucial  to  the  company’s establishment.  Moreover,  it  may  be 
worth  noting  that  the  kinship  between  Norway  and  Sweden  was  important  in  this  context.  Kristian 
Birkeland  and  Sam  Eyde,  together  with  the  Swede  Marcus  Wallenberg,  are  considered  as  the 
founders of Hydro.  
Trade  between  Norway  and  Sweden  was  considerable,  with  a  fairly  high  degree  of  labour  flows 
between the two. In the 1800s, a law was enacted providing for a common market for trade in goods, 
but in 1888 Sweden adopted a more protectionist stance. In 1897, Sweden rescined this law, which 
led to a severe setback for Norwegian exports.  
Close  ties  between  Norway  and  Sweden  have  thus  been  important.  They  also  favour  regional 
development, particularly for regions far from national centres but closer to the economic hub in the 
neighbouring country. Monetary policy does not give any particular weight to regional considerations. 
But  a  monetary  policy  that  safeguards  monetary  values  in  the  long  term  and  seeks  to  stabilise 
economic  developments  in  the  short  and  medium  term  will  also  contribute  to  promoting  regional 
development.  
Long-term economic developments 
Consumer prices and economic growth in Norway and Sweden moved on a fairly similar path during 
the years around the dissolution of the union and up to the beginning of the 1970s.  
There  are  several  reasons  for  this.  First,  we  have  been  part  of  and  been  influenced  by  the  same 
international  business  cycles.  Second,  we  have  close  trade  relations,  even  if  there  were  setbacks 
during the interwar period and the two World Wars. Third, both countries participated in various fixed 
exchange  rate  systems  for  long  periods.  After  World  War  II,  we  adhered  to  the  international  fixed 
exchange rate system Bretton Woods.  
During the period 1900 to 1970, the Norwegian and Swedish economy grew at an average annual rate 
of 3.2 and 3.3 per cent respectively.  
With Norway’s emergence as an oil nation, a change occurred. The Norwegian economy continued to 
grow  at  about  the  same  pace.  From  1970  to  date,  the  Norwegian  economy  has  expanded  by  an 
                                                      
1   Report no. 39 (1983): Act on Norges Bank and the Monetary System 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
annual average of 3.4 per cent. The development of the petroleum sector and the use of petroleum 
revenues  contributed  to  relatively  high  growth  also  in  the  mainland  economy.  In  Sweden,  however, 
growth fell to an annual average of 2 per cent.  
Business sector competitiveness in Norway 
After Norway became an oil nation, competitiveness in the business sector in Norway deteriorated in 
relation  to  Sweden.  First,  wage  growth  in  Norway  has  been  somewhat  higher  than  in  Sweden. 
Second, the value of the Norwegian krone against the Swedish krona has appreciated sharply.  
The rise in labour costs in local and common currency was particularly high in the mid-1980s and after 
1997. Hourly labour costs for a Swedish manufacturing worker were on average 8 per cent higher than 
for  a  Norwegian  manufacturing  worker  in  1980  measured  in  common  currency.  In  2004,  however, 
hourly  labour  costs  for  a  Swedish  manufacturing  worker  was  almost  20  per  cent  lower2. 
Competitiveness  in  Norway’s  manufacturing  industry  is  now  close  to  20  per  cent  weaker  than  the 
average for the past 30 years.  
Norwegians had to pay close to 138 Norwegian kroner for 100 Swedish kronar in 1970. Today, we 
only have to pay a little more than 90 Norwegian kroner. The appreciation of the Norwegian krone has 
made it less expensive to buy goods and services in Sweden.  
During  longer  periods,  the  exchange  rate  seems  to  have  been  influenced  by  changes  in  prices  for 
export goods and import goods in the two countries. In the 10 years to 1983, the Norwegian krone 
showed a particularly strong appreciation against the Swedish krona. This occurred at the same time 
as  Norway  experienced  far  more  favourable  developments  in  prices  for  its  export  goods  relative  to 
import  goods  than  was  the  case  for  Sweden.  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  improved.  In  the  1970s,  the 
sharp rise in oil prices contributed to this.  
In  practice,  the  appreciation  of  the  Norwegian  krone  against  the  Swedish  krona  occurred  when  the 
Swedish  authorities  devalued  their  currency  more  than  the  Norwegian  authorities.  The  authorities 
devalued against a basket of currencies. In Sweden, the Palme government’s devaluation of 16 per 
cent in October 1982 was particularly strong. Finland responded by devaluing its currency by 6 per 
cent. In Norway, industrial leaders and industry organisations also pressed in favour of a devaluation 
of the Norwegian krone. Norway’s finance minister Rolf Presthus characterised the Swedish decision 
as a serious setback for Nordic cooperation3, and chose not to change the value of the Norwegian 
krone.  
In  much  of  the  1970s  and  1980s,  economic  policy  in  Norway  and  Sweden  lacked  a  long-term 
approach and credibility. This contributed to wide swings in production and employment. With a policy 
of  low  interest  rates  and  devaluation,  inflation  became  entrenched  at  a  high  level.  Frequent 
devaluations in the period following 1976 could not prevent a weakening of the manufacturing sector 
in the long run. On the contrary, they proved to be self-reinforcing. The wide fluctuations culminated in 
a borrowing spree that started in the mid-1980s, first in Norway and then in Sweden. The borrowing 
spree was succeeded by deep economic crises.  
Both Norway and Sweden had to abandon their fixed exchange rate policy in 1992. Important reasons 
were  freer  capital  flows,  deeper  financial  markets  and  hence  a  surge  in  cross-border  capital 
movements.  
Sweden switched to inflation targeting in 1993 and was among the first countries to introduce a system 
that would later become the norm for small and medium-sized economies. The Riksbank succeeded 
fairly  quickly  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  in  Sweden. 
Norway followed suit in March 2001.  
With  floating  exchange  rates,  the  exchange  rate  may  adapt  to  changes  in  growth  prospects  and 
changes in the terms of trade. Since the end of the 1990s the Swedish krona has depreciated against 
the  Norwegian  krone.  During  this  period,  Norway  has  experienced  a  considerable  rise  in  prices  for 
                                                      
2   Source: The Technical Reporting Committee on Income Settlements, Report no. 1, 2005, preliminary version. The estimates 
take account of both actual hourly wages and indirect costs. 
3   Aftenposten, October 1982 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
export  products such as oil  and aluminium,  partly  owing  to  high  demand  in  China.  Sweden,  on  the 
other hand, has been influenced by a slower rise in prices for goods such as ICT products.  
The  close  trade  relations  between  Norway  and  Sweden  are  of  benefit  to  both  countries.  Even  if 
petroleum exports to Sweden rose sharply in the 1970s, Norway still ran a trade deficit with Sweden.  
We  have  needed  goods  from  Sweden  to  build  up  our  petroleum  sector,  and  increased  wealth  has 
enabled us to increase goods imports from Sweden. Norway has thus maintained its import share of 
traditional  goods  from  Sweden  while  our  export  share  to  Sweden  has  declined.  Weaker  business 
sector competitiveness in Norway in relation to that of Sweden is probably one important factor.  
Looking ahead, some of the features we have observed over the past 30 years may change. There is 
an  imbalance  between  the  cost  level  in  Norway  and  in  Sweden.  The  cost  differential  cannot  be 
sustained  in the  longer  term.  The  high  cost  level  in  the Norwegian  business sector  is adapted  to a 
situation where we are developing the petroleum sector and phasing in the use of petroleum revenues 
into  the  mainland  economy.  After  a  period,  we will  be  able  to cover  a smaller share  of  our imports 
using current petroleum revenues and by drawing on capital in the Petroleum Fund. The Norwegian 
cost level will then have to be dampened, also compared with that of Sweden. Competitiveness may in 
the longer run be brought back to the level prevailing at the end of the 1960s before Norway became 
an oil nation. During such a period of adaptation, which may start in 5 or 10 or 15 years, a flexible 
exchange  rate,  with  a  fall  in  the  Norwegian  krone  against  the  Swedish  krona,  will  have  to  play  an 
important role.  
Where do we stand today? 
Tariff barriers for trade in goods are low. The EU/EEA agreement also provides for increased trade in 
services. During the 1990s, capital mobility has increased to a level that is higher than 100 year ago. 
Free capital flows and free trade pave the way for high economic growth and prosperity, but also entail 
challenges.  
Competition  has  increased  in  many  industries.  Labour-intensive  processes  are  being  transferred  to 
new EU member states such as the Baltic countries. Some multinational companies have streamlined 
various  production  processes  and distribution  and  centralised  them  in  the  same  location.  Saab  has 
been acquired by General Motors and Volvo by Ford. In periods, this has given rise to unrest among 
local  authorities  and  employees,  for  example  in  the  traditional  manufacturing  city  of  Trollhättan.  In 
Norway, many large multinational companies have closed down operations at home and established 
their main offices and warehouses in the Stockholm or Malmö/Copenhagen area. Both the Norwegian 
costs level and population density have been of disadvantage to use with regard to these structural 
developments.  
Sweden has partly responded to strong international competition by continuing to develop new and 
improving existing products and processes. The country has also become a Nordic financial centre by 
being the home country to four large financial conglomerates. As mentioned the Norwegian economy 
has benefited from good prices for our export products and proximity to petroleum activities provide 
Norwegian manufacturing with advantages. However, our oil dependence and a lack of diversification 
in our industry structure are a source of concern as regard long-term developments  
Conclusion 
Monetary policy’s most important contribution is to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. Today, 
inflation targeting is the norm for small and medium-sized economies. Exchange rates fluctuate, but 
there are several ways of hedging against fluctuations. After Sweden switched to inflation targeting, 
the  country  has  experienced  solid  output  growth  and  low  and  stable  inflation  compared  with  the 
previous decades.  
Since 2002, inflation has fallen sharply both in Norway and Sweden. Between December 2002 and 
March  2004,  the  key  rate  was  reduced  by  a  total  of  5.25  percentage  points  in  Norway.  During  the 
same period, the key rate in Sweden was lowered by 2.25 percentage points, but from a lower level.  
Two years after we started lowering interest rates in Norway, there are signs that inflation is moving 
up,  albeit  slowly.  The  interest  rate  cuts  have  had  a  pronounced  impact  on  demand,  output  and 
employment.  
BIS Review 15/2005 
 3
We cannot expect the interest rate to have the same impact from one period to the next. The economy 
is also exposed to unexpected disturbances. As a result, we cannot fine-tune economic developments 
using the interest rate, but avoid the largest effects when the economy is exposed to disturbances. 
The experience of Norway and Sweden may indicate that inflation expectations remain stable even if 
inflation varies somewhat, as long as the interest rate is used actively to moderate the effects. With 
our highly open economies, we may have to accept somewhat wider swings than some countries.  
4 
 BIS Review 15/2005
