Shri V Leeladhar: Indian banking – the challenges ahead 
Text  of  the  Third  Natarajan  Memorial  Lecture  delivered  by  Shri  V  Leeladhar,  Deputy  Governor, 
Reserve Bank of India, Chennai, 14 November 2005. 
 I deem it an honour to have been invited to deliver this year’s G Natarajan memorial lecture. I did not 
have the good fortune of meeting late Shri G.Natrajan but I have heard a lot about him from my friend 
Shri  V.A.  George.  As  a  father  of  a  mentally  challenged  child  I  had  an  insight  into  the  activities  of 
Smt. Poonam  Natrajan,  founder  chairperson  of  Vidya  Sagar,  formerly  known  as  Spastic  Society  of 
India, Chennai. I am grateful to her for inviting me to address this august gathering. Recently I had an 
opportunity to read late Natrajan’s book – Rupee watch, the story of the Indian Forex Market Retold 
(1993 -99) which gives us an idea of the deep insight he had on the India Forex Markets during those 
turbulent days. To pay my homage to this great visionary, I thought nothing could have been more 
appropriate subject for todays address than – “Indian banking – The Challenges Ahead”. 
In recent years, there has been a considerable widening and deepening of the Indian financial system, 
of which banking is a significant component.  With greater liberalisation, the financial system has come 
to play a much larger role in the allocation of resources than in the past and its role in future can be 
expected to be much larger than at present. The growing role of the financial sector in the allocation of 
resources  has  significant  potential  advantages  for  the  efficiency  with  which  our  economy  functions. 
Consequently, the adverse consequences of malfunction of the financial system are likely to be more 
severe than they used to be in the past. Hence, all our efforts today are focused at ensuring greater 
financial stability. Given the significance of the Indian banking system, one cannot afford to underplay 
the importance of a strong and resilient banking system.  
The  pre-reform  period  witnessed  the  following  major  regulatory  constraints  on  the  banking  sector 
which not only distorted the efficiency of the interest rate mechanism but also adversely affected the 
viability and profitability of banks: 
- 
large pre-emptions – both in terms of the statutory holding of Government securities (statutory 
liquidity ratio, or SLR) and cash reserve ratio (CRR); and 
complex structure of administered interest rates; 
- 
One of the major objectives of banking sector reforms in India has been to enhance efficiency and 
productivity, which were achieved through: 
- 
- 
- 
reductions in the pre-emptions; 
de-regulation of interest rates;  
enhancement  of  competition  through  establishment  of  new  banks  in  the  private  sector,  more 
liberal entry of foreign banks, enhancing the role of public shareholders in nationalised banks by 
gradual  reduction  of  Government  shareholding  in  these  banks  and  allowing  foreign  direct 
investment  in  the  private  sector  banks  up  to  74  per  cent,  subject  to  conformity  with  the 
guidelines issued from time to time.  
The  cumulative  effect  of  these  measures  is  that  banks  have  been  accorded  greater  discretion  in 
sourcing and utilisation of resources albeit in an increasingly competitive environment.  
Present position and the challenges ahead 
The enhanced role of the banking sector in the Indian economy, the increasing levels of deregulation 
and the increasing levels of competition have placed numerous demands on banks. Operating in this 
demanding environment has exposed banks to various challenges.  
i) 
Customer  service:  It  is  no  longer  adequate  for  banks  to  provide  only  traditional  banking 
services. Apart from providing the conventional banking services, banks have begun offering a 
bouquet of financial services to their clients, including cross selling of financial products. The 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 1
greater degree of financial inclusion in the country; 
setting up of a mechanism for ensuring fair treatment of consumers; and  
effective redressal of customer grievances. 
ultimate  aim is  to  offer  a one-stop-shop  for  meeting  varied customers'  financial  needs.  Some 
banks have begun employing customer relationship management systems to not only retain the 
existing customers but also to attract new customers. The establishment of new private sector 
banks and foreign banks has rapidly changed the competitive landscape in the Indian consumer 
banking  industry  and  placed  greater  demands  on  banks  to  gear  themselves  up  to  meet  the 
increasing  needs  of  customers.  For  the  discerning  current  day  bank  customers,  it  is  not  only 
relevant  to  offer  a  wide  menu  of  services  but  also  provide  these  in  an  increasingly  efficient 
manner in terms of cost, time and convenience. 
While banks are focusing on the methodologies of meeting the increasing demands placed on 
them,  there  are  legitimate  concerns  in  regard  to  the  banking  practices  that  tend  to  exclude 
rather than attract vast sections of population, in particular pensioners, self-employed and those 
employed  in  unorganised  sector.  While  commercial  considerations  are  no  doubt  important, 
banks have been bestowed with several privileges, especially of seeking public deposits on a 
highly leveraged basis, and consequently they should be obliged to provide banking services to 
all  segments  of  the  population,  on  equitable  basis.  Further,  experience  has  shown  that 
consumers’  interests  are  at  times  not  accorded  full  protection  and  their  grievances  are  not 
properly  attended  to.  Feedback  received  reveals  recent  trends  of  levying  unreasonably  high 
service/user charges and enhancement of user charges without proper and prior intimation. It is 
in  this context  that  the Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India had  mentioned  in  the  Annual  Policy 
Statement 2005-06 that RBI will take initiatives to encourage 
- 
- 
- 
It  would,  therefore,  be  reasonable  to  expect  banks  to  focus  on  the  above  aspects  while 
designing their products for customers. 
Branch banking: Traditionally banks have been looking to expansion of their branch network to 
increase their business. Against this background it is interesting to observe that the new private 
sector  banks  as  well  as  the  foreign  banks  have  been  able  to  achieve  business  expansion 
through other means.  It has been realized that it might not be necessary to establish a wider 
brick  and  mortar  network  to  reach  a  wider  population.  Banks  are,  therefore,  examining  the 
potential  benefits  that  may  accrue  by  tapping  the  agency  arrangement  route  and  the 
outsourcing route. While proceeding in this direction banks ought not to lose sight of the new 
risks that they might be assuming and hence put in place appropriate strategies and systems for 
managing these new risks.  
Competition: With the ever increasing pace and extent of globalisation of the Indian economy 
and the systematic opening up of the Indian banking system to global competition, banks need 
to  equip  themselves  to  operate  in  the  increasingly  competitive  environment.  This  will  make  it 
imperative for banks to enhance their systems and procedures to international standards and 
also simultaneously fortify their financial positions.  
Technology: A few banks which have impressive branch networks have not been able to meet 
their  customers’  expectations  due  to  inefficiencies  arising  out  of  inadequate  investment  in 
technology  and  consequently  faced  an  erosion  of  their  market  shares.    The beneficiaries are 
those banks which have invested in technology. Another distinct advantage of use of technology 
is  the  ability  to  effectively  use  quantitative  techniques  and  models  which  can  enhance  the 
quality  of  their  risk  management  systems.  Recognising  the  benefits  of  modernising  their 
technology infrastructure banks are taking the right initiatives.  The challenge in this regard will 
be  for  banks  to  ensure  that  they  derive  maximum  advantage  out  of  their  investments  in 
technology and to avoid wasteful expenditure which might arise on account of  
 
 
 
a. 
b. 
c. 
A case in point is the implementation of core banking solutions by some banks without 
assessing its scalability or adaptability to meet Basel II requirements.  
uncoordinated and piecemeal adoption of technology;  
adoption of inappropriate/ inconsistent technology and  
adoption of obsolete technology.  
BIS Review 76/2005
  ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
2 
 v) 
  vi) 
  Basel  II  implementation:  As  you  are  aware,  Basel  II  is  the  revised  framework  for  capital 
adequacy  for  banks.  Implementation  of  Basel  II  is  seen  as  one  of  the  significant  challenges 
facing the banking sector in many jurisdictions. With the introduction of capital charge for market 
risks  with  effect  from  the  year  ended  March  31,  2005  banks  in  India  are  compliant  with  all 
elements  of  Basel  I.  I  will  now  outline  the  approach  to  Basel  II  implementation  in  India. 
Commercial  banks  in  India  will  start  implementing  Basel  II  with  effect  from  March  31,  2007. 
They  will  initially  adopt  the  Standardised  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  the  Basic  Indicator 
Approach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed, both by the banks and also 
by the supervisors, some banks may be allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) 
Approach. Implementation of Basel II will require more capital for banks in India due to the fact 
that operational risk is not captured under Basel I, and the capital charge for market risk was not 
prescribed until recently. Though last year has not been a very good year for banks, they are 
exploring all avenues for meeting the capital requirements under Basel II. The cushion available 
in the system, which has a CRAR of over 12 per cent now, is, however, comforting. 
With  a  view  to  ensuring  migration  to  Basel  II  in  a  non-disruptive  manner,  a  consultative  and 
participative approach has been adopted for both designing and implementing Basel II in India. 
A Steering Committee comprising senior officials from 14 banks (public, private and foreign) has 
been  constituted  wherein  representation  from  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  and  the  RBI  has 
also been ensured. The Steering Committee had formed sub-groups to address specific issues. 
On the basis of recommendations of the Steering Committee, draft guidelines to the banks on 
implementation  of  the  New Capital  Adequacy  Framework  have been  issued.  Though  Basel  II 
implementation is considered as a challenge generally, the above approach has lightened the 
burden on banks in India. 
Notwithstanding  the  above,  capacity  building,  both  in  banks  and  the  regulatory  bodies  is  a 
serious  challenge,  especially  with  regard  to  adoption  of  the  advanced  approaches.  We  have 
initiated supervisory capacity-building measures to identify the gaps and to assess as well as 
quantify the extent of additional capital which may be required to be maintained by such banks. 
The  magnitude  of  this  task  appears  daunting  since  we  have  as  many  as  90  scheduled 
commercial banks in India.  
Improving Risk Management Systems: With the increasing degree of deregulation and exposure 
of banks to various types of risks, efficient risk management systems have become essential. 
As  you  are  aware,  as  a  step  towards  further  enhancing  and  fine-tuning  risk  management 
systems in banks, Reserve Bank has issued guidelines on asset-liability management and risk 
management systems in banks in 1999 and Guidance Notes on Credit Risk Management and 
Market  Risk  Management  in  October  2002  and  the  Guidance  Note  on  Operational  risk 
management in 2005. Though Basel II focuses significantly on risks its implementation should 
not be seen as an end in itself. It should be seen as a medium whereby the risk management 
systems in banks are constantly upgraded to address the changing environment.  
At  the  initial  stages  of  development  of  the  risk  management  systems,  banks  were  managing 
each risk in isolation. The current business environment demands a more integrated approach 
to risk management. It is no longer sufficient to manage each risk independently or in functional 
silos. Enterprises worldwide are, therefore, now putting in place an integrated framework for risk 
management which is proactive, systematic and spans across the entire organisation.  Banks in 
India  are  also  moving  from  the  individual  silo  system  to  an enterprise wide  risk management 
system.  This  is  placing  greater  demands  on  the  risk  management  skills  in  banks  and  has 
brought to the forefront the need for capacity building. While the first milestone would be risk 
integration across the entity, banks are also aware of the desirability of risk aggregation across 
the group both in the specific risk areas as also across the risks. Banks would be required to 
allocate significant resources towards this objective over the next few years. 
In the Reserve Bank, we have adopted the risk based approach to supervision since 2003 and 
have brought about 23 banks under the fold of risk based supervision (RBS) on a pilot basis. On 
the  basis  of  the  feedback  received  from  the  pilot  project,  the  RBS  framework  has  now  been 
reviewed.  The  risk  based  approach  to  supervision  is  also  serving  as  a  catalyst  to  banks’ 
migration to the integrated risk management systems. In view of the relevance of improved risk 
management  systems  under  the  changing  circumstances  and  the  larger  emphasis  placed  on 
risk management systems in banks under Basel II, it is essential that the RBS stabilizes at an 
early date and serves as an important feedback not only to bank managements but also to RBI. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 3
vii) 
However, taking into account the diversity in the Indian banking system, stabilizing the RBS as 
an effective supervisory mechanism will be a challenge to the RBI. 
Implementation of new accounting standards: Derivative activity in banks has been increasing at 
a brisk pace. While the risk management framework for derivative trading, which is a relatively 
new  area  for  Indian  banks  (particularly  in  the  more  structured  products),  is  an  essential  pre-
requisite, the absence of clear accounting guidelines in this area is matter of significant concern. 
It  is widely accepted  that as  the  volume  of  transactions  increases,  which  is happening  in  the 
Indian  banking  system,  the  need  to  upgrade  the  accounting  framework  needs  no  emphasis.  
The World Bank’s ROSC on Accounting and Auditing in India has commented on the absence 
of  an  accounting  standard  which  deals  with  recognition,  measurement  and  disclosures 
pertaining  to  financial  instruments.  The  Accounting  Standards  Board  of  the  Institute  of 
Chartered  Accountants  of  India  (ICAI)  is  considering  issue  of  Accounting  Standards  on  the 
above  aspects  pertaining  to  financial  Instruments.  These  will  be  the  Indian  parallel  to 
International Accounting Standards 32 and 39. The proposed Accounting Standards will be of 
considerable  significance  for  financial  entities  and  could  therefore  have  implications  for  the 
financial sector. The formal introduction of these Accounting Standards by the ICAI is likely to 
take  some  time  in  view  of  the  processes  involved.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  Reserve  Bank  is 
considering the need for banks and financial entities adopting the broad underlying principles of 
IAS 39. Since this is likely to give rise to some regulatory / prudential issues all relevant aspects 
are  being  comprehensively  examined.  The  proposals  in  this  regard  would,  as  is  normal,  be 
discussed  with  the  market  participants  before  introduction.  Adoption  and  implementation  of 
these principles are likely to pose a great challenge to both the banks and the Reserve Bank. 
viii)  Transparency and Disclosures: In pursuance of the Financial Sector Reforms introduced since 
1991 and in order to bring about meaningful disclosure of the true financial position of banks to 
enable  the  users  of  financial  statements  to  study  and  have  a  meaningful  comparison  of  their 
positions, a series of measures were initiated. The disclosure requirements broadly covered the 
following aspects:  
Capital adequacy 
Asset quality 
Maturity distribution of select items of assets and liabilities 
Profitability 
Country risk exposure 
Risk exposures in derivatives 
Segment reporting 
Related Party disclosures 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
With a view to moving closer towards international best practices including International Accounting 
Standards (IAS) and the disclosure requirements under Pillar 3 of Basel II, Reserve Bank has 
proposed  enhanced  disclosures  which  lay  a  greater  emphasis  on  disclosure  of  certain 
qualitative  aspects.  Transparency  and  disclosure  standards  are  also  recognised  as  important 
constituents of a sound corporate governance mechanism. Banks are required to formulate a 
formal disclosure policy approved by the Board of directors that addresses the bank’s approach 
for  determining  what  disclosures  it  will  make  and  the  internal  controls  over  the  disclosure 
process. In addition, banks should implement a process for assessing the appropriateness of 
their disclosures, including validation and frequency.  
Supervision of financial conglomerates: In view of increased focus on empowering supervisors 
to undertake consolidated supervision of bank groups and since the Core Principles for Effective 
Banking Supervision issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have underscored 
consolidated supervision as an independent principle, the Reserve Bank had introduced, as an 
initial  step,  consolidated  accounting  and  other  quantitative  methods  to  facilitate  consolidated 
supervision.  The  components  of  consolidated  supervision  include,  consolidated  financial 
statements  intended  for  public  disclosure,  consolidated  prudential  reports  intended  for 
supervisory assessment of risks and application of certain prudential regulations on group basis. 
In  due  course,  consolidated  supervision  as  introduced  above would  evolve  to  cover banks  in 
ix) 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2005
 x) 
xi) 
mixed  conglomerates,  where  the  parent  may  be  non-financial  entities  or  parents  may  be 
financial entities coming under the jurisdiction of other regulators.  
The financial landscape is increasingly witnessing entry of some of the bigger banks into other 
financial  segments  like  merchant  banking,  insurance  etc.,  which  has  made  them  financial 
conglomerates.  Emergence  of  several  new  players  with  diversified  presence  across  major 
segments and possibility of some of the non-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring 
large  enough  proportions  to  have  systemic  impact  make  it  imperative  for  supervision  to  be 
spread  across  various  segments  of  the  financial  sector.  In  this  direction,  an  inter-regulatory 
Working  Group  was  constituted  with  members  from  RBI,  SEBI  and  IRDA.  The  framework 
proposed by the Group will be complementary to the existing regulatory structure wherein the 
individual  entities  are  regulated  by  the  respective  regulators  and  the  identified  financial 
conglomerates  would  be  subjected  to  focussed  regulatory  oversight  through  a  mechanism  of 
inter-regulatory  exchange  of  information.  As  a  first  step  in  this  direction,  an  inter-agency 
Working  Group  on  Financial  Conglomerates  (FC)  comprising  the  above  three  supervisory 
bodies identified 23 FCs and a pilot process for obtaining information from these conglomerates 
has been initiated. The complexities involved in the supervision of financial conglomerates are a 
challenge not only to the Reserve Bank of India but also to the other regulatory agencies, which 
need to have a close and continued coordination on an on-going basis.  
'Know  Your  Customer'  (KYC)  Guidelines  –  Anti  Money  Laundering  Standards:  Banks  were 
advised in 2002 to follow certain customer identification procedure for opening of accounts and 
monitoring  transactions  of  a  suspicious  nature  for  the  purpose  of  reporting  it  to  appropriate 
authority.  These  ‘Know  Your  Customer’  guidelines  were  revisited  in  the  context  of  the 
recommendations  made  by  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  on  Anti  Money  Laundering 
standards  and  on  Combating  Financing  of  Terrorism.  These  standards  have  become  the 
international  benchmark  for  framing  Anti  Money  Laundering  and  combating  financing  of 
terrorism  policies  by  the  regulatory  authorities.  Compliance  with  these  standards  both  by  the 
banks/financial  institutions  and  the  country  has  become  necessary  for  international  financial 
relationships. Detailed guidelines based on the Recommendations of the Financial Action Task 
Force and the paper issued on Customer Due Diligence for banks by the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision, with indicative suggestions wherever considered necessary, were issued 
to banks in November 2004. Banks were required to ensure that a proper policy framework on 
‘Know  Your  Customer’  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  measures  is  formulated  and  put  in  place 
with the approval of the Board within three months and be fully compliant with these guidelines 
before December 31, 2005. Compliance with the above is a significant challenge to the entire 
banking industry to fortify itself against misuse by anti-social persons/ entities and thus project a 
picture  of  solidarity  and  financial  integrity  of  the  Indian  banking  system  to  the  international 
community. 
Corporate Governance: Banks are “special” as they not only accept and deploy large amount of 
uncollateralized  public  funds  in  fiduciary  capacity,  but  they  also  leverage  such  funds  through 
credit  creation.    Banks  are  also  important  for  smooth  functioning  of  the  payment  system.    In 
view  of  the  above,  legal  prescriptions  for  ownership  and  governance  of  banks  laid  down  in 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 have been supplemented by regulatory prescriptions issued by 
RBI from time to time. In this context, one must remember that profit motive should not be the 
sole criterion for business decisions. Flow of bank finance for productive purposes must always 
take priority over the granting of credit for speculative investment no matter how profitable the 
latter may be. If bank finance flows increasingly to finance speculative activities, it will be to the 
detriment  of  real  productive  investment  for  research,  development  and  the  production  of  real 
goods/  services.  One  might  conclude  that  such  uncontrolled  flow  would  ultimately  affect 
economic growth. Hence, funding of speculative activities must be subject to prudential limits, 
even though it might yield attractive returns. This will be a significant challenge to banks where 
the priorities and incentives might not be well balanced by the operation of sound principles of 
corporate  governance.  If  the  internal  imbalances  are  not  re-balanced  immediately,  the 
correction may evolve through external forces and may be painful and costly to all stakeholders. 
The focus, therefore, should be on enhancing and fortifying operation of the principles of sound 
corporate governance. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 5
 Conclusion 
Friends, it is crucial for the banking industry to meet the increasingly complex savings and financing 
needs of the economy by offering a wider and flexible range of financial products tailored for all types 
of customers. With the increasing levels of globalisation of the Indian banking industry, evolution of 
universal  banks  and  bundling  of  financial  services,  competition  in  the  banking  industry  will  intensify 
further. The banking industry has the potential and the ability to rise to the occasion as demonstrated 
by the rapid pace of automation which has already had a profound impact on raising the standard of 
banking  services.  The  financial  strength  of  individual  banks,  which  are  major  participants  in  the 
financial system, is the first line of defence against financial risks. Strong capital positions and balance 
sheets place banks in a better position to deal with and absorb the economic shocks. Banks need to 
supplement  this  with  sophisticated  and  robust  risk  management  practices  and  the  resolve  to  face 
competition without diluting the operating standards.  
Thank You 
 
Acknowledgements: 
Y V Reddy: Banking sector reforms in India - an overview, Karachi, 18 May 2005. 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2005
