Michael C Bonello: Pursuing faster growth in a stable macroeconomic 
environment 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Annual Dinner of the 
Institute of Financial Services, St. Julians, 10 November 2005. 
 Prime Minister, Parliamentary Secretary, Excellencies, Ladies & Gentlemen, 
I  should  first  of  all  like  to  thank  the  President  and  Council  of  the  Institute  of  Financial  Services  for 
inviting me once again to their annual dinner. Over the past six years I have been able to observe with 
satisfaction  how  the  Institute  has  successfully  adapted  itself  to  the  steady  expansion  of  Malta’s 
financial  services  industry,  and  to  the  demand  this  growth  has  generated  for  a  diversified  range  of 
professional expertise. One planned innovation which I consider most appropriate is the Certificate in 
Mortgage Advice and Practice that is partly based on Maltese law. 
This annual occasion also affords me a welcome opportunity to share with a distinguished audience of 
bankers  and  their  corporate  guests  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  a  subject  of  topical  interest.  In  today’s 
complex global environment several issues spontaneously present themselves as likely candidates for 
further analysis. For us in Malta, the major policy challenge at this time is to return the economy to a 
path of higher and sustained growth. The facts speak for themselves. In the five years to 2004, the 
annual  growth  rate  averaged  only  1.2  per  cent  in  real  terms,  well  below  that  of  many  of  our  EU 
partners; and while this year’s growth rate up to September, at 1.7 per cent, may be encouraging, it is 
too early to know whether the implied acceleration will be sustained. 
And yet the need to achieve a faster pace of economic growth has probably never been as urgent as 
at the present time. Growth is not only necessary in order to satisfy society’s legitimate aspirations for 
higher living standards. Beyond that, an expansion in the economy’s supply capacity and an enhanced 
degree of international competitiveness are essential to overcome the daunting challenges the country 
is currently facing. 
A threefold challenge: globalization and its implications  
The  first  challenge  derives  from  the  pervasive  process  of  globalization,  which,  powered  by  rapid 
advances  in  technology  and  trade  liberalization,  has  given  rise  to  an  unprecedented  mobility  of 
resources between countries in pursuit of the best cost-quality combinations. Suffice it to say that over 
the past two decades exports and foreign direct investment have been growing twice and three times 
faster  than  global  output,  respectively.  Globalization  is  undoubtedly  creating  numerous  profitable 
business opportunities. 
At the same time, however, it represents a potential threat for open economies like Malta’s because of 
the  concurrent  intensification  of  competition.  Behind  recent  trends,  in  fact,  lies  the  emergence  of 
countries  like  China  and  India,  who  have  doubled  their  share  of  global  output  over  the  past  twenty 
years and are now also competing in markets for high technology products. China alone manufactures 
half of the world’s cameras and its share of world exports of computers increased tenfold, to almost 20 
per cent, in the ten years to 2003! We, too, must find a way to participate actively in globalization and 
gain from it. 
... compounded by a sharply higher oil price ...  
The second challenge derives from the sharp increase in oil prices. There is a silver lining to this dark 
cloud in the sense that the price rise is not expected to have a significant effect on world output. The 
IMF, for example, anticipates global growth to average 4.3 per cent both in 2005 and 2006. This is 
mainly  because  it  is  due  to  an  expansion  in  demand  that  is  underpinned  by  economic  growth, 
particularly in Asia. It is still the  case, however, that a massive redistribution of wealth is underway 
from countries which consume oil to those which produce it. 
Malta is inevitably on the losing side of this process. The estimated increase in the fuel bill for 2006 
arising  from  the  production  of  electricity  and  the  consumption  of  liquid  fuels  is  not  far  from  the 
expansion in nominal GDP forecast for 2005. It would seem, therefore, that no significant growth could 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 1
be expected next year if the underlying pace of economic activity does not accelerate from this year’s 
level. 
The increase in Malta’s fuel bill is also roughly equivalent to the narrowing of the fiscal deficit achieved 
over  the  past  seven  years.  In  the circumstances, it would  be  foolish  to  allow  the  progress made at 
considerable cost to be blown away by this external shock. An attempt to cushion the increase in the 
oil price through borrowing may be economically justifiable in terms of sustaining the incipient recovery 
suggested by recent GDP data. On the other hand, any borrowing would have to be serviced; and, 
because  it  would  constitute  interference  with  market  signals,  it  could  also  retard  the  process  of 
economic adjustment. 
The only long-term remedy to counteract the effects of higher fuel prices is to expand productivity and 
output, and therefore incomes. Indeed, the oil price shock is another compelling reason, if one were 
needed, for redoubling our efforts to energize the economy. 
… and by a higher dependency ratio due to population ageing.  
The third challenge is the demographic shift caused by population ageing, such that the ratio of the 
working age to the dependent population is expected to shrink from almost four- to just over two-to-
one by the late 2020s. Some effects of this trend are already being felt this year as the first cohorts of 
the  baby-boom  generation  reach  retirement  age.  This  has  produced  a  significant  acceleration,  by 
some Lm7 million or 10 per cent of the budget deficit, in the rate of increase in pension expenditures. 
Pension reform clearly cannot be delayed any longer. 
Population  ageing  also  represents  a  broader  threat  to  the  sustainability  of  living  standards  and  to 
social  cohesion  because  the  burden  of  supporting  a  growing  number  of  dependent  persons  will,  at 
some point, become unbearable for the productive sectors of the economy. This burden consists not 
only of pension and other welfare payments, but also of services provided in kind, most notably by the 
public health system. This is another reason why reducing government recurrent commitments should 
be a priority objective. 
A  better  understanding  of  the  magnitude  of  these  challenges  can  be obtained  by  synthesising  their 
effects  in  terms  of  the  growth  rate  necessary  for  the  economy  to  deal  with  them  effectively.  For 
example,  in  order  just  to  compensate  for  the  increase  in  the  dependency  ratio  associated  with 
population ageing, the economy would have to grow by around 1 per cent per annum over the next 
twenty  years.  At  this  rate  of  growth,  which  is  more  or  less  what  Malta  averaged  over  the  past  five 
years, there would not be any improvement in per capita GDP, that is in living standards. As for hopes 
of  raising  the  activity  rate  by  ten  percentage  points  to  around  70  per  cent  over  twenty  years,  the 
economy would have to grow by an average annual rate of at least 3 per cent. This growth rate, in 
turn, would still not be sufficient to ensure convergence with the average per capita GDP of the EU 
twenty years from now. For this latter objective to be achieved, a real growth rate of some 4 per cent 
would be required. 
The way forward: a concerted push for faster growth 
These  scenarios  underline  the  urgency  of  achieving  more  rapid,  sustainable  growth.  The  longer  it 
takes  to  expand  the  productive  base  of  the  economy,  the  more  onerous  the  challenge  will  be.  The 
prospects  for  a  significant  recovery  in  the  short  term,  moreover,  are  doubtful  since  oil  prices  are 
expected to remain at their current high level, and the dynamic benefits of fiscal consolidation and EU 
membership  are  unlikely  to  exercise  a  marked  impact  on  growth  in  the  coming  months.  Growth 
forecasts for 2006 vary between 1% and 2%. 
The current economic situation, therefore, requires decisive action designed to produce early results. I, 
therefore,  feel  obliged  once  again  to  make  a  strong  appeal  to  all  the  social  partners  not  to 
underestimate the threat which today’s realities represent for the wellbeing of their own members, and 
to  cooperate  in  the  search  for  real,  long-term  solutions  in  the  national  interest.  The  alternative  is  a 
slow, but depressing process of stagnation. 
The way forward towards faster growth lies in the first instance in striving to maintain the competitive 
advantage  of  traditional  sectors  –  which  typically  rely  heavily  on  cost  advantage  and  where  market 
share  is  being  lost  -,  while  promoting  the  development  of  new  activities  that  exploit  the  potential 
offered  by  Malta’s  strategic  assets.  These  include  EU  membership,  a  modern  technological 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2005
infrastructure  and  a  skilled  and  flexible  labour  force.  The  current,  encouraging  expansion  in  new 
activities  such  as  financial  services,  software  development  and  pharmaceuticals  attests  to  the 
competitive edge which our economy indeed enjoys in these areas. This advantage must, however, 
also be supported by a stable operating environment that is responsive to changing market conditions. 
Elements of a coherent policy framework 
Such  an  environment  requires  a  coherent  policy  framework  on  three  levels:  the  first  is  the 
macroeconomic level, where a sound financial system and prudent fiscal and monetary policies should 
combine  to  provide  favourable  conditions  for  the  restructuring  of  the  productive  base.  At  the 
microeconomic level, resources must be more efficiently allocated and managed by enterprises so as 
to  obtain  the  maximum  possible  degree  of  cost-effectiveness  and  market  penetration.  The  third 
involves  what  may  be  termed  as  meso-level  policies,  involving  specific  sectors.  Policy  at  this  level 
should primarily avoid distorting the mechanisms that facilitate economic activity. 
Supportive macroeconomic policies are already in place … 
At the macroeconomic level, the recent track record has been largely positive. Fiscal consolidation is 
progressing  in  line  with  the  projections  of  the  convergence  programme.  Despite  weak  growth,  the 
fiscal balance improved significantly in 2004 and again this year. This has not escaped the attention of 
international  observers.  The  recent  assessment  of  the  Maltese  economy  by  the  IMF,  for  example, 
commends  the  progress  achieved  in  strengthening  macroeconomic  management,  including  the 
substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit. 
Looking  ahead,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Budget  for  2006  bears  the  hallmark  of  continuity. 
Operating  within  the  constraints  represented  by  the  natural  upward  creep  in  spending  on  health, 
pensions and welfare programmes, on the one hand, and the need to avoid increasing the burden of 
taxation  on  a  slow  moving  economy,  on  the  other,  the  Government  has  charted  a  course  which 
envisages  a continuation of  the process  of  fiscal consolidation,  leading  to  a  further reduction  in  the 
deficit  to  GDP  ratio  to  below  3  per  cent.  This  is  an  ambitious  target  whose  attainment  will  depend 
crucially on a rigorous implementation of all the Budget measures, together with an intensification of 
efforts aimed at cutting costs and collecting taxes. 
On the monetary front, the financial markets have so far considered the level of domestic interest rates 
as  appropriate  and  inflation  remains  moderate.  Monetary  stability  is  also  being  promoted  by 
participation in ERM II, which is proceeding smoothly. 
Allow  me  at  this  point,  Mr.  President,  to  reiterate  the  reasons  behind  the  Bank’s  advice  to  the 
Government to maintain the value of the Maltese lira constant against the euro within ERM II at the 
rate prevailing prior to entry in the Mechanism. 
First, it is generally acknowledged that Malta’s pegged exchange rate regime has in the past served 
the economy well, in that it kept inflation and inflationary expectations at bay. As for the level of the 
central  parity  rate  of  the  lira  in  ERM  II,  studies  conducted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  found  no 
evidence of a significant exchange rate misalignment, a conclusion which was not contested by the 
competent  EU  institutions.  There  being  no  compelling  reasons  for  change,  therefore,  the  exchange 
rate  level  prevailing  prior  to  entering  the  Mechanism  was  retained  in  the  interests  of  continuity  and 
stability. 
As for the unilateral commitment to maintain the currency at its central parity rate during the ERM II 
phase, I would remind the proponents of a flexible exchange rate regime of Malta’s high dependence 
on foreign trade. For such an open economy, the resultant volatility and consequent uncertainty would 
entail additional costs associated with insuring against exchange risk, thereby inflating both retail and 
export prices. 
Changes  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  moreover,  are  not  likely  to  have  a  significant  impact  on 
competitiveness  via  adjustments  in  the  real  exchange  rate.  This  is  because  a  weakening  of  the 
currency  is  typically  followed  by  a  rapid  pass-through  in  the  shape  of  higher  prices  of  imports  and 
wages,  as  the  1992  experience  proved.  On  the  other  hand,  due  to  downward  rigidities,  a 
strengthening of the Maltese lira cannot be expected to be followed by commensurate reductions in 
price and wage levels. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 3
Finally, advocates of flexibility should note that if the Maltese lira were allowed to fluctuate within the 
ERM II bands, the exchange rate would reflect developments in the balance of payments as a whole, 
including  those  in  the  capital  account,  and  would  not,  therefore,  necessarily  adjust  in  response  to 
export trends. Indeed, had the Bank opted for the bands, market forces would have exerted upward 
pressure on the exchange rate. This is because since ERM II entry in May there has been a steady 
market  demand  for  the  lira,  such  that  the  Bank  has  been  a  net  buyer  of  foreign  exchange  and  the 
external reserves have increased substantially. 
It is very important that these basic facts be well understood before public pronouncements are made 
that  might  affect  the  credibility  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy.  You  will  recall  that  when 
negative perceptions about the exchange rate took hold towards the end of 2004, they eventually led 
the Bank to defend the currency by raising interest rates. This is a responsibility that the Bank cannot, 
and will not, abdicate. 
… as are progressive policies at the enterprise level … 
At the microeconomic level, a measure of progress is being registered in spite of the failure to adopt a 
social  pact.  There  are  indications  that  productivity-enhancing  measures  are  being  introduced  at  the 
enterprise  level  under  the  pressure  of  competitive  forces.  These  range  from  more  flexible  working 
practices  and  wage  restraint  to  improved  management  techniques  and  more  focussed  marketing 
efforts. Some areas, however, remain susceptible to further efficiency gains, particularly the services 
sector. 
… but the public sector still lags behind.  
At  the  meso  or  sectoral  level,  some  important  measures  were  announced  in  the  Budget  for  2006, 
including the decision to intensify efforts to improve efficiency in the public service. Hopefully this will 
also involve the adoption of output-, rather than input-oriented management practices. The recently-
signed  collective  agreement  for  the  public  service,  moreover,  is  an  example  of  what  a  responsible 
social dialogue aimed at balancing competing interests can achieve. 
There remains, nevertheless, ample room for further progress. The country needs to undergo a culture 
change so as to realise the fallacy inherent in the perception of unlimited government power to levy 
taxes,  which  leads  to  the  assumption  of  jobs  for  life  regardless  of  performance  or  need,  and  of 
universal  and  free  welfare  services  irrespective  of  their  sustainability  and  of  equity  considerations. 
Such thinking is incompatible with an ethic based on efficiency and accountability, and with the need 
to reduce the burden of taxation, foster initiative and encourage investment. Social dialogue can, and 
should  play  a  crucial  role  in  promoting  acceptance  of  the  policies  necessary  to  bring  about  this 
change. 
The  attainment  of  greater  efficiency  in  the  public  sector  is  a  key  objective  because  it  provides  vital 
support services to the productive sectors of the economy. It must, therefore, become better geared to 
ensure that the intentions of policy-makers are implemented rapidly and effectively. Determined efforts 
must  be  made  to  streamline  bureaucratic  procedures,  eliminate  outdated  regulations  and  generally 
reduce the cost of engaging in any economic activity. The Better Regulation Unit in the Office of the 
Prime Minister must meet the expectations its creation has raised. Failure to do so risks compromising 
all  the  efforts  being  undertaken  at  both  the  macro  and  microeconomic  levels  to  create  a  modern, 
dynamic economy. 
At  the  national  level,  moreover,  we  need  to  understand  that  the  simultaneous  pursuit  of  economic 
growth and a high degree of social protection can only be achieved by making our product and labour 
markets  more  flexible;  by  investing  more  in  people,  refining  their  skills  and  helping  them  into  work, 
while  introducing  an  obligation  to  take  up  jobs;  and  by  giving  more  importance  to  developing  our 
scientific and technological base. 
We  do  not  need  to  look  far  to  see  how  this  can  be  done.  Faced  with  high  labour  costs  in  the  late 
1990s,  German  companies  started  restructuring  and  downsizing.  The  government  meanwhile 
introduced social security reforms aimed at making the welfare state less expensive, as well as labour 
market  reforms  that  created  incentives  for  the  jobless  to  work.  An  awareness  developed  that  the 
solution  to  chronic  deficits  and  unemployment  could  no  longer  be  to  cut  public  investments.  As  a 
result, Germany’s unit labour costs have fallen by 12 per cent since 1999 against those of France. The 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2005
payoff  was  significant:  the  volume  of  German  exports  rose  by  47  per  cent  over  the  same  period, 
compared with 25 per cent in France. 
The  French  were  not  unaware  that  they,  too,  had  a  competitiveness  problem.  A  commission  of 
independent experts led by the former Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, was set up 
in 2003. Reporting earlier this year, the experts concluded that without a change of direction, decline 
was a real threat for France. They identified two obstacles to growth: first, not enough people worked, 
and those who did failed to work long enough; second, the heavy State had become a costly drag on 
the economy. 
Our own country faces a similar predicament. Malta’s labour participation rate is among the lowest in 
the EU at 58 per cent; as for hours worked, during 2004 the Maltese worked 72 fewer hours than the 
hardest working people in the EU, the Estonians, Lithuanians, Poles and Slovenes, mainly because 
we enjoyed 13 public holidays, the most in the EU, whereas the countries just mentioned had only 8; 
as for the cost of the State, the public sector in Malta absorbs just over half of the GDP, the fourth 
highest percentage in the EU. 
Conclusion 
Mr. President, we are indeed facing an unprecedented challenge. The consequences of our inherent 
vulnerability  to  external  events,  and  of  a  large  State  apparatus  which  subsidizes  inefficient  public 
corporations  and  offers  its  citizens  notionally  free  services  irrespective  of  income  levels  as  well  as 
generous  welfare  benefits  are  catching  up  with  us  very  rapidly.  In  the  meantime,  the  world  has 
changed  beyond  any  expectation.  For  those  of  us  who  remember  the  days  when  famines  and 
inefficient  state-controlled  economies  were  endemic  in  Asia,  today’s  realities  are  not  easy  to 
comprehend or to accept. The former EU Internal Market Commissioner, Fritz Bolkenstein, captured 
the momentous nature of this change most strikingly when he observed recently that “The true heirs of 
the capitalist revolution now live in Asia.” 
We  in  Malta,  too,  need  to  change  if,  like  them,  we  want  to  turn  globalization  from  a  threat  into  an 
opportunity.  We  must  shake  off  our  ambivalent  attitude  to  reform:  we  know  that  the  status  quo  is 
unsustainable, but it is also comfortable, and so we are reluctant to bear the cost of change. Hence 
the slow pace of reform, characterized by the commissioning of reports followed by long drawn-out 
consultations in search of a consensus, which frequently proves elusive. But time is running out faster 
than many appreciate. For a start, let us stop blaming others for our woes and, as Brutus was enjoined 
to do, let us accept that “The fault …… lies not in our stars but in ourselves.” We should then work 
together to build on our past achievements, which are not negligible, in order to secure the objectives 
of greater material wellbeing and social cohesion which, after all, we all profess to share. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 5
