Toshihiko Fukui: Overview of the Japanese economy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 8 December 2005.  
 Introduction  
I understand that this has been a very active and full year here in the Chubu region with the opening of 
Central  Japan  International  Airport  (Centrair)  and  the  success  of  Expo  2005  Aichi  Japan.  The 
Japanese  economy  has  also  been  recovering  its  vibrancy,  as  if  absorbing  the  dynamism  of  your 
region. I attended the meeting of the G-7 countries in London last week. The G-7 countries shared the 
view  that  overall  global  economic  growth  remained  and  should  continue  to  be  solid  although  there 
were risk factors such as high crude oil prices and increasing inflationary pressures. In my remarks 
today,  I  will  present  the  Bank's  view  regarding  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  and 
explain our thinking on the conduct of monetary policy.  
The current state of Japan's economy and the outlook  
Japan's economy continues to recover, having emerged from the temporary pause that began in the 
second half of 2004. The economy is likely to experience a sustained period of expansion at a pace 
slightly above its potential. The Bank released the October Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
(the Outlook Report) about a month ago. This Outlook Report projects that such economic growth will 
continue during the rest of fiscal 2005 and through fiscal 2006.  
In  addition  to  the  continued  expansion  of  overseas  economies,  another  major  factor  behind  the 
ongoing recovery is that the corporate sector has essentially completed its adjustments of the "three 
excesses," namely, production capacity, employment, and debt. In relation to the financial system, it 
may also be noted that financial institutions have now mostly overcome the nonperforming-loan (NPL) 
problem and recovered their management stability.  
In the corporate sector, corporate profits have increased for three consecutive years since fiscal 2002, 
and this trend is continuing during fiscal 2005 with the ratio of profits to sales primarily at large firms 
surpassing the levels recorded during the bubble era. The semiannual book closings for the first half of 
fiscal 2005 indicated that high profits were being maintained across a wide range of industries. As a 
background to the favorable corporate profits over the past three to four years, firms have reduced the 
"three  excesses,"  and  this  has  been  effective  in  greatly  lowering  break-even  points.  Amid  these 
developments,  the  global  economic  growth  rate  accelerated  through  2003-04,  and  domestic  private 
demand has been firmer than predicted in fiscal 2005, pushing up sales and strongly supporting the 
recent improvement in profits.  
Domestic private demand has been firmer than expected because while business fixed investment has 
increased against the background of high corporate profits, strong corporate performance is positively 
influencing  the  household  sector  via  increases  in  wages  and  employment,  as  well  as  increases  in 
dividends and stock prices. According to the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in 
Japan), large and small firms believe that they are presently facing their greatest personnel shortages 
in  13  and  eight  years,  respectively.  Under  these  conditions,  the  number  of  part-time  employees 
peaked in early fiscal 2005 and the number of full-time employees is growing. Turning to wages per 
worker,  regular  payments  have  been  rising,  mostly  because  of  increases  in  wages  for  full-time 
employees,  and  special  payments  have  also  been  increasing  against  the  background  of  high 
corporate profits. According to surveys by private institutions, winter bonuses at large firms for 2005 
will increase at a high rate, surpassing the rise in summer bonuses. Consequently, household income 
continues to rise gradually. Moreover, the dividend income received by households is growing year by 
year, with the percentage of dividend income against interest income rising from about 40 percent to 
about  80  percent  over  the  past  three  to  four  years.  Amid  this  improvement  in  the  employment  and 
income situation, consumer confidence is generally good and private consumption has been steady.  
In this manner, a virtuous cycle has begun whereby favorable corporate profits are leading to stronger 
business  fixed  investment  and  spreading  to  the  household  sector  in  various  ways,  increasing 
household  expenditures  and  feeding  back  to  the  corporate  sector  via  the  growth  in  private 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 1
consumption. The economy is thus unlikely to fall into a recession due to domestic factors for the time 
being.  
Also, as I have mentioned, the financial system has been improving significantly. The percentages of 
NPLs at financial institutions have declined greatly since they peaked at the end of fiscal 2001, and 
banks  posted  record-high  profits  in  their  semiannual  book  closings  at  the  end  of  September  2005, 
surpassing those achieved during the bubble era. Bank lending (amount outstanding, after adjusting 
for the liquidation of loans and loan write-offs), which had long maintained negative growth, began to 
rise year on year from August 2005. While the corporate sector as a whole continues to repay debt, 
repayment pressures are gradually easing, and amid the continuing recovery in business conditions 
some  firms  are  moving  ahead  with  their  external  funding  activities,  taking  advantage  of  the 
accommodative financial environment. Additionally, land price adjustments have advanced, especially 
in  major  cities,  and  the  increase  in  housing-related  investment,  among  others,  is  another  factor 
contributing to the rise in bank lending.  
Future risk factors  
Of  course,  there  are  certain  risk  factors  for  the  economic  outlook.  The  Bank  is  paying  particular 
attention to the rise in crude oil prices and the developments in overseas economies. Crude oil prices 
marked a record high around the end of August 2005 (about 70 U.S. dollars/barrel for WTI crude oil) 
following  the  hurricane  damage  in  the  United  States,  and  have  softened  somewhat  recently,  but 
remain at a rather high level. The rises in crude oil prices in recent years are largely attributable to 
increased  global  demand,  reflecting  developments  such  as  high  growth  in  emerging  economies. 
Therefore, high crude oil prices may be compatible with the expansion of the global economy if both 
oil-producing  countries  and  oil-consuming  countries  take  adequate  actions  to  deal  with  increased 
demand.  Nevertheless,  as  demonstrated  by  the  rapid  increase  in  crude  oil  prices  with  the  U.S. 
hurricane damage through the end of August, there is some risk that crude oil prices may shoot up to 
a  level  that  is  not  compatible  with  the  demand  increase  accompanying  the  expansion  of  the  global 
economy  when  there  is  a  keen  awareness  that  refining  capacity  and  other  supply  constraints  are 
intensifying. If that risk manifests in the future, it may influence the global economy and the economy 
of Japan by further decreasing the real purchasing power of the non-oil-producing countries and by 
the full-scale emergence of global inflationary concerns.  
As  for  overseas  economies,  price  stability  is  being  maintained  in  the  United  States  as  the  Federal 
Reserve has raised interest rates to prevent the emergence of inflationary pressures while crude oil 
prices  remain  at  a  high  level.  In  Europe  and  Asia,  concern  is  shifting  toward  the  risks  on  the 
inflationary side. The European Central Bank raised interest rates at the beginning of December 2005. 
The maintenance of an accommodative financial environment under price stability forms part of the 
background to the expansion of overseas economies in recent years, and a future loss of price stability 
could change this structure and exert a negative influence on the growth of the global economy. While 
I  mentioned  before  that  the  Japanese  economy  is  unlikely  to  fall  into  a  recession  due  to  domestic 
factors, we must note that an unexpected slowdown in overseas economies or other large external 
shocks could decelerate economic growth in Japan.  
Price conditions and the outlook  
Turning  to  price  conditions,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  are  currently  rising  at  a  pace  slightly 
below 2 percent year on year, reflecting the increase in crude oil and other international commodity 
prices and the depreciation of the yen. While the rate of increase is likely to ease, corporate goods 
prices are projected to continue rising with strong upward pressure.  
The consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) had been moving slightly 
below the previous year's levels, but posted a zero percent rise from 2004 in the recently released 
figures  for  October  2005.  The  CPI  figures  for  January  through  March  2006  are  expected  to  show 
relatively  clear  positive  year-on-year  increases.  This  is  affected  by  the  factors  that  the  negative 
contribution  from  lower  rice  prices  has  dissipated  and  the  influence  from  electricity  and  telephone 
charge reductions is weakening. In addition, it is affected by the factors that the decline in unit labor 
costs is shrinking under rising wages, and the gap between supply and demand is narrowing in the 
Japanese economy as a whole, as indicated by the perceptions of a labor shortage in the Tankan. The 
year-on-year  changes  are  expected  to  remain  positive  thereafter  as  Japan's  economic  growth  is 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2005
projected  to  exceed  the  potential  growth  rate.  Surveys  on  price  developments  also  indicated  that 
expectations of prices were being revised upward.  
Financial market developments  
Against  this  background  of  a  positive  turn  in  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices,  net 
purchases of Japanese stocks by foreign investors have been posting record highs, stock prices have 
risen substantially, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average recovered the 15,000 yen level at the beginning 
of December 2005, the highest level in about five years. Meanwhile, the yen has depreciated further in 
the foreign exchange market, falling to 121 yen to the U.S. dollar in early December and continuing its 
declining trend against the euro and Asian currencies. It is said that the recent depreciation of the yen 
reflects market participants' view on differentials between Japanese and foreign interest rates, given 
the  greater  awareness  of inflation  risk abroad  and heightened  expectations  of  higher  interest  rates. 
The influence on the economic activity and prices from these financial market developments including 
the rise in stock prices continues to warrant careful monitoring.  
The Bank's conduct of monetary policy  
The Bank has been maintaining the quantitative easing policy since March 2001. The two pillars of the 
quantitative easing policy are: the Bank's provision of ample liquidity to the money market so that the 
outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  substantially  exceeds  the  amount  of  required 
reserves of about 6 trillion yen; and the Bank's commitment to continue with this provision of ample 
liquidity until the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) 
registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. This commitment is unprecedented as central 
bank  monetary  policy,  but  stipulating  the  conditions  beforehand  has  made  it  possible  for  market 
participants to act based on the commitment and that has contributed to boosting the transparency 
and effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Reviewing  the  subsequent  policy  effects,  when  there  were  strong  concerns  about  financial  system 
stability, the provision of ample liquidity by the Bank, which met financial institutions' liquidity demand, 
stabilized  financial  markets  and  maintained  accommodative  financial  conditions,  and  contributed  to 
averting a contraction in economic activity. In financial markets, the Bank's provision of ample liquidity 
pushed  short-term  interest  rates  down  to  practically  zero  percent.  Longer-term  interest  rates  have 
remained stably at low levels, because the commitment by the Bank has led the market to expect that 
the short-term interest rates will remain at zero percent when prices continue to decline.  
Now  that  concerns  about  financial  system  stability  have  subsided  substantially  and  prices  are 
beginning to rise, the commitment is losing its influence on the formation of longer-term interest rates. 
Thus, the effects of the quantitative easing policy are coinciding with the effects of short-term interest 
rates being at practically zero percent.  
After the quantitative easing policy is maintained in accordance with the commitment, future monetary 
policy will follow the path of the processes of "reducing the outstanding balance of current accounts 
toward  a  level  in  line  with  required  reserves,"  "maintaining  very  low  interest  rates,"  and  "gradually 
adjusting interest rates to a level consistent with economic activity and price developments."  
In explicating these processes in somewhat greater detail, with respect to the timing for changing the 
quantitative easing policy framework, the Bank will judge whether the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis in accordance with the commitment. 
Assuming that developments follow the projection described in the Outlook Report, the possibility of 
meeting  the  conditions  of  the  commitment  and  of  departing  from  the  present  monetary  policy 
framework is likely to increase over the course of fiscal 2006.  
In reducing the outstanding balance of current accounts, the Bank will need to monitor financial market 
conditions  carefully,  because  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  has  been 
exceeding substantially the amount of required reserves for a long period of time.  
Up to this point, the outstanding balance of current accounts, substantially above the level of required 
reserves,  has  kept  very  short-term  interest  rates  practically  at  zero  percent,  with  some  minor 
fluctuations if any. Considering that the effects of the quantitative easing policy are coinciding with the 
effects of short-term interest rates being at practically zero percent, a change of the policy framework 
itself does not imply any major change in the policy effect. If the trend toward positive year-on-year 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 3
growth  in  the  CPI  becomes  firmly  established,  real  short-term  interest  rates  will  effectively  decline, 
providing powerful stimulus to economic activity and prices.  
The level and the time-path of interest rates under the subsequent two processes will certainly depend 
on economic activity and price developments. If it is judged that upward pressure on prices continues 
to be contained and the economy follows a sustainable and balanced growth path, this is likely to give 
the Bank latitude in conducting monetary policy.  
The Bank conducts monetary policy to realize the sustainable growth of the Japanese economy under 
price stability. At present, the economic recovery is continuing and the environment influencing prices 
is beginning to change. If the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI registers zero percent or higher 
on a sustainable basis, that will mark a sort of milestone toward realizing such a goal. The Bank will 
continue to conduct monetary policy appropriately in accordance with the changes in economic and 
price conditions to provide support from the financial side for the good performance of the Japanese 
economy over the long term.  
Appropriate  monetary  policy  is  also  important  from  the  perspective  of  financial  market  stability.  For 
example, long-term interest rates have remained stable in the United States in part because of market 
confidence that the appropriate conduct of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve will maintain price 
stability  into  the  future.  In  Japan  as  well,  as  noted  in  the  Outlook  Report,  together  with  the 
maintenance of appropriate monetary policy, the Bank's explanation of its thinking on the conduct of 
monetary policy in detail will contribute to smooth formation of prices in financial markets.  
Closing remarks  
Chubu  is  a  region  that  has  taken  advantage  of  its  manufacturing  strengths,  vigorously  developed 
private-sector  business  activities,  and  pulled  the  Japanese  economy  forward.  Such  originality  and 
inventiveness  based  on  private-sector  initiatives  will  be  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  Japanese 
economy  to  realize  sustainable  growth.  In  that  sense,  I  look  forward  to  the  further  remarkable 
development of the Chubu region. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2005
