T T Mboweni: Monetary and economic trends in South Africa 
Statement  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank,  at the South African Reserve Bank, Victoria, 13 October 2005. 
 Introduction 
For  the  past two  years, CPIX  inflation  has been  within  the  inflation  target  range  of  3-6  per  cent.  In 
recent  months,  however,  oil  price  developments  have  posed  an  increasing  risk  to  the  continued 
attainment of the inflation target and since the last meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, CPIX 
inflation has risen by 1,3 percentage points. These increases were in line with expectations, and our 
current forecasts show that we should remain within the target range over the forecast period. More 
recently there has been some respite in the oil market, and prices have moderated from recent peaks 
caused by hurricanes Katrina and Rita. However, oil prices remain at high levels and continue to be of 
concern. 
Despite  the  petrol  price  increases,  the  economy  continues  to  perform  at  a  robust  pace,  domestic 
demand remains strong, and formal sector employment has increased. 
Recent inflation developments  
Inflation as measured by the consumer price index for metropolitan and other urban areas excluding 
the interest cost on mortgage bonds (CPIX) reached a low of 3,1 per cent in February and then began 
to increase, mainly as a result of petrol price movements. After measuring 3,5 per cent in June, CPIX 
inflation increased to 4,2 per cent and 4,8 per cent in July and August respectively. During these two 
months, the petrol price increased by a total of R0,56. Excluding petrol and diesel costs, CPIX inflation 
measured  3,6  per  cent  in  both  July  and  August  having  averaged  3,4  per  cent  for  the  previous  
12 months. This indicates that thus far there has been limited pass-through from petrol prices to prices 
of other goods and services.  
Other  categories  of  goods  and  services  that  have  shown  significant  price  increases  are  tobacco 
products, domestic workers’ wages, medical costs and education. In contrast, prices of clothing and 
footwear  have  continued  to  fall,  while  most  other  categories  show  very  subdued  price  increases. 
Despite  recent  increases  in  the  maize  price,  food  price  inflation  has  remained  low,  measuring  
2,7 per cent in August. Administered prices excluding petrol rose at 5,9 per cent, marginally below the 
upper  limit  of  the  inflation  target  range.  However  if  the  petrol  price  is  included,  administered  prices 
increased by 11,2 per cent.  
Production price inflation has also displayed a marked upward trend, reflecting to a significant degree 
the  higher  energy  prices.  Having  measured  2,4  per  cent  in  May  2005,  production  price  inflation 
increased steadily, reaching 4,2 per cent in August. Imported goods inflation increased from an annual 
rate  of  1,8  per  cent  in  May  to  6,2  per  cent  in  August,  while  domestically  produced  goods  inflation 
increased from 2,6 per cent to 3,6 per cent over the same period.  
The outlook for inflation 
Owing  mainly  to  the  adverse  oil  price  developments,  the  Bank’s  inflation  forecast  has  deteriorated 
somewhat since the last MPC meeting. However CPIX inflation is expected to remain within the target 
range of 3-6 per cent over the forecast period. The upper turning point is expected to occur in the first 
two quarters of 2006 at a level just below 6 per cent. Thereafter, CPIX inflation is expected to resume 
a moderate downward trajectory. Although there are no clear signs of second-round effects, the longer 
the upward trend and volatility of oil prices persist, the more likely the price increases will continue to 
impact  on  expectations  and  feed  through  to  other  prices.  Monetary  policy  has  to  remain  vigilant  in 
anticipating such developments. 
Since  the  last  meeting  of  the  MPC,  the  international  crude  oil  prices  reached  new  record  levels  of 
almost US$70 per barrel in the wake of the hurricanes in the United States. The price of Brent crude 
averaged  around  US$64.50  per  barrel  in  August  and  US$63  in  September,  compared  to  US$58  in 
July.  These  developments  resulted  in  further  increases  in  the  domestic  petrol  price  of  R0,29  and 
   1/3 
R0,12 per litre in September and October respectively, and will contribute to further upward pressure 
on CPIX in those months. More recently crude oil prices have declined to below US$60 per barrel and 
if this trend continues, we could see a moderate decline in petrol prices in November. However the 
volatility of international oil prices means that significant upside risk remains. 
There  are  a  number  of  other  developments  that  also  pose  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook.  The  latest 
inflation  expectations  survey  conducted  by  the  Bureau  for  Economic  Research  at  the  University  of 
Stellenbosch indicates that there has been a marginal deterioration in inflation expectations which may 
be a result of the impact of the higher petrol prices. CPIX inflation is now expected to average 5,2 per 
cent  next  year,  and  5,4  per  cent  in  2007,  up  0,3  per  cent  and  0,4  per  cent  respectively.  The 
deterioration  in  inflation  expectations  was  also  reflected  in  the  increase  in  the  breakeven  inflation 
rates, measured by the spreads between the yields on South African CPI inflation-linked bonds and 
conventional nominal bonds of the same maturity. If the deterioration in inflation expectations were to 
continue, it would be a cause for concern given the critical role of expectations in the price and wage 
formation process. 
The economy has continued to grow at a robust pace, with quarter-on-quarter annualised real GDP 
growth accelerating from 3,5 per cent in the first quarter of 2005 to 4,8 per cent in the second quarter. 
This  acceleration  was  attributed  in  part  to  the  strong  increase  in  the  real  value  added  by  the 
manufacturing sector, which appears to have recovered from the contraction in the first quarter. The 
utilisation  of  production  capacity  in  manufacturing,  having  fallen  back  in  the  previous  two  quarters, 
picked  up  again  in  the  second  quarter  of  2005.  The  physical  volume  of  manufacturing  production 
continued  on  an  upward  trend  in  the  third  quarter  and  the  most  recent  value  of  the  Investec/BER 
Purchasing  Manager's  Index  (PMI)  also  indicates  that  the  recovery  in  this  sector  has  continued, 
although  at  a  more  moderate  pace.  Most  other  sectors  have  also  remained  buoyant  and  the 
composite leading business cycle indicator shows a favourable growth outlook. 
This  positive  growth  performance  had  a  positive  effect  on  employment.  According  to  the  Quarterly 
Employment Statistics survey, formal non-agricultural employment increased at an annualised quarter-
on-quarter rate of 7,6 per cent in the second quarter of this year. Over the past year this reflects an 
increase of 84,000 employees. 
Domestic demand shows few signs of significant moderation and all components of final demand grew 
at  a  healthy  rate  in  the  second  quarter.  New  motor  vehicle  sales  reached  new  record  highs  in 
September,  although  there  was  a  moderate  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  motor  vehicle  sales  which 
increased by 25,3 per cent over the year. The strong domestic demand has been underpinned by low 
nominal  interest rates,  higher  real  incomes  and  increases  in  asset  prices.  Share  prices  on  the JSE 
Limited, for example, reached new record highs, and since the previous MPC meeting the all-share 
price index increased by 4 per cent. 
The  vigorous  demand  was  financed  in  part  by  increased  borrowing,  and  the  household  debt  ratio 
continued to rise in the second quarter. Household debt as a percentage of disposable income rose 
from 60 per cent in the first quarter to 62 per cent in the second quarter of 2005. However, because of 
the low nominal interest rate environment, debt servicing cost as a percentage of disposable income 
remained unchanged at a relatively low level of 6½ per cent. 
The  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  have  also  been  increasing  at  rates  consistent  with  strong 
domestic demand. Year-on-year growth in M3 picked up from 17,1 per cent in June 2005 to 19,9 per 
cent in July and 19,0 per cent in August. Total domestic credit extension grew by 18,0 per cent in July 
and 18,3 per cent in August. Twelve-month growth in bank loans and advances to the private sector 
remained above 20 per cent, with increases in mortgage advances reaching 26 per cent in August. 
The latter reflects continued buoyancy in the housing market, although the rate of increase in house 
prices has fallen steadily since September 2004. 
Strong domestic demand and high international crude oil prices have impacted on the current account 
of the balance of payments. Although the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments as 
a  percentage  of  GDP  contracted  to  3,4  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2005,  data  for  July  and 
August  indicate  a  possible  widening  of  the  trade  deficit  in  the  third  quarter.  The  current  account 
however  remains  financed  by  capital  inflows,  and  the  international  liquidity  position  of  the  Bank 
increased to a level of US$16,1 billion at the end of September. 
World inflation is expected to be negatively affected by higher oil prices. The IMF now predicts that 
world inflation in 2006 will average 3,7 per cent, compared to the April forecast of 3,1 per cent for the 
same period. Nevertheless this is lower than the revised 3,9 per cent average expected for 2005 and 
   2/3 
indicates that world inflation appears to be well contained. World growth is expected to be sustained at 
a robust rate of 4,3 per cent in 2006 although it has moderated somewhat since last year. 
Not all developments have been negative from an inflation perspective. Although inflation expectations 
have deteriorated moderately, there is no evidence that this has impacted on wage settlements. Unit 
labour costs in the first half of this year increased at rates within the inflation target range, measuring 
4,6 per cent and 5,3 per cent in the first two quarters of this year.  
The nominal effective exchange rate of the rand depreciated by 0,3 per cent since the last meeting of 
the MPC, but it has been relatively stable over the period. The volatility that did occur was to a large 
extent  a  reflection  of  movements  between  the  euro  and  the  US  dollar.  Positive  international 
perceptions of South Africa were further confirmed with the recent sovereign credit rating upgrade by 
the Fitch rating agency. 
Monetary policy stance 
The  deterioration  in  the  inflation  outlook  cannot  be  ignored.  The  increased  risk  of  possible  
pass-through leading to pronounced second-round effects on CPIX inflation must inform policy going 
forward. Although there is no conclusive evidence of pass-through at present, and the Monetary Policy 
Committee has not judged it necessary to change the monetary policy stance at this meeting, these 
developments will be closely monitored. The Committee stands ready to take the appropriate action in 
order to ensure that the inflation target mandate continues to be achieved. At this meeting the MPC 
has decided therefore that the repurchase rate will remain unchanged at 7 per cent per annum. 
 
   3/3 
