Ardian Fullani: Bank-business relationship in Albania 
Greeting speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the meeting “Business - 
Bank Communication Day”, Tirana, 20 October 2005. 
  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Recently,  the  promising  paces  in  the  increase  of  crediting  to  the  economy  from  the  banking  sector 
make  us  realize  that  the  numerous  meetings  organized  with  the  scope  of  approaching  banks  to 
businesses  are  finally  producing  their  results.  Nonetheless,  it  is  yet,  too  soon  to  describe  it  as  a 
victory. Without diminishing the significance of these meetings, I think that the expansion of business 
crediting is not an effortless issue to be solved, especially when considered that our economy is still in 
transition.  Frequently,  the  solution  to  the  arousing  issues  goes  beyond  the  good  will  of  both,  the 
business  and  banking  community.  Thus,  avoiding  the  rhetoric  of  the  previous  meetings  which 
habitually  sets  one’s  party  claims  against  the  other,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  need  of a  better 
coordination of efforts by the two communities to the solution of various issues. 
 
A  few  days  ago,  on  the  privatisation  anniversary  of  one  of  the  participant  banks  present  in  this 
meeting,  I  stressed  the  necessity  of  intensifying  the  institutional  relationship  between  the  banking 
system and the different business associations. Therefore, this meeting is an outstanding example of 
putting  this  initiative  into  practice  and  I  trust  it  will  serve  as  a  good  start  of  the  regular  contacts 
between the banking association and the business one.    
 
The bank-business relationship institutionalisation might assist in resolving a number of issues, which 
may be challenging to be addressed individually by banks or businesses, be they large ones. The best 
example  is  the  effort  of  reducing  the  informal  economy.  All  present  parties  in  this  meeting  have 
expressed  their  pros  to  the  fight  against  evasion  and  informality.  In  reality,  however,  the  dishonest 
competition  forces  many  of  them  to  choose  the  informal  means,  since,  contrary,  they  will  find 
themselves out of the market. The breaking of this vicious circle could be made possible by a better 
coordination of our efforts, in order to avoid the so-called free-rider phenomenon, where the dishonest 
business is given too much room to take advantage of the situation.  
 
Hence,  I welcome  today’s  meeting,  hoping  that  it  shall  not simply  remain  within  the communication 
context, but rise in a higher level of coordination. 
 
 
   1/1 
