Lars Heikensten: Swedish banks in an international perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  Royals  Vinterträdgård,  
Grand Hôtel, Stockholm, 10 November 2005. 
Diagrams for this speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website www.riksbank.com. 
 Swedish banks' competitiveness 
I would like to begin by thanking the Bankers' Association for inviting me to participate in this panel 
discussion on Swedish banks' competitiveness. Before I set about giving my view on the matter, I think 
it  is  important  to  stress  that  there  are  several  different  perspectives  on  competitiveness  and 
competition. So, the conclusion will vary depending on the angle from which you look at the issue. The 
composition  of  the  panel  reflects  these  different  perspectives  well,  which  should  guarantee  an 
interesting discussion. 
I would like to define a bank’s competitiveness as a measure of how efficient the bank is at providing a 
given quantity of financial services at a certain level of quality. For the Riksbank, the competitiveness 
of  Swedish  banks  is  important  both  from  a  stability  point  of  view  and  an  efficiency  perspective. 
Competitive banks have greater resilience to different kinds of pressures regardless of whether they 
stem from increased competition or poorer economic performance. They also are more efficient and 
can provide more and better financial services at a low cost. 
How  to  measure  competitiveness,  though,  is  by  no  means  self-evident.  It  is  fairly  uncomplicated  to 
observe business profitability and cost efficiency in a bank with the aid of measures such as return on 
equity and the C/I ratio. But a high return on equity and low C/I ratio is not necessarily a sign of an 
efficient banking sector, but can just as easily indicate weak competition and high margins. Similarly, 
from an economic point of view it is hazardous to place too much trust in the equity market’s valuation 
or a rating agency’s credit rating since these partly represent a different perspective. For example, for 
investors  it  is  only  positive  if  a  bank  –  all  other  things  being  equal  –  operates  in  a  market  where 
competition is low and margins are high. 
Against this background, it is important to supplement the business analysis with an assessment of 
the quality and the price of the financial services provided by banks. I suppose the best indicator of the 
quality of a bank’s service range is how well the bank’s services fare in the competition from other 
banks and financial institutions. If the barriers to entry are high and there are few alternative suppliers, 
a high market share can hardly be taken as a sign that the bank’s service offering is particularly high 
quality  or  worth  its  price,  even  though  that  can  of  course  be  the  case.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
banking sector consists of a number of strong players and there also are plenty of alternatives, it is 
much  more  conceivable  that  a  large  market  share  or  high  profitability  is  a  result  of  a  genuinely 
competitive product range. 
A European investor perspective 
So what do we know about Swedish banks' competitiveness – how do they fare in an international 
perspective? Looking at the European banking sector from an investor’s point of view, we can note 
that the profitability of Swedish banks is very average. In a selection of the 25-30 biggest listed banks, 
the Swedish banks come close to the median value for return on equity (see Figure 1).1 
The Swedish banks’ net interest margin – net interest income in relation to interest-bearing assets – 
also appears mediocre at first glance. But if we take into account their very low loan losses, then for 
three of the four major Swedish banks the “loan-loss-adjusted” net interest margin is actually higher 
than  for  the  European  median  bank.  Also  as  regards  cost  efficiency,  measured  in  terms  of  the  
C/I ratio, the Swedish banks are among the best. 
                                                      
1   This and the following comparisons are based on full-year results during the period 2002-2004. 
   1/4 
But if Swedish banks are relatively good at earning money on lending without incurring excessive loan 
losses  and  moreover  are  cost-efficient,  it  seems  a  bit  strange  that  this  does  not  result  in  an  even 
higher  return  on  equity.  One  explanation  could  be  that  Swedish  banks  are  just  unusually  
well-capitalised.  However,  a  quick  look  at  the  core  capital  ratios  of  European  banks  shows  that 
Swedish banks instead have relatively low capital levels. The only possible remaining explanation is 
that Swedish banks are not as good at generating income from services other than lending. And right 
enough the results also reveal that Swedish banks’ non-interest income is among the lowest in Europe 
(see Figure 2). 
So  what  is  a  European  bank  investor’s  assessment  of  Swedish  banks?  Judging  by  equity  market 
prices  there  is  some  scepticism  towards  Swedish  banks.  As  regards  both  valuations  of  their  book 
capital – the price-to-book ratio – and P/E ratios, the Swedish bank shares are trading at a small, but 
nonetheless clear, discount in relation to the European banking sector. The possible reasons for such 
a valuation discount are either that the expected profitability is lower for Swedish banks or that they 
are judged to be riskier than their European counterparts. I think, though, that the latter hypothesis that 
Swedish banks are comparatively risky can be rejected – Swedish banks’ high credit ratings, low loan 
losses  and  stable  earnings  tend  to  suggest  the  opposite.  In  other  words,  it  seems  as  if  the  equity 
market  is  sceptical  because  it  judges  Swedish  banks’  potential  for  improvement  or  growth  to  be 
limited. 
The  assessment  of  Swedish  banks’  growth  potential  as  limited  has  several  possible  explanations, 
which are more or less benevolent depending on whom you ask. Swedish bank managers sometimes 
claim  that  the  competition  in  the  Swedish  banking  market  is  fierce  and  that  it  is  easier  to  generate 
earnings abroad. Foreign bank analysts prefer to emphasise the relative smallness and maturity of the 
Swedish  and  Nordic  banking  market  –  the  major  structural  deals  have  already  been  done  and  all 
households already have a home loan. However, bank managers and analysts seem to agree that the 
potential for improving return on equity is limited. 
To  sum  up,  we  can  conclude  that  Swedish  banks  are  neither  more  nor  less  profitable  than  their 
European competitors. While Swedish banks are cost-efficient, unfortunately they are less successful 
when it comes to generating earnings on services other than lending. It reminds me in some ways of 
the Swedish football team before Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Henrik Larsson blossomed into the stars they 
are today – disciplined and effective in defence, but fairly lacking in goals and imagination in attack. 
The structure of the Swedish banking sector 
So,  is  Swedish  banks’  average  profitability  and  smaller  valuation  discount  a  result  of  their  inability, 
despite their efficiency, to benefit from higher margins due to tough competition, or is it because the 
banks operate in an oligopoly and are incapable of developing new, profitable products. In the former 
case the relatively low profitability is a symptom of an efficient and competitive banking sector. But in 
the latter situation the authorities should be concerned, while investors possibly can see interesting 
but risky development potential. 
The Swedish banking sector was one of the first in Europe to be consolidated, largely because the 
banking crisis speeded up the restructuring process. The consolidation enabled Swedish banks at an 
early  stage  to  rationalise  overlapping  branch  networks  and  to  reduce  staff  numbers.  Even  though 
several EU countries now have caught up with or even passed by us in terms of consolidation, the 
Swedish banking sector stands out by having the lowest number of both branches and employees per 
capita in the EU15. That might indicate that the limited improvement potential is due to Swedish banks 
already being highly efficient. 
But  a  low  number  of  branches  and  employees  is  not  necessarily  the  same  thing  as  an  efficient 
banking sector if it means that the range of financial services is being rationed. It may be the case that 
the  Swedish  banking  sector  is  stingy  rather  than  efficient.  The  Swedish  banking  sector  is  in  fact 
relatively small, in terms of assets in relation to GDP, but this is probably not explained by low lending, 
which is average, but by the fact that relatively speaking Sweden together with Finland has the lowest 
level of deposits among all EU15 countries. On the other hand, that is because in comparison with 
households in many other countries Swedish households make greater use of other forms of saving 
than bank accounts. Given that Swedish banks also have a very strong position in terms of savings in 
funds and life insurance it therefore is difficult to dismiss the Swedish banking sector’s lower branch 
and employee numbers by saying that the range of products is stingier than elsewhere. 
   2/4 
In one area, though, the Swedish banks are stingiest in Europe, and that is with regard to how easy 
they make it for their customers to access their bank funds through cash withdrawals – undeniably a 
fairly significant aspect for a bank customer. Interestingly, Sweden has the lowest number of ATMs per 
capita of all the EU15 countries – and some 20 per cent lower than Finland, which is second from 
bottom  (see  Figure  3).  It  could  quite  simply  be  that  Swedish  bank  customers  prefer  to  use  charge 
cards  instead  of  cash,  but  that  is  not  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  Swedes  make  far  more  ATM 
withdrawals than the average European. That leads to the common sight in Sweden of long queues 
winding their way up to ATMs, which in fact is very unusual is most other countries (if we disregard 
planned  economies).  Swedish  banks  simply  ration  their  customers’  possibilities  to  make  ATM 
withdrawals.  It  is  perhaps  not  that  strange  that  Swedish  banks  are  not  overly  eager  to  provide  an 
expensive service that is difficult to charge for. That does not necessarily have to be the consequence 
of weak competition but it results nonetheless in a poorer product for the customer. 
On the other hand, Swedish banks are doing very well in other areas. I already have mentioned the 
very  strong  position  enjoyed  by  Swedish  banks  in  the  market  for  long-term  saving,  compared  with 
many other European banks. Another well-known Swedish example is the high Internet use of both 
companies and households in their dealings with their banks. 
Swedish  banks  have  also  been  relatively  quick  to  expand  abroad.  In  relative  terms,  the  Swedish 
banking  system  is  one  of  the  most  European  banking  markets,  along  with  the  Belgian  and  Dutch 
systems.  However,  that  only  applies  to  the  Swedish  banking  system’s  “outward”  Europeanization  – 
Swedish  banks’  expansion  outside  Sweden.  As  regards  the  presence  of  European  banks  in  the 
Swedish market, ”inward” Europeanization, the Swedish banking market is one of the least integrated, 
beaten  even  by  a  “closed”  market  like  the  Italian  one.  Assuming  that  Swedish  authorities  have  not 
discriminated against foreign players, this pattern could perhaps also be taken as a sign of Swedish 
banks’ high competitiveness. 
So  it  is  not  all  that  easy  to  answer  the  question  of  how  competitive  Swedish  banks  are  in  an 
international  or  European  perspective.  Nevertheless, 
their 
competitiveness is fairly good. To all appearances the Swedish banking system is efficient in its use of 
resources and it does not seem that this is being achieved through a poorer range of financial services 
– with possibly the low number of ATMs as an unusual but striking exception. On the contrary, there 
are  several  examples  to  show  that  Swedish  banks’  service  range  fares  relatively  well  in  an 
international comparison. On the whole, it appears that Swedish banks are organisationally efficient 
and good at adopting new technologies in their distribution of services, but are less advanced when it 
comes to developing new products and services. 
to  suggest 
is  much 
there 
that 
Flexibility and long-term competitiveness 
In  the  long  run,  a  company’s  competitiveness  is  determined  by  its  ability  to  adapt  to  changed 
conditions. How well-positioned are the Swedish banks to meet the banking and financial markets of 
tomorrow? I do not intend here and now to try to predict what the banking market will look like in ten 
years – that would be doomed to failure. But I would still like to take the chance to reflect on some of 
the trends that we nonetheless can perceive and what these might entail for Swedish banks. 
Here, I would like to highlight two such trends that are somewhat related. The first is disintermediation, 
which entails that banks’ role in the loan market is changing from own lending to only providing loans 
for  which  another  investor  assumes  the  risk.  The other  trend  is commoditization,  which  means  that 
certain  kinds  of  financial  contract  –  e.g.  loans,  funds  or  insurance  –  are  becoming  increasingly 
standardised  and  difficult  to  distinguish  from  one  another.  With  that,  the  price  should  become  the 
crucial factor in the consumer’s choice of product. 
These kinds of trends should be taken with a pinch of salt, of course. Changes seldom mean that all 
previous  truths  suddenly  cease  to  be  valid,  and  moreover  changes  do  not  happen  overnight. 
Especially in the banking market, important changes are more likely to occur slowly and gradually over 
a long period. 
Nonetheless, these trends, even if the impact only proves to be half as big as the financial markets’ 
trend  oracle  predicts,  entail  interesting  challenges  and  opportunities  for  Swedish  banks.  Together, 
disintermediation  and  commoditization  should  result  in  a  more  distinct  division  of  production, 
distribution and risk-taking. As I am sure you know, this is what consultants call the breaking up of the 
value  chain.  Even  though  some  banks  undoubtedly  will  try  to  keep  as  much  of  the  value  chain  as 
   3/4 
possible,  it  is  going  to  become  more  difficult.  Each  part  of  the  value  chain  will  be  exposed  to 
competition from specialised niche players. 
Allow  me  to  give  a  few  concrete  examples.  For  several  years  now  it  has  been  noted  that  Swedish 
banks’ share of savings is slowly but surely decreasing. Not because Swedish banks have performed 
worse than any other pension or fund manager, but simply because there are a lot of players that are 
at  least  as  good,  and  sometimes  also  cheaper.  The  four  major  banks  have  a  strong  grip  on  the 
Swedish mortgage market for households. But they seem to have defended their large market shares 
in some measure through price cuts. 
Also  as  regards  the  corporate  market,  the  four  major  banks  appear  to  have  a  continued  strong 
position. But this market has grown very weakly and in real terms is smaller today than it was at the 
start of the 1990s. It is not that the market for company financing has shrunk, but it seems to have 
scaled back its connections to the major banks. That is partly because large Swedish companies can 
turn to foreign banks or directly to the capital market for funding. Also, it is probably partly because 
Swedish  banks  in  the  wake  of  the  banking  crisis  have  made  a  conscious  decision  to  reduce  their 
share  of  risky  lending.  However,  it  does  not  seem  as  if  the  Swedish  banks  have  fully  managed  to 
compensate  for  this  lower  lending  through  increased  advisory  services  or  other  ”intermediary 
services”. 
In essence, Swedish banks have strong positions in a number of areas but these markets are either 
mature or else the banks’ shares are shrinking. If we were to assume that the trend oracle will be right, 
I envisage two possible ways forward for the major Swedish banks, both of which represent extremes. 
The  first  strategy  would  be  based  on  the  banks’  proven  proficiency  in  terms  of  organisation  and 
distribution, and to refine this strength and also become better at peripheral advisory services. Fewer 
resources would be invested in product development and risk-taking – products can easily be copied 
and risks sold on to other, hungrier investors. 
The  second  strategy  would  instead  be  to  rediscover  what  you  could  call  “classic”  banking,  in  other 
words healthy risk-taking underpinned by better knowledge about certain risks and conditions than the 
market  in  general.  As  long  as  higher  loan  losses  and  larger  earnings  fluctuations  are  kept  at  a 
bearable  level  and  are  compensated  for  by  higher  margins,  then  risk-taking  in  itself  is  not  bad 
business. 
However,  as  a  central  bank  governor  I  do  not  want  to  inspire  the  banks  to  take  on  higher  risk  but 
instead  would  encourage  them  to  make  use  of  the  opportunities  in  today’s  financial  markets  to  re-
package and spread risk, but like I said that is a different perspective. 
 
   4/4 
