Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Empowering consumers for a progressive and sustainable 
financial system 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Third 
International Forum on Financial Consumer Protection and Education "Fostering Greater Consumer 
Protection and Education", Kuala Lumpur, 14 December 2005. 
 Let me first of all extend a warm welcome to all of you to this Third International Forum on Financial 
Consumer Protection and Education. Malaysia is most honoured to host this conference. I understand 
that we have participants from across the globe, including for the first time, delegates from the Middle 
East and Africa. A forum such as this not only allows for greater engagement among regulators and 
brings  about  a  better  understanding  on  the  issues  confronting  us  but  also  contributes  towards 
advancing forward the development agenda. 
Promoting  a  sound  and  progressive  financial  system  is  a  vital  and  key  pre-requisite  to  achieving 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  development.  This  recent  decade  has  seen  a  significant 
transformation  of  the  financial  landscape  shaped  by  the  forces  of  globalisation,  advances  in 
technology, the trend towards greater market orientation and financial innovation. In this more dynamic 
environment,  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability  has  become  increasingly  more  complex  and 
challenging.  The  requirements  and  expectations  of  consumers  are  also  changing  rapidly  in  tandem 
with  the  increased  education  levels,  growing  wealth  and  greater  affluence.  Following  these 
developments,  consumers  have  become  more  discerning  and  demand  for  better  product  choices, 
more efficient delivery channels and more customer centric practices from financial institutions. These 
trends have also become important in reinforcing an increasingly more competitive environment in the 
financial services sector. A comprehensive approach thus needs to be adopted to address all the key 
elements of the financial system so as to form a solid foundation on which the soundness and stability 
of the system can be achieved. A major strategy that has been adopted has been the strengthening of 
the prudential regulatory and supervisory framework. The safety and soundness of the banking system 
however has to extend beyond prudential regulation and supervision. Maintaining financial stability of 
the  financial  system  also  requires  the  development  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  in  particular,  the 
financial markets; building the capacity of financial institutions and finally to have in place an adequate 
consumer protection framework. 
My remarks this morning will focus on the consumer protection and education from the perspective of 
maintaining financial stability and the development of a progressive and sustainable financial system. 
Consumer  protection  and  education  initiatives  empower  consumers  to  be  better  positioned  to  take 
responsibility for their own well-being. It allows consumers to assume a more important role in exerting 
market  discipline  on  service  providers  to  drive  greater  efficiency,  competition  and  innovation  in  the 
market  place.  In  the  design  of  a  consumer  protection  framework,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that 
financial  products  and  services  differ  significantly  from  most  other  goods  and  services.  Specifically 
there is asymmetry in the access to information and bargaining power between the consumers and 
financial  service  providers.  These  imbalances  can  be  addressed  by  three  mutually  reinforcing 
strategies. Firstly, promoting stronger transparency and disclosure standards in financial institutions; 
secondly  strengthening  the  mechanisms  for  consumer  protection;  and  thirdly  enhancing  consumer 
education. An increasing number of countries have undertaken this more comprehensive approach in 
order  to  give  greater  focus  to  consumer  protection  issues  for  ensuring  the  soundness  of  financial 
service providers and ultimately to the stability of the financial system. This will also in turn promote 
more  effective  consumer  participation  in  the  economy,  thus  contributing  more  significantly  to  the 
economic growth and development process. 
The approach and mechanisms adopted to protect consumers in individual jurisdictions will vary from 
one  country  to  another,  given  the  unique  characteristics  prevailing  in  the  different  respective 
economies  and 
financial  systems.  Consideration  of  country-specific  circumstances  and 
contextualisation  is  important  to  evolve  relevant  and  effective  consumer  protection  and  education 
infrastructures.  Individual  countries  need  to  customise  the  consumer  protection  and  education 
framework  to  their  environment,  taking  into  account  factors  such  as  the  stage  of  economic  and 
regulatory development, the structure of the financial system and the level of consumer sophistication.  
BIS Review 86/2005 
 1
Prudential safety and soundness, competition and consumer protection need to co-exist to effectively 
serve the various stakeholders' interests. Hence, implementing an effective consumer protection and 
education  framework  involves  achieving  an  appropriate  balance between  providing  adequate  safety 
for  consumers  while  promoting  competition  and  financial  innovation.  In  formulating  policies  to 
safeguard consumers' interests, adequate consideration needs to be given to ensure the appropriate 
level of consumer regulation without imposing excessive regulatory costs and burden on both financial 
institutions and consumers, and thus avoid compromising the benefits that the policies are designed to 
achieve.  In  this  process,  ethics  and  integrity  cannot  be  legislated.  Regulators,  therefore,  need  to 
consider  other  approaches  in  preventing  market  abuses  or  misconduct  and  in  promoting  consumer 
confidence. Of importance is to evolve an appropriate incentive structure for financial institutions so 
that they recognise that it is in their best interests to foster fair and equitable business practices as part 
of good governance, corporate social responsibility and brand building. Good business practices need 
to be instilled and embedded in all aspects of the operations and at all levels within the institutions. 
On  consumer  education,  it  is  recognised  that  with  more  well-informed  and  financially  astute 
consumers  making  better  financial  decisions,  competition  is  promoted  among  the  financial  service 
providers. Moreover, market efficiency would improve with the creation of new products and services 
that are more responsive to the requirements of consumers. In relation to this, financial literacy has 
become  a  vital  skill  in  this  increasingly  more  complex  financial  world,  characterised  by  increasingly 
sophisticated financial products and services and growing diversity in financial service providers and 
distribution channels. While the overarching objective of consumer education is to impart knowledge 
that will improve consumers' financial decisions, it cannot be assumed that equipping consumers with 
more  information  will  automatically  lead  to  improved  financial  behaviour.  Research  has  shown  that 
consumer decisions may not always be made based on sound advice and knowledge, but are at times 
made on impulsive intuition. The key challenge lies in determining how behavioural factors and other 
factors such as socio-economic and cultural backgrounds, life events and skill levels influence rational 
decision-making.  The  wide  variation  in  information  needs  that  arise  from  differences  in  prior 
experience, language and cultural background, current financial situation, and competing demands for 
consumers'  time  all  pose  challenges  in  the  development  and  delivery  of  relevant  information  to 
consumers. In particular, the most effective means of engaging consumers that have a low level of 
interest in financial planning needs to be determined.  
In  relation  to  this,  financial  service  providers  need  to  provide  consumers  with  information  that 
accurately represents the features, risks and returns associated with their products and services and 
demonstrate  integrity  and  good  faith  by  offering  products  and  services  that  are  appropriate  to  the 
customers'  financial  needs  and  circumstances.  The  issue  is  how  a  consistent  and  comprehensive 
disclosure regime could be established, with the flexibility to apply differentiated rules in response to 
different situations and circumstances. Finally, disclosure as a consumer protection tool will only serve 
its purpose if consumers are able to understand the information provided. The challenge is to get the 
right balance between providing sufficient information to consumers to make informed choices, with 
the information being clear, concise and effective.  
The  increase  in  the  number  of  delivery  channels  has  not  resulted  in  an  equitable  expansion  in  the 
access to financial services. Even in developed countries, there remains minorities that have limited 
access  to  basic  financial  services.  For  instance,  a  study  conducted  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the 
period  2002-2003  found  that  2.8  million  adults  in  households  had  no  access  to  a  bank  account.  In 
relation  to  this,  regulators  have  to  balance  between  the  need  for  financial  institutions  to  operate 
efficiently  and  the  need  to  ensure  access  to  basic  financial  services  for  both  individuals  and  small 
businesses.  In  addition,  rural  communities  have  also  tended  to  be  underserved.  The  challenge 
confronting regulators is to ensure that all communities have access to financial services. This greater 
inclusion is vital to bring the lower income groups into the economic mainstream. 
An  important  aspect  in  the  development  of  a  consumer  protection  framework  is  to  ensure  that  the 
framework remains relevant despite changes in economic and financial environment. Changes in the 
profile of consumers following changes in the demographic structure for example needs to be taken 
into account. In most communities, the ratio of retired population relative to working adults is expected 
to  rise  more  steeply  in  the  next  decade.  In  countries  with  growing  ageing  populations,  there  is  an 
increasing  demand  for  financial  planning,  life  insurance,  wealth  management  and  mutual  fund 
investment services. Consumers' interests in these areas would need to be adequately safeguarded 
while financial literacy among the various target groups need to be actively promoted.  
While regulators have an important role in promoting consumer protection and education, it is equally 
important  to  galvanise  support  and  collaboration  from  all  market  participants  -  financial  service 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
providers,  government  agencies,  educators  and  consumer  associations  and  community-based 
organisations, toward effective implementation of the initiatives. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  the  experience  of  Malaysia  in  promoting  consumer 
protection and education. The Malaysian economy has transitioned from a production-based economy 
towards a knowledge-driven economy, with small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) assuming an 
increasingly  significant  role  in  the  economy.  The  financial  sector  has  also  evolved  accordingly  to 
facilitate this economic transformation process, with a growing trend towards greater deregulation and 
market  orientation.  To achieve  a  more efficient,  competitive  and resilient  financial system, Malaysia 
has formulated a blueprint that outlines the roadmap for the development of the financial sector. The 
Financial Sector Master Plan which was issued in 2001 outlines the key strategies for the development 
of the financial sector. Amongst the important strategies implemented has been the development of 
the  consumer  protection  framework  and  the  enabling  infrastructure  to  protect  consumers'  interests 
while  at  the  same  time  to  enhance  their  financial  capability  to  participate  effectively  in  the  financial 
system.  
Bank Negara Malaysia has adopted a multi-pronged approach in empowering consumers. As a central 
bank  in  an  emerging  market  economy,  our  mandate  is  broader  than  our  counterparts  in  the  more 
advanced and mature economies. We have the important role of developing the financial sectors. In 
the area of strengthening the consumer protection infrastructure, the agenda covers a wide spectrum 
of  initiatives  involving  infrastructure  and  institutional  capacity  development  that  includes  financial 
education,  advisory  services,  distress  management,  rehabilitation  and  putting  in  place  avenues  for 
redress.  
Recent initiatives include evolving a more effective Financial Mediation Bureau (FMB) to ensure that 
consumers of all financial service providers under the purview of the Central Bank have recourse to an 
independent,  fair  and  impartial  dispute  resolution  mechanism.  Earlier  this  year  a  deposit  insurance 
scheme  was  introduced  to  further  strengthen  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  adopt  sound 
financial and business practices and enhance public confidence in the financial system by providing 
explicit  protection  on  deposits.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  also  currently  finalising  the  details  for  the 
establishment of a credit counselling and debt management agency to be introduced early next year, 
with  the  aim  of  providing  individuals  with  credit  counselling  and  assistance  in  restructuring  of  their 
debts. 
To  promote  financial  education  at  an  early  age,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  embarked  on  an  education 
programme in schools on basic financial knowledge in partnership with the Education Ministry since 
1997.  Further,  in  collaboration  with  the  financial  industry's  associations,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
launched a ten year Consumer Education Programme (CEP) for the banking and insurance sectors. 
We are now in the fifth year of this programme. Extensive information is being disseminated via the 
spectrum  of  distribution  channels  including  newspapers,  radio,  websites,  branches  of  financial 
institutions and outreach programmes.  
The  consumer  education  efforts  are  also  complemented  by  initiatives  to  promote  a  higher  level  of 
disclosure and transparency so as to ensure that consumers have access to relevant, comparable and 
timely  information  on  products  and  services.  A  significant  focus  has  been  on  the  insurance  sector, 
given  that  a  significant  segment  of  the  Malaysian  consumers  do  not  have  good  understanding  of 
insurance products. In particular, guidelines on medical and health insurance and the requirements for 
marketing  of  life  insurance  policies,  have  been  strengthened  while  rules  for  independent  financial 
advisers have been introduced.  
In meeting socio-economic objectives, there is also a need to ensure that the welfare and interests of 
all segments of society are protected and that no target group is excluded or marginalised. Indeed, an 
important component of our consumer protection framework is to ensure that all consumers continue 
to  have  access  to  basic  banking  services  at  reasonable  costs.  In  this  connection,  a  more 
interventionist  approach  has  been  pursued  to  require  banking  institutions  to  offer  a  list  of  basic 
banking services to all Malaysians and to set guiding principles for the imposition of fees and charges 
for these retail products and services for individuals and small and medium sized enterprises.  
Efforts have also been taken by the Central Bank in collaboration with the financial services industry to 
enhance the integrity of the payments systems and instruments, aimed at promoting confidence and 
ensuring that consumers' interests are safeguarded. Specific measures include upgrading the funds 
transfer systems, migrating all magnetic stripe for ATM card and credit card infrastructure to a chip-
enabled  environment,  and  introducing  payment  platforms  that  leverages  on  the  Internet  to  promote 
users' confidence and safeguard consumers' interests. Malaysia is the first country in the Asia Pacific 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 3
region that has mandated the migration of ATM cards to chip based cards and has also been the first 
to  complete  the  implementation  of  a  national  migration  to  EMV  chip  based  credit  cards.  This  is 
essentially to combat fraud in payment instruments. A number of other initiatives have also been put in 
place to create greater awareness among the public regarding counterfeit banknotes and to promote 
increased consumer understanding on credit card usage and protection. 
As we advance forward, changes in the financial landscape will continue to be dynamic and the level 
of  complexity  and  sophistication  in  the  financial  markets  will  further  intensify.  While  considerable 
efforts  have  been  undertaken  to  empower  consumers  through  financial  education  and  enhance 
protection for consumers, much remains to be done in fostering the commitment of financial service 
providers to sound business practices and promoting fair and equitable treatment of consumers. Given 
the  global  dimension  of  financial  services  and  the  increasing  interdependence  of  financial  markets, 
efforts  by  individual  countries  to  strengthen  consumer  protection  need  to  be  matched  by  efforts  to 
enhance  safeguards  at  the  international  level.  Forums  like  this  one  provide  a  good  opportunity  for 
regulators  to  share  information  and  insights,  to  discuss  the  issues  and  challenges  at  hand,  explore 
potential  areas  for  cooperation  and  lay  the  groundwork  for  future  partnerships.  Drawing  on  the 
experience and expertise of various countries, this forum provide a platform for participants to work 
together  towards  developing  global  best  practice  standards  on  consumer  protection  and  education 
issues. I look forward to the outcome of your deliberations in fostering greater consumer protection 
and education. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2005
