Lars Heikensten: The current economic situation 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a seminar organised by the 
SNS Center for Business and Policy Studies, Stockholm, 16 November 2005. 
 “The  Riksbank's  most  recent  assessment  of  inflation  prospects  was  published  in  Inflation  Report 
2005:3 on 20 October. There we painted a bright picture of economic developments in both Sweden 
and  abroad.  International  growth  was  expected  to  remain  good.  In  the  United  States,  the  strong 
growth was expected to slacken somewhat, mainly due to tighter monetary policy. This was expected 
to  be  counteracted  to  some  extent  by  higher  growth  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  it  was 
considered probable that the strong growth in Asia would continue. As before, the growth figures in 
China were expected to be high, while the situation in Japan for the first time in more than a decade 
appeared to be relatively stable with rising growth. All in all, the global growth rate was expected to be 
between 3.5 and 4 per cent, which is slightly lower than last year, but still entails good opportunities for 
Swedish exports,” said Mr Heikensten. 
”The information received since the Inflation Report was published largely confirms this assessment. 
Despite hurricanes and a high oil price, US households and companies have continued to increase 
their  consumption  and  investment  at  a  stable  rate.  Elsewhere  in  the  world,  too,  we  have  seen  a 
number  of  positive  economic  signals.  For  instance,  the  purchasing  managers  index  for  the 
manufacturing sector rose in both the euro area and Japan in October. Recent statistics thus indicate 
that international economic activity remains strong and that developments are largely in line with the 
assessment made in the Inflation Report. This also means that there may be less reason for concern 
over  international  developments  than  has  sometimes  been  the  case  in  recent  years,”  continued  Mr 
Heikensten. 
”With regard to the Swedish economy, we observed in October that economic activity had accelerated 
again after the slowdown at the beginning of the year. Exports were expected to show strong growth. 
The investment upturn that began last year was expected to continue, but gradually enter a calmer 
phase. Private consumption was also expected to rise more rapidly given, for example, a good growth 
in real wages, expansionary fiscal policy and a gradual increase in employment. All in all, we foresaw 
a fairly good growth rate and a normal economic cycle, where domestic demand would become more 
of  a  driving  force.  Given  this  background,  we  were  assuming  there  would  be  a  turnaround  for  the 
better in the labour market," said Mr Heikensten. 
"New  data  also  largely  confirm  the  earlier  picture  with  regard  to  economic  activity  in  Sweden.  The 
most recent business tendency survey paints a bright picture of the situation in most sectors included 
in the survey, and foreign trade statistics indicate stronger growth in exports. In line with developments 
elsewhere in the world, the Swedish purchasing managers index for October also showed a positive 
development.  The  expected  upturn  in  private  consumption  is  confirmed  by  new  information,  in  this 
case turnover in the retail trade sector. The picture of a gradual, cautious strengthening of the labour 
market is also supported by incoming data regarding, for instance, new job vacancies, redundancies 
and  companies’  recruitment  plans.  Employment  appears  if  anything  slightly  stronger  than  was 
expected," said Mr Heikensten. 
“Inflation in the Swedish economy has been low since the end of 2003. According to the most recent 
data,  for  October,  annual  inflation  in  terms  of  the  CPI  and  UND1X  stood  at  0.5  per  cent  and  
0.8 per cent, respectively. The low domestic inflation rate is largely due to a surprisingly rapid increase 
in productivity. At the same time, imported inflation has been kept down by strong global competitive 
pressure,  spare  resources  in  the  global  economy  and  a  previously  relatively  strong  krona.  Our 
assessment in the Inflation Report was that inflation would increase in future, but at a fairly moderate 
rate. At the beginning of the forecast period the oil price in particular was expected to push up the rate 
of price increase. After that, rising capacity utilisation in Sweden and abroad, together with diminishing 
effects of a number of price-dampening factors, was expected to lead to inflation rising. Against that 
background, our assessment was that UND1X inflation would rise from the current low levels and be 
close to the target a couple of years ahead,” observed Mr Heikensten. 
”Experiences  show  that  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  is  often  slightly  uneasy  during  phases 
when  interest  rates  are  adjusting  upwards.  This  has  also  been  the  case  over  the  past  year.  There 
appears  to  have  been  unusually  clear  focus  on  differences  in  short-term  rates  between  different 
   1/2 
countries, which has had repercussions for the krona. Let me therefore underline that it is not at all 
strange  that  Swedish  short-term  rates  have  been  lower  than  those  in  many  other  countries.  For 
various different reasons, some of which I have mentioned earlier, inflation has been much lower in 
Sweden than in other countries. Compared with the United States and the euro area, the difference is 
between 0.5 and 1 percentage point on average for the past three years, depending on which inflation 
measure  is  used.  In  2004,  the  difference  was  as  much  as  2  percentage  points.  When  one  looks 
ahead, which is important in this context, according to Consensus Forecast, forecasters are expecting 
higher inflation in the euro area and the United States than in Sweden,” continued Mr Heikensten. 
”It is clear that the krona has developed more weakly since the spring than the Riksbank expected. As 
you know, we do not have a target for the exchange rate. However, it is an important factor when we 
assess future inflation. In this context it is not the present exchange rate that is decisive, but how we 
see  it developing  in a slightly  longer-term  perspective.  There  is  no  reason  to depart  from  the  basic 
assessment  we  made  earlier;  there  are  still  strong  reasons  in  favour  of  a  stronger  krona.  It  is  not 
merely  that  Swedish  macro  data  in  general  has  developed  well  over  a  number  of  years  compared 
with, for instance, the euro area; most forecasts indicate that this development will continue. Sweden 
is also one of the countries that has had the highest trade surplus as a percentage of GDP over a 
number of years, which is one indication among many that the value of the krona has been relatively 
low. However, even if we should not – as I see it – change our basic assessment that the krona will 
strengthen, its value at present is rather different. There is therefore reason to take into consideration 
a risk scenario for inflation linked to a weaker exchange rate. Just as the Riksbank emphasised during 
2003 and 2004 that the strong krona was one reason behind the low inflation rate, there is reason to 
point  out  that  the  weakening  of  the  krona  this  year,  particularly  if  it  persists,  could  result  in  higher 
inflation,” said Mr Heikensten. 
”All in all, I do not at present see any reason to change my view of inflation now to any great extent, 
compared  with  the  October  assessment.  However,  in  my  opinion,  the  changes  that  have  occurred 
would appear to indicate slightly stronger economic growth and perhaps also the risk of a slightly more 
rapid rate of price increase, mainly connected with international inflation and a weak krona. Given the 
information we have now, the financial markets’ expectations of a repo rate increase some time next 
year  appear  reasonable.  As  I  see  it,  this  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  strong  growth  in  the  real 
economy  and  the  increased  risks  that  follow  on  from  a  continued  rise  in  house  prices,”  continued  
Mr Heikensten. 
”Let me conclude with a few more general reflections. It is quite natural given the current situation with 
extremely low interest rates and stimulation from monetary policy that the time for a repo rate increase 
is approaching. There have been increases in the repo rate on a number of previous occasions since 
inflation  targeting  was  introduced,  without  any  dramatic  consequences.  This  is  essentially  a  natural 
consequence  of  the  strong  economic  growth  and  something  that  could  contribute  to  safeguarding 
continued  stable  development 
the  Swedish  economy  during  coming  years,”  concluded  
Mr Heikensten. 
 
in 
   2/2 
