Lars Heikensten: Introduction on monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 20 October 2005. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for your invitation to the Committee on Finance. 
We have now been working with inflation targeting for just over ten years in Sweden. We have had 
open  hearings  in  their  current  form  since  1994.  The  hearings  are  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  the 
Riksbank’s strategy regarding openness and are an important instrument with which to win democratic 
legitimacy for monetary policy.  
Today is the last time I will have the opportunity to appear before the Committee in my capacity as 
Riksbank Governor. Against that background I thought I would begin with a look back at the last ten 
years. What have we achieved during these years? What has gone well and less well? I also intend to 
discuss  a  couple  of  issues  concerning  the  formulation  of  the  inflation  targeting  policy;  what 
expectations are reasonable to have? How is policy being conducted and how can it be developed? 
These  are  relevant  questions,  not  least  given  the  discussion  that  we  have  seen  recently.  Finally,  I 
intend to speak about the outlook for the economy and inflation that is presented in the Inflation Report 
and my own view on future monetary policy.  
Developments in the past ten years 
As I’m sure you all remember, our country was hit hard by a deep economic crisis at the start of the 
1990s.  This  crisis  could  generally  be  described  as  a  dramatic  end  to  almost  twenty  years  of 
stabilisation policy problems. The Swedish economy had been characterised by an unsustainable rise 
in costs, which had originated in price and wage increases that constantly came on a collision course 
with the fixed exchange rate. The result was repeated devaluations, modest economic growth, poor 
productivity growth and more or less stagnant growth in real wages. The performance was markedly 
weak both compared with earlier periods and in relation to other countries. During the crisis years the 
situation was aggravated further. Unemployment increased fourfold in the course of a few years and 
the  central  government  finances  deteriorated  dramatically.  Interest  rates  rose  unchecked  and  the 
interest rate differential vis-à-vis Germany occasionally came to several percentage points.  
Favourable results 
Today, a little more than ten years after the crisis, the situation is completely different. The new focus 
of stabilisation policy – which involved crucial changes in the framework for both fiscal and monetary 
policy  –  has  meant  that  inflation  now  remains  relatively  stable  around  the  target  of  two  per  cent  
(Figure 1). The lower inflation rate has not been associated with weaker growth in output, rather the 
opposite. GDP growth has averaged roughly half a percentage point higher a year in the past decade 
than  in  the  two  previous  decades,  and  the  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy  also  appear  to  have 
lessened (Figure 2). Productivity growth has been surprisingly robust – stronger than in the rest of the 
EU – and there now seems to be broad consensus that the long-term rate of productivity growth, and 
thus  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate,  has  been  raised.  Real  wages  have  also  improved 
considerably; since 1995 they have risen by roughly 2.5 per cent a year on average, compared with 
less than 1 per cent on average during the 1970s and 1980s (Figure 3). Growth in employment has 
not been quite as good, but it nonetheless is worth pointing out that the situation today is far better 
than  it  was  in  the  mid-1990s.  At  that  time  unemployment  was  commonly  judged  to  have  become 
entrenched around 8 per cent.  
Those  of  us  who  experienced  the  crisis  years  know  that  this  performance  was  by  no  means  a 
certainty. That there was a shift in stabilisation policy is in itself perhaps not that surprising given both 
the  seriousness  of  the  situation  at  the  time  and  the  pressure  imposed  by  an  environment  with  free 
movement of capital. But the decisiveness and speed with which the changes were implemented is 
something that is still brought up when I speak with colleagues abroad. Compared with other countries 
it is perhaps above all the changes in fiscal policy that have made Sweden stand out, in spite of the 
fact  that  the  limits  in  the  fiscal  policy  framework  have  been  stretched  somewhat  in  recent  years  – 
   1/7 
inflation  targeting  is,  after  all,  now  conducted  in  some  twenty  countries  around  the  world  and  there 
also are other reasons than inflation targeting that have contributed to lower price increases globally. 
The comparatively sound central government finances have been a great strength for our country over 
the past ten years. In the years ahead demands will rise even further if we are to meet the challenges 
posed by an ageing population.  
More surprising, in a positive sense, has perhaps been wage formation. It is not that long ago since 
Swedish wage formation used to be highlighted in economic circles as a warning to other countries. 
But with the odd exception wage formation in Sweden since the mid-1990s has worked well from a 
macroeconomic perspective. I think the fact that the Swedish Trade Union Confederation has said that 
“the  Riksbank  is  a  wage-earner’s  best  friend”  clearly  shows  that  something  has  happened.  Real 
wages  have  grown  positively  in  negotiations  that  have  set  out  from  stable  inflation  expectations 
(Figure 4). That is not to say that wage formation and the way the labour market functions are perfect. 
The  future  is  likely  to  involve  even  greater  requirements  for  a  more  productivity-based  local  or 
individual wage formation.  
The vigorous productivity growth has been another positive surprise in the performance (Figure 5). At 
the  start  of  the  1990s  there  were  no  indications  that  this  would  be  the  case.  Why  then  would  the 
Government  have  appointed  a  productivity  delegation?  The  firm  productivity  gains  have,  of  course, 
been  crucial  for  the  increases  in  real  wages.  But  they  also  have  meant  that  companies  have  not 
needed to hire new staff on the same scale as before, which has contributed to the weak employment 
growth in recent years. We really do not know why productivity has improved so strongly even if there 
are a number of hypotheses according to which the IT explosion, deregulation and increased global 
competition are significant explanations. For the Riksbank, it is important to understand this better if 
we are to be able to produce accurate forecasts of inflation. Of even greater importance, of course, is 
to do what is possible through economic policy to ensure that the positive performance can continue. 
In the long run higher real wages presuppose increased productivity.  
Two problem areas 
However, not everything has been as positive. Labour supply has not developed as well as one might 
have  hoped.  There  are  currently  large  groups  outside  of  the  labour  market  and  employment  has 
increased at a slower rate than is desirable over the past ten years. Continued weak growth in the 
labour supply will mean in concrete terms that the Swedish economy will reach its capacity ceiling at 
an earlier stage and that the Riksbank may be forced to raise the repo rate at a lower growth rate than 
would otherwise have been the case. Another dimension of the problem is that the ageing population 
gives rise to greater expenditure on medical treatment, care of the elderly and pensions, which burden 
government budgets. At the risk of sounding repetitive, as this is something pointed out by many in the 
debate, I would nevertheless like to emphasise that the only realistic means of alleviating these effects 
is for more people to work and pay taxes and for fewer to be dependent on the social welfare system. 
This area will offer one of the largest challenges to economic policy in the future.  
Another factor that has proved surprisingly negative is the development of the krona. If someone had 
said  to  me  ten  years  ago  –  when  I  first  came  to  the  Riksbank  –  that  we  would  have  as  good 
macroeconomic growth as we have had, I would never have imagined that the krona would develop as 
weakly  as  it  has  done.  The  question  is  why  this  has  happened?  Traditional  explanations  based  on 
competitiveness, relative inflation rates or growth rates are not sufficient. The Riksbank has therefore 
begun a large-scale study with the aid of external academics to try to understand this development. 
Questions relating to the taxation system, corporate location and investment trends will be examined 
in  this  context.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  the  weak  exchange  rate  has  periodically  been  of 
assistance during, for instance, the latter part of the 1990s, when strong export growth was able to 
compensate  for  weak  domestic  demand.  However,  there  is  also  another  side  to  this  issue.  An 
excessively weak krona is not good for the Swedish people’s standard of living. 
A few words about the Riksbank 
During the hearings at the Committee on Finance I do not usually speak of developments within the 
Riksbank. Today I intend to make an exception and report some developments to you, our owners. In 
the mid-1990s we who formed the management of the Riksbank, my predecessor Urban Bäckström, 
my successor Stefan Ingves and myself, set a course for the organisation based on a few fairly simple 
principles.  We  would  endeavour  to  concentrate  on  the  Bank’s  core  tasks;  monetary  policy  and 
   2/7 
financial  stability.  The  emphasis  would  be  on  building  up  increased  analytical  capacity  and 
competence within these areas. In addition, we would aim for greater openness, both internally and 
externally. These have been the guiding principles for our work over the past ten years. The changes 
that have been made are quite substantial. The number of employees at the Riksbank, including the 
Bank’s subsidiaries, has been reduced from over 1,200 to just over 400, which makes us one of the 
smallest central banks in Europe. Despite this, we have been able to significantly increase resources 
in our main fields. We now have a lot more people working on analysing issues related to monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability  than  we  had  ten  years  ago.  The  academic  level  has  also  been  raised 
substantially, which can be noted, for instance, in the fact that we have a much higher percentage of 
employees with postgraduate research degrees than we had ten years ago.  
The emphasis on openness has also had clear consequences. We publish a comprehensive report 
showing the reasoning behind our interest rate decisions, the Riksbank Governor attends hearings at 
the Committee on Finance and members of the Executive Board travel around the country taking part 
in discussions and giving information on the Riksbank's work. In studies of central bank transparency, 
we are regularly ranked among the top few (Figure 6). In my opinion, this openness has been a central 
issue in gradually building up confidence in the Riksbank and its inflation target. It is also important to 
make it possible to regularly examine the Riksbank’s work in a serious manner. 
One  indication  that  we  are  on  the  right  path  to  achieving  a  solid  monetary  policy  regime  is  what 
happened when Urban Bäckström announced his resignation in May 2002 and when I myself did the 
same  thing  a  couple  of  weeks  ago.  In  neither  case  were  there  any  significant  effects  on  either  the 
exchange  rate  or  interest  rates.  Of  course,  I  was  a  little  uncertain  as  to  whether  I  should  just  be 
pleased about this. But I think there is reason to be; it shows namely that we have a monetary policy 
regime which is stable and not dependent on single individuals. 
Inflation targeting – some thoughts on the future 
As I have mentioned, the macroeconomic outcome for Sweden has been relatively good over the past 
decade. Of course, this does not prevent there being questions worth discussing and much that can 
be improved. This also applies in the field of monetary policy. An important question in this context is 
what one can expect from monetary policy. If the expectations are excessive, there is a risk they will 
lead to the wrong issues being discussed and, if the worst comes to the worst, to political discontent 
that will undermine the current monetary policy system.  
Reasonable expectations 
According to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, the Riksbank is to safeguard price stability. We have chosen 
to implement this by keeping inflation at a target level of 2 per cent. The fact that the legislator has 
been clear that low inflation should be the target for monetary policy and nothing else, such as high 
growth or low unemployment, is because inflation is the only factor the Riksbank can govern in the 
long term. It is therefore unwise, and perhaps even counterproductive, to give a different impression. 
For instance, it is worth repeating that in order to reduce unemployment permanently, an attempt must 
be made to influence the structural component of unemployment, i.e. the component that is not due to 
fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  the  economy.  And  this  requires  completely 
different measures than those of monetary policy. These measures must influence the functioning of 
the  labour  market  and  create  a  beneficial  environment  for  new  businesses  and  corporate  sector 
growth. Of course, this does not prevent the Riksbank from contributing as far as possible to other 
economic policy targets being attained; this is quite in line with the preparatory works to the Sveriges 
Riksbank  Act.  The  condition  for  this  is  that  our  own  target  of  a  low  and  stable  inflation  rate  is  not 
jeopardised.  
The fact is that developments in recent years show that the task of ensuring inflation remains in line 
with our target is hard enough. There have been repeated structural changes that have been difficult 
to parry completely with interest rate adjustments. It is rarely possible to forecast structural changes 
well in advance, much less to estimate their quantitative effects on inflation. They can therefore often 
lead to inflation deviating from the target level. As I mentioned earlier, over the past ten years there 
have been a number of changes of a structural nature that have almost all contributed to holding back 
inflation.  
   3/7 
When the Riksbank uses changes in its key rate to affect inflation, this is mainly by way of influencing 
aggregate demand. To put it simply, we usually put the brakes on when economic activity is rising and 
we  accelerate  when  it  is  falling.  Inflation  targeting  should  thereby  often  be  able  to  contribute  to 
smoothing  the  business  cycle.  It  is  also  possible  that  it  can  reduce  fluctuations  in  unemployment. 
However, it is not reasonable to believe that the fluctuations in economic activity can be eliminated 
entirely.  It  is  therefore  seriously  misleading  to  make  the  Riksbank  responsible  for  the  difference 
between actual unemployment and what could potentially have been attained if it had been possible to 
abolish fluctuations in economic activity. What we can hope for is a slightly more stable development, 
which  we  appear  to  have  attained  over  the  past  ten  years,  although  it  is  too  early  to  draw  any 
completely certain conclusions.  
The policy is flexible 
Another question which arises in the discussion now and then is how mechanical or how flexible the 
policy should be and how it should then be assessed. The Riksbank currently conducts what is known 
as flexible inflation targeting. We are definitely not what my British colleague Mervyn King would call 
“inflation nutters”. The focus lies not merely on stabilising inflation under any circumstances; as long 
as there is fundamental confidence in the policy, that we will have low inflation in line with our target, 
we also take into account other factors. 
In January 1999 we published a clarification of our policy. There we made it clear that some deviations 
from the target level could be accepted, but that the Riksbank at the same time normally strives to 
bring inflation back to target level within two years. One reason for allowing deviations is that monetary 
policy does not make such a rapid impact and does not have the precision to closely steer inflation in 
the short term. Another reason is the need to be able to take account of other factors than inflation 
trends – for instance, growth in the real economy.  
The  principle  of  normally  bringing  inflation  back  in  line  with  the  target  within  two  years  can  be 
interpreted as a restriction the Riksbank has imposed upon itself to make its policy more clear. This 
restriction helps clarify the consideration normally given to factors other than the price stability target. 
However, sometimes situations arise where flexibility with regard to the target needs to be greater to 
avoid  the  effects  on  the  stability  of  the  real  economy  –  variations  in  production  and  employment  – 
reaching  unacceptable  levels.  In  extreme  cases  the  deviations  from  the  inflation  target  may  be  so 
large  that  it  is  neither  possible  nor  desirable  to  return  inflation  to  target  within  the  usual  two-year 
perspective. 
There are a number of examples of situations where considerations other than the assessment of CPI 
growth over the coming two years have affected our policy. During the mid and late 1990s we did not 
cut the repo rate as much as our normal principles might have recommended, as our assessment was 
that some of the fall in prices was due to our own interest rate cuts, which subdued the housing cost 
component of CPI, and to deregulation that was partly of a temporary nature. In the same way, we did 
not react as much as we could have done when inflation rose sharply for transient reasons in 2001 
and 2003. A more recent example is the decision in March 2005 not to cut the key rate. Our reasoning 
then was that it might have been possible with the inflation forecasts we had, but that the expected 
high growth, combined with elevated house prices, called for some caution.  
Our  flexibility  can  also  be  said  to  include  a  preparedness  to  react  to  events  where  the  final 
consequences  are  particularly  difficult  to  survey.  One  such  example  is  the  acts  of  terrorism  in  the 
United States on 11 September 2001. In the wake of these attacks, many central banks around the 
world  were  quick  to  cut  interest  rates.  This  powerful  response  can  be  interpreted  as  a  kind  of 
"insurance"  against  a  really  poor  outcome,  rather  than  as  the  result  of  carefully-considered 
assessments of the most probable outcome. 
It  would  be  desirable,  for  a  better  understanding  of  monetary  policy,  to  develop  the  principles 
governing  how  our  reasoning  in  practice  weighs  future  inflation  against  real  or  financial  stability. 
However, this is for obvious reasons no simple task and there are no good examples of this from other 
central banks. Last spring, the Riksbank began work aimed at achieving this objective. One potential 
result of this work could be a development of the clarification from 1999. 
A clearer picture of which deviations are allowed would also make it easier to communicate our policy 
and to assess it in a purposeful manner. At present, policy is often assessed solely on the basis of 
historical averages for inflation. While this can act as a natural starting point, the discussion should be 
taken further and include how the outcome of the policy relates to the considerations taken to various 
   4/7 
more transient price fluctuations. Real and financial developments should also be taken into account 
in contexts where they have affected the policy.  
I imagine that these are questions to which the Committee will wish to return in future, both as a result 
of the work conducted within the Riksbank and perhaps also as a result of the external assessment of 
monetary  policy  the  Committee  intends  to  make.  The  Riksbank  is  also  holding  discussions  with 
external  parties  on  a  regular  assessment,  where  a preliminary starting  point would  be comparisons 
between the assessments made by the Riksbank and other forecasters in order to provide a better 
basis for a correct discussion.  
The economic situation 
Let me now comment on our current assessment of inflation prospects and our interest rate decision 
yesterday.  
International cyclical upswing continuing 
World economic growth overall has been relatively firm for a couple of years. Last year in particular, 
growth figures were very high, driven by the marked upswing in the United States and by stable firm 
growth  in  large  parts  of  Asia,  but  also  in  other  emerging  market  economies.  However,  during  the 
spring  new  data  releases  prompted  us  and  other  forecasters  to  question  the  strength  of  the 
international  economic  upswing  that  we  had  envisaged.  Growth  statistics  from  the  euro  area  were 
weaker than expected and the information from the United States was providing a somewhat mixed 
picture. 
Judging by the data that have been released over the summer and at the start of the autumn, most 
indications are that the slowdown in economic activity that we saw at the beginning of the year was 
temporary. In the United States, growth continued to be high in the second quarter. In China and the 
rest of Asia the economic expansion has continued and it is pleasing that the Japanese economy now 
looks stronger than it has for a long time. On the other hand the performance in the euro area has 
remained weak, especially in the large economies, but there are nonetheless some indicators there as 
well pointing to a turnaround.  
Overall,  it  appears  that  GDP  growth  abroad  will  continue  to  be  firm  this  year  and  that  there  are 
prospects  that  the  global  cyclical  upswing  will  persist  in  the  coming  years,  with  the  United  States, 
China, and the rest of Asia as the main engines. 
But nothing is certain when it comes to economic activity. One obvious source of uncertainty is the oil 
price, which has turned out much higher than we anticipated as late as in June. Forward prices, which 
reflect expectations of future oil prices, have also risen and judging by these, expectations in general 
seem to be set on a slowly falling, but nevertheless still high, oil price. Even though the oil price has 
dropped back recently we have revised up our forecast for the coming years.  
It is hard to judge what effects the high oil price will have on growth and inflation. Among other things, 
this depends on whether the high price reflects mounting demand or whether it has been caused by 
supply shocks. Pointing to the first explanation is the fact that the price rise in recent years has gone 
hand in hand with an increase in output. A dampening factor is that most industrialised countries are 
considerably less dependent on oil than they were a couple of decades ago. Against that background, 
we estimate in our assessment that the high oil prices will have limited effects on economic activity. 
But,  of  course,  it  is  not  possible  to  rule  out  either  higher  inflation  or  a  more  negative  impact  on 
demand. Signs of the former can be seen in the United States. Another source of uncertainty is the 
large savings imbalances around the world and how a correction might come about.  
Strong domestic demand in Sweden 
In  Sweden,  too,  economic  growth  was strong  last  year. During  the spring  this  year,  however,  there 
were signals indicating that a slowdown was on the way. Moreover, in June growth data were released 
for the first quarter, which were weaker than expected by all economic forecasters. That prompted the 
Riksbank to revise down its growth forecast for 2005, as well as our outlook for future cost pressures. 
But we nevertheless stuck to our assessment that most factors – not least the expansionary economic 
policy – pointed to comparatively firm growth in the period ahead.  
   5/7 
That now seems to have been a correct assessment. The statistics for the first quarter were revised up 
over the summer and thus were not quite as weak as they first appeared. During the second quarter 
GDP growth also rose, according to the data we now have. The performance is positive as regards 
both domestic demand – consumption and investment – and exports. Looking ahead, we expect that 
domestic demand will be a more important driving force than it has been so far in the cyclical upswing.  
However, demand  is  likely  to  begin  to  slacken  by degrees  as  a  result  of  ordinary  mechanisms  that 
dampen economic activity. One such mechanism is that interest rates rise as resource utilisation and 
cost pressures pick up.  
Previously, the forecasts in our main scenario have been produced on the basis of the assumption 
that  the  repo  rate  is  constant  during  the  forecast  period.  In  this  Report  the  forecast  in  the  main 
scenario is based on the assumption that the repo rate evolves in line with implied forward interest 
rates. According to this assumption the repo rate will remain at 1.5 per cent up to about the second 
quarter next year, when it gradually begins to be raised.  
Overall,  the  Swedish  economy  is  forecast  to  grow  at  a  comparatively  firm  rate  during  the  forecast 
period. GDP growth is estimated to be 2.3 per cent this year and 3.0 per cent next year. Thereafter, it 
will gradually fall towards just over 2 per cent in 2008. Compared with the assessment in the June 
Report, this is an upward revision and the fundamental outlook is now more positive. For this year it is 
mainly the revision of the outcome for the first quarter that has affected the forecast. After that it is, 
among other things, the more expansionary economic policy compared with our June Report – both a 
slightly lower repo rate and more expansionary fiscal policy – that have raised the forecast.1 
Resource utilisation to increase gradually 
There  are  now  signs  that  the  situation  in  the  labour  market  is  improving.  Among  other  things,  the 
number of hours worked has begun to rise and indicators of the number of redundancy notices and 
new job vacancies also point to a more robust labour market. 
Relatively firm growth in domestic demand in the period ahead, coupled with the fact that it should 
become  increasingly  difficult  for  companies  to  boost  output  without  also  adding  to  their  workforces, 
means that we foresee higher demand for labour in the coming years. The announced labour market 
policy programmes for next year entails that total employment will rise more than regular employment, 
but there should also be an increase in the number of regular jobs. Our forecast is that the number of 
employed  will  rise  by  0.4  per  cent  this  year  and  1.1  per  cent  next  year.  Open  unemployment  is 
estimated to be 5.9 per cent this year, 5 per cent in 2006 and then to drop somewhat more.  
Wages  are  forecast  to  increase  faster  as  the  labour  market  improves.  During  the  latter  part  of  the 
forecast period growth in productivity is also expected to diminish, which is natural when growth in the 
economy  will  be  driven  to  a  greater  extent  by  domestic  demand  and  higher  output  in  the  private 
services sector. Overall, that means that companies’ costs will begin to increase faster again, but our 
assessment  is  that  the  rise  will  be  comparatively  slow  and  that  cost  pressures  will  be  moderate 
throughout the forecast period.  
It is difficult to determine exactly how much the productivity upswing will be dampened. It is possible 
that the rate of increase in productivity has been raised on a more permanent basis compared with 
before. One cause may be the large-scale investment in IT undertaken by companies at the end of the 
1990s. But it is also possible that the continued economic upturn will be followed by a rapid decline in 
productivity growth. Our assessment today is that the high growth in productivity will last somewhat 
longer than assumed in the previous Inflation Report and the forecast for average productivity growth 
therefore has been revised up slightly over the forecast period.  
                                                      
1   The  comparison  refers  to  the  forecast  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  evolves  in  line  with  implied  forward 
interest rates, which in the previous Report was presented in a box. 
   6/7 
Inflation rising but still low 
Inflation has risen somewhat recently but remains low. In September this year, the annual CPI and 
UND1X inflation rates stood at 0.6 per cent and 1.0 per cent, respectively. That is slightly higher than 
we forecast in June, owing mainly to the unexpectedly high oil price.  
In  the  coming  years,  mounting  domestic  cost  pressures  are  anticipated  to  contribute  to  a  rise  in 
domestic inflation. However, the rate of this increase is estimated to be modest due to both continued 
fairly strong productivity growth and stiff competition.  
That  imported  inflation  in  recent  years  has  been  contained  is  due,  among  other  things,  to  the 
strengthening  of  the  krona  and  the  fact  that  there  has  been  a  substitution  in  favour  of  cheaper 
imported goods. The strength of these effects is likely to diminish slightly during the forecast period, as 
a  pick-up  in  global  resource  utilisation  leads  to  higher  international  price  pressures.  Neither  do  we 
believe that the krona will appreciate as much in the period ahead.  
The overall assessment is that inflation will rise in the coming years, but at a fairly moderate pace. For 
the larger part of the forecast period inflation is expected to be below 2 per cent. Our forecast is that 
the twelve-month change in the CPI will be 1.5 per cent in one year and 2.2 per cent in September 
2007.  The  corresponding  forecast  for  underlying  inflation  UND1X  is  1.2  per  cent  and  1.8  per  cent, 
respectively.  
The question then is what this entails for monetary policy. What is clear is that the low inflation has 
meant that monetary policy has been highly expansionary for a rather long time. This, of course, has 
helped  stimulate  economic  activity  and  contributed  to  the  firm  economic  growth.  It  also  has  had 
consequences for, among other things, developments in house prices and households' debt situation.  
As I observed earlier, the assessment in the Inflation Report’s main scenario is based on the technical 
assumption that the repo rate will develop in line with implied forward rates. It must be emphasised 
that  the  assumed  interest  rate  path  should  not  be  interpreted  as  reflecting  the  path  the  Riksbank 
considers to be most desirable.  
The  inflation  development  I  have  described  and  which  follows  on  from  the  current  interest  rate 
assumption is judged to be reasonable, but there are several alternative paths for the future repo rate, 
which would give roughly the same outcome for inflation. As before, there is also reason to note that 
household borrowing and house prices are continuing to rise rapidly. Given this, the decision we made 
yesterday  was  to  leave  the  repo  rate  unchanged  at  1.5  per  cent.    The  precise  future  stance  of 
monetary  policy  will  depend  as  usual  on  new  information  regarding  economic  developments  in 
Sweden and abroad and on the Riksbank's assessment of the inflation outlook.  
By way of conclusion I would like to refer back to the first part of my speech, where I presented some 
information regarding the outcome of the policy that has been conducted in Sweden in the past ten 
years and of the Riksbank's efforts. Let me stress that the good results that have been achieved – with 
a stable and relatively strong economic performance – are very much due to decisions taken here in 
the Riksdag. I am thinking of those decisions you made during and after the crisis years with regard to 
budget policy, both its framework and its implementation, and the various decisions you have taken 
that have helped to make the Riksbank independent.  
It has been a great privilege to have been involved in this process and to have had the opportunity to 
work for ten years in the management of the Riksbank. I would like to take this opportunity to thank 
you for the faith you have shown in me and the support and encouragement you have given me, as 
well as for your excellent cooperation, and that applies to you all irrespective of political affiliation.  
Thank you! 
 
   7/7 
