Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Migration to E-payments  
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Payment 
Systems Forum and Exhibition 2005, Kuala Lumpur, 28 November 2005. 
 Bismillahhirrahmanirrahim 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  Payment  Systems  Forum  and  Exhibition  2005.  The 
theme  of  this  inaugural  forum  is  the  "Migration  to  E-Payments"  with  a  focus  on  the  issues  and 
challenges  in  the  transition  from  paper-based  payments  to  electronic  payments  in  Malaysia.  The 
issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  for  a  nation  to  effectively  migrate  from  paper-based  payment 
instruments  to  electronic  means  of  payments  are  multi-faceted.  This  will  require  changes  in  the 
infrastructure and business processes, developing and sustaining users'confidence and inculcating a 
change among all the relevant stakeholders, including the service providers and the customers. 
Our  objective  is  to  transform  the  payments  system  into  one  that  is  competitively  leveraged  on  a 
modern market-based system. Indeed, this will need to be achieved by the cumulative efforts of all 
parties  involved,  including  the  industry  and  the  authorities.  This  forum  and  exhibition  has, therefore 
been  organised  to  provide  a  platform  to  discuss  the  range  of  significant  issues  and  challenges  in 
achieving the common vision of migrating to e-payments in Malaysia and to increase public awareness 
of  the  various  payment  channels  available  in  the  market  today,  as  well  as  to  discuss  views  on  the 
development of services and infrastructure for the next generation of systems. The forum is designed 
to encourage active dialogue and deliberations from the different perspectives, notably between the 
service providers and the users. The dialogue will also serve as a platform to discuss how the industry 
may effectively operate in the context of the prevailing regulatory environment, policies and practices. 
From the regulators'perspective, the aim is to develop an enabling environment to facilitate and foster 
greater use of more efficient payment mechanisms in Malaysia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
An efficient, reliable and secure electronic payment system is critical to the soundness of the financial 
system,  the efficiency  of  the  financial markets  and the  economic  growth  and development process. 
With  the  rapid  technological  advancements  and  increasing  consumer  demands  for  more  efficient 
delivery services, the Malaysian financial landscape has continued to transition towards the increased 
significance  of  an  electronic  payment  systems  and  channels.  Despite  the  progress  that  has  been 
achieved, Malaysians however, remain high users of currency notes and coins, with the currency-in-
circulation amounting to about 6.4% of GDP. In contrast, the average ratio for high users of electronic 
payments such as in the Scandinavian economies is only 2.9%. The use of cheques is also dominant 
in our financial system, accounting for 96% of the total value of non-cash payment instruments. These 
indicators  suggest  that  measures  to  encourage  more  active  use  of  e-payments  would  need  to  go 
beyond building the electronic payment infrastructure. It needs to address the broader issues revolving 
around building public awareness and confidence, promoting greater convenience; reviewing business 
and operating practices and finally, addressing the commercial interfaces between the customers and 
the service providers. Allow me to take this opportunity to elaborate on these issues. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
E-payment  increases  operational  efficiency  and  improves  productivity  levels  through  expedient 
payments and receipts of funds as well as through the reduction or redeployment of resources used 
for  handling  cash  and  cheques.  Whilst  the  migration  to  e-payment  may  require  considerable 
investment and effort to provide the enabling infrastructure, the use of e-payments provide consumers 
with greater convenience and security that would result in cost savings in the long run. In this regard, it 
is important for the financial institutions and payment service providers to provide more widespread 
access  points  for  electronic  payment  services  via  multiple  channels,  including  the  automated  teller 
machines,  the  point-of-sale  terminals,  the  gated  toll  and  parking  gantries  and  through  the  network 
channels  and  devices,  such  as  the  Internet  and  the  mobile  phones.  Needless  to  say,  the  payment 
products  and  services  need  to  be  continuously  enhanced  to  meet  the  changing  needs  of  the 
consumers. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 1
In  addition,  the  efforts  to increase  the use of e-payments will  not  only  hinge on  the capacity  of  the 
service providers to ensure that e-payment services are convenient, but also secure. In the area of 
fraud prevention, the industry would need to be constantly vigilant to maintain consumers'confidence. 
Robust technology and strong internal controls must be in place to protect and preserve the integrity of 
the financial system. 
In line with this objective, our banking institutions have successfully replaced the magnetic stripe ATM 
and credit cards with chip-based cards to ensure a more secure environment for payment cards. This 
move has effectively eliminated counterfeiting and fraud involving ATM and credit cards in Malaysia. 
This has provided Malaysia with the platform to further enhance payment card services by maximising 
the  chip  infrastructure.  The  conclusion  of  this  year  will  see  the  completion  of  the  industry-wide 
migration to Europay-MasterCard-Visa (EMV) standards with all of the point-of-sales terminals being 
fully  EMV-compliant.  With  this,  Malaysia  will  become  the  first  country  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  to 
successfully migrate on a national scale from the magnetic stripe environment to the EMV chip-based 
credit card infrastructure. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For Malaysia to fully adopt e-payments, the task ahead requires great determination and commitment 
from all sectors. From the Central Bank’s perspective, a strong motivation for promoting e-payments is 
in  the  eventual  savings  from  the  reduction  of  paper  processing  and  printing,  and  the  more  efficient 
distribution  of  money  in  electronic  form  in  the  financial  system  that  generates  immediate  economic 
value.  Research  studies  have  shown  that  shifting  from  an  all  paper-based  to  an  electronic-based 
payment system will generate annual savings of about 1% of the GDP. All stakeholders, including the 
financial  institutions,  payment  system  providers,  the  authorities,  the  corporate  sector,  and  the 
consumers, have their respective roles to play to support this national agenda to reduce the use of 
paper-based payment instruments, particularly cheques, in Malaysia.  
In this regard, the Government had recently announced in the 2006 Budget its intent to increase the 
acceptance  of  electronic  means  of  payment  with  the  Government  and  to  promote  the  use  of  e-
payments  nationwide.  This  should  provide  a  catalyst  for  the  adoption  of  e-payments  on  a  national 
scale, as most individuals and businesses have payment transactions with the Government. Key to 
making this a success is the need to review the business and operating practices and address any 
impediments that may hinder the use of e-payments. These practices ranges from the inability to store 
and collect bank account numbers, acknowledging electronic payment and receipt notices, instructing 
payments electronically, and many more that may be identified during the discussions at this forum. All 
corporations  and  institutions  that  are  present  at  this  forum  should  consider  undertaking  a  business 
process  reengineering  in your  own  organisation  to  fully  use  the  e-payment  channels  that  are  being 
offered  by  the  service  providers  and  the  financial  institutions.  As  a  national  agenda,  I  would  like  to 
propose that this forum debates and considers the feasibility of setting a realistic target date, perhaps 
by the year 2010, for a full implementation of a national e-payment roadmap that specifically outlines 
the strategies and realignments of the business processes and operating practices, for the nation to 
be fully engaged in making the migration a success. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me now move on to the third key point mentioned earlier on the commercial interfaces, whereby 
the  underlying  business  models  and  pricing  mechanisms  for  electronic  payments,  should  take  into 
account the need for an incentive structure that promotes the increased use of e-payments. In recent 
years,  several  notable  developments  in  e-payments  in  Malaysia  have  taken  place.  Following  its 
introduction in 2000, the Inter-Bank GIRO system, an electronic credit transfer system, had recorded 
on annual average increase in transactions of 160% in terms of volume and nearly 200% in terms of 
value between 2003 and 2004. The credit card is also becoming a popular means of payment card, 
with the total value and volume of increasing annually by 15 and 20 percent respectively. The growing 
acceptance of Internet banking as a convenient delivery channel for accessing banking services has 
translated into a significant growth of Internet banking subscribers, which today comprise two thirds of 
the total internet subscribers. The latest mode of electronic payments channel is the mobile banking 
services that provide convenience to consumers to access a range of payment services such as funds 
transfers, bill payments and credit card services through mobile phones. In addition, the establishment 
of  an  Internet-based  multi-bank  payment  system  in  Malaysia,  the  Financial  Process  Exchange  in 
October  2004,  would  facilitate  online  payments  for  a  variety  of  payments  by  providing  convenience 
and  an  efficient  channel  for  businesses  and  consumers  to  undertake  their  payment  transactions 
through the internet. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2005
While  these  positive  developments  will  support  the  attainment  of  the  objective  of  migration  to  e-
payments, the commercial issues between the consumers and the service providers have often times 
inhibited  growth  in  the  volume  of  the  e-payments.  The  business  and  pricing  models  have  at  times 
inadvertently promoted a less efficient system, such as in the case of the low price that customers pay 
for using cheques compared to the Inter-Bank GIRO payments, and the popularity of the credit card 
against debit card, which is a more efficient system that carries less risk. In addition, service providers 
have also had difficulties in agreeing on a common business platform, due to their own competitive 
positioning strategies. Such differences have contributed to containing the increased acceptance of e-
payments,  which  is  further  reinforced  by  the  consumers'need  to  see  a  wide  spread  acceptance  by 
merchants  before  deciding  to  use  the  e-payment  mode,  while  the  merchant  needs  to  see  a  critical 
mass of consumers before putting in place the required infrastructure. In this regard, a comprehensive 
review  of  the  industry-wide  related  issues  involving  payment  instruments  and  systems  needs  to  be 
undertaken to make Malaysia more competitive, with a view to promoting the more efficient payment 
systems and addressing the commercial hurdles. In order to further improve the growth and promote 
the  e-payments,  the  payments  industry  may  wish  to  consider  establishing  a  Payment  System 
Association to deal with the industry-wide issues involving electronic payments. A Payment System 
Association  would  be  able  to  address  the  lack  of  common  technology  standards  between  service 
providers  to  promote  interoperability,  and  the  lack  of  a  collective  forum  to  identify,  understand  and 
manage the spectrum of stakeholders' interests and expectations. I should add that this idea is not 
new, as payment associations are already in existence in several other countries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The  future  landscape  of  the  payment  industry  is  one  that  will  continuously  evolve  with  market 
innovations,  resulting  in  enhanced  services  that  offer  improvement  in  efficiency  and  cost  savings 
compared to traditional payment methods. Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to play the role of a 
facilitator to spearhead the development and improvement of the payments system infrastructure and 
to promote a conducive enabling environment for such developments to take place. In this respect, 
Bank Negara Malaysia has taken several initiatives to promote greater use of electronic payments by 
the public sector and in bringing about a mindset change amongst the users. Several taskforces have 
been  established,  involving  users  and  service  providers  to  promote  the  sharing  of  information  and 
cooperation amongst the players, to develop industry-wide best practices and security standards, and 
to collaborate with relevant agencies to promptly deal with security infringement issues. Bank Negara 
Malaysia is also currently undertaking a series of measures to increase the efficiency and reduce risks 
in  the  payment  systems,  and  facilitate  a  progressive  transformation  and  migration  of  the  payment 
systems infrastructure. In this regard, a cross-border link between the Ringgit and the USD settlement 
systems in Hong Kong, that is the RENTAS and USD CHATS in Hong Kong, will be established to 
reduce  foreign  exchange  settlement  risk  via  a  simultaneous  payment  versus  payment  mechanism 
between Ringgit and USD in the same time zone. A cheque truncation system is also being developed 
to improve operational efficiencies through the elimination of the physical movement of cheques with 
the use of electronic images and data. 
Bank Negara  Malaysia  also  aims  to  provide  a conducive regulatory  framework  that  is  supportive  of 
market-based  innovation  and  ensuring  transparency  for  the  benefit  of  consumers.  In  this  regard,  I 
certainly  hope  that  the  results  of  your  deliberations  in  this  Payment  Systems  Forum  and  Exhibition 
2005 will provide valuable input for the formulation of strategies and modalities for both the industry 
and  authorities  to  accelerate  the  migration  to  e-payments  in  Malaysia.  It  is  also  hoped  that  the 
exhibition will heighten public awareness of the various payments products and services available in 
Malaysia, as well as globally. 
On this note, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have great pleasure in declaring open the Payment Systems 
Forum and Exhibition 2005. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 3
