Sunil Mendis: Basel II - preparation of implementation in the Asia-Pacific region 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Sunil  Mendis,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the  SEACEN 
Seminar  on  Basel 
the  Asia-Pacific  Region,  Colombo, 
7-10 December 2005. 
II:  Preparation  of 
Implementation 
in 
 Dr Subarjo, Executive Director of the SEACEN Centre, Deputy Governors and Distinguished Guests,  
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this SEACEN Conference of Bank Supervisors and industry 
participants  in  the  Asia  Pacific  Region,  on  a  topic  that  is  currently  occupying  centre  stage  in  the 
regulatory arena – the implementation of Basel II and its challenges.  
Basle  II  has  been  the  major  preoccupation  of  bank  regulators  all  over  the  world  for  the  last  seven 
years.  This  seminar  is  of  particular  significance  as  it  brings  together  regulators  and  industry 
participants  to  a  common  arena  to  share  experiences  and  challenges  in  the  operational  and  policy 
issues involved in the implementation of this new capital accord. I am particularly happy because this 
first  ever  seminar  bringing  together  the  industry  participants  in  a  SEACEN  programme  on  this 
important  subject  was  a  result  of  a  suggestion  made  by  me  at  the  last  SEACEN  Governors’ 
Conference held in Fiji earlier this year and that it is held in my own country. Its implementation is seen 
as one of the most significant challenges facing the banking industry the world over, in recent times. 
Unlike  Basel  I,  which  was  simple  and  user  friendly,  Basel  II  is  complex.  Therefore,  the  Basle 
Committee has quite rightly advised that regulators and banks should approach it with caution even 
with regard to the simplest approach to Basel II. We commenced our journey one year ago, together 
with  the  industry,  and  we  will  move  slowly,  but  steadily,  towards  full  implementation  of  the  basic 
approach, hopefully in 2008. We will, however commence our test runs in parallel with Basle I in 2006, 
fine  tuning  our  systems  for  full  compliance  as  we  go  along.  This  would  be  in  line  with  the  widely 
accepted policy that countries should adopt the options and approaches that are most appropriate for 
the state of their markets, their banking systems, and their supervisory structures.  
In Sri Lanka, as in most countries, the banking sector enjoys predominance in our financial system. As 
is  to  be  expected,  the  financial  environment,  domestically,  is  becoming  more  innovative  and 
competitive  to  meet  the  sophistication  of  peer  foreign  banks  and  the  needs  of  investors  and 
consumers. This naturally increases their risk profile. Increasingly, therefore, our remit as regulators is 
to  ensure  an  efficient  risk  management  framework  and  the  adequacy  of  resources  to  mitigate  risk. 
Against this background, therefore, Basle II is synonymous with good risk management, not only of the 
core risk of credit default, but of a wider range of risks such as market risk and operational risk in Pillar 
I . Together with the mutually reinforcing pillars II and III, of regulatory review and market discipline, 
Basle II represents a formidable tool to insulate banks against inherent risks in the highly leveraged 
business of banking. 
In this process, we must be mindful of the fact that Basle II has been built on the experiences and risk 
parameters  of  developed,  sophisticated  economies.  Through  customization  to  suit  conditions  and 
markets in emerging economies, which have fundamentally different characteristics, the principles of 
Basel  II  should  be  appropriately  adapted  to  suit  such  conditions.  The  “one  size  fits  all”  solution  of 
Basle  I  will  not  suit  the  complexities  of  Basle  II.  The  markets  in  which  we  operate  have  their  own 
peculiarities and their own cultures. Promoting international best practice in such a culture is, indeed, a 
challenge which demands a fundamental change in credit cultures, attitudes, and policies. The will to 
change is important and in the case of banking institutions, has to be mandated, if it is to be in the best 
interests of the major stakeholders, the depositors.  
Full  implementation  of  Basel  II  is,  indeed,  demanding  for  banking  institutions  and  regulators  alike. 
Capacity building is an imperative on both sides, as is the framework for good risk management built 
on risk models. The supervisory capacity to assess and validate these models must be enhanced and 
developed.  The  magnitude  of  the  investment  in  technology  by  the  banks  must  be  justified  in  a 
business  sense.  We  must  ensure  that  the  cost  of  compliance  does  not  outweigh  the  benefits  from 
Basle II. Emerging market economies are very vulnerable to the reputational risk of non-compliance. 
Therefore we must take one step at a time. The infrastructure for compliance - legal, accounting and 
market - must be established and is an essential pre-requisite which underlies the success of these 
initiatives.  
BIS Review 84/2005 
 1
The implications on the several sub sectors of our economy from Basle II will have to be examined 
carefully with regard to access to finance and the pricing of risk. Uneven playing fields may arise as a 
result  of  the  internationally  active  foreign  banks  adopting  more  advanced  approaches,  thereby 
improving their competitiveness over their local counterparts. Will the models developed by the foreign 
banks be relevant for the risks in our markets? These are the regulatory challenges which have to be 
addressed by the regulators.  
In meeting these challenges, the local banks must make best use of the existing resources to minimize 
the cost of full compliance. They can build on their existing data bases and leverage on the default 
data available in institutions such as the Credit Information Bureau. They can benefit from data pooling 
within the industry. All these resources must be harnessed. 
It is important that the banks do not lose sight of the long term benefits of Basle II of better capital 
allocation  and  consequently,  better  pricing,  because  they  are  embroiled  in  the  details  necessary  to 
meet the deadline. The ultimate objective is financial stability. I am sure that this dialogue that we have 
initiated  today  will  result  in  a  fruitful  exchange  of  views  on  this  important  subject  and  will  help  to 
consolidate our implementation plans on this long journey that we have all commenced. 
I therefore wish you all a very stimulating and useful discussion and a very successful seminar. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2005
