Savenaca Narube: Fiji’s economy – performances and prospects 
Speech by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, address to the Fiji Australia 
Business Forum, Nadi, Fiji, 17 October 2005. 
 Economic performance 
There should be no doubt that the Fiji’s economy has performed remarkably well since 2000 with an 
average growth of 3.5 percent.  Last year, the economy grew by over 4 percent and I understand that 
the final figure may be even higher. 
This  level  of  growth  four  years  in  a  row,  I  believe,  is  hard  to  match  in  Fiji’s  recent  history.    Our 
achievement is even more remarkable if we look back at the volatile and precarious situation that we 
started from.  I don’t think anyone can argue that our economic management at the macro level has 
not  brought  us  the  desired  results.    The  selected  mix  of  an  expansionary  fiscal  stance  and  an 
accommodative  monetary  policy  has  worked  well  to  raise  domestic  demand,  which  has  driven  the 
economy in the last four years.  Perhaps, also remarkable was that this buoyant demand has been 
accommodated in a non-inflationary environment and comfortable balance of payments.  Inflation is 
currently below 3 percent, interest rate is historically low, investments have started to turn north after 
two decades of general decline and foreign reserves are at adequate levels.  I have a strong sense 
that confidence in the economy may be at its highest level for many years. 
Economic prospects 
However, the economic scenario is now turning.  The economy is now slowing down. This is largely 
due to the sharp erosion in our market access exacerbated by poor performances in key sectors such 
as sugar and gold. 
What can we look forward to in 2005?  Late last year, we projected a growth of 1.5 percent for 2005.  
In April this year, this growth rate was lowered to 1.2 percent, due to the faster decline in garment 
production  and  the  unanticipated  reduction  in  gold  output.    More  recently,  we  upgraded  this  year’s 
growth outlook to 1.4 percent in August, close to where we started.  I guarantee you that this number 
will change again several times before becoming final. 
I am presenting this year’s forecast in this way to underline the point that projections are not static and 
they will change.  Forecasting is definitely not an exact science.  Projections, of course, depend on 
information that comes to hand. 
There appears to be a perception of inconsistency between our modest growth forecast for 2005 and 
the  buoyant  tourism and  construction sectors.   The only  answer that  I  can  give  is  that  our forecast 
covers  the  entire  economy.    And,  as  I  will  show  later,  there  are  many  sectors  like  sugar,  gold  and 
garments that are not doing too well.  In fact, if it were not for the tourism and construction sectors, the 
economy would be in a very difficult situation today. 
Medium term projection 
For the next two years, we expect economic performance to be below 2 percent.  On average, our 
growth rate for the next three years is less than half of the 3.5 percent achieved in the last four years.  
I again stress that these projections will change as new information are received. 
Let me make two points here.  First, to avoid past misinterpretation, let me clarify particularly to the 
media  that  may  be  here  today  that  slowing down  does not  mean  that  the  economy  is  declining.    It 
means that the economy is still growing but our rate of growth is lower.  While this might appear to be 
an obvious point, it does make a huge difference.  Second, while growth is lower, we estimate that we 
will nevertheless still be growing in the next three years.  This will represent an unprecedented period 
of 7 consecutive years of positive growth. 
But I strongly believe that we should not be contented at growing at around 2 percent.  This level of 
growth is clearly not sufficient to create enough jobs for our growing number of school leavers, will not 
raise our per capita incomes and very importantly, will not be enough to eradicate poverty in Fiji. 
   1/8 
We  must  all  aspire  to  grow  faster  towards  the  national  target  of  8  percent  that  the  Honourable  
Prime Minister has set.  This remains our greatest challenge.  It calls for action. 
Sectoral developments 
Let us now look at what is beneath this outlook of the economy.  We will look at it first from a sectoral 
perspective. 
Tourism 
The tourism industry continues to be the star performer.  After a growth of 9 percent in the first eight 
months, the industry is heading for another new record this year in both arrivals and earnings.  There 
is  little  doubt  that  tourism  earnings  are  well  on  their  way  to  reaching  the  billion  dollar  target  before 
2007. 
The  industry  is  already  hitting  its  boundaries  in  terms  of  availability  of  high-end  accommodation, 
adequacy of infrastructure and lack of skills.  New hotels that are under way will help address the first 
issue  but  more  rooms  will  still  be  needed  if  the  industry  is  to  continue  to  grow  in  the  future.  
Government  in  partnership  with  the  industry  will  need  to  play  a  proactive  role  in  dealing  with 
infrastructure and training. 
I am often asked about the retention ratio in the tourism industry.  While the retention ratio may be 
lower in the tourism industry than the resource based sectors and we need to continue our efforts to 
increase it, my view is that the industry contributes significantly to the country particularly to the lives of 
the rural communities in Fiji.  Something is always better than nothing and in tourism that something is 
sizeable. 
I believe that tourism will continue to drive the economy in the next decade.  We therefore need to 
nurture and protect this star performer to ensure that we exploit its potential. 
Building and construction 
The boom in the construction industry that started around 2002 is continuing largely at the back of the 
growth in the tourism industry.  This is well supported by construction of commercial and residential 
buildings in the major urban centres.  At the same time, the public sector is contributing its share in the 
construction of the Rewa Bridge, the extension to the Kings Wharf and the Nadi Airport, as well as the 
investment by the Fiji Electricity Authority.  Total value of the work put in place is growing rapidly and 
so far this year private sector works alone is rising by a phenomenal 106 percent. 
The construction sector is also facing constraints in higher prices of inputs and the adequacy of skills.  
Unlike tourism, whether we will see the same level of building activity after two years is uncertain.  We 
have therefore built some slow down in this sector in the medium term. 
Garments 
Garment  production  has  been  hit  hard  by  the  removal  of  quotas  to  the  US  market  declining  by  
40  percent  this  year.    Another  decline  of  20  percent  is  envisaged  for  next  year.    However,  in  the 
medium  term,  the  garment  industry  is  expected  to  stabilize  at  a  lower  level.    Beyond  that,  some 
industry experts are confident that garment has the potential to grow by about 5 percent annually.  I 
hope they are right.  We will wait and see.  The extension of the SPARTECA Scheme by Australia and 
other assistance will help stabilize the industry.   
Gold Production 
Despite a sizeable investment program, gold production is projected to decline dramatically this year.  
This  is  a  major  turn  around  to  the  bullish  outlook  following  the  15  percent  growth  in  gold  output  in 
2004.  Cumulative to August this year, total gold output has fallen by 28 percent.  We are really not 
sure  what  is  happening  in  Vatukoula  but  we  are  told  that  this  reflects  equipment  failures,  high  oil 
prices,  productivity  concerns  and  lower  quality  ore.    On  a  positive  note,  the  mine  is  currently 
   2/8 
undergoing a major restructure to lift performance and reduce operational costs.  In this vein, the mine 
anticipates  a  strong  recovery  in  production  in  the  near  term.    We  certainly  would  like  to  see  gold 
production back to at least its historical level by 2007. 
Sugar 
What about sugar?  Everyone knows the problems that this industry faces.  The preferential prices for 
our sugar will start falling from next year, for the next 4 years, leading to the drop in export receipts by 
close to 40 percent.  Everyone also knows that we need to urgently address these critical problems to 
safeguard  the  livelihood  of  close  to  100,000  people  that  are  directly  or  indirectly  supported  by  this 
industry.  In purely economic argument, the opportunity costs of propping the sugar industry will be 
extremely high.  But I share the view that given its social and economic importance, we cannot let this 
industry  slip  away.    We  have  built  into  our  forecast  a  recovery  in  the  sugar  production  from  2006 
onwards based on our faith in the proposed industry restructure.  The industry itself is more optimistic 
of its medium term prospects than we have allowed in our forecast. 
In particular, we are encouraged by the industry’s performance so far this year.  By September, both 
cane and sugar production has exceeded last year’s levels by almost 20 percent.  This is one of the 
best performances recorded by the industry in the last 5 years. 
Emerging industries 
On the emerging industries, the success of Fiji’s mineral water is now well known.  New businesses 
are starting up in this industry.  Mineral water exports will fetch some $70 million in earnings this year 
and  has  moved  up  to  be  the  7th  largest  foreign  exchange  earner.    With  major  investment  at  the 
Yaqara plant last year, we are expecting the exponential growth in mineral water exports to continue 
into 2008. 
ICT Industry 
I believe that Fiji’s embryonic ICT and audio visual industry has potential.  To enable us to realize this 
potential  in  an  extremely  competitive  business,  a  host  of  factors  will  need  to  be  in  place.  
Communication charges in Fiji have already dropped and the introduction of broadband will provide 
businesses with faster access to the Internet.  An ICT park is now in the planning stages.  All of these 
will increase Fiji’s appeal as an investment destination.  But we will need to build up our manpower 
capacity in this ICT area to adequately support its full potential and again government’s initiative will 
be important here. 
Agriculture and resource based industry 
Before  I  leave  this  sectoral  commentary,  let  me  say  something  on  agriculture  and  resource-based 
industry  like  forestry  and  fishing.    Taking  into  account  our  economic  endowments,  Fiji’s  long-term 
prosperity  remains  with  agriculture  and  resource  based  industry.    Up  to  now,  we  have  not  even 
reached the potential level of harvesting these resources.  We have these resources ready for use.  
But for some reasons we are not using them.  Someone said that this is like seeing a $100 bill on the 
ground and walking past without picking it up.  I might add that not only do we not pick up the bill, we 
go  around  the  corner,  spread  our  handkerchiefs  and  beg  for  gratuity.    Fulfilling  our  own  domestic 
requirements  on  some  of  these  agricultural  products  is  elusive  let  alone  exporting  them.    We  are 
unable to meet the needs of our hotels on fruit, vegetables and seafood.  We hear a lot about forestry 
but not as much is coming out of the forest. 
We should seriously ask: What can we do to lift this important industry?  It appears that the agriculture 
sector needs a complete overhaul.  If we can get this sector moving, the gains are immediate and the 
benefits flow to many in our rural communities. 
   3/8 
Sectoral summary 
In summary, our sectoral performances are broadly unchanged from the last time we met.  Tourism 
and construction are the drivers supported by some sectors like mineral water.  The garment sector is 
suffering but may stabilize at a lower level.  Gold production is declining but may pick up again in the 
medium  term.    Almost  all  the  other  traditional  sectors  are  yet  to  realize  their  full  potential.  Our 
agricultural sector sorely needs to be revitalized.  The somewhat optimistic outlook for the sugar sector 
entirely depends on its restructuring program.  ICT has potential but at the same time, we need to put 
a host of things in place before we can see growth in this emerging industry. 
I know that this summary does not sound too optimistic.  But there are potential upsides in the tourism 
industries, sugar and agriculture that if realized will change this outlook significantly for the better.   
Aggregate demand 
We have looked at the sectors.  Let me now talk about the economy from what we economists call the 
expenditure  side.    This  approach  will  give  some  very  useful  insights  on  what  we  could  do  to  raise 
growth. 
To put it very simply, economic growth is an aggregate measurement of what we produce in Fiji. This 
is equivalent to what we all spend in the economy.  The expansionary policies that we introduced after 
2000 were aimed at inciting spending in the economy.  As I said, this policy package has worked very 
well and the economy has been driven largely by domestic demand in the last four years.  Simply put, 
people, government and corporations are spending more.  This spending comes largely in two parts - 
consumption and investment.  Both these are buoyant and are helping to move the economy along. 
Consumption spending 
Let me talk first about consumption spending.  The buoyancy in consumer spending is clearly reflected 
in the growth in the wholesale and retail sector, buoyant VAT receipts and strong pick up in credit.  
While consumption helps growth in the year that it is spent, its impact does not last beyond that.  In 
fact, for an economy like Fiji, consuming more also means more imports and over time this can lead to 
balance of payments problems if we cannot sell enough exports. 
After four years of high consumer spending, this is exactly what we are facing now.  Our imports are 
rising  while  sadly  our  exports  are  not  keeping  up.    As  I  explained,  sugar,  gold,  agriculture  and 
garments are struggling.  Exports in the last three years have declined in absolute terms.  We forecast 
exports  to  increase  only  by  3  percent  in  the  next  three  years.    Meanwhile  imports  are  rising  by  an 
average of 6 percent annually.  The trade deficit is therefore widening.  Something will have to close 
the gap very soon. 
The solution is therefore obvious.  We must sell more exports.  A modest target of 10 percent growth 
in  our  domestic  exports  per  year  for  the  next  five  years  should help.    And we  can easily meet  this 
target if we accelerate the sugar reform, lift the productivity of our agricultural exports and grow the 
new industries. 
Financing of consumption 
One may ask where is the funding of this strong consumer spending coming from.  Well, from four 
major  sources.    Firstly,  wages  and  salaries,  secondly,  credit  or  borrowing,  thirdly,  Fiji  National 
Provident  Fund  withdrawals  and  lastly  from  remittances.    Withdrawals  from  FNPF  are  running  at 
around $16 million a month. 
Remittances 
Let  me  elaborate  on  the  remittances.    Personal  remittances  have  become  a  prominent  source  of 
foreign exchange for Fiji.  Personal remittances have surged to $300 million in 2004, compared to a 
mere $50 million  five  years  ago.    Remittances  are  now  equivalent  to  7  percent  of  GDP  and  that  is 
more than many of our traditional economic sectors.  They have also displaced garments and sugar 
on their rise to become the second largest source of foreign exchange earnings for Fiji.  Furthermore, 
   4/8 
we are only capturing remittances that flow through the financial system.  There are others that are 
carried in person and sent through the ordinary mail.  There are also those remittances in kind.  One 
estimate  puts  these  unrecorded  remittances  at  over  $150  million  lifting  total  remittances  above 
retained tourist receipts. 
These remittances have come at an opportune time for us, with our exports not performing well.  They 
have  given  us  much-needed  breathing  space.    Everyone  should  say  thank  you  to  all  our 
peacekeepers, security personnel, nurses, sportspersons and family members abroad for helping us 
pay for our imports. 
This  level  of  remittances  warrants  immediate  national  attention.    A  study  estimates  that  about  
40 percent of households receive remittances in Fiji.  From experience, remittances generally flow to 
lower income families and are used more for consumption.  
We must understand this phenomenon better.  We need to know more about the sender, the receiver 
and what the monies are used for.  Data collection through surveys is a priority and an opportunity is 
to piggyback on the census due next year. 
An  important  issue  is  their  sustainability.    I  personally  think  that  the  current  number  of  our  workers 
abroad will be maintained or even rise in the next three years.  We can therefore sustain the current 
levels of remittances in the medium term.  So far this year, remittances are higher than last year’s. 
We  must  acknowledge  this  valuable  source  of  foreign  exchange.    I  would  urge  Government  to 
examine ways in which it can maximise opportunities for labour exports, facilitate the sending of these 
remittances and provide infrastructure and incentives to help channel these into savings, businesses 
and investments.  The linkage of these remittances into micro finance is an exciting possibility. 
Investment 
Let  me  turn  to  investment  spending.    We  know  that  investment  spending  permanently  increases 
capacity  and  lead  to  lasting  economic  growth.    Over  the  past  5  years,  investment  has  consistently 
risen in Fiji from around 12 percent of GDP in 2000 to around 17 percent now - levels that we last 
attained way back before 1987.  Pleasingly, most of the current increase in investment is now driven 
by the private sector. 
We expect investment to hover around this level next year.  Some investors understandably may be 
taking a ‘wait and see’ approach in the run up to the election.  We have set ourselves an investment 
target of 25 percent of GDP.  We have some way to go to reach that target.  I am certain that with the 
election successfully out of the way, we can see investment rising again towards 25 percent of GDP. 
However, we should also keep in mind that we can still extract more growth from the existing level of 
investment.  It depends on how efficient we can turn the investment dollar into growth.  Unfortunately, 
our efficiency ratio in Fiji is quite low.  It takes around $6 of investment to produce $1 of GDP.  Some 
countries  need  only  about  half  of  that.    If  we  want  to  improve  our  efficiency,  we  must  undertake 
reforms to improve resource allocation, speed up our decision making processes, lower the cost of 
doing business and enhance productivity. 
Net exports 
Finally, some may ask that if investment and consumption are buoyant, why then is economic growth 
falling?  When we look at all the three expenditure components of GDP, we see that consumption and 
investment  spending  actually  accounts  for  more  than  100  percent  of  the  GDP.    How  can  that  be 
possible?  The explanation is that our net exports, which is the difference between what we spend on 
imports from abroad and what we receive from our exports is negative.  Yes, I repeat negative!  This is 
exactly what is pushing growth down and is consistent with the sectoral trends that I had explained 
already.  Again, the answer is obvious.  Get more exports. 
Oil prices 
I would now like to turn to international crude oil prices. Demand is not the major cause of this price 
rise.  The  high  oil  prices  have  been  blamed  on  supply  uncertainty  with  the  heightened  geo-political 
uncertainties, natural disasters and the limited spare capacity among the world’s oil producers.  The 
   5/8 
future direction of oil prices is uncertain.  Some are talking of further increases as the Northern winter 
sets in. 
The oil prices will hit us in three ways.  Immediately, our oil bill is escalating.  This adds to our already 
increasing demand for imports, which worsens our deteriorating trade balance. 
Secondly, the high oil prices will increase the input cost to businesses.  In turn, they will try to pass on 
these costs to consumers.  We are already hearing noises about rising bus fares, taxi fares, freight 
charges and travel surcharges.  All these will lead to higher inflation. 
Inflation 
We have forecasted inflation to stay at around 3 percent in 2005.  Fortunately for Fiji and generally 
true for the world, the impact of this oil crisis on inflation has been benign compared to the last oil 
crisis.  This is due to several factors.  Inflation at the beginning of this oil crisis was low.  Many of our 
trading  partners  have  managed  to  control  inflation  extremely  well.    Lower  prices  of  domestically 
produced  goods  and  services  are  also  suppressing  consumer  prices.    However,  in  the  next  year, 
inflation  could  rise  as  the  effects  of  oil  prices  work  its  way  through  the  entire  economy.    We  are 
projecting inflation to rise to 4 percent next year.  This again depends on where the oil price goes from 
here. 
Thirdly, in the medium term the higher fuel costs will ultimately dampen spending and lead to lower 
economic growth. 
Oil Price 
The  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  has  come  at  bad  time  for  Fiji  when  our  exports  are  falling;  imports  are 
rising; and economic growth declining.  Our immediate concern is its impact on our external position.  
Clearly, we cannot do anything about the level of oil prices in the world.  What we can influence is our 
response to it.  We must avoid the cyclical impact of this inflation back to wages.  We must continue 
the search for alternative sources of energy, we must conserve the use of fuel and also exports more 
to pay for the rise in oil imports. 
Asset price inflation 
I would like to move on to another topical subject of asset prices.  In the last four years, we have seen 
significant  movement  in  property  values.    Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  prices  of  residential 
properties in some centres have almost doubled since 2000.  Our assessment, at this stage, is that 
demand in the property market is expected to remain buoyant. 
We  can  understand  some  of  the  underlining  factors  behind  this  trend  like  the  growth  in  incomes, 
improvement in labour market situation as well as lower interest rates and competitive loan conditions.  
But we are concerned about the quantum of the price increases that appear to be well in excess to the 
real rate of growth in incomes or even expected future incomes.  It implies that speculative elements 
may  be  at  work.    If  asset  price  bubble  continues  to  be  artificially  inflated,  they  not  only  take  the 
affordability of owning a house out of the reach of many of our citizens, they potentially can lead to 
unsustainable  debt  levels  particularly  if  incomes  drop  with  flow  on  effects  to  the  quality  of  loans  of 
financial institutions.  The Reserve Bank is monitoring the situation closely. 
Productivity 
Let  me  briefly  raise  the  topic  of  productivity.    A  major  challenge  for  Fiji,  in  assessing  labour 
productivity, has been the lack of consistent and timely data. Additionally, no national benchmark for 
productivity at corporate level exists.  However, we estimate that productivity growth in the country at 
the aggregate level has averaged around 1 percent over the last 10 years, on the assumption that the 
capital to labour ratio has remained stable. 
Fiji’s one percent average productivity growth is less than half of that of Australia. Mauritius’ is four 
times higher than Fiji’s.  It is obvious from benchmarking our performance against these countries that 
   6/8 
Fiji  seriously  lags  behind  in  productivity  growth.    Therefore,  if  we  could  raise  productivity  it  would 
increase our economic growth without using additional capacity or resources. 
Financial system 
Let  me  say  a  few  words on  the  financial  system.    Fiji’s  financial  system  is  sound  and  stable.  Total 
assets are growing well and key prudential indicators of Fiji’s financial system are strong.  Moreover, 
the  Reserve  Bank  will  modernise  the  country’s  payment  system  by  installing  a  Real  Time  Gross 
Settlement (RTGS) System next year. 
In terms of combating money laundering and terrorism financing, the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), 
which  was  previously  operating  from  the  Reserve  Bank  on  an  informal  basis,  will  now  be  formally 
established when the Financial Transactions Reporting Act becomes effective at the beginning of next 
year.  Additionally, a Capital Markets Group is exploring options to further develop the country’s capital 
markets. 
Policy mix  
I  have  discussed  some  of  the  specific  issues  that  can  help  us  grow  faster.    I  would  now  like  to 
conclude  by  getting  back  to  strategy.    As  I  said,  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  have  been  
pro-growth  since  2000.    The  result  has  been  a  consistent  improvement  in  our  macroeconomic 
performance.    But  given  that  economic  growth  is  now  slowing,  prices  are  rising  and  our  balance 
payments needs protecting, one of the key issues facing policy makers is what policy mix can they put 
in place to address these issues simultaneously. 
Unlike 2000, we are now faced with two additional issues.  Our debt level is now over 50 percent of 
GDP and the balance of payments deficit is widening now exacerbated by the hike in oil prices. For 
these reasons, the expansionary stance of policies up to now may not be appropriate any longer.  We 
need a new strategic mix.  What could this be?  Perhaps the panel can help us identify this. 
The  new  strategy  will  need  to  sensitively  balance  growth  and  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  short 
term.  This balancing act is a tough one under normal circumstances but becomes more complicated 
with the general elections around the corner. 
But let me shed some thoughts on this balancing act.  We have basically two pillars of policy, fiscal 
and  monetary.    One  of  the  realities  of  policy  making  is  that  by  its  nature,  fiscal  policy  has  a  more 
immediate  and  powerful  impact  on  the  economy  through  its  annual  budget  than  monetary  policy.  
Therefore, the fiscal stance becomes the de facto policy thrust.  One important thing that we should 
avoid is for the two polices pulling in opposing direction. 
If I were given the policy choice, I would put more weight on safeguarding macroeconomic stability 
now.    Why?    This  stability  will  certainly  deliver  us  a  much  better  growth  potential  in  the  next  three 
years  and  beyond.    But  without  stability,  growth  will  be  at  best,  uncertain  and  at  worse,  virtually 
impossible.  Hence, there is really no conflict between stability and growth in the long run.  I would 
therefore  like  to  see  government  resist  any  further  expansion  in  the  fiscal  deficit  beyond  what  is 
currently  projected.    In  fact,  I  expect  that  the  consolidation  of  the  debt  position  is  very  high  on  the 
government agenda. 
Once we know that we can immediately protect our balance of payments and consolidate debt in the 
medium term, we should then look at the possibility of introducing growth oriented measures.  The mix 
of government expenditure plays a pivotal role in this area.  Debt creation should only be available for 
capital formation and not operating expenditure.  We all know that this is easier said than done.  The 
reality  of  the  situation  is  that  government  operating  expenditure  is  generally  inflexible  downwards.  
Perhaps  I  can  also  invite  the  panel  to  suggest  ways  of  addressing  this  difficult  issue.    In  addition, 
selected incentives can spurn growth in many of our industries particularly the emerging ones. 
What then of monetary policy?  The Reserve Bank has made our future intention clear early last year 
when we announced an increase in official interest rate.  However, even with this tightening, interest 
rates are still very low by historical standards and competitive against our neighbours Australia and 
New Zealand.  In no way can one therefore regard current interest rates as impeding investment and 
growth.    Monetary  policy  remains  accommodative.    To  date,  we  continue  to  see  strong  growth  in 
domestic credit.  We think that this will soften somewhat in the next two years.  We are monitoring the 
situation carefully and monetary policy will remain on a tightening bias for the foreseeable future. 
   7/8 
With such a mix of fiscal and monetary policy, we can protect our fundamentals and at the same time 
allow  the private  sector  to  lead  growth.    Interest  rates  will remain  competitive.    Investor  confidence 
should continue to rise.  The reforms will make our investment dollar go further and higher productivity 
will generate more growth.  I am convinced that such a package can make Fiji to grow higher than the 
2 percent that we are projecting now and closer to the 8 percent national growth target. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, in closing, the economy is enjoying a long period of consistent growth.  This 
will  continue  into  the  next  three  years.    However,  the  rate  of  growth  is  declining.    The  greatest 
challenge remains for us to raise this growth rate to a level high enough to at least create sufficient 
jobs for our people and close the poverty gap.  While we have hurdles to overcome, I stress that they 
can indeed be overcomed.  Untapped potential and possibilities are there.  We know what we need to 
do.  We can be proactive and do them now to allow us to reap the benefits as early as possible and 
secure a more certain future. 
Such a gathering as this will help build the momentum for action. 
Thank you. 
 
   8/8 
