Süreyya Serdengeçti: The Turkish economy and the European Union 
Remarks by Mr Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of Turkey, at the London School 
of Economics, London, 27 October 2005.  
 Distinguished Academicians, Guests, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today at London School of Economics (LSE), and to 
have an opportunity to give this lecture on such a delicate subject, that is the Turkish economy in the 
context of the European Union (EU). 
I would also like to express my heartfelt thanks for the establishment of the Chair in Contemporary 
Turkish Studies that, I believe, will play an important role in the relations between Turkey and the EU. 
I want to begin my speech by first giving you a simple description of Turkey on its way towards the EU 
membership. I will be referring to the words of Sir Winston Churchill. On November 10, 1942, after the 
victory at El Alamein that changed the course of the Second World War, he said, "This is not the end. 
It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning ". Personally, I think 
this is exactly how we should see the Turkish membership in the EU as of October 3rd; it is simply the 
end of a long beginning. 
Three important points now: the first one is about the fact that in Turkey, the EU accession has always 
been a long-term goal. 
In historical perspective, as you all know very well, the EU is a "sui generis" structure implying a legal, 
political  and  economic  project  of  integration  shaped  around  contemporary  values.  Quoting  Prime 
Minister Tony Blair's own words; "This is a union of values, of solidarity between nations and people, 
of  not  just  a  common  market  in  which  we  trade  but  a  common  political  space  in  which  we  live  as 
citizens." 1 
On  the  other  side,  as  Atatürk,  the  founder  of  the  modern  Turkish  Republic,  clearly  stated;  "the 
contemporary level of civilisation" has always been Turkey's main objective since its foundation as a 
republic out of the ashes of the Ottoman Empire. Therefore, considering the main principles of the EU 
and Turkey's desire to reach the contemporary level of civilisation, Turkey's everlasting willingness to 
be a member of the EU shouldn't be surprising. 
Accordingly,  Turkey  had  applied  to  the  EU  for  full  membership  in  1959.  During  these  46  years, 
governments with different political views have been in charge. Despite some delays, setbacks and 
obstacles  in  relations  with  the  Union  all  over  this  period,  our  aim  of  full  membership  has  never 
changed. Also, the majority of the Turkish society has always been supporting the main goal of full 
membership. In fact, 68 percent of the public who answered the most recent questionnaire of Euro 
Barometer in 2005 responded in favour of full membership. 
The second point I want to make is about the whole process leading to the eventual membership of 
Turkey to the EU. The eventual membership will depend on a lot of factors, political and economic. 
Clearly, it is hard to know in advance what the outcome of the process will be. But what I believe is 
that whatever the outcome, the whole process until the final stage is more important than the outcome 
itself; and that s because the process will involve serious political, legal and economic reforms that we 
have to do for ourselves anyway in Turkey. 
The third point is that there is a deterministic issue: That is globalisation. As Alan Greenspan indicated 
in  one  of  his  speeches;  "Globalisation  has  altered the  economic  frameworks of  both  advanced  and 
developing nations in ways that are difficult to fully comprehend.”2 In other words, it is obvious that we 
cannot  complete  our  analyses  related  to  the  EU  and  Turkey  by  disregarding  globalisation  and  its 
effects on the functioning of the world economy and individual countries. 
                                                      
1   Blair, T. (23 June 2005). “PM speech to the EU Parliament”. EU Parlaiment. 
2   Greenspan, A. (l0 March 2005). "Globalization". The Council on Foreign Relations, New York, NY. 
   1/8 
2 3 
In recent decades, increasing number of countries have been integrating to the world economy and 
politics  so  the  world  is  going  through  a  rapid  alteration.  Hence,  this  change  brings  about  new 
challenges to the international arena that even industrialized countries have difficulties to cope with. 
I  believe  that  the  notion  of  enlargement  provides  a  mean  for  the  EU  to  increase  its  power  both  in 
political and economic environment in the world and to face challenges in the international arena as a 
global power. 
I will refer once again to Prime Minister Tony Blair’s words: "It would be a Europe confident enough to 
see enlargement not as a threat, as if membership were a zero sum game in which old members lose 
as new members gain, but an extraordinary, historic opportunity to build a greater and more powerful 
union. Because be under no illusion: If we stop enlargement or shut out its natural consequences, it 
wouldn't, in the end, save one job, keep one firm in business, prevent one delocalisation. For a time it 
might, but not for long. And in the meantime Europe will become more narrow, more introspective and 
those  who  garner  support  will  be  those  no  in  the  traditions  of  European  idealism  but  in  those  of 
outdated nationalism and xenophobia. But I tell you in all frankness: It is a contradiction to be in favour 
of liberalizing Europe 's membership but against opening up its economy."3 
Since its foundation in 1957, the EU has continuously been engaged in a process of enlargement. The 
process, having begun with the inclusion of the UK, Ireland and Denmark in 1973, has proceeded for 
the time being with the challenging accession of the ten Central and Eastern European countries on 
May 1St, 2004. Thus, enlargement has become an important aspect of the EU policy. 
Distinguished guests, 
Almost  in  every  meeting  on  the  EU  and  the  Turkish  economy,  I  am  faced  with  questions  such  as 
"What can Turkey contribute to the EU, in other words, what will be the advantages of the EU from 
Turkey's membership?" or "What does Turkey expect from being a full member of the Union?". 
But, there are no easy and quick answers to these questions. Therefore, my answer will rather be a 
long one. 
Apparently,  there  are  very  strong  arguments  in  favour of  Turkish  membership  such  that Turkey  will 
bring the Islamic world and the Western world together or a larger EU with Turkey will certainly be a 
much bigger power playing an important role in the world. 
Apart from political aspects, it is clear that the debate on the Turkish membership is very much related 
to the economic structure of Turkey. Hence, I want to make one thing clear: although membership is a 
political decision in essence, my answers to the questions I mentioned will focus mainly on economic 
aspects. 
Having this in mind, now I’d like to start with the notion of competitiveness on a global level and its 
implications for both Turkey and the EU. 
The  20th  century  has  been  a  new  era  in  terms  of  diminishing  borders  in  trade  and  means  of 
production and led to increasing competition all around the world. 
As we all know, Europe and the United States (US) had been the engines of world development in the 
last few centuries. However, emergence of new actors into the picture in recent decades has changed 
the global economic environment. 
Despite the fact that the role of the US has been continuing with an increasing weight, that of the EU 
has  been rather slow.  And  hence  today  together  with  the  US,  new  global  actors are coming  to  the 
forefront, for example emerging from Asia such as China and India. 
To be more precise, between the years 1980 and 2004, the share of the EU-15 trade in total world 
trade decreased by 25.3 percent while that of East Asia and Pacific region countries increased by 165 
percent. During the same period, the US also increased its share in total world trade by 13 percent. 4 
                                                      
3   Blair, T. (23 June 2005). “PM Speech to the EU Parliament”. EU Parliament. 
4   The World Bank. Own calculations. 
   2/8 
4 
5 
We observe a similar pattern in terms of growth as well. In fact, the largest rise in shares in total world 
output since 1980 belong to East Asia and Pacific region countries by 68 percent. However, the share 
of EU-15 s output in total world output decreased by 6.8 percent during the same period.5 
It is exactly at this point that Turkey comes into the picture of the EU as one of the new actors in the 
global economy. 
So, I will elaborate briefly on the achievements in Turkey in the last four years. 
Since  the  2001  crisis,  a  comprehensive  stabilization  program  has  been  put  with  determination  into 
practice.  Tight  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  along  with  an  intensive  structural  reform  agenda  have 
been the three main pillars of the program. 
Thanks to these policies, firstly, disinflation has finally succeeded. Inflation targets have been reached 
in three consecutive years; the inflation rate of 73.2 percent in January 2002 is now down to single 
digits that is 8 percent as of September 2005 after three decades of high and chronic inflation. 
Furthermore,  not  only  inflation  fell  to  single  digits,  but  also  dynamics  of  inflation  have  changed 
significantly and that ensures the irreversibility of the disinflation process in Turkey. 
After  so  many  failures  in  three  decades,  the  turning  point  came  when  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey 
(CBT) has been granted independence. In May 2001, the CBT Law was amended so that the primary 
objective of the CBT has been defined as to achieve and maintain price stability, and since November 
2001, no credits are extended to the public sector. I should say that these developments have been 
the milestones of disinflation in Turkey. 
The change in inflationary dynamics also came as a result of a very transparent communication policy, 
which  has  been  instrumental  in  changing  the  expectations  of  the  public  about  stabilisation.  Policies 
gained  credibility;  inflation  inertia  has  decreased  sharply;  the  volatility  of  inflation  too  has  declined. 
Hence, the inflation target is now a more credible nominal anchor for economic agents. 
To sum it up, today, Turkey appears to be catching up with the Maastricht criterion on inflation. 
Secondly, the Turkish economy grew by a total of 28 percent between the end 2001 and the first half 
of 2005. This is the highest rate among the EU countries and the acceding countries such as Bulgaria 
and Romania, also one of the highest in the world. 
A  closer  look  into  the  spectacular  growth  reveals  the  fact  that  the  dynamics  of  growth  have  been 
changing  as  well.  These  high  growth  rates  have  been  attained  while  inflation  was  coming  down 
continuously,  contrary  to  the  widespread  belief  in  Turkey  up  to  2002  that  inflation  made  growth 
possible. 
During  this  new  era,  the  productivity  surge  in  the  economy  and  the  private  sector  have  been  the 
engine of the growth performance. Actually, in the last three years the cumulative increase in labour 
productivity is about 35 percent. 
Besides,  it  is  essential  to  note  that  exports  of  goods  are  contributing  to  growth  with  an  increasing 
share. As a matter of fact, the total foreign trade volume has gone up by 120 percent since 2001. This 
figure is the highest among acceding countries and all members. 
Turkey is now focusing on maintaining high growth rates on a sustainable path. 
The  third  point  in  developments  in  the  Turkish  economy  is  that  tight  fiscal  policy  and  sound  debt 
management  brought  substantial  improvement  to  the  debt  dynamics,  which  was  in  the  centre  of 
concerns together with inflation four years ago. So, the gross public debt declined from 107.5 percent 
in 2001 to 74.6 percent by the second quarter of 2005. The Maastricht criterion on gross public debt 
may be met in the near future. 
These  achievements  on  the  macroeconomic  front,  the  improvement  in  the  debt  dynamics  and  the 
positive  outlook  for  growth  have  brought  more  resilience  to  shocks  and  contributed  to  financial 
stability.  Volatility  in  the  financial  markets  has  decreased;  maturities  are  now  longer;  derivatives 
markets finally begin to develop. 
                                                      
5   The World Bank. Own calculations. 
   3/8 
6 
Though it is essentially a political decision, the negotiations between the EU and Turkey would not 
have started at all if we had not made all these achievements. 
Distinguished participants, 
Turkey’s  membership  implies  an  expansion  of  the  EU  market.  The  Turkish  economy  is  among  the 
biggest 20 economies in the world. It is the largest economy in Eastern Europe, the Balkans and the 
Middle East, second in the Black Sea Basin and sixth among emerging market economies. 
Unlike most of the new member states at the start of negotiations, Turkey already has a functioning 
market  economy,  which  is  far  advanced  in  meeting  the  economic  chapters  of  the  acquis 
communautaire. This is because of the start of the development of the market economy goes back to 
1950, relationship with the EU back to 1963 and the completion of the Customs Union back to 1995. 
Indeed, Turkey is the only country that completed customs union without being a member. 
In a sense, Turkey is more integrated to the European markets than many new members and other 
candidates. When you look at the current account, Turkey has the second largest share after Poland 
in total trade volume towards the EU-15. And as of August 2005, the share of the EU-25 in Turkey’s 
total exports and imports are 52.5 percent and 42.4 percent respectively. 
Furthermore, 52 percent of the total number of tourists visiting Turkey so far in 2005 are EU citizens. 
Viewing Turkey’s capital account, it is noticeable that in the last two years, 85 percent of total foreign 
direct investment inflows to Turkey came from the EU. That figure was 71 percent on average in the 
last fifteen years. 
In  consequence,  the  Turkish  membership  to  the  EU  will  nourish  this  close  economic  relationship 
further. 
Turkey’s membership will not only create a market for the EU in favour of both consumers and firms, 
but  also  help  the  EU  to  become  closer  geographically  to  the  Middle  East,  Russia,  Black  Sea  and 
Central Asia markets and so increase its competitiveness. 
As  you  all  know,  Turkey  is  an  important  regional  power  at  the  crossroads  of  important  energy, 
transportation and communication networks. It can also be said that Turkey is the only country in the 
region  with  the  necessary  institutional  structure  and  capacity  for  integrating  the  region  to  the  world 
economy through business association networks and partnerships.6 
In addition to this, in terms of the EU’s long-term energy policy including petrol, natural gas and water 
sources, the increasing importance of the Middle East and Caspian Region has made Turkey a bridge 
to the energy sources in the region. 
With this strategic location, it is in the geo-strategic interest of the EU to have Turkey as a member 
with regard to the foreign and security policies dimensions. And, I believe that the Turkish accession 
will be a strategic opportunity for Europe. 
Distinguished guests, 
Despite the improvements in the Turkish economy, it is obvious that at the present stage Turkey has 
lower income per capita compared to the new members and acceding countries. 
However,  we  know  that  income  per  capita  of  the  new  members  and  acceding  countries  when  they 
started negotiations was similar to that of Turkey. 
Actually, decomposing the equation of income per capita, we see that it is a product of productivity, 
employment rate, inverse of the dependency ratio7 and participation rate.8 
In other words, increase in income per capita can be accelerated by productivity growth, increase in 
employment and labour participation rate and decelerated by increase in the dependency ratio. I will 
                                                      
6   Sak, G. (2005). "EU-Turkey Relations: Time for Contemplation? Time for Reality Check?” Berlin. 
7   Dependency ratio is described as the ratio of total population to working population i.e. aged between 15 and 64. 
8   Gerald, J.F. (23 April 2004). "Lessons from 20 Years of Cohesion". The Economic and Social Institute, paper presented at 
the Brussels Economic Forum. 
7 
   4/8 
use this basic equation as a tool to highlight the areas to be improved in Turkey and Turkey s possible 
contributions to the EU in terms of productivity, demographic developments and the repercussions of 
all these in the labour market. 
First of all, as Ben Bernanke indicated, "Productivity growth is the principal source of improvements in 
living standards ".9 
And then, we observe that during the last decades, the EU has lagged behind in productivity growth 
compared with other industrialized economies. 
In particular, labour productivity growth has been weak since the mid-1990 s.10 Thus, while growth in 
hourly productivity in the 1980s stood at 2.4 percent on average in the Euro area and at 1.3 percent in 
the US, that trend has been reversed between 1996 and 2004, with an annual average in the Euro 
area and in the US of 1.3 percent and of 2.5 percent respectively. In the US, productivity growth has 
even picked up to 4 percent per annum since 2001, despite adverse factors such as September 11 
terrorist  attacks,  the  2001  recession  and  the  recent  rise  in  energy  prices.11  Of  course,  there  are 
several reasons of the EU s lagging behind in the productivity growth. However, they are beyond the 
scope of my speech today. 
When the productivity comparison is made between Turkey and the new EU member states, it is seen 
that  the  average  gross  value  added  per  employee was  10.9  in Turkey  for  the  year  2004,  while  the 
same figure was 4.1 for Bulgaria, 4.2 for Romania, 10.9 for Poland, 11.5 for Hungary and 11.7 for the 
Czech Republic.12 Turkey is not lagging behind these countries. 
It also has to be taken into consideration that some of these countries figures reflect their positions 
after accession. But, Turkey has just started the negotiations. Most probably, with the reinforcements 
of  the  structural  reforms  during  the  accession  process,  Turkey  will  be  even  better  off  in  terms  of 
productivity when the date of accession comes.13 
In fact in the last four years, as I mentioned before, the cumulative increase in labour productivity has 
been 35 percent in Turkey. And it is expected that in the upcoming period, increases in total factor 
productivity will be one of the most important contributors to our growth potential. As a consequence of 
the envisaged huge productivity increase and according to the baseline scenario on the EU accession 
process, the Turkish State Planning Organization (SPO) estimates that by the year 2015, the Turkish 
economy would grow by 82 percent on a sustainable path. This implies an average growth rate of 6.2 
percent.14 
The other items in the decomposed income per capita equation are employment, dependency ratio 
and participation rate which are closely related to a country’s demographic factors. 
Growth rates of population in the old and new members of the EU are quite low and the slowdown in 
population  growth  leads  to  aging  in  the  EU  countries.  This  implies  serious  problems  for  the  EU 
economy in general and its labour market in particular. 
First  of  all,  the  problem  of  aging  in  the  EU  suggests  lower  labour  participation  rates  and  higher 
dependency ratios in the future. This will certainly decelerate the potential growth rate of Europe. 
Then,  fiscal  problems  due  to  increase  in  social  security  and  health  care  costs  as  population  ages 
come to the forefront. 
                                                      
9   Bernanke, B. S. (19 January 2005). "Productivity". The C. Peter McColough Roundtable Series on International Economics, 
Council on Foreign Relations. 
10   Trichet, J.C (24 June 2005). “ Monetary Policy in EU: Views and Challenges”. 
11   Bernanke, B. S. (19 January 2005). "Productivity". The C. Peter McColough Roundtable Series on International Economics, 
Council on Foreign Relations. 
12   Gros, D. (2005) "Economic Aspects of Turkey's Quest for Membership". CEPS Working Paper." 
13   Gros, D. (2005) "Economic Aspects of Turkey's Quest for Membership". CEPS Working Paper. 
14   Under Secretariat of State Planning Organization. (November 2004). "Possible Impacts of the Turkish Membership on the 
EU". 
   5/8 
On  the  other  hand,  Turkey  s  demographic  profile  makes  it  different  than  both  the  old  and  the  new 
members of the Union. Turkey is a relatively large country with a young and fast-growing population. 
The Turkish accession today would imply an increase of more than 17 percent in the EU population. 
Indeed, between 1990-2003, the average population growth rate and the birth rate Turkey have been 
1.8  percent  and  2.3  percent  per  annum  respectively.15  The  Turkish  population  is  expected  to  stay 
young  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Whereas  in  the  2000  s,  the  EU-15  has  0.3  percent  of  population 
growth rate and 1.1 percent of birth rate on average at highly decreasing trends.16 According to certain 
estimations, in the year 2020, the average age in the EU-15 will be 43, while it will be 33 in Turkey17. 
This means that in the future, Europe will probably be experiencing labour shortages rather than the 
unemployment problems of today18. 
What this argument implies that Turkey s young and expanding population will reduce the negative 
impact of the EU s aging and diminishing work force in the coming 15-20 years. Turkey with a young 
population would be an important asset in the long-term in competing with countries such as China, 
India and the US. 
As another variable in the equation, we observe an advantageous position for Turkey regarding the 
dependency ratio. As a result of a young and growing population, the dependency ratio of the Turkish 
population is in a decreasing trend. As of the year 2000, the share of the age group of 55 and above in 
total  population  is  29  percent  in  the  EU-15  while  that  of  Turkey  is  a  mere  11  percent19.  The 
International Labour Organization (ILO) estimates that the said ratio will increase to 36 percent in the 
EU-15 by the year 2020. However, it is expected to be only 16 percent in Turkey by that time. 
According  to  another  study  by  the  United  Nations,  the  EU  would  need  an  average  of  6.1  million 
immigrants a year from 2015 to 2040 to maintain a ratio of three working-age adults for each retiree20. 
This I believe clearly implies a substantial contribution of Turkey to the EU on the demographic front. 
On the other hand, when it comes to labour force participation rate in the income per capita equation, 
Turkey lags behind the EU. 
One of the reasons of Turkey’s lagging behind is the low female participation rate in the labour force. 
Although the female participation rate in banking, legal and medical sectors are among the highest in 
Europe, the very low participation in rural areas cause the overall female participation rate to remain 
quite low. Another reason of low participation rates based on official figures is the high share of the 
unregistered economy. 
With the ongoing reform process and their expected effects on the structure of the labour market, the 
share  of  the  unregistered  economy  would  decrease  and  then  the  female  participation  rate  would 
increase.  This  will  imply  further  increase  in  the  labour  force  participation  rate  in  the  Turkish  labour 
market in the near future. 
Moving  on  to  the  employment  side  of  the  equation,  I  will  mention  some  other  important  points 
regarding the Turkish labour market. 
First of all, although the unemployment rate in the Turkish economy is quite high compared to the EU 
members,  we  observe  that  the  total  increase  in  employment  throughout  the  year  2004  was  much 
higher than that of the EU members and acceding countries. 
 
Another notable issue about the structure of our labour market is that Turkey s 
is 
moving from a labour intensive structure toward a capital intensive one. And it is 
natural 
consequence that during this period some sectors are expanding while others are contracting. What 
this implies is that the structure of employment has also been changing. In fact, even though it is still 
economy 
a 
                                                      
15   Under-Secretariat of State Planning Organization. 
16   http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/eurostat. 
17   International Labour Organization. 
18   Böttcher, B. (2004). "Turkish Accession to the EU- The Way is the Goal". Deutche Bank Research. 
19   International Labour Organization. 
20   www.un.org. 
   6/8 
high compared to the EU members, the share of the agricultural sector in total employment has been 
falling  while  that  of  services  sector  has  been  on  the  rise.  And  I  believe  that  Turkey  s  young  and 
dynamic demographic structure supports easier transfers between sectors and facilitates improvement 
in the sectoral dispersion of employment. 
Having mentioned all these demographic and labour market conditions of the EU and Turkey, I need 
to emphasize the importance of making further progress on educational reforms in 
Turkey.  It  is  clear  that  in  order  for  the  young  population  to  be  an  advantage  for  us,  a  very  well 
designed and planned education strategy is a must. 
Indeed, the education level of the overall population in Turkey is getting better and Turkey is catching 
up with several of the new EU members. In the 25-34 age group, 11 percent of population has high 
level of education, which corresponds to the same level with Slovakia and nearly the same level with 
the Czech Republic.21 
Hence,  as  the  older  generation  leaves  the  market  for  the  younger  generation  and  the  educational 
reforms are put into practice during the accession process, the education level of the Turkish labour 
force will increase and both the EU and the Turkish economy will benefit from it. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Having touched briefly on the advantages of the EU from Turkey s membership, what I d like to talk 
about next is the other side of the coin; that is the advantages of Turkey from the accession process 
and the ultimate membership. 
As I mentioned in the early part of my speech, the performance of the Turkish economy for the last 
four years clearly indicates that Turkey successfully continues the process of economic restructuring. 
However, in our view, all the achievements so far now belong to the past. Nowadays, we have to start 
viewing  developments  with  a  longer-term  and  broader  perspective  in  the  context  of  the  adjustment 
process for the EU membership. 
I believe that the EU negotiations process will establish the best conceivable framework not only for 
the continued reform process, but also for the new reforms within the framework of convergence to the 
EU. The membership will act as a much needed reform anchor for Turkey. 
The membership process is expected to show its very first impact on increase in predictability, or in 
other words, decrease in uncertainty in policies and the economy. 
In a parallel manner, there are two more important benefits of the EU membership process for Turkey. 
The  first  one  is  institutionalisation  of  policies  and  the  second  one  is  improvement  in  governance 
indicators in the country as a whole. Developments in these areas together with increase in credibility 
would carry the Turkish economy to a better macroeconomic equilibrium point to operate. 
In the area of trade, though tariffs on both sides were abolished with the completion of the Customs 
Union,  the  accession  process  and  the  membership  would  bring  about  the  elimination  of  non-tariff, 
administrative  and  technical  barriers  and  so  foreign  trade  relations  with  the  EU  would  further 
develop.22  This  would  clearly  result  in  welfare  gains not  for  only  Turkey  but  also  for  the  EU  due  to 
trade creation effect. 
And according to a study of Capel and his colleagues in March 2004, bilateral trade between Turkey 
and  EU  can  increase  by  around  one  third  once  Turkey  has  become  a  full  member  of  the  single 
European Market.23 
Moreover,  thanks  to  the  intensive  reform  agenda,  the  investment  climate  in  the  Turkish  economy 
would improve for both domestic and foreign investors. 
                                                      
21   Dansk Industry (December 2004). Turkey and the EU - Perspectives and Opportunities. 
22   Commission of the European Communities (2004). Issues rising from Turkey’s membership perspective. 
23   Capei, C.H., Lejour,A.M. and Mooji de R.A. (March 2004). Assessing the Economic Implications of Turkish Accession to the 
EU .CPB, No. 56. 
   7/8 
In consequence, it is reasonable to assume that foreign direct investment (FDI) will increase strongly. 
According to some studies, the EU membership is estimated to result in 2-4 billion Euro24 worth FDI 
flows per year. This in turn will not only contribute to the strengthening of the economy as a whole, but 
will also help to deal with current macroeconomic concerns such as the current account deficit. 
I have to add that economic benefits of FDI are potentially high because FDI not only brings in long-
term capital but also technology, management skills and opportunity to reach new export markets. 
In this framework, the membership would give both an opportunity and an obligation for local firms to 
improve  their  businesses  at  the  micro  level  through  increasing  their  productivity,  enhancing  their 
management and technical skills together with the quality of labour force and switching to products 
with high value added. 
In  short,  as  the  Turkish  economy  moves  along  the  membership  process  and  converges  to  the  EU 
economy,  we  would  see  a  high  and  satisfactory  level  of  sustainable  growth,  advance  further  in 
economic stability and therefore in the enhancement of the welfare of the society. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  you  all  know,  we  have  started  negotiations  only  a  few  weeks  ago.  It  is  obvious  that  the  EU 
enlargement with Turkey will be very different from the previous enlargements in the sense that Turkey 
is  not  similar  to  the  other  countries  in  its  dynamics  including  economic,  demographic  and  political 
ones. 
However, a closer look at the enlargement periods of the new members reveals the fact that these 
periods are associated with both debates and concerns. But, when we look at the results, we see a 
win-win situation for both the EU and the new member states. And I believe that Turkey s membership 
will be another win-win situation as well. 
All in all, I believe that Turkey s membership will create a synergy in which both the EU and Turkey 
could enjoy a mutually advantageous conjunction of their different characteristics. 
However,  one  has  to  remember  that  during  this  process,  both  Turkey  and  the  EU  have  their  own 
responsibilities. In this respect, each party should make every effort to fulfil its own homework. 
Thank you. 
 
                                                      
24   Backgrounder on Turkey s economy and accession to the EU; Press Conference Turkish Desk. (22 September 2004). 
   8/8 
