Nout Wellink: China's rise and its impact on Western economies 
Speech  by  Dr  A  H  E  M  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  China 
Congress, 'The Culture of Sharing Knowledge', Amsterdam, 3 October 2005.  
 
 Thank you for inviting me to this conference organised by the Asia house. China is returning to the 
place  it  occupied  in  the  world  economy  hundreds  of  years  ago,  when  it  was  a  centre  of  trade  and 
innovation.  Direct  trade  relations  between  the  Netherlands  and  China  go  back  to  the  early  
17th century, but it is largely due to the opening of the country in the past decades that China’s image 
as a ‘mysterious’ and ‘inaccessible’ country has changed radically. China is already one of the leading 
world economies, yet as in every rapidly developing country, its economic policy faces challenges. In 
addition, I would like to share my views on China’s impact on the European economy. Note that while I 
will focus on China during my talk, we should not forget the other large, Asian country – India. The 
challenges faced by India might be of a slightly different nature, yet it reinforces the points I will make 
about the economic impact of China on Western economies. 
How important is China now? 
China dominates newspaper headlines. China’s economic growth has averaged almost 10 percent per 
year over the past two decades, so that during that time its national income has been doubling every 8 
years.  Compare  this  to  the  euro  area:  our  last  doubling  of  national  income  took  30  years.  In  brief, 
China’s  growth  represents  one  of  the  most  sustained  and  rapid  economic  transformations  seen 
anywhere  in  the  world  economy.  And  it  has  led  to  a  significant  reduction  in  poverty  levels,  too:  by 
some accounts, over half of the reduction in absolute poverty in the world between 1980 and 2000 
occurred in China.  
While the shock itself occurs in China, it is transmitted to the Western world. Direct effects can occur 
through trade, leading to more international competition. The term ‘globalisation’ is typically used to 
describe  changes  in  the  world  economy  resulting  from  dramatically  higher  international  trade.  The 
ratio  of  worldwide  exports  to  worldwide  GDP  rose  from  about  8  percent  in  1960  to  27  percent  last 
year. The Netherlands imported for almost 15 billion euro goods from China in 2004. This is about 6 
percent of total Dutch imports.  
In addition, there are indirect effects. For instance, China’s appetite for resources drives up prices for 
commodities,  including  –  as  you  may  have  experienced  at  gas  stations–  oil.  Oil  consumption  from 
China has risen by 15 percent in the past year, helping global oil demand to grow at the fastest pace 
since 25 years. Not surprisingly, such increases drive up oil prices. Moreover, a redistribution of wealth 
takes place from oil-importing countries to oil producers. 
Looking forward: policy challenges for China 
Economic expansion can result from two sources: first, use of more inputs (growth in employment and 
the  capital  stock);  second,  increases  in  the  output  per  unit  of  input  (increases  in  productivity). 
Productivity  in  China  is  rising,  but  so  far  an  even  more  important  part  of  China’s  success  story  is 
driven  by  an  astonishing  mobilisation  of  inputs:  China’s  population  is  about  1.3  billion  people,  and 
there  is  still  a  large  amount  of  surplus  labour  in  the  rural  area.  As  the  Chinese  economy  is 
transformed, around 25 million jobs are created every year. In the same period, about 2-3 millions jobs 
are created in the U.S., and only about 1.5 million in the euro area! China’s rise is a shock to world 
labour  supply  of  unprecedented  magnitude.  If  the  pace  of  job  creation  is  sustained,  China’s  rapid 
growth  could  last  for  another  decade  or  so.  Clearly,  if  economic  growth  is  based  on  expansion  of 
   1/3 
resources,  its  pace  is  not  sustainable.1  At  some  point  all  inputs  are  fully  used.  From  that  point  on, 
China’s growth will slow down to its pace of productivity growth. 
At  present,  China’s  growth  gets  an  additional  boost  from  keeping  its  currency  undervalued.  This 
improves its international competitiveness and fuels export growth. But a country cannot keep its real 
exchange rate fixed forever. Eventually a revaluation will occur: If a country grows faster than the rest 
of  the  world,  economic  fundamentals  require  an  appreciation  of  one’s  currency  over  time.  The 
adjustment can occur via two channels: a nominal appreciation, or high inflation. By fixing the nominal 
exchange  rate,  the  pressure  on  inflation  will  increase.  By  limiting  the  room  for  an  interdependent 
monetary policy, it also magnifies the risk of financial imbalances, such as bubbles in asset markets. 
Moreover, liberalisation of capital flows and financial globalisation implies that keeping one’s exchange 
rate undervalued nowadays has become more difficult than in the 1980s. 
There  is  a  second  issue  to  having  a  flexible  Chinese  exchange  rate.  To  restrict  exchange  rate 
flexibility,  capital  controls are  used.  At  present,  Chinese control  the  outflow  of  capital.  The  Chinese 
savings  rate  is  extremely  high  (40  percent),  but  interest  rates  offered  to  Chinese  investors  are 
relatively low. Therefore, an opening up of the capital account could lead to high outflows of Chinese 
capital,  causing  difficulties  for  the  banking  sector.  Therefore,  changes  to  the  exchange  rate  system 
must go hand in hand with efforts to strengthen the banking sector. 
China’s  accession  to  the World  Trade Organisation (WTO) comprised  commitments  to substantially 
liberalise its financial sector by 2006. Clearly, the pace at which market participants need to comply 
with  international  practices  may  differ  –  e.g.  different  requirements  may  be  in  place  for  local  banks 
than  for  international  banks  –  but  large  commercial  banks  will  certainly  have  to  adopt  international 
standards.  To  ensure  a  level  playing  field,  this  will  also  imply  that  at  some  point,  large  Chinese 
financial  institutions  will  have  to  follow  the  same  international  rules  and  practices  as  European 
financial  institutions  –  including  Basel  II.  In  a  general  sense,  Basel  II  represents  an  improved  and 
internationally  comparable  way  to  look  at  risk  taking  in  financial  organisations  over  time.  This  also 
implies that the supervisory framework needs to be strengthened, in order to be able to cope with the 
supervisory challenges resulting from advanced instruments to manage risk. 
Finally, no discussion of China’s growth would be complete without mentioning the notoriously poor 
quality of China’s statistical data. When browsing through China’s official statistics, one cannot fail to 
notice inconsistencies, such as shares of investment per sector adding up not to 100 percent, but to 
120-or-so percent. I suspect that data for the service sector could be even more unreliable, given the 
particular  difficulties  of  measuring  output  and  detecting  underreporting.  To  take  good  decisions  a 
policymaker  needs  good  data.  Part  of  the  problem  could  lie  in  the  fact  that  private  parties  are  not 
allowed  to  compile  statistics.  That  said,  progress  is  being  made  almost  as  I  speak,  as  Chinaworks 
hard  to  improve  the  quality  of  statistical  data  and  to  bring  it  up  to  international  standards,  such  as 
those of the OECD. 
How should western economies react? 
Despite the policy challenges there can be little doubt that China’s presence in the world economy will 
grow  further.  Emergence of  new  economic  powers  is  not  a  new  phenomenon:  since  the  1950s,  for 
instance, we have witnessed the rapid rise of Japan.  
The rise of China is different from that of any other country in terms of its size. It is not different in the 
sense  that  the  world  as  whole  will  benefit.  If  the  productivity  of  1.3  billion  people  increases,  world 
production  increases  and  we  all  benefit.  Consumers  experience  this  every  day:  international 
competition  has  resulted  in  cheaper  goods,  and  has  contributed  to  the  success  of  central  banks  in 
maintaining  price stability.2  But  it  is  not  just  that  prices  have  fallen,  in  addition consumers  can  also 
choose from more variety: where Henry Ford once joked that his famous T-model comes in ‘any color 
as long as it is black’, today’s consumers can purchase a wide array of goods not available in the past. 
                                                      
1   P. Krugman. The myth of Asia's miracle. Foreign Affairs 73 (6):61-79, 1994. Krugman’s main message is confirmed in Duo 
Qin, Marie Anne Cagas, Pilipinas Quising, and Xin-Hua He. How much does investment drive economic growth in China? 
Queen Mary University of London Working Paper 545, 2005. 
2   K. Rogoff, 2003, Globalization and global disinflation, paper prepared for Jackson Hole conference, August. 
   2/3 
A recent U.S. study found that the welfare gains from consumers having a broader choice of goods 
are equivalent to 2.8 percent of GDP.3  
China  has  a  huge  cost  advantage  in  producing  labour-intensive  goods.  Consequently,  Europe’s 
economic structure will change: as Chinese wages are much lower than European wages, production 
of  labour-intensive  goods  is  shifted  to  China.  Europe  will  specialize  in  capital-intensive  production. 
One area where massive relocation of business activities is already taking place is the textile sector. 
We must acknowledge the hardship imposed on those who find themselves out of work. And we must 
ask ourselves: which policies are needed to ease the adjustment? 
Let me be clear: protectionism is not the answer. This would not only hurt Chinese workers, it would 
also deprive European consumers from the benefits of international trade. Instead, competitive, sound 
firms in Europe must have opportunities to grow, while policymakers should limit assistance to firms 
that  will  no  longer  remain  competitive.  Structural  change  brought  about  by  globalisation  is  not  very 
different from structural change imposed by technological progress. Had we banned cars, we would 
still be using horses and buggies. Viewed from that angle, it is clear that we would become poorer by 
protecting industries that cannot compete with cheaper foreign products, or by protecting employment 
in these sectors. Europe’s advantage lies in the production of capital-intensive goods. And given that 
the most severely affected jobs are typically those requiring the least education, our efforts must be 
directed to improve education and to offer training for those affected. 
I  am  often  asked  whether  Dutch  wages  are  too  high  in  the  face  of  competition  from  low-wage 
countries. I believe that the gap in wages will fall, but there are two sides to that issues: (1) what will 
happen  in  China,  and  (2)  what  will  happen  in  Europe.  A  consequence  of  China’s  rapid  productivity 
growth will be that real wages in China will rise. Economic history offers no example of a country that 
experienced long-term productivity growth without a roughly equal rise in real wages. The idea that 
somehow  the  old  rules  no  longer  apply  and  that  China  will  always  pay  low  wages,  despite  rising 
productivity, has no basis in actual experience. 
The second issue is what will happen in Europe. Here my approach is a pragmatic one: we should not 
a priori exclude the possibility that part of the adjustment could occur via wages.  I would like to remind 
you that we are dealing with a world labour-supply shock of unprecedented magnitude. We simply do 
not know what the exact effects on European wages will be, but one thing is clear: if real adjustment is 
needed,  we  cannot  prevent  it  from  happening.  The  more  restrictions  we  impose  on  the  adjustment 
process  the  worse  off  Europe  will  be  in  the  end.  Restricting  wage  adjustment  could  result  in 
adjustment occurring via a lower exchange rate. But with one important downside: wage adjustment 
can  allow  for  sectoral  differences,  while  adjustment  via  the  exchange  rate  hits  the  entire  economy. 
This is most likely not an optimal solution. 
Conclusion 
The  world  economy  is  increasingly  integrated.  Therefore,  China’s  rise  transmits  shock  waves  to 
Western  economies  as  that  country  continues  to  develop  and  prosper.  Europe  will  face  tough 
competition.  New  possibilities  will  open  up  for  European  firms,  but  Europe’s  production  of  labour-
intensive goods is likely to come under pressure.  
China offers tremendous opportunities for Western consumers and firms, and there is little reason to 
be  scared  of  China’s  rapid  development.  To  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  China’s  rise,  European 
policymakers  must  not  hesitate  to  reform  our  economies.  In  particular,  our  labour  markets  need  to 
become more flexible, as the pace of change is likely to increase. Changes imply that in the short run, 
there will be winners and losers. Overall, however, welfare will rise, as was the case when we moved 
from  the  horse  to  the  car.  Changes  in  the  European  production  structure  towards  more  
capital-intensive  production  will  imply  that  some  workers  will  have  to  change  jobs.  We  have  to 
continue  to  stimulate  an  environment  of  lifelong  learning  to  facilitate  retraining  and  to  ease  this 
transition period. 
 
                                                      
3   C. Broda and D. Weinstein. Are we underestimating the gains from globalization for the United States? Current Issues in 
Economics and Finance (Federal Reserve Bank of New York) 11 (4), 2005. 
   3/3 
