Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro area economy - determinants of growth, 
competitiveness and the need for structural reforms  
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at an executive briefing 
with the Premier Cercle/Wall Street Journal, Brussels, 10 October 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all I would like to thank Premier Cercle and the Wall Street Journal for inviting me here today 
and giving me the opportunity to share with you some thoughts regarding a number of issues which I 
deem of critical importance for the euro area economy. I would first like to draw a broad picture of 
economic growth trends in Europe as compared to the United States; based on this diagnosis, I would 
then like to stress how the issues of structural reforms are key to preserve and improve the economic 
performance of the European economy.  
Assessment of the euro area’s growth performance 
Let me start with an assessment of the euro area’s growth performance. Since the 1980s, real GDP in 
the euro area has grown on average at a pace almost one percentage point lower than in the U.S. 
Similarly, but even more importantly, per capita real GDP growth over the same period has not only 
been lower in the euro area on average, but the gap vis-à-vis the U.S. has also been increasing over 
the last decade. 
Europe’s  achievements  should,  however,  not  be  underestimated.  If  one  considers  output  per  hour 
worked, the picture is somewhat different. Output per hour worked in the euro area, which was around 
88% of the level of the U.S. in 1980, was equal to the U.S. level in the latter part of the 1990s. Over 
recent years, however, the pattern has gradually changed, such that labour productivity is again below 
U.S. levels by almost ten percent. I will come back to this shortly. 
Despite  some  catching  up  in  terms  of  output  per  hour  worked,  the  level  of  output  per  capita  has 
remained just over two-thirds that of the U.S. since the 70’s. The lack of convergence in output per 
capita to U.S. levels reflects the weaker performance of the labour market in Europe. This resulted 
from a lower level of participation rate, significant reductions in working hours per person employed in 
Europe and a higher level of unemployment since the first oil shock. More recently, however, there 
have been some positive developments, with stronger increases in European employment than in the 
past. 
Since 1980, the average number of working hours per person employed in the euro area has been 
around  12%  lower  than  in  the  U.S.  The  difference  has  gradually  increased  and  latest  estimates 
suggest that average working hours in the euro area is currently some 15% below U.S. levels. The 
lower  level  vis-à-vis  the  U.S.  is  partly  explained  by  fewer  actual  working  days  per  year,  while  the 
widening of the gap reflects the shortening of statutory full-time working weeks and the rising share of 
part-time employment. In the U.S. these latter determinants have remained broadly stable. 
An important question which has featured prominently in the policy discussion is whether lower labour 
utilisation  in  the  euro  area  reflects  predominantly  preferences  or  disincentives  from  tax  and  social 
contribution systems. In this respect, some data show that part-time employment in both the euro area 
and  the  U.S.  seems  to  be  partly  of  a  voluntary  nature  and,  per  se,  might  thus  reflect  individual  or 
cultural preferences. However, having said this, it should also be borne in mind that households are 
influenced  by  their  institutional  environment.  This  includes  for  example  taxes,  social  security  and 
pension systems. Such factors are providing disincentives to work. 
Let  me  now  continue  with  more  recent  developments.  While  the  gap  in  per  capita  GDP  growth 
vis-à-vis  the  U.S.  has  remained  unchanged  ,  the  underlying  explanation  has  changed.  Labour 
productivity  has  evolved  more  favourably  in  the  U.S.,  whilst  labour  utilisation  has  developed  more 
favourably in Europe. On the latter, I hope and believe that these developments will continue, as the 
potential for catching up in this regard is very substantial. Both participation rates and average hours 
worked are low in the euro area and unemployment rates are high. 
   1/4 
Why has there been a reversal of the catching up process of labour productivity growth vis-à-vis the 
U.S. since the mid-1990s? The answer is partly found in the usage of information and communication 
technologies, which has had a beneficial effect on labour productivity in the U.S. A word of warning 
may  be  appropriate  here  as  these  kinds  of  comparisons  are  unfortunately  surrounded  with 
uncertainties due to different statistical practices and statistical measurement problems. Nevertheless, 
when analysed by sector, it is impressive to see that, on top of the sectors that manufacture these 
technologies, it is the very rapid improvement in the service sectors that are using them – such as 
wholesale  trade,  retail  trade,  financial  intermediation  –  that  explains  much  of  the  difference.  This 
feature of the U.S. economy explains, together with the relatively more unsatisfactory demographics of 
Europe,  why  European  growth  has  been  disappointing  in  comparison  with  the  U.S.  during  the  past 
decade. 
Let me elaborate a bit on the role of demographic developments for the euro area. The importance of 
demographic factors as a source of growth in the euro area has been gradually decreasing over time 
during  the  past  three  decades.  Although  in  the  short  to  medium  run  demographic  factors  are  not 
projected to become too grave a problem, in the longer run they are likely to become a major source 
of  concern.  In  particular,  the  growth  rate  of  the  population  of  working  age  is  projected  to  gradually 
decline, from current positive rates of around 0.4% per annum, and become negative within one to two 
decades in the euro area. As a matter of comparison, the growth rate of the population of working age 
has since the beginning of the 1980s averaged 0.5% in the euro area, while the corresponding figure 
for  the  U.S.  is  1.1%.  This  difference  has  recently  increased.  The  projected  changing  age  structure 
moreover  implies  a  gradual  ageing  of  the  population.  If  fertility  rates  do  not  rise,  the  adverse 
consequences arising from this particular feature could only be solved by an extension of the working 
life and/or substantial inward migration. Forward looking growth accounting exercises show that these 
adverse demographic developments would reduce average real GDP growth in the period up to 2010 
below 2% and in the period up to 2020 further to around 1½% if no compensation is achieved through 
higher  contributions  from  other  supply-side  factors.  Taking  into  account  these  unfavourable 
demographic developments, only with ambitious and comprehensive reforms therefore, there is some 
scope for raising medium to longer-term output growth in the euro area or even simply sustaining the 
long term growth potential. 
Structural reforms and future challenges 
The implementation of appropriate reforms is key for sustaining or even raising medium to longer-term 
output  growth  in  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  there  is  a  need  to  further  boost  labour  utilisation  and 
productivity. Back in 2000, the EU’s leaders therefore adopted a blueprint of structural reforms – the 
so-called  Lisbon  Strategy  –  which  was  to  turn  the  European  economy  into  a  highly  competitive 
knowledge-based economy. 
A  key objective  of  the Lisbon strategy is  to raise  the  employment  rate.  To  achieve  this,  some  euro 
area countries have started to implement the needed reforms to reduce the disincentives to work that 
are  currently  present  in  many  European  labour  markets.  Unemployment  schemes  have  been 
amended  and  early  retirement  incentives  have  been  reduced.  As  a  result,  the  countries  that  have 
introduced  measures  aimed  at  increasing  flexibility  of  the  labour  market  witnessed  a  fall  in  actual 
unemployment rates and consequently in the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment – the so 
called  NAIRU  –  which  is  the  level  of  the  unemployment  rate  that  does  not  lead  to  inflationary 
pressures.  Moreover,  thanks  to  the  implementation  of  labour  market  reforms  the  employment  rate 
increased in most euro area countries, but the size of the increase differed across countries. In 2004 
only  three  euro  area countries  met  the  interim  Lisbon  employment  target  of  an  employment  rate  of 
67% and just one euro area country achieved an overall employment rate higher than 70%. The euro 
area-wide employment rate stood last year at 63%, while, for comparison, it stood at 71% in the U.S. 
Thus, if the 2010 Lisbon target is to be met, employment rates need to increase much more rapidly. 
Boosting labour productivity growth is another central component of the efforts to enhance Europe’s 
growth potential. Innovation and technological diffusion have an important role to play in this context. 
An  article  in  the  Economist  recently  pointed  out  that  “Europe’s  only  chance  of  preserving  its  living 
standards lies in working smarter than its competitors rather than (..) cheaper”. In a world of pervasive 
globalisation  and  relentless  technological  change,  our  future  prosperity  will  indeed  depend  on  our 
ability to generate and exploit new knowledge and ideas. A key factor for promoting innovation and 
technological  diffusion  is  research  and  development.  Most  innovations  result  from  entrepreneurial 
activities or investment in research and development. In this field, Europe clearly suffers from a lack of 
   2/4 
private investment. The Lisbon strategy set a target that research and development spending should 
reach 3% of GDP, two thirds of which should come from private investment. In 2003 expenditure stood 
at 1.9% of GDP for the euro area, and only one euro area country currently exceeds the Lisbon target 
level. By way of comparison, the U.S. spends 2.8% of GDP on research and development. It is also 
important that efforts to achieve the Lisbon target should be accompanied by policies that enhance the 
gains from efforts and money spent on research and development. 
Productivity growth can also be boosted by more  and better education and training. The right skills 
and competences are required to reduce mismatches in the labour market and allow for a smoother 
reallocation of workers between sectors and firms. So far, investment in human capital development in 
Europe is insufficient. For instance, the number of European school-leavers who go on to complete 
higher education is inadequate for the knowledge-intensive economy. In the euro area, only Finland 
and Ireland have reached a comparable level with the U.S. in this field. Human capital improvements 
in  these  countries  came  together  with  a  fast  development  of  the  sectors  within  information  and 
communication technologies. As a consequence, they enjoy a labour productivity growth performance 
which  is  significantly  above  the  euro  area  average.  A  comparison  with  the  U.S.  illustrates  the 
knowledge gap very well: in the US, annual expenditure on higher education institutions per student 
represent 57.8% of GDP per capita, while in the euro area 35% is spent. 
Creating  well  functioning,  competitive  and  efficient  markets  is  another  key  aspect  of  the  Lisbon 
strategy. In a number of fields clear progress has been made. For example, most network industries 
are now fully or largely open to competition, in particular those in telecommunications and air transport 
and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  energy  markets.  And  the  reforms  do  pay  off:  the  remarkable  labour 
productivity  growth  performance  in  network  industries  in  Europe  over  the  last  ten  years  provides  a 
perfect  example  of  the  positive  impact  on  labour  productivity  growth  of  easing  regulations  and 
fostering competition. We also need to make Europe an attractive place for businesses to operate in. 
Here, some progress has been made in the reduction of excessive business regulations, for instance 
by reducing the time and costs required to set up a business. 
All in all, progress has been made to promote long-term productivity growth and to increase labour 
utilisation,  but  the  extent  differs  widely  across  countries  and  policy  areas.  Although  the  structural 
reforms have been moving in the right direction, they have not been far reaching enough. In fact, we 
need  to  step  up  considerably  the  implementation  of  the  necessary  reforms  in  order  to  achieve  the 
Lisbon goals. In particular more progress in labour market reforms is needed to attract more people 
into labour market and investment in research and development and human capital should be strongly 
encouraged. 
What needs to be done is rather clear. But how to deliver it in an environment of rapid change is the 
more challenging question. 
The  difficulties  faced  with  delivering  the  Lisbon  Strategy  in  the  first  five  years  may  be  summarised 
under three headings: a lack of focus, a lack of adequate commitment and a lack of incentives. Or, as 
the Kok report put it in November 2004: The Lisbon strategy had become “about everything and thus 
about  nothing”;  “Every  body  [was]  responsible  and  thus  no  one”.  And  there  was  a  need  for  more 
‘naming, shaming [but also] famin”’. 
In view of these problems, the European Heads of State or Government clarified their position earlier 
this year. First, as regards the lack of focus resulting from the plethora of objectives and targets, they 
made  it  clear  that  the  focus  of  the  Strategy  is  now  on  growth  and  employment.  Growth  and 
employment are indeed the key to our future prosperity and the sustainability of our social model.  
Second, regarding the insufficiently clear commitment, the Heads of State or Government also clearly 
set  out  the  responsibilities  of  the  European  and  the  national  level.  Since  the  Member  States  are 
responsible for most of the policy reforms required for achieving the Lisbon objectives, they have now 
been called upon to take full national ownership of the Strategy. Countries have been asked to spell 
out how they will turn European commitments into real action at home in so-called National Reform 
Programmes, which are discussed with their national parliaments and social partners. Let us hope that 
this increased national ownership will be instrumental in beefing up the commitment to reform. 
As for the third difficulty – namely the lack of incentives at the European level to stimulate reforms, it 
remains to be seen to what extent ‘naming, shaming, and faming’ will be strengthened. Some people 
have  argued  that  the  Commission  should  not  assume  the  role  of  a  schoolmaster  faming  good  and 
naming bad pupils, and should instead play more a role of the coach. However, I would suggest that 
benchmarking Member States’ performance can indeed provide incentives for reform and thus shore 
   3/4 
up the commitment to reform. Obviously, it can also be useful for a coach to compare his team with 
other, better performing teams and to identify the best and most appropriate role models. Is it wrong to 
look at how Ireland implemented well focused structural reforms to achieve such a leap in GDP per 
capita?  Should  we  ignore  how  Finland  succeeded  in  raising  its  employment  rate  by  7  percentage 
points in 10 years? And outside the euro area but following exactly the same monetary policy, does 
not  Denmark  present  a  remarkable  example  of  a  good  functioning  labour  market  in  a  social 
environment which has similarities with a number of European continental economies?  
The  European  Union  can  also  contribute  in  a  direct  way  to  the  Lisbon  goals.  Most  importantly,  the 
benefits  from  the  internal  market  in  terms  of  growth  and  employment  are  still  to  be  fully  exploited. 
Today,  the  greatest  unexploited  potential  clearly  lies  in  the  internal  market  for  services.  It  is  not 
through  protectionism,  but  rather  by  unleashing  the  forces  of  competition  in  goods  and  services 
markets  that  we  can  tap  the  untapped  potential  of  the  European  economy,  fuel  the  entrepreneurial 
spirit and boost innovation. 
Moreover, the EU budget can also help to achieve the economic objectives of the Union. In particular, 
it can ensure that expenditure is channelled towards growth-enhancing outlays, such as research and 
development  and  the  improvement  of  human  capital.  Such  expenditure  will  be  more  beneficial  for 
Europe’s future than other outlays aiming to subsidise certain sectors. 
Citizens  need  to  understand  the  case  for  structural reform  in  order  to  welcome  it.  Therefore,  better 
informing Europe’s citizens about the reasons for and the benefits of structural reform will be crucial 
for the success of the revamped Lisbon strategy. Indeed, a better understanding of the benefits from 
structural  reforms  could  raise  consumer  and  business  confidence.  The  ECB,  from  its  side,  will 
continue  to  play  its  role  in  delivering  the  message  that  structural  reforms  are  beneficial  for  the  EU 
economy as a whole. 
Let me conclude with the words of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry: “L’avenir, il ne s’agit pas de le prévoir, 
mais de le rendre possible.” (“As to the future, the task is not to foresee it, but to enable it.”) We can all 
foresee  the  future  challenges  of  the  enlarged  Europe:  increasing  globalisation,  faster  technological 
change and a rapidly ageing population. If we want to enable Europe’s future, we need to turn these 
challenges into opportunities; more competitiveness, more innovation and more employment. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
   4/4 
