Glenn Stevens: Finance and the ageing population 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Financial 
Planning Association of Australia Limited, Gold Coast, Australia, 16 November 2005. 
 There has been much talk about the phenomenon of population ageing in recent years. Some of the 
figures, on their face, are stark. As a result of declining fertility, and rising longevity, the median age of 
the  world's  population  is  increasing  by  about  three  months  each  year.1  In  Australia,  whereas  today 
there are about five people of 'working age' for every person over 65 years, by mid century there will 
be just over two, according to ABS population projections.2 Assuming all other things unchanged, that 
implies a substantial impact on the rate of growth of per capita national income, and on the proportion 
of national income required to sustain the non-working part of the population. That, in turn, would raise 
thorny issues of income distribution and require careful management of the policies which affect that 
distribution.  
Whether such an assumption – that all other things remain unchanged – should be made is another 
thing altogether. Indeed, if we know anything about economic behaviour at all, it is that everything else 
won't remain constant in the face of such profound changes in society's age structure (forecasts of 
which, themselves, assume that recent fertility rates persist, even though we know that fertility rates 
have varied a lot, in both directions, in the past eighty years). Individuals, markets and economies will 
adjust to these changes. I would like to explore some of the possible adjustment issues today.  
Much  of  the  discussion  of  the  ageing  issue  to  date  in  Australia  has  been  about  the  impact  on 
government budgets (a lot of which seems to come via the health system, rather than solely through 
age-specific  payments  per  se).  Those  matters  are  important,  but  surely  there  will  be  counterpart 
issues  for  private  financial  markets.  In  addressing  a  group  of  financial  planners,  it  would  seem 
appropriate at least to pose some of those questions, even if we cannot provide many of the answers.  
What is ageing and why does it occur?  
In popular discussion we often hear about the ageing 'baby boomers'. This generation – those born 
between 1946 and about 1965 – is getting close to retirement. Indeed, some members of the leading 
edge of this cohort have presumably started retirement over the past few years, and many more will 
be thinking about it in the next few years. There has been considerable speculation about the impact 
that  this  may  have  had,  and  prospectively  might  have,  on  asset  market  prices  and  returns.  Some 
commentators  have  attributed  the  share  market  boom  in  many  countries  in  the  late  1990s  to  the 
efforts  of  'boomers'  to  accumulate  assets  in  their  high-income,  immediate  pre-retirement  working 
years.3 There is a corresponding concern in some quarters that, as boomers move through their older 
years, they will sell assets to facilitate consumption, leading to a slump in asset values.  
There are a few problems with that story, not least of which is that saving rates have tended to fall, 
rather than rise, in the past decade at the time when boomers were supposed to be seeking rapidly to 
build  their  net  worth.4  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  baby  boom  is  an  important  demographic 
phenomenon. It was the result of a surge in fertility rates during and after the Second World War, after 
                                                      
1   UN 
Population  Division,  World 
http://esa.un.org/unpp/index.asp?panel=1).   
Population 
Prospects: 
The 
2004  Revision  Population  Database 
2   ABS Cat. 3222.0, Population Projections, Australia 2002 to 2101.  
3   See  discussion  in  J.  Poterba  (2004),  ‘The  Impact  of  Population  Aging  on  Financial  Markets',  in  Global  Demographic 
Change: Economic Impacts and Policy Challenges, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
Federal 
City, 
163–216 
http://www.kc.frb.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2004/pdf/Poterba2004.pdf). 
Reserve 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Bank 
City, 
pp. 
of 
4   Another is that, in cases where we have information on asset decumulation in old age, it has historically been much smaller 
than would be consistent with the basic life-cycle saving view of the world. If that continues to be true, the mooted slump in 
asset values as the baby boomers run down their savings might be a more modest, drawn-out affair than sometimes feared. 
   1/6 
a slump which had started in the early 1920s and extended until the mid 1930s. Baby boomer women 
themselves,  on  the  other  hand,  had  lower  fertility  rates  than  their  mothers,  so  that  the  succeeding 
generation, the children of the boomers, is relatively smaller. Thus the boomers are disproportionately 
large in the age distribution compared with both the previous and succeeding generations, and as they 
age, all other things equal, the median age of society rises.  
But it is worth noting that there would be ageing even if the baby boom had never occurred. Declining 
fertility is a long-term trend observed in all countries as part of the 'demographic transition'. Indeed, 
maybe  the  baby  boom  is  best  seen  as  a  temporary  departure  from  the  long-term  trend  decline  in 
fertility, in which case it actually put off ageing by a generation or so.  
Furthermore, aside from the influence of declining fertility, increasing longevity contributes to ageing of 
the  population.  Importantly  for  financial  markets  and  planners,  life  expectancy  has  continued  to 
increase,  presumably  due  to  numerous  factors  including  advances  in  medicine  and  nutrition,  and 
healthier lifestyles (e.g. a large decline in smoking).  
So ageing is not just about the baby boomers, as prominent a cohort as they (or we) are. The effects 
of the baby boomers are superimposed on a longer, more profound, trend, and they will eventually 
pass (though, admittedly, that is still some time off). The more far-reaching and long-lasting economic 
effects of ageing will come about more from the effects of longevity and declining fertility than from 
'boomer' effects.  
Why should individuals care about ageing?  
Insofar  as  ageing  occurs  because  of  increased  longevity,  it's  hard  to  see  it  as  a  bad  thing.  Unless 
increased longevity is of the type that involves an elongated period of being seriously unwell before 
death, and there is no evidence that that is the case, it is surely a good thing. People can look forward 
to  being  productive  at  things  they  enjoy,  to  consuming  goods  and  services,  and  to  enjoying  the  
non-pecuniary 'goods' of life for longer.  
The  problem  comes  about  simply  because  people  have  to  make  decisions  with  significant  long-run 
consequences at various points in their life. They make decisions about saving and asset allocation 
through their lives. And, of course, one of the biggest decisions is when to retire from the workforce. If 
this decision is more or less irreversible, then the individual has to ask: have I got enough assets to 
last me until I die?  
Rising life expectancy undermines the assumptions typically made in this area. Since the mid 1970s, 
life expectancy at age 65 has risen by about four years, to about 83 for men and 86 for women. Quite 
possibly it will keep edging up at that rate.  
Consider then someone who is today about 50 years of age, and intends retiring a decade from now. 
By retirement, they will probably face a world in which they can expect to live five or six years longer 
than they would have anticipated (had they thought about it) when they started work in the mid to late 
1970s.  Which  means,  if  they  were  planning  to  provide  for  their  own  retirement  needs  out  of 
accumulated savings, based on assumptions made earlier in their lives, they quite possibly will find 
that they won't have enough. The fact that most of us didn't think about this when we started work, of 
course, won't help matters.  
This  is  a  complex  area,  and  I  am  conscious  that  all  of  you  in  this  room  have  far  greater  technical 
expertise  than  I  in  the  actuarial  intricacies  of  retirement  income  sufficiency.  But  if  we  imagine  an 
individual with an expected forty-year working life, and a plan to accumulate enough assets to provide 
a reasonable fraction of pre-retirement income after they retire, with plausible assumed saving rates 
and asset returns, we can ask what effect a rise in life expectancy of, say, five years would have on 
the calculations for asset sufficiency. Roughly speaking, there would need to be a rise in the saving 
rate  of  several  percentage  points  of  income  through  their  whole  working  life.  Alternatively,  asset 
returns  would  need  to  be  perhaps  50  to  75  basis  points  higher,  risk  adjusted,  through  their  whole 
working life. A third possibility is that our representative person could simply accept a lower retirement 
income. Finally, he or she could decide to retire later than originally planned, so accumulating more 
assets and shortening the draw-down period. Some combination of these possibilities could also be 
adopted, of course.  
These sums are arrived at in a hypothetical, modelled situation for the representative individual. But in 
practice, for many people, by the time they realise that they will have a problem of insufficient assets, 
it is quite likely to be late in their asset accumulation phase. So they can't save a few extra percentage 
   2/6 
points of income over their whole life; they would have to save a great deal more over a short period 
towards the end of their working life. Nor will extra yield equivalent to half a percentage point or more 
every year for forty years be easy to find, at least without taking much more risk (wherein lies a major 
issue). It would be even harder to find if everyone is simultaneously attempting to save more since 
rates of return would be bid down. Equally, most people would find the prospect of noticeably lower 
post-retirement income hard to accept.  
So, in the end, my guess is that while people will adjust their saving behaviour to some extent, and 
this  will  have  an  effect  on  financial  markets,  a  large  part  of  the  adjustment  to  the  recognition  of 
increasing  life  expectancy  will  ultimately  need  to  take  the  form  of  prolonging  working  lives.  The 
existence  of  the  old-age  pension,  on  which  people  can  fall  back  if  their  own  funds  are  inadequate, 
naturally complicates the analysis. Even so, one way or another, surely increasing longevity means we 
will have to get used to the idea of retiring later than we might once have done. In fact, the rule of 
thumb is likely to be that the proportion of total expected life spent working will need to be roughly 
constant, as life expectancy increases.  
People will start to make that adjustment naturally. I think it is probably already beginning. Presumably 
a role for public policy is to foster the adjustment, by making sure that the retirement income system 
does not inadvertently offer incentives in the opposite direction. That is a big topic, and would take me 
outside my usual area of expertise. So I shall turn instead to some of the implications of ageing for 
financial markets.  
Why should financial markets care about ageing?  
We have established that, for individuals, ageing in the form simply of living longer means that earlier 
notions  of  retirement  age  and  asset  sufficiency  will  be  revisited.  We  need  then  to  think  about  the 
various effects on financial markets. For as individuals seek to adjust their own behaviour, including 
through  saving,  investment  and  work/retirement  decisions,  there  will  surely  be  effects  on  market 
pricing and structure.  
In  a  world  in  which  people  live  longer  and  enjoy  longer  retirement,  they  will  need  to  build  a  higher 
stock of savings with which to retire. For a given length of working life (an assumption to be relaxed in 
a moment), this would require a higher rate of saving in each of their working years, and lower annual 
consumption every year of their life. The total size of accumulated assets would be higher in every 
year of life than would be the case with shorter life-spans. The amount of savings to be invested in the 
economy would be higher.  
The  question  would  then  arise:  how  would  the  additional  capital  which  becomes  available  be 
deployed, and by whom? And what price changes are required to induce them to do so?  
Businesses may be inclined to adopt a more capital-intensive production technology if the availability 
of labour diminishes relative to capital as the population ages. But economics teaches that this shift in 
the capital-labour ratio would be associated with a higher real wage, relative to the return on capital. 
This stands to reason: if the situation is one of an impending relative scarcity of workers and a relative 
abundance for saving looking for a use, then the relative prices of the two factors of production would 
alter accordingly. So overall, this sounds like a scenario in which long-run returns to capital are lower 
(perhaps  after  an  adjustment  period  in  which  the  bidding  down  of  yields  produces  a  rise  in  asset 
values).  
Two things potentially moderate that tendency. First, the length of working life is not fixed and as I 
noted above, it seems likely that people will tend to delay their retirement. The mooted relative price 
change between capital and labour would reinforce that tendency by changing the incentives between 
work and retirement, in the direction of it being more rewarding to make the adjustment partly in the 
form of a longer working life, rather than entirely in the form of higher saving.  
Second, in a globalised world, 'surplus' capital arising from higher saving in any given country might, 
instead of simply lowering returns at home, flow abroad with little impact on home rates of return.  
One general prediction is that capital will flow from 'old' societies to 'young' ones, though it is actually 
more complex than that. Most societies are ageing; it is the different rates of ageing, and the different 
positions  in  the  'demographic  transition',  which  would  drive  the  potential  capital  flows.  The  'older' 
societies are now seeing a decline in the share of their populations which is of working age, but some 
other countries, such as India and some other countries in Asia, will see a rise in this share for some 
time yet even though they too are ageing. This so called 'demographic dividend' arises now because 
   3/6 
their fertility rates declined more recently than in the developed western countries. In such countries, 
investment rates will presumably need to be relatively higher, in order to provide the capital for the 
larger workforce to work with. So one might expect capital to flow towards them from countries which 
are more 'advanced' in the ageing process.5 
One might have expected this to mean capital would flow into many developing countries in Asia. Over 
recent years, as it turns out, the reverse has been occurring. National investment rates fell in many 
countries  in  Asia  after  the  financial  crisis  in  1997–98,  and  have  not  recovered  much  as  yet.  So 
'surplus' saving in Asia has been flowing out of the region, towards the developed world.  
This reminds us that financial flows are responsive to a great many forces; demography is only one of 
them.  Perhaps  it  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  attempts  to  distil  empirically  the  effects  of  changing 
demographic structure on asset prices and returns in the past have had mixed results. Some studies 
do  find  a  significant  relationship  but  others  don't.  Even  in  studies  where  demographic  effects  are 
statistically  significant,  the  amount  of  variation  in  asset  prices  and  returns  that  is  explained  by 
demographic  factors  is  often  small  relative  to  the  total  degree  of  variation  in  those  things.  It  would 
seem that, given our present state of knowledge at least, the cycle of euphoria and gloom still does 
much of the work in driving asset prices and returns.  
For  that  reason  alone,  not  to  mention  the  complexity  of  demographic  effects  themselves,  any 
hypothesis about how ageing will affect financial prices shouldn't be held dogmatically. Added to that 
is the fact that the long-run state we are imagining is a long time away – assuming we ever get there. 
The  transition  towards  it  will  have  its  own  complications,  not  least  because  many  people  will  only 
gradually recognise the implications of increasing longevity, and accordingly will adjust their behaviour 
only slowly. Nonetheless, a reasonable working hypothesis for the moment, in my judgement, is that 
we  would  expect  to  observe  a  tendency  toward  higher  rates  of  saving,  lower  returns  and  longer 
working lives.6 
Moving  from  these  general  points  to  more  specific  concerns  of  financial  markets  and  institutions,  a 
major  issue  exists  in  managing  longevity  risk  for  providers  of  defined-benefit  pension  plans.  Such 
providers,  of  course,  have  an  obligation  to  provide  a  stream  of  payments  to  pensioners  for  the 
remainder of their lives after retirement. If those lives turn out to be longer than expected, the pension 
plans will be under-funded.  
In some countries (not Australia), funding of defined-benefit obligations is turning out to be a major 
issue  for  household-name  companies  who  carry  the  legacy  costs  of  a  large  number  of  former 
employees with pension and other entitlements. Only a small part of these problems seems to be due 
to  people  living  longer  –  mainly  they  reflect  a  period  of  less-than-expected  returns  and  funding 
holidays taken by businesses. Nonetheless, they are a picture of the sorts of problems that could arise 
more frequently in an ageing scenario. A public policy question which we could expect to emerge in 
these countries is the extent to which shareholders of the companies in question will be able to shift 
these obligations on to their country's taxpayers, or indeed the pensioners themselves.  
But  even  if  adequate  funding  is  available,  with  the  longer  duration  of  obligations,  the  question  is 
whether there are sufficient long-duration assets to hold. These factors can affect financial markets. 
Regulations requiring closer matching of duration in some countries in Europe have been nominated 
as  one  factor  (though  far  from  the  only  one)  behind  apparently  strong  demand  for  long-dated 
government  securities  in  global  markets.  Some  European  governments  have  recently  issued  very 
long-dated  securities  –  up  to  50-year  maturities  –  to  tap  this  demand.  There  are  also  proposals  to 
create 'longevity bonds' to help pension providers manage longevity risk. A more daring idea still is 
6  
                                                      
5   That said, some developing countries may, in due course, age quite rapidly. In China, for example, the share of population 
of working age has been rising quickly up to now. But between 2010 and 2050, it is expected to decline more quickly than in 
the United States, and by about the same as in Germany. 
In theory, ageing can in some circumstances produce lower saving rates. The reason is that people have a longer period 
over which compounding affects their wealth, so that they need a lower saving rate each year. See, for example, D. Bloom, 
D. Canning and M. Moore (2004), ‘The Effect of Improvements in Health and Longevity on Optimal Retirement and Saving', 
NBER Working Paper No. 10919 (http://papers.nber.org/papers/w10919.pdf). But in models which produce this result the 
yield on investment is assumed unchanged in the face of ageing, whereas it is reasonable to think that rates of return would 
be lower in an ageing scenario. Hence the power of compounding would probably not, in practice, be enough to allow a fall 
in saving rates. 
   4/6 
that of a swap of exposures between pension funds and those industries which might expect to profit 
from longer life-spans.  
In  Australia,  there  are  relatively  few  defined-benefit  plans  these  days;  the  growing  pool  of 
superannuation  assets  is  predominantly  of  an  accumulation  type.  Hence,  these  issues  of  funding 
adequacy  and  long-duration  asset  availability  do  not  arise  to  quite  the  same  extent  for  our 
superannuation funds. The risk that a retirement plan might be under-funded has been transferred to 
the retiree.  
Nonetheless,  there  is  presumably  a  qualitatively  similar,  if  quantitatively  less  pressing,  issue  on 
duration  once  people  get  to  retirement,  if  we  assume  that  it  is  desirable  for  them  to  purchase  an 
income  stream.  Increasing  longevity  still  presumably  implies  a  requirement  for  assets  of  an 
appropriately longer duration to support these sorts of products; the question will be at what price they 
can be acquired.  
In fact as a general proposition, completeness in the set of financial markets and instruments is likely 
to be important in managing the various issues associated with ageing. Instruments which facilitate the 
transformation of assets into long-run income streams will presumably be increasingly needed. It is to 
our  advantage,  therefore,  that  Australia's  financial  market  participants  are  at  the  dynamic  and 
innovative end of the spectrum when it comes to creating and adopting new instruments, and we can 
expect them to respond well to the changing needs of the population. Along with that will come, of 
course, all the associated issues of pricing and risk, and the requirement for user education.  
Financial planners and ageing  
What then are we to say to financial planners about the implications of ageing for their work?  
It  is  obvious  that  as  people  come  to  terms  with  all  the  issues  around  ageing,  they  will  focus 
increasingly  on  their  saving,  investment  and  retirement  decisions.  So  there  will  be  no  shortage  of 
demand for the services of good financial planners. But because the issues are of such importance, 
the performance of the financial planing industry will surely be subject to heightened scrutiny.  
It is not for me to prescribe how you should respond to these challenges. The Reserve Bank certainly 
has no regulatory power over, or supervisory responsibility for, the financial planning industry. Let me 
simply offer two broad observations.  
The first is that while financial planners have much to offer their clients in the form of advice on asset 
allocation and tax management, it still seems to me that probably about the biggest decision most of 
your clients are going to make is when to retire. I grant that for more than a few who have retired over 
the past two decades, the decision was not entirely voluntary. But I suspect that many people have 
been content to take early retirement, because they held an optimistic – probably too optimistic – set 
of  assumptions  about  the  future  earning  potential  of  their  assets.  They  may  well  also  have 
underestimated longevity. It gradually will be dawning on people that in a world of lower yields on most 
assets and increasing longevity, they are going to have to work hard at making their assets last – or, 
simply, work in the more normal sense of that word.  
Retirement  ages  will  tend  naturally  to  rise  in  the  future  as  people  realise  that  they  need  more 
resources  for  their  lengthening  lives.  Financial  planners  can  probably  assist  that  natural,  and 
inevitable, development by giving appropriate advice. As time goes by, I think that we will see a world 
in  which  later  retirement  is  more  feasible  than  it  might  have  been  in  the  past,  because  the 
demographic  changes  occurring  themselves  mean  that  an  excess  supply  of  labour,  common  from 
1970 to 2000, will more than likely give way to excess demand for labour in the future. Surely firms are 
going  to  find  it  to  their  advantage  to  keep  their  older  employees,  and  will  need  to  offer  effective 
inducements to them in order to do so. So while people will need to be productive for longer in order to 
adjust to longer life expectancy, it will hopefully be not only more feasible, but also more rewarding, for 
them to expend their energies in that fashion.  
Second, because increasing longevity will likely mean  an ever-increasing focus on the adequacy of 
assets, rates of return (and, one trusts, risk), it surely follows that there will also be more attention paid 
to the fee structure of the service providers in the funds management and advising businesses. For 
fund managers, the era of high nominal yields on many assets disguised the fee structure – just as 
high inflation distorted a great many price signals in the economy. When yields are lower, and people 
have a keener appreciation of the importance of the earnings on their savings, fees are more visible. 
Those offering advice, who usually (and rightly) point out to people the power of compound interest, 
   5/6 
will  surely  see  people  concerned  about  that  power  being  weakened  through  a  long  flow  of 
commissions. One can easily imagine the fees for financial advice and managing funds being of more 
community interest than the fees on bank accounts. This will be a challenge for the industry.  
Conclusion  
The phenomenon of ageing is one of the key long-run developments our society faces. To the extent 
that it reflects greater longevity, there is no reason to fear it (though of course declining fertility, if it 
proceeded far enough, would bring much bigger concerns). We simply need to adjust to it. To date 
much  discussion  has,  understandably,  been  focussed  on  the  impacts  on  government  finances.  As 
important as they are, participants in private financial markets should also take an interest. Financial 
arrangements will be able to adapt to the needs of an ageing population, I expect, but they will adapt 
more smoothly if we have some realistic discussion of the issues.  
I am sure that this will provide business opportunities of one form or another for the more alert and 
innovative  market  participants,  including  in  the  financial  planning  industry.  I  wish  you  well  in  your 
deliberations here today, and in your future efforts to serve the community. 
   6/6 
