Guy Quaden: The National Bank of Belgium - a century and a half of Belgian 
and European history 
Introductory statement by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at a symposium 
on the history of the National Bank of Belgium, Brussels, 22 November 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When  Belgium  celebrated  its  175th  anniversary,  the  National  Bank  naturally  joined  in.  Thus,  we 
sponsored  an  exhibition  on  “La  Belgique  visionnaire”,  and  today  we  are  publishing  a  book  on  the 
history of the Bank, together with a set of detailed articles on the period 1940–1971.  The history of the 
Bank is closely intertwined with that of the Belgian State. However, while the Kingdom of Belgium is 
celebrating its 175th anniversary this year, the Bank is only –might I say – celebrating its 155th birthday. 
During the first twenty years of Belgium’s existence, banknotes were issued by several private banks, 
mainly the Société Générale, founded in 1822 under the Orangist regime, and its principal rival, the 
Banque de Belgique, established in 1835. 
The financial crisis of 1848 led to the imposition of the ‘compulsory rate’ – i.e. the suspension of the 
right to exchange banknotes for precious metals  – and paralysis of the discount credit system. 
At  this  time,  a  young,  dynamic  politician,  Walthère  Frère-Orban,  was  appointed  as  Minister 
of Finance.  Drawing radical conclusions from the situation, he took action against the two big mixed 
banks  which  were  monopolising  financial  power  in  the  country.  He  forced  them  to  amend  their 
statutes,  renouncing  their  right  of  issue  together  with  certain  discount  activities  in  favour  of  a  new 
institution, the National Bank. By way of consolation, when the National Bank was launched, the two 
big  banks  became  the  sole  shareholders  in  the  new  company,  established  in  the  form  of  a  private 
limited liability company. 
All the same, at the time of its establishment the National Bank was not the mere puppet of the big 
private  banks.  Thus,  the  Governor,  the  linchpin  of  the  system,  was  appointed  by  the  King  and  the 
Government also nominated a Commissioner, making the institution different from its counterparts in 
neighbouring countries. In return for the right of issue, the State also received a substantial part of the 
Bank’s revenue. 
The National Bank has never been quite like other financial institutions or limited companies. 
Minister  Frère-Orban,  addressing  parliament  in  1850,  made  the  following  statement  which  I  have 
sometimes  had  occasion  to  repeat  in  recent  years:  “Que  voulons-nous  en  instituant  une  Banque ?  
Nous  voulons,  non  pas  donner  des  bénéfices  à  des  particuliers,  non  pas  enrichir  des  actionnaires, 
mais nous instituons une banque dans l'intérêt public, dans l'intérêt général”.(What is our intention in 
setting  up  a  Bank?  We  do  not  want  to  give  profits  to  individuals,  nor  do  we  want  to  enrich 
shareholders; we are establishing a Bank in the public interest, in the general interest). 
Like  the  other  central  banks  of  the  day,  however,  the  Bank  did  combine  functions  in  the  public 
interest with commercial activities. The book being published today describes the long and sometimes 
bumpy road, leading from the issuing and discount institution created in the mid 19th century to the 
modern central bank which the National Bank of Belgium gradually became in the course of the 20th 
century. 
Over the years, the Bank underwent a metamorphosis, shaped by developments in the monetary and 
financial system, changing attitudes towards the role of government in economic life, and changes in 
the  international  context.  It  gradually  phased  out  its  commercial  activities,  becoming  increasingly 
public in character, especially just before and just after World War II. And the Bank’s activities became 
international in scope. 
Nowadays,  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  performs  its  functions  as  a  modern  central  bank  within  a 
European  context:  issuing  banknotes,  defining  and  implementing  monetary  policy,  managing  the 
official foreign exchange reserves, overseeing the payment systems and contributing to the stability of 
the financial sector. The Bank has been a member of the Eurosystem ever since it was launched in 
1999. 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
The National Bank of Belgium has always been pro-European. In accordance with our country’s motto, 
we believe that in union there is strength. At the National Bank of Belgium we are not at all nostalgic 
for  a  monetary  sovereignty  which  has  in  any  case  become  illusory  in  highly  integrated  small  and 
medium-sized  economies.  The  switch  to  a  single  monetary  policy,  decided  on  by  the  Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank, has not meant any loss of monetary power for Belgium. Quite 
the reverse. In reality, since the day when the Government and the Bank decided, fifteen years ago, to 
peg the Belgian franc to the most stable European currency, Belgium was in reality already importing 
its monetary policy from Frankfurt. The difference is that, while our monetary policy is still decided in 
Frankfurt, the decisions are now taken around a table where at least one Belgian has a say. 
Furthermore, the Eurosystem - comprising the European Central Bank and the national central banks 
of the twelve countries which have so far adopted the euro - is an unprecedented structure governed 
by  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  and  having  no  equivalent  in  the  world  of  central  banks.  The 
implementation  of  the  monetary  policy  is  decentralised.  And,  in  the  analysis  of  each  country’s 
situation,  in  dealings  with  the  financial  players,  and  in  communication  with  the  general  public,  the 
member central banks, being closer to their own particular country, retain a supreme role. 
Finally, it is unusual for modern central banks to be purely central banks. They are also businesses 
providing services for the government, the financial world and the population in general. However, the 
National Bank of Belgium differs from many of its colleagues in the diversity of the public service tasks 
entrusted  to  it  by  the  legislature.  For  example,  in  Belgium  the  Bank  is  the  main  centre  for  the 
collection,  processing  and  analysis  of  economic  data,  covering  both  the  national  accounts  and  the 
financial  and  social  balance  sheets  of  businesses,  as  well  as  consumer  credit.  In  view  of  its 
acknowledged expertise, its commercial neutrality, its sense of the public interest and its autonomy, 
further reinforced recently by the Maastricht Treaty, the Bank is regularly called upon to cater for new 
needs of Belgian society. 
In the Maastricht Treaty, the European States in fact opted for the model of a European central bank 
and  national  central  banks  with  a  high  degree  of  independence.  Under  this  arrangement,  once  the 
central bankers have been appointed and recognised by the political authority, they act in accordance 
with their own instincts and conscience, without seeking or receiving instructions, taking the decisions 
which they consider best suited to the attainment of the objectives assigned to them by the European 
treaty and by national law. 
Most people believe that such a system is the best way of ensuring the credibility and effectiveness of 
monetary policy; in particular, it makes it possible to keep risk premiums to a minimum and to maintain 
relatively  low  interest  rates.  But  this  increased  autonomy  also  implies  that  we  are  under  greater 
obligations, of which I am particularly well aware. 
First, there is the obligation to keep a closer watch than ever on the objectivity and impartiality of our 
analyses,  decisions  and  recommendations.   And  there  is  the  obligation  to  render  account  for  our 
actions,  to  be  tireless  in  our  efforts  to  explain  and  where  possible  persuade,  because  the  ultimate 
foundation of the independence of the central banks is not a law, nor even a treaty, but the support of 
the people concerned for the objectives pursued and the measures which they devise. 
Similarly, I am also glad that the Bank’s Council of Regency has been retained, even if it has finally 
lost all monetary power.  It provides an irreplaceable opportunity for dialogue between the officials of 
the central bank and the experts representing Belgian society in general. 
The Bank gave responsibility for the publications being presented today not only to some of its own 
staff,  but  also  to  teams  of  experienced  economists  and  historians:  that  is,  in  its  own way,  a  further 
illustration of our desire for objectivity and neutrality. 
I would like to express our thanks to the various authors. I would also like to express my gratitude and 
that  of  my  colleagues  to  our  predecessors  at  the  head  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium.  Like  any 
human endeavour, the history of the Bank is certainly not without its imperfections. But overall, that 
history  has  been  distinguished  and  fruitful.  The  Bank  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the 
economic  development  and  financial  stability  of  Belgium.  It  has  also  always  been  a  steadfast 
supporter of international monetary cooperation, and particularly of European monetary unification. 
In the new context created not only by the changeover to the euro, but also by the spread of the new 
technologies and the concentration taking place in the commercial financial sector, we are striving to 
fulfil  our  aim  of  being  a  modern  central  bank,  increasingly  capable  of  meeting  the  expectations  of 
Belgian society and taking our place on the European and international stage. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As I said on the occasion of the celebrations marking the Bank’s 150th anniversary in 2000: we are 
proud of the Bank’s past and we are ambitious for its future. 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 3
