Davíð Oddsson: The Central Bank of Iceland’s commitment to price stability 
Speech by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
a seminar organised by the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavik, 5 December 2005. 
 On December 2, 2005 the Central Bank of Iceland raised its policy interest rate by 0.25 percentage 
points before last weekend. I do not expect that decision came as a surprise. Some people may well 
have  read  into  what  the  Bank  wrote  in  connection  with  the  policy  rate  hike  in  September  that  the 
increase this time would be greater, by 0.50 or even 0.75 percentage points. No such decisions were 
embodied in those writings, although the Bank made a clear commitment that it takes its mandatory 
role seriously and would not flinch at following it with full force. Those declarations stand firm. 
Monetary Bulletin, which was published on the Central Bank’s website last Friday, includes a detailed 
account of the Bank’s assessment of economic and monetary developments and prospects, and the 
arguments underpinning its decision to raise the policy interest rate now. 
The scenario that we faced on September 27 has changed in several ways. Uncertainty about wage 
settlements has been dispelled, although admittedly at considerable cost. The consumer price index 
fell somewhat at the last measurement. House price inflation has slowed down and there are signs 
that a turning point has been reached. Credit institutions are now proceeding more cautiously in their 
lending to this sector and interest rate terms are changing. Oil prices seem to be stabilising, and in 
spite of mounting labour market pressures, wage drift has been contained. The Central Bank’s policy 
rate hike is beginning to spread through the economy; monetary policy is transmitted with an inherent 
lag  in  all  cases,  and  this  has  even  been  exaggerated  by  Iceland’s  unique  economic  conditions  at 
present.  The  most  important  change  in  the  wake  of  the  September  policy  hike,  however,  was  that 
indexed bond yields began to rise at last. It was vital for monetary policy to begin to have an effect in 
the  parts  of  the  economy  which  showed  the  clearest  signs  of  overheating,  i.e.  soaring  private 
consumption growth. 
Although all these points represent an interesting and positive development, on their own they do not 
justify changing the policy that the Central Bank has been pursuing. Substantial pressures still exist in 
the economy, demand is buoyant and there are undeniably sizeable imbalances. These factors must 
be seen in context. While recent information on the short-term outlook should obviously be observed, it 
is even more vital to look at indicators for longer-term developments.  
In effect the Central Bank has no other option – like God’s mills, the Bank’s instruments grind slowly, 
but grind exceedingly well, if patience and foresightedness guide the way. The Central Bank has made 
no secret that the current strength of the króna is not sustainable in the long run. An important change 
this  autumn  and  so  far  this  winter  has  been  large-scale  issues  of  króna-denominated  bonds  in 
international  markets.  In  particular,  these  issues  are  driven  by  the  wide  interest-rate  differential 
between Iceland and other developed countries. The current Monetary Bulletin attempts to analyse the 
impact  of  these  issues,  including  a  separate  article  dedicated  to  this  topic.  Their  impact  can  be 
positive. For example, it can lead to more efficient foreign exchange and securities markets in Iceland, 
thereby  benefiting  domestic  economic  developments.  However,  the  issues  can  also  –  at  least 
temporarily  –  create  uncertainty  about  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  even  intensify  its 
impact effect through the exchange rate channel. Such a pass-through hits export sectors hard, while 
doing little to subdue private consumption growth.  
One standard assumption underlying the inflation forecast published in the current Monetary Bulletin is 
that the policy rate will remain unchanged from the day of forecast. On the basis of this scenario, the 
Board of Governors decided to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points. The Central Bank’s 
monetary policy over the medium term will need to ensure that the exchange rate adjustment which 
appears inevitable in the long run does not result in a higher rate of inflation than is compatible with 
the target. A tight monetary stance will be required to do so, for as long as capacity and labour market 
pressures  pose  inflationary  threats.  Furthermore,  a  sufficiently  wide  interest-rate  differential  with 
abroad must be maintained to contribute to a smooth exchange rate adjustment. 
The  surge  in  house  price  inflation  has  reached  a  peak.  If  the  króna  remains  relatively  strong  and 
stable, goods prices are also quite likely to fall. Thus the outlook is for a slowdown in the inflation rate 
in the coming months, not least because the depreciation of the króna this year has only been passed 
BIS Review 82/2005 
 1
on to the domestic price level to a limited extent. If the housing market cools more quickly than the 
Central Bank forecasts, house price inflation is likely to slow down even more sharply than is currently 
expected.  Foreseeable  exchange  rate  developments,  an  ongoing  surge  in  private  consumption  and 
greater-than-expected rises in unit labour costs, however, will outweigh these factors in the long run. 
The Central Bank has repeatedly cautioned against ideas that the inevitable difficulties accompanying 
a  tight  monetary  policy  can  be  avoided  by  abandoning  the  inflation  target  temporarily,  or  “letting 
inflation through”, as it has sometimes been called. This is an unrealistic option. Such a volte-face in 
Central  Bank  policy  would  immediately  push  up  inflation  expectations,  fuel  even  higher  wage 
increases and catalyse a depreciation of the króna and more inflation. Ultimately the policy rate would 
need to be raised by even more to bring inflation back down. Businesses and households would suffer 
more rather than less from such a policy. Nor should it be forgotten that a large share of household 
and business debt is either price-indexed or exchange rate-linked. Due to this distinctive feature of the 
Icelandic  financial  system,  even  the  short-term  benefits  to  households  and  business  from  a  more 
accommodative monetary stance could prove to be minimal or even negative. 
However, a tight fiscal policy can contribute to a softer landing. Buoyant demand and soaring business 
profits have generated revenues for the Treasury this year far in excess of forecasts. A similar position 
could be on the cards in 2006. It is vital for both central and local government authorities to respond to 
this boost in revenues not by easing their restraint on the expenditure side, but rather by planning to 
achieve  increased  surpluses,  which  appears  to  be  the  aim  behind  the  budget  currently  before 
Parliament. 
As announced recently, a change will be made to monetary policy implementation whereby interest 
decisions  will  be  made  on  six  fixed,  preannounced  dates  next  year.  Three  will  coincide  with  the 
publication of Monetary Bulletin. On all these dates, the Board of Governors will announce its decision 
at  a  press  conference,  irrespective  of  whether  the  policy  rate  is  changed  or  not,  together  with 
supporting  arguments.  This  change  will  make  monetary  policy  even  more  transparent.  The  Central 
Bank can thereby be said to have increased its formal interest rate decision dates from four to six, 
because  the  publication  dates  for  Monetary  Bulletin  were  already  recognised  as  such  in  effect. 
Nonetheless, the Board of Governors can of course decide to change interest rates in between the 
preannounced dates if this is considered justified. The first formal interest rate decision date next year 
will be Thursday, January 26. 
Icelandic economic conditions at any given time broadly correspond to what is going on elsewhere in 
the world. However, occasional tasks can differ and call for specific measures. This is what we see 
from the Central Bank of Iceland’s policy rate at the moment. It is not reflected anywhere else. The 
explanation is that the picture in Iceland is unique, and maintaining a low and stable inflation rate in 
the current climate would widely be thought an ambitious aim.  
First, the largest single investment programme in Iceland’s history is now under way, and Landsvirkjun 
and its foreign business partners are by no means the only investors planning major projects.  
Second,  we  are  simultaneously  experiencing  the  largest-ever  overseas  expansion  of  the  Icelandic 
banking system, which has accumulated foreign debt on an unprecedented scale with accompanying 
capital inflows.  
Third, the Icelandic credit market has been sharply transformed, with an open invitation for everyone 
to join in.  
Fourth, tax cuts have been implemented or announced for the coming months. And to add the icing to 
the  cake,  wage  earners  are  compensated  for  the  inflation  caused  by  the  broad  rise  in  their  house 
prices which has taken place at no cost to them.  
This is the climate in which we aim to ensure that medium-term inflation will obey the principles set for 
it in the Central Bank Act and the joint declaration by the Central Bank and Government of Iceland. 
This  must  surely  be  considered  an  ambitious  goal.  Sizeable  imbalances  can  be  seen  in  the  global 
economy. The massive US current account deficit is eating up a large share of total global saving at 
present. Managed exchange rates elsewhere, for example in China, delay markets in responding to 
this  problem.  Economists  claim  that  a  change  is  inevitable,  and  the  later  that  it  comes,  the  more 
upheaval  it  will  cause  when  it  eventually  does.  As  far  as  Iceland  is  concerned,  however,  external 
conditions  have  been  favourable  so  far.  It  enjoys  high  creditworthiness  and  wide  open  access  to 
markets. Interest rates have been low and product prices high, making the strong position of the króna 
– which will not last forever – much easier than otherwise for many to weather. But we need to make 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2005
sure that favourable external conditions in most areas do not become a fundamental precondition for 
our own success.  
In my opinion – after only a few weeks at the Central Bank of Iceland –one of the main reasons that its 
management is employed there is to pay particular attention to risks in the economy. I shall mention 
the  following illustration.  Of  course  it  is  perfectly  normal  for progressive and  rapidly  growing  banks, 
which feel constrained by the small size of the Icelandic market, to be eager for foreign capital in their 
efforts to expand and reap profits. The financial system infrastructure and all the criteria assessed by 
supervisory authorities and ratings agencies are in excellent shape. All markets should therefore stand 
open to Icelandic banks for the foreseeable future. However. it is not necessarily certain that these 
important preconditions will be the only factors at work at any given time. They do so while market 
conditions  are  normal  but  markets  can  be  volatile,  especially  in  a  climate  of  global  economic 
imbalances.  The  US  economy  is  very  buoyant  and  dynamic  at  present.  This  is  to  be  welcomed. 
However, other signs are less encouraging: a low level of saving, a wide fiscal deficit and a current 
account deficit that repeatedly hits record levels. Europe has still not recovered and the recent rise in 
the ECB minimum lending rate has been harshly criticised by those concerned about stagnation and 
growing unemployment. All these aspects of our environment call for normal caution to be exercised, 
not  least  against  the  background  of  such  rapidly  growing  and  increasingly  prominent  forays  by 
Icelandic  financial  institutions  in  the  international  capital  markets.  Under  such  conditions  we  can 
endorse the comment by my colleague, the Governor of the Central Bank of Denmark, who said a few 
days ago that it was just as important to observe the speed limit in economic policy as on the roads.  
Now  I  would like  to  allow  myself  a  few  words  about  housing  issues.  It  is  definitely  easy  to  make a 
reasonable case that the Government could have considered the matter more carefully when it made 
radical changes to its housing policy at the onset of the upswing in 2003, and that it would have been 
more prudent to postpone them until the boom came to an end. (I presume people realise which Prime 
Minister this criticism is levelled at). But there are even stronger arguments for claiming that, in spite of 
the  questionable  timing,  this  represented  a  very  positive  reform  to  the  housing  system  framework, 
which  the  Government  can  be  proud  of.  However,  the  response  by  the  banking  system  certainly 
caught the Government by surprise. As things have developed, this is now a secondary consideration. 
The banks’ response rendered the housing system in its old form virtually obsolete overnight, whether 
we like it or not. 
Mortgage interest rates are admittedly still high in Iceland. That is by no means the most interesting 
point in the current debate, however. Access to credit and finance terms for buying or building housing 
in  Iceland  have  never  been  better.  But it  seems  obvious  that  a  large  part  of  the  banking  system  is 
probably subsidising its own mortgage lending at the moment. Of course this may be a deliberate risk 
taken in the faith that, since such lending is long-term, lenders will eventually reap handsome profits 
when interest rates move into line with those in other countries. Disregarding such speculation, the 
competitive position in the housing market is clearly untenable when one player enjoys the same credit 
rating  as  the  sovereign,  does  not  pay  fees  for  its  Treasury  guarantees  and  is  exempt  from  various 
charges levied upon its rivals. It is quite true that the credit institutions already knew this when they 
aggressively intensified their participation in the mortgage market. But as I said, this is a secondary 
consideration now and the task ahead must be to normalise these arrangements as soon as possible.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Since becoming Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I have now moved 
to a part of Icelandic society that attracts words of concern and caution from all directions. And I have 
a feeling that it is a sensible arrangement to assign such a role to a single body – but it must have the 
capability to assess the position and respond correctly. I hope that the Central Bank of Iceland is in 
such a position. It is certainly true that the Central Bank plays the same sort of role in an economic 
upswing as an air traffic controller, paying more attention to the landing than to the takeoff. But it is not 
true, as is sometimes implied, that the Bank does not care whether this landing will be a hard or a soft 
one.  
BIS Review 82/2005 
 3
