Jean-Claude Trichet: The eurosystem and the integration of european financial 
markets  
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 50th Anniversary 
of ACI – The Financial Markets Association, Paris, 28 October 2005. 
 1.  
Introduction  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I accepted with pleasure the invitation to speak to you today on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of 
ACI – The Financial Markets Association.  
First of all, I would like to congratulate your association – fifty years is an impressive length of time. 
The  anniversary  prompts  us  to  look  back  in  time.  When  I  think  back  to  the  1950s,  the  year  1952 
immediately comes to mind. It was the year when the European Union started out as the European 
Coal  and  Steel  Community.  As  we  know,  the  idea  at  that  time  was  to  better  preserve  peace  by 
bringing  together  under  a  common  European  roof,  with  rules  that  were  binding  for  all  participating 
countries, those resources that had been decisive for the conduct of wars – coal and steel.  
Encouraged by their success, the European countries decided to also integrate other sectors of their 
economies  in  order  to  form  a  common  market.  In  the  course  of  time,  other  countries  joined  the 
European Union – as it has been called since the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 – encompassing today 25 
countries.  
Key milestones have been successfully reached during these years. As President of the ECB, let me 
in particular highlight the fact that the euro indeed acted as a strong catalyst for the further integration 
of European financial markets. On the side of the ACI, allow me to mention that you founded in 1999, 
at the time of the launch of the euro, the Euribor ACI, which has since then led several initiatives – and 
I will later address some of them – that foster financial integration in Europe and in particular in the 
euro area.  
This is actually the topic I would like to address today: European financial integration.  
I  have  organised  my  remarks  along  the  following  main  lines.  I  will  first  explain  the  Eurosystem’s 
interest in European financial integration. Then I will mention different kinds of activity conducted by 
the  Eurosystem  that  contribute  to  enhancing  European  financial  integration.  I  will  today  focus  on  a 
particular financial market, namely the money market, and on a particular kind of Eurosystem activity, 
namely  our  possible  role  to  act  as  a  catalyst  for  private-sector  activities  to  foster  the  integration  of 
European  financial  markets.  Such  initiatives  involve  close  collaboration  with  market  participants, 
among them the ACI and the Euribor ACI.  
The Eurosystem’s interest in European financial integration 
2.  
The Eurosystem’s interest in European financial integration is founded on three basic reasons. 
First, the financial system is used for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area, which is the 
basic task assigned to the Eurosystem under the Treaty establishing the European Community (“the 
Treaty”).1  A  well-integrated  financial  system  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of 
monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area. 
Second,  financial  integration  has  implications  for  the  Eurosystem’s  task  of  safeguarding  financial 
stability in the euro area and the EU, as laid down in the Treaty.2 The pursuit of financial integration 
                                                      
1  
In accordance with Articles 4 (2), 105 (1) and 105 (2) of the Treaty, the primary objective of the definition and conduct of the 
single monetary policy, which is a basic task of the Eurosystem, shall be to maintain price stability. 
2   Article 105 (5) of the Treaty sets out the statutory tasks of the Eurosystem to “contribute to the smooth conduct of policies 
pursued  by  the  competent  authorities  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the  stability  of  the 
financial system.” 
   1/6 
can  have  very  beneficial  effects  on  financial  stability  as  more  integrated  financial  markets  could 
provide  the  necessary  conditions  for  the  smoother  absorption  of  financial  shocks.  It  may  also  help 
financial institutions to better manage and diversify their risks and realise economies of scale, which 
may,  in  turn,  lead  to  greater  efficiency.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  necessary  to  closely  monitor  the 
profound changes in the nature of financial stability challenges due to the structural transformation of 
the financial system, including intensified cross-border links.  
Third,  financial  integration  can  generally  help  to  promote  the  development  of  financial  markets, 
institutions and infrastructures, thereby helping to support economic activity and to raise the potential 
for economic growth. According to the Treaty, the Eurosystem shall “without prejudice to the objective 
of price stability, […] support the general economic policies in the Community”.3 The Eurosystem is 
fully  committed  to  supporting  the  general  economic  policies  of  the  Community,  with  a  view  to 
contributing to the achievement of its objectives. This includes financial integration, which is a priority 
Community  objective.  I  recall  in  this  respect  the  findings  of  a  recent  study  that  quantified  the  
macro-economic impact of the integration of European bond and equity markets.4 The study found that 
such financial integration would result in additional EU GDP growth of around 1% - i.e. around EUR 
100 billion – over a ten-year period.  
On a more general note, I would like to recall another principle laid down in the Treaty that states that 
the  Eurosystem  “shall  act  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free 
competition,  favouring  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources”.5  This  also  determines  the  Eurosystem’s 
view  that  financial  integration  is  first  and  foremost  a  market-driven  process.  In  addition  to  this,  the 
Eurosystem sees it as a basic task of public authorities to create a framework conducive to fostering 
financial  integration.  If  the  opportunities  thus  created  have  been  exploited  by  market  forces,  true 
financial integration will have been achieved and its benefits can be reaped. 
The Eurosystem’s contribution to fostering European financial integration 
3.  
As we see it, the basic task of public authorities with regard to the process of financial integration is to 
create a framework whereby, generally speaking, all potential market participants in a given financial 
instruments or services market are subject to a single set of rules when they decide to deal with those 
financial instruments or services, have equal access to this set of financial instruments or services and 
are treated equally when they operate in the market.  
The Eurosystem generally distinguishes between four types of activity through which it contributes to 
fostering financial integration.  
First,  we  provide  central  banking  services  that  are  conducive  to  European  financial  integration.  An 
example of this is the TARGET system that we run, which today handles around 90% of large-value 
euro payment traffic. TARGET is one of the two largest wholesale payment systems in the world, the 
other  being  Fedwire  in  the  United  States.  TARGET2  –  the  launch  of  the  single  shared  platform  is 
planned for November 20076 – will foster financial integration even more. TARGET2 will enable the 
provision of a harmonised level of services across Europe, supported by a single technical platform 
and  a  single  price  structure  for  domestic  and  cross-border  payments,  and  it  will  have  new 
functionalities for banks to better integrate their euro liquidity management. 
Second, we give advice on shaping the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system. 
As an example, I would like to mention the Eurosystem’s contribution to the European Commission’s 
consultation on the priorities for financial services policy over the next five years.7 In this contribution, 
the Eurosystem expresses its support to the key policy orientations of the Green Paper which focuses 
                                                      
3   See Article 105 (1) of the Treaty. 
4   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
5   See Article 105 (1) of the Treaty. 
6   See  under  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/target2progressreport200510en.pdf  (Second  progress  report  on  TARGET2, 
ECB press release dated 21 October 2005). 
7   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecgreenpaperfinancialservicespolicy2005en.pdf 
   2/6 
on the consolidation and consistent implementation of the legislative framework for financial services 
to  be  achieved  by  exploiting  the  potential  of  the  existing  institutional  set-up  and  by  a  profound 
assessment – both ex ante and ex post – of new legislative initiatives. The Eurosystem also supports 
the strands of action suggested by the Commission in the area of financial regulation and supervision, 
in particular the importance attached to the objective of rationalising the existing regulatory framework 
and the pursuit of supervisory convergence.  
Third,  we  try  to  enhance  knowledge  and  raise  awareness  of  the  state  of  and  need  for  European 
financial integration, and we measure the progress made towards its achievement.  
And  fourth,  we  can  act  as  a  catalyst  for  private-sector  activities  by  facilitating  collective  action  and 
assisting with possible coordination problems.  
I would like to concentrate more particularly on these last two kinds of activity, namely measuring the 
state of financial integration and acting as a catalyst for private-sector activities.  
The integration of European financial markets and selected examples of fostering it 
4.  
The basic starting point for any possible action is to first assess the state of affairs in order to gather 
the  evidence  upon  which  the  decision  to  undertake  a  certain  activity  can  be  based.  For  a  financial 
instrument or financial service, a price normally exists, so one can use quantitative indicators, based 
on  the  law  of  one  price,  to  measure  the  degree  of  integration.  In  this  respect,  let  me  draw  your 
attention to the ECB’s report on “Indicators of financial integration in the euro area” that was published 
at the end of last month.8
This report provides an assessment of the degree of financial integration in the main segments of the 
euro area financial market, covering the money market, the government and corporate bond markets, 
the equity market and banking markets. I should also like to point out that while this first report, which 
covers  financial  and  banking  markets,  already  focuses  on  important  dimensions  of  the  financial 
system, the coverage of the indicators will be further developed; in particular, it is envisaged to add 
indicators  of  the  underlying  factors  of  integration  related  to  financial  institutions  and  market 
infrastructures. 
The  ECB  report  provides,  on  the  basis  of  20  quantitative  indicators,  an  overall  assessment  of  the 
degree of financial integration in the main financial market segments. It is shown that the degree of 
integration differs from market segment to market segment, with integration being more advanced in 
those market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy. Today, I will indeed concentrate 
on the most integrated market, namely the money market, and I would like to refer you to the report for 
our assessment of the other financial markets.  
As regards the money market, the various indicators presented in the ECB report measure financial 
integration based on the dispersion of lending rates – namely overnight rates, unsecured lending rates 
and repo rates – offered by banks in euro area countries, with the data referring to actual transactions 
or rates offered by EONIA, EURIBOR and EUREPO panel banks.  
Also the different segments of the money market show different degrees of integration.  
The unsecured interbank market has, since shortly after the introduction of the euro, been integrated 
to a nearly perfect extent. In fact, our indicators display a euro area cross-country standard deviation 
for the overnight maturity of around 3 basis points shortly after the start of 1999 and only around one 
basis point by today. As a comparison to these impressive figures, just recall that one year before the 
start  of  monetary  union,  in  January  1998,  the  cross-country  standard  deviation  of  the  average 
overnight lending rates among euro area countries still stood at more than 130 basis points.  
As a first example of the Eurosystem’s contributions to fostering financial integration by acting as a 
catalyst for private-sector activities, I would like to mention the ECB’s calculation and publication of the 
EONIA rate. The technical definition and the procedures for the calculation of the EONIA rate were 
defined by market participants through a series of market conventions. The EONIA rate is a concrete 
                                                      
8   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/indicatorsfinancialintegration200509en.pdf 
   3/6 
example how market participants play an important role in fostering financial integration through the 
adoption of market conventions, facilitated by the ECB acting as a catalyst. 
A consistent picture of a highly integrated unsecured money market is also painted by the indicators 
for  the  maturities  longer  than  overnight.  Both  the  cross-country  standard  deviation  of  EURIBOR 
lending rates among euro area countries for the one-month and for the 12-month maturity stood even 
below one basis point shortly after the introduction of the euro and remained stable thereafter. This 
compares with the respective values in January 1998, i.e. one year before the start of monetary union, 
of more than 100 basis points for the one-month rates and of around 50 basis points for the 12-month 
rates.  
The growing repo market is still somewhat less integrated than the unsecured segment, but integration 
is  progressing.  The  creation  of  the  EUREPO  index  –  the  benchmark  for  secured  money  market 
transactions  in  the  euro  area  –  in  2002  was  an  important  market  initiative  to  further  promote  the 
integration of the repo market. Our indicators for the integration of the repo market reveal that the euro 
area  cross-country  standard  deviation  of  the  one-month  EUREPO  rates  was  around,  and  normally 
below,  one  basis  point  and  today  stands  at  around  0.5  basis  point.  The  indicator  for  the  12-month 
EUREPO rates shows larger movements, in part reflecting the lower liquidity of this market. Still, with a 
standard deviation always below 2.5 basis points, and today standing at around 1.5 basis points, the 
indicators  suggest  that  there  is  a  relatively  high  degree  of  integration  also  in  the  euro  area  repo 
market.  
The major role of the euro in enhancing financial market integration is also visible in the interest rate 
derivatives markets. The total of euro interest rate OTC derivatives contracts reaches a daily turnover 
of around EUR 380 billion, thereby being larger than the US dollar segment, with a daily turnover of 
around EUR 290 billion.9 A particularly important part of this is the euro interest rate swap market, with 
a daily turnover of almost EUR 250 billion. It is the largest interest rate swap market in the world, i.e. 
also  larger  than  the  equivalent  US  dollar  segment  that  has  a  daily  turnover  of  around  EUR  160 
billion.10 Let me in this respect also highlight the success of the euro overnight index swap market, 
where contracts are exchanged in which one party pays a fixed rate of interest for the duration of the 
contract, while the other party pays an average of the overnight EONIA rate realised over the period. 
The launch, conducted jointly by Euribor FBE (European Banking Federation) and Euribor ACI, of the 
EONIA Swap Index in June this year is evidence of both the importance and the further potential of 
this market segment. 
I now turn to the least integrated money market segment, namely the one for short-term securities. 
Compared  with  the  equivalent  US  commercial  paper  market,  which  has  an  outstanding  amount  of 
around EUR 1.3 trillion, the aggregate size of the commercial paper and certificates of deposit markets 
in Europe is around EUR 0.8 trillion.11 In addition, while the US market is integrated, the short-term 
securities  markets  in  Europe  continue  to  be  segmented,  with  de  facto  several  markets  based  in 
several market places. Issuers and investors in the European short-term paper markets are therefore 
confronted with reduced depth and liquidity, and they have less diversification opportunities than in the 
US. 
The Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative, which was set up and is being led by ACI – The 
Financial Markets Association, aims to overcome such fragmentation and to promote the development 
of a pan-European short-term paper market. STEP specifically aims to promote the convergence of 
the standards and practices prevailing in the European short-term securities markets through market 
players’  voluntary  compliance  with  the  standards  set  out  in  the  STEP  Market  Convention,  which 
covers  aspects  like  information  disclosure,  documentation,  settlement,  and  the  provision  of  data  for 
the production of STEP statistics. 
Since May this year, the European Banking Federation has been very fruitfully supporting the ACI in 
the  completion  of  the  preparatory  work.  Moreover,  the  European  Banking  Federation  will  directly 
contribute to the functioning of the STEP market, once in operation.  
                                                      
9   See BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey - Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 (March 2005). 
10   See BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey - Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 (March 2005). 
11   Including instruments issued on European markets, but denominated in currencies other than the euro. 
   4/6 
The promoters are at present finalising the STEP convention and expect to see the first STEP-labelled 
programme in early 2006. 
As with the example of the ECB calculating and publishing the EONIA rate, which I mentioned earlier, 
the ECB has supported the STEP initiative since its inception by acting as a catalyst for private-sector 
activities. Back in 2001, the first discussions on STEP took place at the meetings of the ECB Money 
Market Contact Group. In 2002, the ECB hosted on its website the ACI’s public consultation on the 
first STEP report. And, finally, ECB staff have contributed to the work of the Euribor ACI STEP Task 
Force since its creation. 
The Eurosystem will also provide operational support to the functioning of the STEP market. In July 
2004, the Governing Council of the ECB discussed the recommendations addressed to the European 
System  of  Central  Banks  in  the  final  report  of  the  Euribor  ACI  STEP  Task  Force.  The  Governing 
Council  welcomed  the  STEP  initiative  and  took  a  favourable  attitude  towards  its  aim  to  ease  the 
convergence of standards and to foster the integration of the fragmented European short-term paper 
markets through a market-led initiative. 
Specifically,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  support,  in  principle,  the  activities  pertaining  to  the 
introduction of a STEP label, which will acknowledge the adoption of the STEP standards, for the first 
two years after its launch. The STEP Secretariat, which will be created and managed by the European 
Banking  Federation,  will  perform  the  STEP  labelling  with  the  support  of  the  Eurosystem  and,  in 
particular, of several of its national central banks. Such a technical contribution to the labelling process 
would,  however,  not  lead  to  a  national  central  bank  taking  any  action,  such  as  the  prohibition  or 
suspension  of  issuance,  in  the  event  of  non-compliance  by  an  issuer  with  the  convention’s 
requirements.  In  such  a  case,  the  only  consequence  would  be  that  the  STEP  Secretariat  would 
withdraw the STEP label from the issuance programme in question.  
Moreover, the Governing Council of the ECB decided, subject to a final check regarding the efficiency 
of  the  collection  process,  to  accept  the  request  put  forward  in  the  Euribor  ACI  STEP  Task  Force 
report,  to  produce  and  publish  STEP  statistics  on  yields  and  volumes  on  an  ongoing  basis,  which 
would foster integration and reduce issuers’ costs through greater market transparency. 
I have the pleasure to inform you today that the work of the ECB and the national central banks in this 
respect  is  well  advanced.  Just  a  few  days  ago,  the  Governing  Council  has  approved  the  so-called 
efficiency  check,  i.e.  the  assessment  of  the  costs  and  benefits  related  to  the  production  of  STEP 
statistics, and decided that the Eurosystem will indeed produce such statistics.  
Now, after a long preparatory phase, the urgent priority is to complete the STEP Market Convention, 
which  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  whole  project  and  the  last  step  to  be  overcome  to  achieve  its 
successful completion. I am confident that the promoters of the initiative, foremost the ACI, will find the 
necessary drive to overcome the last technical difficulties in the preparation of this document and will 
successfully  launch  STEP  early  next  year.  This  will  bring  about  the  necessary  integration  and 
development in this market, surpassing the remaining current segmentation between the part of this 
market.  
The success of the STEP initiative will also be proof that market-led initiatives are essential for the 
benefits of integrated financial markets in Europe to be reaped. Furthermore, it should show that self-
regulation – to which the Eurosystem, like yourselves, attaches significant importance – complements 
and  can  even,  in  some  respects,  be  a  substitute  for  public  regulation.  Markets  obviously  do  not 
function  only  on  the  basis  of  public  regulation:  they  also  need  rules  devised  by  the  market  players 
themselves, who know best which standards and business practices would lead to efficient outcomes. 
In view of the potential to realise economies of scale and scope inherent in an integrated European 
financial  market,  the  private  sector  should  accordingly  contribute  to  establish  such  rules  at  the 
European level.  
Market  forces  alone  may  not  always  be  able  to  drive  financial  integration  forward  or  towards  an 
optimal outcome. In areas such as standard setting or the establishment of common infrastructures, 
the cooperation between private agents of the financial sector is as necessary as competition. Also, 
there is still a need for market participants to further develop the coordination of joint interests. Market 
associations, such as the ACI, have an important role to play in this respect.  
The  function  of  a  catalyst  can  help  coordination.  A  central  bank  can  perform  this  role  thanks  to  its 
acknowledged  competence  and  objectivity,  its  direct  participation  in  financial  markets  and  its 
numerous contacts with market participants which ensue from its basic tasks. In fact, I consider the 
   5/6 
catalyst function of the ECB and the Eurosystem in fostering European financial integration to be a 
major responsibility at the current juncture. 
Concluding remarks 
5.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  remarks  by  stressing  that  progress  in  European  financial  integration 
requires an effective interplay between market forces and action by public authorities. 
The  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  prefer  a  market-first  approach  in  this  process,  with  a  significant  role 
given to self-regulation. Examples like the STEP initiative show that the private sector can contribute 
substantially  to  the  integration  of  the  European  financial  system  and  that  the  Eurosystem  supports 
such market-led initiatives.  
While  expressing  my  congratulations 
its  
50th anniversary, I would also like to encourage you all to take up the challenges that lie ahead of us. 
STEP-like initiatives should become a more widely used approach to fostering financial integration in 
Europe. A lot has been achieved, but just as much remains to be done.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
to  ACI  –  The  Financial  Markets  Association  on 
   6/6 
