Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Developing a robust competency framework for the Malaysian 
banking industry 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Industry 
Competency Framework Study Focus Group Discussion, Kuala Lumpur, 6 December 2005. 
 Saya  berasa  amat  bangga  kerana  diberi  peluang  untuk  menyampaikan  sepatah  dua  kata  dan 
seterusnya merasmikan Sesi Wacana Institut Bank-Bank Malaysia. Saya ingin mengucapkan terima 
kasih atas penyertaan anda dalam temu ramah eksekutif yang merupakan input yang amat bernilai 
dalam pembentukan rangka kerja kompetensi industri yang akan dibincangkan hari ini.  
The banking sector will remain the pillar of our financial system, as it evolves to offer more innovative 
financial solutions to meet the changing needs of the economy. The industry however, needs to be 
well positioned in a financial landscape that is continuously being redefined. While new opportunities 
have emerged, there are also new challenges on the horizon. Foremost amongst these is intensified 
competitive  pressures,  spurred  by  financial  liberalisation  and  technological  revolution.  Other 
challenges include the growing demands of customers for differentiated product offerings and value-
added services at more competitive prices, excellent service quality, and superior level of efficiency. 
Strategic  opportunities  also  arise  from  new  growth  areas  and  a  larger  marketplace  as  economic 
integration  regionally  and globally  gather  pace,  driven  by  increasing regional  and  global  trades  and 
investment  flows.  Banking  institutions  must  be  ready  for  the  challenges  and  be  well  equipped  with 
distinct capabilities to take advantage of the opportunities that the new environment accords.  
Banking  is  a  knowledge-intensive,  skills-based  and  relationship-rich  industry.  In  an  increasingly 
complex and a more liberalised environment, the competitiveness of banking institutions will depend 
critically  on  the  quality  of  human  intellectual  capital  and  the  extent  to  which  the  industry  is  able  to 
leverage  on  these  talents.  To  compete  effectively,  banking  institutions  need  professionals  with  the 
requisite skills and expertise not only at the strategic and management level, but also at the technical 
and  operational  level.  Successful  institutions will  be  the  ones which  accord  high  priority  to  effective 
placements,  rewards,  retention  and  most 
the  continuous 
enhancement  of  human  capital.  Lifelong  learning  is  becoming  increasingly  important  in  this 
knowledge-based  economy  where  knowledge  and  skills  need  to  be  continuously  updated  and 
upgraded. At the macro-level, the breadth and depth of skills of the entire financial services workforce 
will increasingly be the defining factor in determining the success in building a more efficient, effective 
and dynamic financial sector. The availability of appropriately trained and competent human resources 
is a critical factor key to support the performance of the industry. In essence, continuous strengthening 
of  intellectual  resources  and  capabilities  must  be  made  to  create  a  larger  pool  of  talents  and  high 
calibre professionals in the banking and finance industry.  
Competence  and  skills  development  have  always  been  an  area  of  focus,  but  it  will  be  even  more 
important  as  we  prepare  our  workforce  for  a  more  challenging  environment,  one  that  is  more 
competitive and more complex. The first step is to build the skills required at the tertiary level to ensure 
that the curriculum at our universities and colleges equip graduates with the relevant knowledge and 
skills that meet the needs of the industry. In this respect, closer cooperation between the industry's 
training institute and the academia will help to develop a new breed of graduates who will be much 
better  prepared  to  enter  the  workplace.  At  the  post-employment  stage,  we  need  incentives  for 
continuous learning and upgrading of skills and an infrastructure that delivers the appropriate training. 
For the development of banking sector workforce, the International Centre for Leadership in Finance 
(ICLIF) was established to pave the way for the development of future leaders in the industry, while 
Institut Bank-Bank Malaysia (IBBM) provides the avenue for competency building among the various 
levels of staff.  
With the onset of financial liberalisation, the traditional lines of business are likely to expand into new 
areas and new business models. As a consequence, the skills requirements have also evolved with 
the  growing  diversity  and  complexity  of  businesses  in  which  banks  are  engaged,  the  increasingly 
sophisticated  customer  needs,  technological  innovation,  and  the  expectations  for  sound  risk 
management.  In  this context,  there  is a  need  to  analyse  the  essential  competencies  for current  job 
functions and to anticipate future skills requirements, with a view to building a competency framework 
for banking and finance that is relevant to the changing financial landscape.  
learning  and 
importantly, 
lifelong 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 1
The development of an industry competency framework seeks to elevate the level of professionalism 
and  competence  in  the  banking  industry  through  appropriate  training  and  certification  programmes. 
For banking institutions, the competency framework will serve as a source of reference and impetus in 
sharpening competencies of staff and enhancing organisational capabilities to meet future challenges. 
The  framework  could  also  provide  a  benchmark  for  performance  measurement  and  recognition  for 
skills improvement. The competency framework will provide the foundation to guide IBBM in designing 
and offering relevant management and technical programmes to meet the current and future needs of 
the  banking  industry.  In  addition,  the  framework  would  assist  academic  institutions  in  aligning  their 
curriculum to meet the industry's needs and to ensure a steady supply of graduates in new growth 
areas.  Competency  standards  set  for  certification  programmes  could  also  serve  as  a  basis  for 
evaluating  and  accrediting  training  providers  to  ensure  the  provision  of  top  quality  training.  For  the 
banking  workforce,  the  framework  provides  a  platform  for  self-assessment  to  be  aware  of  their 
competency  gaps,  and  to  engage  in  continuous  learning  so  as  to  further  their  careers  and  keep  in 
tandem with the new demands.  
The  quality  of  human  capital  will  increasingly  become  the  cutting  edge  of  competitiveness.  Having 
competent staff to deliver high quality products and services is critical to building customer confidence 
and  goodwill,  driving  customer  satisfaction,  enhancing  reputation,  and  ultimately  realising  your 
corporate vision and strategic goals. It is therefore, in the banking institutions' interests to ensure that 
the competence and professionalism of staff in their industry is further strengthened.  
The success in developing a robust industry competency framework requires collaborative endeavours 
among all the parties involved, based on a common vision of an industry which embraces the values 
of  continuous  learning  and  development.  The  industry  competency  framework  is  being  developed 
through a participatory process involving strategic insights and feedback from industry leaders in the 
country and the region. Detailed work is already underway, following the executive interviews which 
you  have  participated.  Your  continued  strong  support,  commitment  and  contributions  will  be 
instrumental in ensuring the success of the industry competency framework.  
With rapid changes taking place in the financial landscape, we need a new generation of professional 
bankers  who  are  more  customer-centric,  technology-savvy,  more  highly  qualified,  flexible  and  agile 
with skill sets that are now more comprehensive than previously. As we prepare ourselves for a more 
challenging environment, the need to build a competent human capital base with high integrity, right 
attitudes and work ethics, as well as to maintain a learning environment could not be overemphasised. 
In realising the goals of a progressive and dynamic financial sector, greater efforts must be directed to 
building  human  intellectual  capital  in  a  continuous  cycle  of  competency  development  and 
enhancement.  
Let me conclude on this note and wish you a most productive discussion session.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 83/2005
