Klaus Liebscher: Financial deregulation in the EU – chances and challenges for 
financial stability 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  to  the  5th  Annual  CSI 
Conference  -  “New  Agenda  of  the  WTO:  Challenge  and  Contribution  of  the  European  Union”, 
Innsbruck, 18 November 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
It was with great pleasure that I accepted your invitation to again take part in the annual conference of 
the  Centre  for  the  Study  of  International  Institutions  (CSI).  I  feel  honoured  that  the  speech  by  the 
Governor  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  has  obviously  become  a  traditional  part  of  this 
conference. 
The liberalisation of trade in goods and services was at the centre of your discussions in the previous 
days. World trade is, after all, the most visible example of global economic integration. As a result of 
numerous  trade  agreements  and  tariff  reductions,  global  exports  have  increased  from  one-tenth  of 
world GDP in the early 1970s to one-quarter of world GDP today.  
A  less  visible,  but  even  more  dynamic  recent  phenomenon  is  global  financial  integration.  Some 
decades ago, the realisation of investment projects depended largely on the availability of capital in 
the local economy. Meanwhile, both fund raising and investment occurs at an international level, which 
can  be  attributed  mainly  to  the  deregulation  of  capital  movements.  In  the  1970s,  worldwide  cross-
border  holdings  of  assets  amounted  to  only  one-tenth  of  world  GDP.  Now,  countries  have 
accumulated foreign assets equivalent to the annual GDP of the entire world.  
Over  the  past  30  years,  annual  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  worldwide  grew  from  around  EUR 
8.5 billion  to  almost  EUR  1  thousand  billion  –  half  of  which  is  provided  by  the  European  corporate 
sector.  At  the  same  time,  half  of  world  FDI  is  invested  in  Europe.  For  Europe,  these  international 
linkages are of particular importance, and they illustrate that regional economic integration does not 
hinder global integration, but foster it. 
Before taking a closer look at the European process of deregulation and integration, let me reflect a 
little on the objectives of financial integration: The integration of national financial markets, which used 
to be subject to entry barriers as well as different national regulations, practices and currencies, aims 
at fueling competition, reducing transaction costs and creating markets which are deeper, more liquid 
and more efficient. Cross-border integration requires the removal of entry barriers, the convergence of 
legal,  supervisory  and  fiscal  conditions  underlying  financial  markets,  the  harmonisation  of  financial 
standards and the creation of common payment, clearing and settlement systems. To a certain extent, 
the geographical dimension of financial market integration is brought about by institutional integration. 
This  comprises  the  cross-border  consolidation  and  expansion  of  financial  institutions,  the  main 
purposes  of  which  are  to  make  use  of  economies  of  scale  and  scope,  and  to  improve  risk 
diversification. 
Let me start with a rundown of the milestones of European financial integration, which began several 
decades ago and is still an ongoing process.  
•  The Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957, contained the basic principles for the creation of a single 
European market for financial services. 
In  1985,  the  Single  Market  Programme  provided  a  general  strategy  based  on  minimum 
harmonisation of standards, a “single passport” and the mutual recognition of a financial firm’s 
licence obtained in one EU member state. 
In  1987,  the  Single  European  Act  entered  into  force  with  the  aim  of  establishing  a  single 
European market including free movement of capital. 
  •  From 1999 onwards, European financial integration gathered additional momentum with the 
introduction of the euro and the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). The adoption of the 
single  currency  eliminated  currency  risk  for  the  Member  States of  the  euro  area and  at  the 
same  time  made  it  easier  for  borrowers  and  investors  to  take  advantage  of  borrowing  and 
investment opportunities within the euro area. The purpose of the FSAP was to complete by 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 1
2005  the  legal  framework  enabling  the  effective  exercise  of  market  freedoms  in  financial 
services throughout the European Union. 
•  The  Lisbon  Agenda,  launched  in  2000,  gave  further  stimulus  to  the  integration  process  by 
enhancing structural reforms in order to increase competitiveness. 
What  has  been  achieved  so  far  with  respect  to  European  financial  integration?  To  answer  this 
question, I am referring to a new report published by the ECB with the aim of monitoring the progress 
of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Both  this  report  and  the  European  Commission’s  Financial 
Integration  Monitor  for  2004  point  out  that  the  integration  of  financial  markets  has  deepened 
considerably in the recent past, but its degree varies widely among markets. Generally, it can be said 
that the integration of a market segment is the more advanced the closer it is to the single monetary 
policy. 
The introduction of the euro has entailed the quasi-perfect integration of the unsecured euro money 
market, which has been reflected in the disappearance of differences in short-term interest rates. The 
secured money market has not yet been fully integrated due to national differences in securities and 
fragmented securities settlement systems.  
A high degree of integration has been achieved in euro-denominated government bond markets as 
well.  It  is  true  that  the  integration  of  these  markets  had  already  been  progressing  in  the  run-up  to 
monetary union, in particular from the mid-1990s. For ten-year government bonds, the maximum yield 
spread  between  euro  area  countries  (except  for  Greece)  has  decreased  from  more  than  250  basis 
points in 1995 to between 20 and 30 basis points after 1999. The remaining differences in long-term 
bond yields within the euro area can be mainly attributed to varying levels of market liquidity, to the 
availability of derivatives markets and to the credit risk of the respective issuer.  
In the corporate bond market, integration has accelerated as well, which has been reflected in reduced 
interest rate differentials within Europe and in the growing percentage of foreign market participants.  
The indicators for the euro area equity market suggest that the degree of integration is rising, although 
room  for  further  integration  remains.  As  in  the  case  of  the  secured  money  market,  national  legal 
provisions and fragmented securities settlement systems prevent the integration process in the stock 
and bond markets from deepening more fully. 
As regards banking markets in the euro area, the ECB integration indicators show that retail banking is 
generally  far  less  integrated  than  wholesale  banking  and  banks’  capital  market-related  activities. 
Cross-border  inter-bank  loans  and  cross-border  holdings  of  securities  have,  in  relative  terms, 
experienced substantial growth.  
Cross-border loans of euro area monetary financial institutions (MFI) to other euro area countries have 
increased from 15% at the end of 1997 to 23% in the middle of 2005. At the end of 1997, 15% of 
securities held by euro area MFIs were issued by non-MFIs of another euro area country. This share 
has now reached almost 40%.  
In contrast, the level of banks’ cross-border retail lending activity within the euro area increased only 
slightly from a mere 2% at the end of 1997 to around 3.5% today. The main reasons for the lesser 
integration in retail banking are the local marketing and distribution channels used in retail banking, 
customer relations that are still excellent in these markets and the better reputation of long-established 
institutions.  
Another indicator for the level of integration of financial markets is the share of cross-border mergers 
and  acquisitions  (M&A)  in  total  M&A  transactions.  This  share  is  still  comparatively  modest  and 
increasing only slightly. Of the almost EUR 500 billion worth of intra-EU mergers and acquisitions in 
the financial sector between 1999 and 2004 only about 20% were cross-border deals. The reasons for 
the low level of cross-border M&A activities are legal and tax barriers, differing supervisory rules and 
requirements as well as economic hurdles, like non-overlapping fixed costs, which cannot be spread 
over  several  countries.  Although  cross-border  M&A  activity  has  been  relatively  limited  in  the  EU, 
recent  high  profile  acquisitions  of  Bayerische  Hypo-  und  Vereinsbank  and  BA-CA  by  Unicredit  or 
Abbey National’s acquisition of Banco Santander Central Hispano may mark a turning point.  
As regards cross-border mergers and acquisitions, the Austrian financial sector could be considered 
as  an  exemption.  In  particular  Austrian  banks’  activities  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  are 
outstanding. Austrian banks, for example, were among the first to invest in this region and are now the 
biggest investors with a market share of about 22% on an average basis over the region. Relatively 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2005
low domestic profitability, geographical proximity and historical ties as well as above-average growth 
and profit potential were key reasons for banks’ pioneering role in investing there. 
To sum up, it can be argued that financial integration in the euro area 
is nearly perfect in the money market, 
• 
•  has advanced considerably in the government bond market, 
•  has increased in the corporate bond and equity markets, 
•  differs widely among various banking market segments, and 
•  has just begun in terms of cross-border consolidation of financial institutions. 
In other words, financial integration – though having progressed significantly in a number of markets – 
is still an ongoing process in the euro area and in the EU. As the FSAP has nearly been completed 
and the priorities for the next five years are being reflected on, we are now at a decisive moment as 
regards financial integration in the years to come.  
This spring, the European Commission released the Green Paper on Financial Services Policy, which 
looks ahead to the period up to 2010. It aims primarily at consolidating and simplifying the existing 
Community  legislation,  while  ensuring  that  the  measures  adopted  thus  far  under  the  FSAP  are 
effectively  and  consistently  implemented  and  enforced  at  the  national  level.  In  this  paper,  the 
Commission also argues for a better regulation approach in order to ensure that any new European 
proposal  for  financial  services  legislation  and  implementing  rules  will  yield  significant  economic 
benefits in terms of efficiency and stability. In order to meet this objective, the Commission inter alia 
intends  to  conduct  open  and  transparent  consultation  at  all  levels,  to  establish  thorough  economic 
impact  assessments  before  launching  a  new  proposal  and  to  carry  out  ex-post  evaluation.  The 
Commission’s final policy programme for the next five years is expected to be published in the form of 
a White paper before the end of this month. 
Also the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) contributes to improving financial integration by 
replacing the euro area’s current decentralized payment system with a single technical platform, called 
TARGET2.  It  will  increase  cost-effectiveness  and  allow  for  the  provision  of  a  harmonised  level  of 
services across Europe, supported by the implementation of a single price structure for domestic and 
cross-border payments. 
In addition to the wholesale financial infrastructure, I would like to mention the field of retail payments, 
namely the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project, an initiative of the European banking industry, 
which will go live in 2008. The SEPA will enable European citizens and enterprises to make payments 
throughout the euro area from a single bank account using a single set of payment instruments, as 
easily and safely as they do today in the national systems. In addition, national infrastructures should 
migrate to a pan-European payments infrastructure by the end of 2010, which means that investments 
in the next generation of national systems should be made from a pan-European perspective in order 
to ensure compliance with the SEPA. 
I have so far spent a fair amount of time taking stock of the development and present state of financial 
integration in Europe. After all this, it is time to ask: What are the chances and challenges of financial 
deregulation and integration for financial stability? And what, in fact, is meant by financial stability?  
In brief, financial stability is a condition where the  financial system, comprising financial institutions, 
financial  markets  and  financial  infrastructures,  is  capable  of  directing  capital  to  its  most  profitable 
risk-adjusted use without major disturbances. 
How  can  financial  integration  in  the  EU  contribute  to  financial  stability?  According  to  the  definition 
given above, the stability of a liberalised financial system ties in with efficiency, namely the capability 
of  allocating  capital  in  the  most  efficient  manner.  Thus,  increased  efficiency  brought  about  by  the 
integration process produces a higher degree of stability, at least in the long run. 
In the EU, the elimination of entry barriers and the harmonisation of regulations intensified competition 
in  financial  markets.  Moreover,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  made  capital  allocation  more  efficient, 
since it eliminated the costs for foreign exchange transaction and hedging, and made prices easier to 
compare. 
Increased  integration  is  undoubtedly  beneficial  for  structural  progress  and  efficiency.  Greater 
competitive pressure compelled financial intermediaries to offer price concessions to their customers, 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 3
which  reduced  transaction  costs  and  consequently  facilitated  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  financial 
resources. By contrast, higher competition may lead to a reduction in interest rate margins and without 
a compensating rise in cost efficiency might adversely influence banks’ profitability. As a result, banks 
may  be  tempted  to  loosen  their  credit  policies  and  take  on  more  risk  in  search  for  maintaining 
profitability. Ensuring that banks’ risk monitoring capacities keep up with this process and additional 
risk is properly priced is a major challenge.  
Free  access  to  the  financial  markets  of  the  other  EU  member  states,  roughly  equal  competitive 
conditions and the introduction of the euro have enabled European financial institutions and investors 
to diversify regional risk more broadly. In other words, they have been able to reduce the “home bias” 
of their investments.  
Let  me  give  you  one  example:  Austrian  mutual  funds  saw  the  percentage  of  their  capital  invested 
abroad  increase  from  about  30%  in  1995  to  almost  75%  in  2004.  The  broader  regional  basis  for 
financial  investment  has  made  financial  stability  of  individual  member  countries  less  vulnerable  to 
asymmetric  (country-specific)  shocks  than  it  would  have  been  if  financial  investment  had  been 
concentrated regionally. 
Not  only  has  the  participation  in  the  economic  and  monetary  integration  process  offered  domestic 
financial intermediaries more possibilities of protecting themselves against country-specific shocks, but 
it has also reduced the probability of large shocks which could endanger financial stability.  
The degree of asymmetry of country-specific shocks, for instance, has decreased simply due to the 
ever-closer economic relations between EU member states. Economic disturbances brought about by 
exchange rate shocks are no longer possible in the euro area. The same holds true for interest rate 
fluctuations  caused  by  speculative  attacks  against  single  national  currencies,  such  as  those  that 
occurred frequently within the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System. 
Finally,  financial  integration  is  an  important  factor  in  improving  market  discipline  and  in  adopting 
internationally  recognised  best  practices  with  respect  to  corporate  governance,  transparency,  risk 
management techniques etc. The implementation of such practices clearly supports financial stability. 
However, the rapid integration of financial markets across borders is not without risks. There are initial 
adjustment  costs,  which  are  sometimes  concentrated  on  specific  regions  and  sectors.  In  order  to 
maximise  long-term  benefits  of  financial  integration,  countries  aspiring  closer  integration  with  other 
economic  areas  have  to  modify  at  least  part  of  their  institutional  and  structural  environment,  which 
results in costs that are often front-loaded.  
For  example,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  caused  significant  setbacks  in  certain  types  of  banks’ 
earnings,  especially  in  the  fields  of  international  payments,  money  exchange, interest  arbitrage and 
hedging  against  exchange  rate  risks.  In  addition,  the  increase  in  competition  brought  about  by  the 
common  currency  also  had  some  adverse  effects  on  commission  and  interest  income  of  financial 
institutions. Financial intermediaries that were not able to offset the decline in earnings by cutting costs 
saw  profits  decrease  and  hence  their  risk-bearing  capacity  weaken.  When  the  institutions  affected, 
however, responded to the setbacks in earnings by increasing their cost efficiency, financial stability 
was not compromised. A typical strategy of cutting costs in the process of integration consists in taking 
advantage of economies of scale and scope produced by vertical and horizontal integration of financial 
institutions on a domestic or cross-border basis. Merging two or more institutions into one with a single 
management structure is an obvious strategy for companies which want to gain influence in the single 
financial market beyond their home region and to reduce costs. 
However,  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  the  financial  sector –  no  matter  whether  they  are  national  or 
cross-border  events  –  increase  both  the  market  power  and  the  systemic  relevance  of  individual 
institutions.  The  influence  of  these  institutions  may  be  so  great  that  the  whole  financial  system  of 
certain  countries  is  “at  their  mercy”.  Aside  from  the  problematic  concentration  of  stability  risks,  in 
dominant  financial  institutions  there  is  also  a  greater  danger  that  their  management  is  tempted  to 
succumb to moral hasard by assuming that their businesses were too big to fail.  
On the other hand, large financial institutions usually have a more advanced risk management system, 
which  promotes  financial  stability.  When  consolidating  financial  institutions  of  different  sectors  into 
financial  conglomerates  additional  stability  risks  arise,  such  as  regulatory  arbitrage,  complexity  and 
contagion.  An  increased  risk  of  contagion  exists  not  only  for  cross-sectoral  integration,  but  also  for 
cross-border integration. This can be the result of the expansion of financial institutions into other EU 
member  states.  As  a  case  in  point,  the  banking  sectors  of  the  new  member  states  (NMS)  are 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2005
particularly  characterised  by  high  levels  of  foreign  ownership.  In  2004,  on  aggregate,  71%  of  total 
assets of the NMS banking sector were foreign-controlled compared to only 15.5% in the euro area.  
Other  factors  promoting  cross-border  integration  of  financial  institutions  are  the  common  money 
market, common payment systems and the increasing importance of inter-bank business. From the 
perspective of financial stability, the increased potential risk of a spill-over of foreign financial crises 
into the domestic market in the wake of integration mirrors the decreased susceptibility to asymmetric 
financial crises at home. 
What can be done to intensify the effects promoting financial stability and to weaken those reducing it? 
To  be  brief,  EU  member  states  have  to  co-operate  closely  in  financial  market  regulation,  financial 
market  integration  and  crisis  management.  Only  this  can  ensure  that  financial  institutions,  whose 
organisation and activities are more and more of a cross-border type, can be regulated and supervised 
in  an  appropriate  manner.  And  this  co-operation  is  indispensable  for  preventing  regulatory  and 
supervisory arbitrage.  
The EU’s approach in this context consists in bilateral and multilateral co-operation between national 
regulators and supervisors, which has been reinforced by the Lamfalussy process, which represents a 
move from minimum harmonisation to the adoption of a level playing field.  
In the banking system, for example, the supervisory regime within the EU is based on three pillars. 
The first pillar can be described as harmonisation of minimum supervisory requirements and mutual 
recognition. The second pillar is based on the principle of national responsibility for the (operational) 
supervision  of  the  financial  institutions  in  question.  The  third  pillar  focuses  on  the  co-operation 
between national regulators and supervisors. Within the ESCB, central banks and banking supervisors 
work together in the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC), which addresses mainly macro-prudential 
issues. At the EU level, co-operation has been intensified in the European Banking Committee (EBC), 
which  is composed  of  finance  ministry representatives,  and  in  the  Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors (CEBS), comprising banking supervisory authorities and central banks from the European 
Economic Area (EEA), including the OeNB.  
CEBS  is  a  so-called  level-3  Lamfalussy-committee  and  particularly  aims  at  achieving  supervisory 
convergence  and  establishing  supervisory  networks  in  order  to  ensure  efficient  and  effective 
supervision of cross-border banking groups. These efforts cover both day-to-day supervision as well 
as crisis situations, and for the latter purpose a joint Task Force has been established together with 
the BSC. 
Co-operation in crisis management, for example efforts to minimize negative effects of financial crises, 
can surely be intensified. The second Brouwer report, which had been commissioned by the Council of 
Economics  and  Finance  Ministers,  stated  and  confirmed  that,  above  all,  further  improvements  in 
information sharing were necessary.  
This  proposal  was  taken  up,  for  instance,  in  a  multilateral  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on 
co-operation  between  the  banking  supervisors,  central  banks  and  finance  ministries  of  the  EU  in 
financial crises situations. 
In concluding, I am convinced that the process of European financial integration is on track. However, 
to deepen integration, a lot of efforts are still necessary. Nevertheless, I sincerely do believe that we 
will be able to handle these issues in good time and shall then be able to appreciate the benefits of 
integrated financial markets in Europe. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 5
