Erkki Liikanen: A central bank's view on technology based efficiency and 
productivity in the financial markets  
Opening speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, in the Bank of Finland seminar 
on Technology-driven Efficiencies and Risks in Financial Institutions, Helsinki, 21 November 2005. 
 Europe  needs  more  growth.  But  we  are  aging.  So  growth  cannot  come  from  an  increased  labour 
contribution. We therefore need higher labour productivity. We need more investment, which in turn 
increases  productivity.  And  we  need  better  solutions,  recipes,  bringing  a  lot  higher  total  factor 
productivity. This means faster technological change.  
We  are  happy  to  have  with  us  today  Professor  Matti  Pohjola,  the  renowned  economist,  who  has 
written extensively on ICT, productivity and growth.  
We know that ICT can be a powerful tool in productivity growth, not only concerning ICT-investment 
but  above  all  the  use  of  ICT  in  new  processes  and  ways  of  organising  companies  and  the  public 
sector.  
In Europe, the use of IT in the services sector has not brought about the same increase in productivity 
that we have seen in the United States. The reason behind this, however, is not only slightly lower 
investment levels in ICT but – I believe – less competitive markets. When there is less competition, 
there is less pressure to innovate, and less pressure to increase efficiency.  
This is why we need to have the real Internal Market as an opener of competition. And we need to 
abolish the remaining barriers to cross-border business in all areas.  
Today, we have a common monetary policy but we don't have a common financial market.  
We have made some progress in the financial markets, such as in the wholesale business generally 
and  the  integration  of  inter-bank  large  value  payment  systems  and  securities  markets  in  particular. 
Both  of  which  have  proceeded  well.  Retail  banking  and  securities  settlement  systems  are  where 
matters are lagging most. And the co-ordination and convergence of supervision require further work.  
A  Europe-wide  financial  sector  will  bring  better  and  cheaper services and  lower  interest rates  to  all 
customers:  to  consumers,  SMEs  and  large  companies  alike.  Lending  decisions  are  also  decisions 
about innovation in other sectors. All of which promote growth.  
From the macroeconomic point of view, the integration of the financial sector is significant for Europe, 
because:  
- 
integrated and efficient financial markets would allow the dilution of risks by spreading them 
among countries and regions, and  
integrated financial markets can contribute to the efficient transmission of monetary policy.  
  In the 1970s and 80s, Finland saw substantial investment in IT in the financial sector. But it was only 
after the financial crises in the early 1990's that the sector was forced to revise their operations, and 
ICT  was  widely  used  in  both  re-engineering  the  internal  processes  and  in  creating  new  distribution 
channels.  
In the ten years that followed, banks cut their operating expenses by 50%. This process was initiated 
when  public  authorities  set  stark  quantitative  cost  savings  requirements  as  a  condition  to  receiving 
capital support. On top of which, enhanced competition, due to deregulation, has increased the need 
for continuous re-engineering. Certainly, commonly created standards for customer-to-bank and inter-
bank communication also played a significant role in this development.  
From  which  we  can  see  that  we  need  IT-investment,  we  need  competitive  pressure  and  we  need 
investment in innovating in the organisation to bring about productivity growth.  
Now –and even more so in the future –tough competition in integrating markets force financial market 
institutions to further improve their performance and increase their efficiency. That is also what share -
holders want. And to bring these improvements about, streamlined inter-bank payment systems and 
automated securities settlement systems are required in particular.  
BIS Review 82/2005 
 1
The  European  financial  sector  demonstrates,  however,  significant  differences  in  efficiency,  both 
between institutions and between national banking sectors. This question will be further elaborated in 
today's presentation by De Nederlandsche Bank's Jacob Bikker, the author of a well-known book in 
this area. 
Implementation  of  ICT  has  caused  profound  changes  in  many  business  lines,  and  yet  there  is  the 
potential in further renewing and streamlining the processes – it should not be about carrying out the 
computerisation  of  old  processes  but  rather  about  reinventing  the  processes  and  using  the  full 
capacity of new technology.  
Efficiency comes from savings in personnel and time, streamlined and automated process flows, from 
less errors, from economies of scale and from lower processing costs per unit. Banks have created 
new sources of income by offering more sophisticated products which would not have been possible 
without  the  use  of  ICT.  The  whole  banking  landscape  is  changing.  It  is  going  to  be  of  the  utmost 
interest to hear Bob DeYoung's presentation on what the implications of these changes to the industry 
are, and how far this evolution can go.  
A modern, networked economy also requires financial institutions to review their way of carrying out 
their business with their customers in order to produce added value. This often requires being part of 
their customers' business processes and doing more than was required of them earlier. An example of 
this  is  electronic  account  statements,  with  their  structured  references  and  other  information  for 
automated  booking  and  reconciliation  in  the  company's  financial  management.  The  demand  for 
straight-through-processing  from  customer  to  the  bank,  between  banks  and  to  customer  is  intense. 
Aspect of these issues will be discussed during both Bo Harald's and David Blair's presentations in 
this seminar.  
 From  bricks  and  mortar  to  clicks  and  mortar  is  the  most  visible  phenomenon  of  ICT  in  financial 
institutions A new distribution channel, the Internet, and mobile terminals, along with sufficient ATM- 
and payment card networks have made it possible to bring down the number of bank branches, giving 
savings  in  operating  costs.  Take,  for  example,  one  Finnish  bank  which  has  managed  to  cut  its 
distribution costs by 25% and unit production costs for payments by 68% over a 3 year period. This 
was achieved by implementing multi-channel applications.  
Customers  have  adopted  the  new  way  of  banking,  paying  bills,  checking  credit  card  balances  or 
trading in securities, independent of time or place, surprisingly fast. Coming generations will probably 
have difficulty in understanding how anyone ever queued at a bank branch to pay his bills – to say 
nothing of writing a cheque. Today, it is difficult to see how a bank could enter the Finnish or Nordic 
markets without a well-functioning and comprehensive Internet service.  
New customer generations are also more willing and capable of extensively managing their finances 
using  e-banking  services.  Housing  loans,  for  example,  are  still  largely  negotiated  in  branches,  but 
already we have seen how people request offers from various banks via the Internet before entering 
into  final  discussions  with  one  bank.  This  reinforces  the  customer's  negotiating  power.  And  this 
increases competition.  
Development also requires sufficient security elements to create and maintain public confidence. And 
here  the  challenges  are  growing.  We  need  European  level  cooperation  in  network  security.  Here  I 
hope that ENISA, the European Network Security Agency, will make its contribution. We need efficient 
cooperation  among  the  law  enforcement  authorities  to  fight  cyber  crime.  And  we  need  the  secure 
electronic identification and protection of data privacy. Identity theft, the worst case of e-crime, must be 
fought on all these fronts.  
ICT implementation and exploitation often require huge investments. In many banks ICT has replaced 
personnel as the largest single item of expenditure. Old legacy systems are aging, and according to a 
recent survey, over 80% of ICT expenditure goes into maintenance of these systems. New investment 
is  required,  and  these  are  challenging  projects.  In  Europe,  it  seems  the  banking  industry  is  very 
prudent  in  front  of  new  investments.  This  may  partly  reflect  caution  due  to  over  investments  in  the 
past, as for 2 K. But it may also mirror the risks currently a deficient vision of the future. Maybe there 
are not enough incentives – such as competition?  
 Can  regulation  be  used  to  enhance  competition?  This  was  the  case  with  the  Internal  Market 
programme.  Twelve  or  fifteen  national  regulations  were  replaced  by  a  harmonized  one.  Active 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2005
competition policy was pursued. So a level playing field was created in a great number of sectors. And 
the regulatory costs were lower than in the past.  
But in general, regulation can be a double-edged sword. The first priority is that markets are dynamic 
and  search  for  growth.  Sometimes,  however,  regulation  is  also  required  where  market  failure  is 
evident.  
The EU Commission's regulation (2560) on euro payment fees was the first step towards forcing the 
banking sector to do something about the intra-EU cross-border payment systems. By regulating the 
fees that banks were able collect from cross-border euro-denominated payments within the EU, the 
Commission – in effect – cut the banks' income and forced them to develop cost saving measures in 
the processing of these payments. 
The new draft on the new legal framework for payments is coming soon. This framework should have 
the effect of harmonising the general terms of payment transmission throughout Europe. This means 
that a payment initiated by a Finnish customer in Helsinki to an Italian bank's customer in Milan or a 
Portuguese bank's customer in Lisbon to a German bank's customer in Wilhelmshaven - or wherever 
in Europe - must not take longer than 3 banking days. Knowing the diverse terms of payment in use 
today, this will inevitably force the banking industry to improve their operations. This development will 
also benefit all companies involved with Europe-wide trade.  
Banks have committed themselves to creating the single euro payments area, SEPA through their co-
operation  forum  the  EPC  (European  Payments  Council).  This  development  should  result  in  an 
integrated  euro  payments  market.  Work  on  the  definition  of  common  payment  instruments  is  in 
progress, but the infrastructure for handling them is still obscure.  
Different levels of ICT usage in Europe and different traditions cause controversies in this SEPA work. 
The  only  option  for  Europe  is  to  succeed  in  creating  such  an  internal  payments  infrastructure  that 
benefits the end customer and enhances economic growth. We must not build SEPA according to the 
lowest common denominator; instead it must become the momentum for the entire European financial 
sector. It could provide the required push for the banking industry to find the touchstone to guide them 
to a new level of competitiveness.  
 Why do we need a conference such as this? In their individual statutes, the euro area central banks 
have  been  given  the  task  to  contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the  various 
authorities  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  On  top  of 
which, we are to contribute to the smooth operation of the payment and securities infrastructure. This 
is  the  basic  task  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  The  Bank  of  Finland  has  even  been 
explicitly committed to participating in developing financial markets.  
From this, you can see that the objective comes mainly from the need to boost economic growth; the 
solutions however lie at the micro-level. Two thirds of the topics covered by this conference take a 
micro approach. We need to interlink the forces of integration, competition, innovation and the use of 
technology. Within the financial markets, technology can give us that edge.  
When  setting  up  this  conference  my  colleagues  were  faced  with  the  difficulty  of  placing  the  issue 
before central bankers: the theme is partly a financial market policy issue, partly an oversight issue 
and we cannot ignore the fact that central bank operations are involved, too. It falls into the area of co-
operation  with  supervisors,  as  technology  changes  the  risk  profile  of  financial  institutions  and  the 
market as whole.  
It is essential that new technologies, new products and processes are understood not only by market 
operators but also by the authorities. Contagion can take on new forms via networks and loss of public 
confidence. The new multi-channel world is more transparent than the old brick and mortar world. This 
understandably  poses  new  demands  on  supervisory  regulation  –  although  it  should  not  become  a 
barrier to development. Co-operation across borders must be ensured in the integrated markets.  
I  would  like  to  wrap  this  issue  up  by  promoting  e-banking,  which  to  me  covers  various  services  in 
banking  and  securities  markets  while  extending  to  the  basic  infrastructure  that  include  payment 
systems and instruments. We at the Bank of Finland have felt this area should constitute a strategic 
focus. I believe you can share this vision.  
How can we enforce such a strategy? Perhaps best through the provision of analysis and research 
focusing on efficiency and productivity in the financial sector. Some of this requires the development of 
BIS Review 82/2005 
 3
methodology  and  we  must  surmount  the  difficulties  of  current  research  in  capturing  a  multifaceted 
reality  due  to  a  shortfall  in  data.  Therefore  the  accent  remains  on  co-operation  with  market 
participants. After all, it is the market that will have to deliver the efficiencies.  
I wish you all a lively debate. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2005
