T T Mboweni: How exposed is the rand to the potential outflow of hot money? 
Remarks  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  The  Economist’s 
Fourth Business Roundtable with the Government of South Africa, Johannesburg, 21 November 2005. 
 It is difficult to quantify the exact potential of “hot money” outflows. Undoubtely there is some of it in 
South Africa, similar to any other high-yielding emerging-market country with a liquid currency market. 
Some rough indications of potential “hot money” are the following:  
• 
the high turnover in the foreign exchange swaps market, with mainly non-resident clients as 
counterparties.  
some build-up in authorised dealers’ net forward commitments against rand 
non-residents have increased their holdings of domestic bonds and equities by some R45 
billion in the current year to date. 
 South  Africa’s  current  account  deficit  is  financed  by  (predominantly)  foreign  portfolio  investments 
which  can  be  easily  reversed,  while  foreign  direct  investment  is  generally  regarded  as  being  more 
stable. However, two observations can be made in this regard:  
• 
The IMF in March 2005 published a study entitled “The composition of capital flows: Is South 
Africa  different?”  This  paper  argued  that  ZAR  stability  and  some  changes  to  government 
policies could contribute to greater FDI. The paper noted, however, the SA attracted three 
times more foreign portfolio investment than any emerging-market country, as a percentage 
of  GDP.  Equity  flows  to  South  Africa  remained  well  above  levels  in  other  developing  and 
emerging markets. The composition of capital flows to South Africa appears to be quite the 
opposite of other emerging markets. Importantly, it is noted that South Africa has attracted 
portfolio inflows more consistently than other countries. 
There  are  indications  that  FDI  might  increase  (Absa/  Barclays,  Vodafone)  as  we  sustain 
healthy  growth  rates,  the exchange rate  becomes more stable  and  exchange  controls  are 
relaxed further and eventually abolished. 
 The rand has become more stable: ZAR volatility has declined over recent months – historical volatility 
down from as high as 30 per cent in the middle of 2003 to below 10 per cent in October 2005 
Behaviour  of  importers  and  exporters  has  become  more  rational  –  Balances  in  CFC  accounts  stay 
fairly constant, whereas during 2001 and 2002, there tended to be build-ups in balances as exporters 
anticipated  the  ZAR  to  depreciate.  The  average  holding  period  of  export  proceeds  is  also  healthily 
within the 180 day limit, and remaining fairly stable. 
A  number  of  stuctural  empediments  that  contributed  to  the  ZAR’s  volatility  in  the  past  have  been 
removed  or  improved.  E.g.  the  closure  of  the  NOFP,  and  the  building  of  international  reserves  to 
USD20 billion. This has improved the fundamental value of the ZAR, and also resulted in upgrades by 
the  international  ratings  agencies.  These  factors  contribute  to  the  ZAR  becoming  a  longer-term 
investment destination rather than attracting predominantly “hot money”. 
“Hot money” often tends to be a reference to speculative flows, which can sometimes negatively affect 
a  country.  The  best  way  to  protect  oneself  from detrimental  speculative  flows is  for  South Africa  to 
continue on its path of responsible, predictable, consistent and transparent policies. 
Can the economy pick up speed with such a strong currency?  
International research on the relationship between the exchange rate and growth remains inconclusive 
to  date,  as  it  is  difficult  to  isolate  the  effect  of  the  exchange  rate  from  other  policies  and  economic 
structures that would support or hamper growth. Typically, some sectors gain from a strong exchange 
rate, while others lose. 
BIS Review 81/2005 
 1
There are a number of indicators that provide some comfort that the South African economy is coping 
well with an exchange rate at the current levels, e.g. GDP growth of some 4,8% (quarter on quarter 
saar) and relatively strong manufacturing growth. 
The mining sector is usually particularly negatively affected by a strong exchange rate. However, the 
high commodity prices are providing some cushion in this regard. 
The global environment has been conducive to South African exports. 
It is the view of the SARB that a stable currency is more important that a particular exchange rate, and 
that a particular exchange rate should not be targeted alongside an inflation target. The role of the 
SARB is to contribute to an environment of financial stability in the interest of sustainable economic 
growth  over  the  long  term,  rather  than  providing  short-term  growth  incentives  that,  from  past 
experience, can severely damage sentiment and economic growth over the long term. 
Outlook for key indicators 
The inflation outlook has deteriorated moderately, with CPIX now seen at the upper end of the 3 – 6 
per cent  range  in  the  first  quarter  of  2006.  Nonetheless,  inflation  should  remain  within  target  range 
over  the  forecast  period.  This  is,  among  others,  dependent  on  the  future  path  of  oil  prices,  and 
developments in the exchange rate of the rand and food prices.  
Inflation expectations, as can be expected, have deteriorated moderately, but on the whole still point 
to CPIX remaining within target over the next three years. The Bank needs to guard against inflation 
expectations worsening further and becoming entrenched.  
Economic  growth  should  remain  robust,  despite  the  fact  that  oil  prices  will  most  likely  have  a 
dampening effect on growth. The manufacturing sector appears to have weathered a relatively strong 
rand quite well, while global economic conditions are such that export growth should be maintained at 
a healthy pace.  
Both consumer and business confidence should remain high, with the factors supporting consumer 
confidence  in  2005  still  effective  in  2006  –  healthy  disposable  income,  structural  changes  in  the 
economy, and still low nominal interest rates.  
Money  supply  and  credit  extension  should  witness  a  mild  moderation,  alongside  growth  in  the 
housing market. We have noted signs of cooling off already. Expectations of interest rate increases 
are likely to dampen credit demand (mortgage financing) somewhat. However, certain country-specific 
factors  are  likely  to  support  still  high  and  positive  rates  of  growth,  namely,  the  participation  of  non-
resident buyers in the local market, the emergence of a new middle class, strong consumer demand, 
and a general catching up in the local housing market with international developments.  
International developments point to a moderation but still healthy economic growth rates, and while 
the inflation outlook internationally has deteriorated, the overall picture remains benign. This should 
support both economic growth locally and limit inflationary pressures in the local economy.  
The balance of payments may witness a mild deterioration, however, capital inflows, both portfolio 
and foreign direct investment, should be sufficient to finance this.  
Fiscal policy remains supportive of a non-inflationary expansion in economic growth.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  build  its  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  purchase  foreign  currency  at 
opportune times in a manner that does not destabilise the financial markets. 
