Erkki Liikanen: Towards more balanced growth - past experiences and current 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at a high-level seminar between the 
executives’ meeting of East Asia-Pacific central banks and the Eurosystem, Frankfurt, 8-9 November 
2005. 
 - Looking at the world economy, one is struck by the pronounced differences in GDP growth rates of 
different  countries  and  country  groups  as  well  as  by  the  expansion  of  current  account  deficits  and 
surpluses.  Some  of  the  rapidly  growing  economies,  notably  the  USA,  have  had  to  face  increasing 
imbalances. This has intensified concerns over worsening problems and how to manage them.  
- As always, such unbalanced developments arise from a host of problems that are difficult to spell 
out. This is clearly reflected in the international debate concerning these problems. One must be wary 
of oversimplifying the problems and their solutions. Careful analysis of the problems will clearly help us 
decide on an appropriate policy strategy.  
-  Current  account  problems  should  be  viewed  from  several  different  angles.  The  logic  behind 
macroeconomic  variables  presents  three  fundamental  perspectives  from  which  to  analyse a  current 
account deficit:  
1.  Foreign trade and the services and income accounts of the balance of payments 
2.  The balance of savings and investment in the economy 
3.  Developments in the economy's external assets and liabilities  
- Analysis is usually dominated by the foreign trade aspect, so that policy debate tends to focus on 
trade barriers and exchange rates. This is also typical of recent discussions of the US current account 
deficit and the surpluses of many other countries, particularly in Asia.  
- It is important to examine the current account also from the perspective of savings and investment. 
Current imbalances in the global economy are largely due to the low level of savings and high level of 
consumption in some western economies, particularly the USA, and the abundant savings and modest 
private  consumption  particularly  in  several  Asian  economies.  Recently,  savings  rates  have  also 
inreased sharply in oil-producing countries, with the boost in income from high oil prices.  
-  One  should  also  emphasise  the  factors  related  to  indebtedness  and  financial  investment.  By 
definition, the increase in an economy's indebtedness is the counterpart of its current account deficit.  
Often  mentioned  as  determining  factors  in  international  capital  flows  are  the  depth  of  US  financial 
markets and the US dollar's position as major reserve currency. These factors draw investment funds 
into the USA and so provide the financing for US domestic demand.  
 - Of the three perspectives cited here it is savings and investment behaviour that is likely to get top 
billing in connection with the current imbalances. Europe, with its moderate level of savings, has been 
somewhat amazed by the lofty savings rates of many Asian countries and the low savings rate of the 
USA. Are Asia's robust savings rates fuelled by an authentic need to save or is this a case of weak 
consumption partly due, for example, to various kinds of regulations?  
-  The  high  degree  of  global  saving  has  been  prominent  in  recent  discussions  but,  as  voiced  for 
instance by the IMF, the global savings rate has in fact declined in the last few decades. Apparently, 
the reduction has taken place mainly among households, so that the savings pendulum has shifted to 
the corporate sector. Corporate profitability has remained good in most countries, which is surprising, 
in  the  light  of  the  heightened  international  competition.  It  may  be  that  labour's  pricing  power  has 
suffered even more from tighter competition due to globalisation than has that of companies.  
- As a result, the problem – as well as the reason for the low level of international long-term interest 
rates – appears not to be a savings glut but rather an investment drought. This is partly because in-
vestment has shifted to "lighter" objects, where prices have declined, whereas the euro area especially 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
needs more investment in equipment and machinery. This is because of the simple fact that new tech-
nology should be introduced swiftly. Given the low level of investment activity in the corporate sector, 
an abundance of financial resources has been channelled into the housing market, which has fostered 
sharp increases in house prices in many countries. As a result, households may have gotten into debt 
problems.  
- Sluggish investment in the euro area in particular raises questions in a situation in which the factors 
that generally encourage investment are in place: Overall corporate profitability is good, interest rates 
are low, credit availability is good, and liquidity is abundant. A decline in capital-intensive production 
and a rechannelling of investment to countries with lower costs, such as the new EU member states, 
may have contributed to the low level of investment. Increasingly fragile demographics may be another 
reason for the subdued propensity to invest.  
 - One way of addressing both the global imbalances and the low level of investment in the euro area is 
to  boost  productivity  in  the  euro  area  service  sector.  Poor  performance  in  the  service  sector  is  the 
main reason why euro-area productivity growth has been lagging behind that of the USA. Increasing 
competition is vital to improving productivity. Enhanced productivity would reduce service prices, which 
would support domestic consumption and ultimately boost investment to meet the new demand. This 
would  also  lead  to  an  increase  in  imports.  All  in  all,  productivity  growth  would  raise  euro  area 
economic growth towards that of the other major economic regions and would also help to correct the 
US external deficit.  
- Using its GEM model, the IMF has evaluated the impact of more intense competition on economic 
development. Calculations show that enhanced competition in the goods, services and labour markets 
would have significant real-economy effects in the euro area. The impact would also be felt in the rest 
of the world economy. Calculations made using the Bank of Finland's Aino model have also produced 
similar results. Over the long term, increased competition in the product markets would stimulate the 
growth of consumption and investment.  
 - Turning to Asia, several countries there have been running large current account surpluses. Devel-
opments in Asia resemble the strong reversal in Finland's current account experienced in connection 
with the deep recession of the early 1990s. Before the crisis, the Finnish economy was characterised 
by abundant but relatively ineffective investment and, as a result, a large and fairly persistent current 
account deficit. Following the crisis, capital usage became more effective and savings increased, and 
the current account moved substantially into the black.  
improved price competitiveness due to a depreciating currency and modest wage increases 
-  The reversal of Finland's current account can be attributed to several factors:  
- 
-  more effective investment by companies and households 
- 
- 
- 
- 
consolidation of public finances 
investment abroad following the switchover to the euro (pension funds) 
reduction of interest payments due to a shrinking debt 
the major impact of Nokia and its exceptionally strong profitability   
-  What  happened  in  many  Asian  countries  was  similar.  Investment  rates  of  the  private  sectors  in 
particular  declined  after  the  crisis  and  have  not  returned  to  previous  levels.  As  savings  rates  have 
remained stable or increased slightly, current accounts have moved into surplus.  
- Countries with financial surpluses should also contribute to the equilibrating of the global economy. 
As  in  Asian  countries,  the  surpluses  have  also  increased  in  the  oil-producing  countries.  They  have 
thus far used their surpluses prudently, but most of them have a great need to use resources to further 
their own development.  
- Some Asian countries are in a financial position where they could allow for higher consumption. This 
is  particularly  evident  in  China,  where  consumption  accounts  for  an  exceptionally  small  portion  of 
GDP. The extremely high propensity to save in China has been explained largely by the low level of 
household  wealth,  lack  of  social  security,  and  increasingly  worsening  demographics.  To  a  certain 
extent, similar developments can also be seen in some other Asian countries. Consumption is, after 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
all, the ultimate aim of economic activity. So far, Asia in particular has emphasised the importance of 
product  manufacturing.  But  now  the  great  need  is  for  improvements  in  the  provision  of  services. 
Improvement  of  market  efficiency  would  seem  to  require  an  increasingly  positive  attitude  towards 
imports of goods and services.   
-  It  may  still  be  possible,  and  to  an  extent  necessary,  to  increase  productive  investment  in  Asia, 
because  the  current  investment  rates  of  some  countries  may  be  too  low  to  maintain  rapid  growth. 
Good  financial  intermediation  is  important  for  both  investment  and  consumption.  It  would  enable 
efficient  channelling  of  financial  surpluses  to  the  sectors  that  need  them. This  in  turn  would  reduce 
companies'  dependence  on  retained  earnings  for  funding  their  investments,  which  may  have 
contributed  to  compa-nies'  high  propensity  to  save  since  the  Asian  crisis.  Well-functioning  financial 
systems would be of particular benefit to small and medium-sized companies.  
-  The  efficacy  of  the  financial  system  also  affects  private  consumption.  As  social  safety  nets  are 
usually  inadequate,  households  must  prepare  for  ageing  and  other  problems  also  via  their  own 
savings  arrangements.  An  effective  financial  system  would  facilitate  protection  against  risks  and 
increase  households'  possibilities  to  even  out  their  consumption  over  the  life  cycle.  As  population 
ageing progresses, these factors will become increasingly important.  
 - Solution to global imbalances thus requires careful analysis of underlying causes. These are likely to 
be manifold. Addressing them calls for a multitude of measures in both deficit and surplus countries. 
Often the solutions to these problems call for structural changes in the product, labour and financial 
markets.  
- In particular, it would be an enormous mistake to tackle current account problems by protectionist 
measures. Change in the global economy is in many respects unavoidable. Countries with high cost 
levels must give up part of their production, but this can be compensated for by producing high-tech 
goods,  which  the  low-cost  countries  will  need  to  enhance  their  production. Countries  determined  to 
carry out the necessary changes in a flexible manner – without resorting to import restrictions – will 
undoubtedly gain an advantage in the long run. 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
