Toshihiko Fukui: Semiannual report on currency and monetary control 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank's Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Councillors, Tokyo, 18 October 2005. 
 Introduction  
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2004 to the Diet in June 2005. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an overall 
review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan's economy  
I. 
Japan's economy has emerged from its temporary pause that started during the summer of 2004, and 
continues to recover.  
Exports are continuing to increase moderately against the background of the expansion of overseas 
economies,  although  the  momentum  of  export  growth,  especially  to  China,  weakened  temporarily. 
Production  is  on  an  uptrend  with  some  fluctuations,  partly  due  to  the  completion  of  inventory 
adjustment  in  IT-related  sectors.  Business  fixed  investment  is  growing  steadily  in  a  wide  range  of 
industries,  as  corporate  profits  remain  high  and  business  sentiment  has  been  showing  a  gradual 
improvement. As for the household sector, after a prolonged period of difficulty due to firms' efforts to 
reduce excess labor and personnel expenses, household income has been rising moderately, as the 
number of employees has been increasing and wages have picked up. With this improvement in the 
employment and income situation, private consumption has been steady.  
Looking forward, exports are expected to continue rising against the background of the expansion of 
overseas economies. Domestic private demand is likely to continue increasing against the backdrop of 
high corporate profits and the moderate rise in household income, as structural adjustment pressure 
stemming  from  firms'  excess  capacity  and  labor  has  almost  dissipated.  Given  this  situation,  the 
economy  is  likely  to  experience  a  relatively  long  period  of  growth,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace. 
Nevertheless, there are risk factors such as the continuing surge in crude oil prices and its possible 
effect on overseas economies, and these should be monitored closely.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have been increasing mainly reflecting the effects 
of high crude oil prices, and this uptrend is expected to continue. Consumer prices (excluding fresh 
food,  on a  nationwide  basis)  have  been  declining slightly  on a year-on-year basis  partly due  to  the 
reduction in electricity and telephone charges against the background of such factors as deregulation. 
The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer  prices  is  projected  to  be  zero  percent  or  a  slight 
increase toward the end of the year, as the effects of temporary factors, such as the decline in rice 
prices and the reduction in electricity and telephone charges, fall off. The year-on-year rate of change 
in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  expected  to  increase  thereafter,  as  the  Japanese  economy  is 
likely to continue growing at above its potential rate, causing the gap between supply and demand to 
shrink further.  
On the financial front, the environment for corporate finance is becoming more accommodative on the 
whole.  The  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  has  been  becoming  more  active.  Under  these 
circumstances, the negative year-on-year change in the amount of lending by private banks observed 
since 1998 has gradually improved, and the amount of their lending is currently at around the previous 
year's level. The environment in the capital markets for firms raising funds through CP and corporate 
bonds continues to be favorable.  
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
Conduct of monetary policy  
II. 
The Bank has been providing ample liquidity based on the quantitative easing policy. At the Monetary 
Policy Meeting (MPM) on October 11 and 12, 2005, the Policy Board decided to maintain the target 
range for the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the Bank at "around 30 to 35 trillion yen."  
The framework of the quantitative easing policy is based on two key elements. The first element is the 
Bank's  provision  of  ample  liquidity  to  the  money  market  so  that  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts at the Bank substantially exceeds the amount of required reserves. The second is the Bank's 
commitment to firmly maintain this ample provision of liquidity until the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis.  
Regarding the first element, the Bank's provision of ample liquidity contributed greatly to maintaining 
financial  system  stability  and  an  accommodative  corporate  financing  environment  by  responding  to 
financial  institutions'  precautionary  demand  for  liquidity  when  there  were  strong  concerns  about 
financial  system  stability.  Since  then,  such  concerns  have  largely  subsided,  as  evidenced  by  the 
smooth  implementation  of  the  full  removal  of  blanket  deposit  insurance  in  April  2005.  As  a  result, 
financial  institutions'  precautionary  demand  for  liquidity  has  been  on  a  declining  trend.  Under  these 
circumstances,  since  the  MPM  held  on  May  19  and  20,  2005,  the  Bank  has  been  allowing  the 
outstanding balance to temporarily fall below the target range when it is judged, in a situation where 
the Bank is doing its utmost to provide funds while at the same time giving due consideration to the 
effects  on  the  functioning  of  the  market,  that  financial  institutions'  liquidity  demand  is  exceptionally 
weak.  This  decision  is  intended  to  enable  the  quantitative  easing  policy  to  be  conducted  more 
smoothly by making it possible for liquidity to be provided with a minimum of hindrance to the process 
of price formation and efficient allocation of funds in the financial markets.  
In  the  current  situation,  the  quantitative  easing  policy  contributes  to  maintaining  an  accommodative 
financial environment by stabilizing market interest rates, thus allowing firms to continue to enjoy low 
funding  costs.  The  commitment's  positive  effects  through  interest  rates  on  the  economy  are 
strengthening as corporate profits increase with economic recovery.  
Conclusion  
Japan's economy has emerged from its temporary pause and continues to recover. As for the outlook, 
it is likely to experience a relatively long period of growth, albeit at a moderate pace, and the Bank will 
continue  its  close  monitoring  of  developments.  At  the  meeting  of  general  managers  of  the  Bank's 
branches scheduled for October 20, the Bank will examine the state of the economy in each region 
thoroughly based on the report presented there.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  appropriately  based  on  careful  examination  of 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices.  In  the  current  situation  where  the  CPI  has  been 
declining slightly on a year-on-year basis, the Bank is determined to support Japan's economy from 
the financial side to achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability, by maintaining monetary 
easing in accordance with the commitment based on the CPI.  
The Bank will also continue to pursue more advanced central bank services as well as ensure well-
disciplined  management,  according  to  a  Medium-Term  Strategic  Framework  for  fiscal  2005-2009 
formulated  in  March  2005,  in  order  to  properly  carry  out  the  duties  entrusted  to  it  as  the  nation's 
central bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
