Lars Heikensten: Risks and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Department of Business 
Studies, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 7 October 2005.   
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  your  homecoming  party,  although  I  have  never 
studied at the Business Studies Department at Uppsala University. I intend to take this opportunity to 
speak about the rapid developments in the financial markets over the past 10-15 years and to discuss 
the question of whether this entails risks being built up that will later result in serious setbacks. The 
trends  and  tendencies  I  intend  to  highlight  today  with  regard  to  market  agents’  behaviour  may  be 
primarily  observed  outside  of  Sweden’s  borders  –  it  is  important  to  emphasise  this.  I  have 
nevertheless chosen to discuss these partly because they can give us an idea of what might happen 
in  Sweden  in  the  long  term,  and  partly  because  these  tendencies  may  lead  to  problems  in  the 
international markets and thereby indirectly affect the Swedish market, too.1 
What has happened on the financial markets? 
The financial markets have developed rapidly in recent years, and there are many reasons for this. 
Technological  developments  have  radically  altered  the  potential  for  making  financial  transactions. 
Developments in IT, for instance, have enabled large numbers of prices to be stored and extensive 
calculations  can  be  made  in  various  risk  models.  This  has  enabled  us  to  take  advantage  of  the 
developments in financial theory, with increasingly advanced models for calculating prices. 
Technological  advances  contributed  to  some  extent  to  the  extensive  deregulation  of  the  financial 
markets. In a world where technology made it possible to circumvent many of the existing regulations, 
it  became  necessary  to  remove  them.  The  game  rules  were  thus  changed.  A  company  needing  to 
borrow capital does not need to rely purely on the usual form of bank lending, but can choose other 
types of instrument and other financial agents. Freedom of choice has increased. 
The stable macroeconomic trend – with low and stable inflation – in recent decades has probably also 
provided a good basis for developments. Financial innovations could perhaps not have occurred at the 
same rate in an uncertain economic environment. 
What does this mean for participants in these markets? 
Taken  together,  these  factors  have  led  to  an  increase  in  competition,  and  the  emergence  of  new 
instruments and participants. This has affected the financial landscape in many areas and changed 
the  role  of  traditional credit  institutions such  as banks  and  mortgage  institutions.  The  markets  have 
taken  on  an  increasingly  large  role  and  both  complement  and  compete  with  the  traditional  bank 
market. 
One example of the markets’ increased role is that many households no longer save their money in 
banks  to  the  same  extent;  they  save  directly  in  the  financial  markets  via  mutual  funds  and  also 
insurance  and  pension  fund  companies.  In  addition  to  buying  securities  in  the  market,  these 
companies can invest households’ savings in other funds with differing risk profiles. There is thus a 
larger number of agents involved. 
The opportunities today to divide cashflow into different types of securities with the liquidity, duration 
and risk that suit a particular investor are another example. This means, for instance, that the banks 
which lend money to a customer do not need to retain the credit risk this causes, but can sell the risk 
on to, say, a pension fund company. They do this by selling the loan to a special company, which then 
                                                      
1   The inspiration for this speech has largely come from a discussion at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's seminar 
"Monetary Policy in the Era of Alan Greenspan", based on an article by Raghuram G. Rajan "Has Financial Development 
Made the World Riskier?". 
   1/5 
issues securities with the loan as collateral. The pension company can then in turn sell the risks to 
others looking for good investments, such as households or other investors. 
Derivative products also enable risks to be divided up and priced separately. However, agents in the 
Swedish  markets  use  both  credit  derivatives  and  securitisation  relatively  sparingly  as  yet. 
Internationally,  these  markets  have  shown  rapid  growth.  In  the  year  2004  the  value  of  outstanding 
contracts for credit derivatives was almost six times higher than it had been in 2001. 
All  in  all,  this  development  will  lead  to  investors,  borrowers  and  banks  being  able  to  create  the 
combination of risks that they prefer. As I mentioned, this has changed the conditions for the banks, 
mostly on an international basis. The banks now need to find new sources of income to compensate 
for the decline in income on more traditional, mature markets. Their activities are increasingly being 
centred on more customised solutions, financial innovations and risk management. Thus, the banks 
are now less dominant in all areas of the financial system’s functions than they once were. 
Many  analysts  claim  that  the  financial  system  –  that  is  to  say  the  agents,  market-places  and 
infrastructure  –  can  function  more  efficiently  after  these  changes,  as  risks  are  spread  among  more 
agents and can therefore be managed in a better way. At the same time, there are those who advise 
caution and believe that certain tendencies in the new development will probably lead to fewer, but 
more  serious  financial  crises.  Let  me  begin  by  discussing  the  potential  advantages  of  the  new 
developments. 
Have the financial markets become more robust… 
The question of whether the financial markets have become more robust is one asked by many people 
after the Asia crisis, the Russia crisis, LTCM and other crises came and went without leaving making 
any major disruptions in the markets, other than temporary and relatively small price fluctuations. The 
effects on the international financial system were thus slight, although the crises affecting both Asia 
and Russia led to extensive redistribution of wealth and political tumult in the countries concerned. 
There are probably several reasons why the effects were so limited. One is probably that economic 
policy has become more predictable in many countries in recent decades, with sound public finances 
and stable, low inflation. The markets should therefore be less sensitive to shocks. 
However, another reason is actually that the financial system has become more resilient. The fact that 
risks have a better spread makes the system more stable. The risks are also transferred to the agents 
who want them or should have them. 
There  is  also  the  fact  that  the  banks  have  gained  more  experience  of  operating  in  deregulated 
financial markets. The development towards more market-based transactions means that banks can 
now concentrate on the risks they are best at managing. They have also become better at managing 
them, with well-developed risk management methods and models. 
So  far,  so  good.  A  better  spread  for  risks  and  improved  risk  management  can  contribute  to  better 
absorption of shocks to the financial system. On the other hand, there can be elements that increase 
the risk of more serious shocks that also spread throughout the whole system. 
…or have they become more prone to risk? 
One such tendency could be an increased propensity among market agents to take greater risks and 
to copy others’ actions. The reason for this is that those investing our money today are to a greater 
extent assessed – and thereby also rewarded – in relation to other agents and on a shorter-term basis 
than was the case in the world of traditional banking. It is also simpler to follow in others’ footsteps, as 
there is more information on what others are doing. 
The  crises  we  have  experienced  in  recent  years  have  recurrently  shown  that  events  assessed  as 
almost improbable can nevertheless occur sometimes and will then have a severe impact. 
To  use  Tage  Danielsson’s  words,  this  type  of  risk  could  be  described  as  follows:  Before  the  event 
occurred, it was extremely improbable that what happened could actually happen. There are still those 
who believe that what happened was so incredibly unlikely that it probably did not really happen. And 
one can understand that they have their doubts, because according to their probability calculations, 
this sort of event happens so rarely. And if what happened was really true, the risk of it happening 
   2/5 
again is ridiculously slight. Actually, it was lucky it did happen. Because now we know that it is almost 
definite that it will not happen again. 
It is possible that there are some inherent mechanisms in the agents’ ways of acting that may lead to 
these risks being undervalued. One such mechanism could be the fact that they are evaluated in the 
short term. If the asset managers are lucky, they will manage to predict the period with a positive yield 
and the rare loss will not become a reality during the period they are being evaluated. This appears 
more likely the shorter the evaluation period is. 
Willingness to take risks can increase in a low interest rate environment. Agents may then wish to take 
more interest rate risk and perhaps come further out on the yield curve, thus becoming more sensitive 
to rapid interest rate fluctuations. They may also look for new types of investment. 
The  fact  that  they  are  evaluated  in  comparison  with  others  in  the  market  may  also  lead  to  asset 
managers adopting herd behaviour, even if they have a different opinion of the current developments 
in the financial markets. It is better to lose in good company than to stand alone with an investment 
that might provide a good return in the long-run, but which results in short-term losses. The word might 
is central here, as no one can predict market developments and it is therefore difficult to go against a 
trend. Herd mentality can thus lead to asset prices deviating from fundamental economic conditions 
during a relatively long period of time. The contagion effects can also increase when the view of the 
world changes. 
Herd behaviour among market agents does not only involve investing in the same assets. There are 
signs that this also includes researching information. All of the agents stand back and assume that 
someone else will do the work, which means that many of them use the same sources of information 
for strategies and investments. The theory that market prices are based on all available information is 
thus overthrown. Prices are based more on recommendations from rating agencies and other external 
analysts who thereby assume great responsibility. To some extent, it must be the case that for each 
individual agent to research the information would be too costly and time-consuming. However, it is 
important to make use of the market that is there, with different analysts. 
A large number of agents closely linked to one another can lead to the liquidity in the market becoming 
more important - in short, that there is someone there when you want to sell at a reasonable price. 
There are greater risks that liquidity problems will arise when there are more links in the chain and if all 
of the market agents risk running in the same direction. Then there may be several agents trying to 
sell the same asset at the same time. 
Although many market agents have become much better at managing risk, many models are based 
on historical data which provides little information on risks in new, untried products. If one of these 
very improbable events were to occur, it could lead to increased uncertainty and willingness to rapidly 
change holdings, which would perhaps be difficult if everyone else had become more cautious. 
During  the  Russia  crisis  in  1998,  for  example,  the  models  could  not  predict  that  the  Russian 
government would default on payments – this type of event is generally very difficult to build into a 
model  –  and  the  slump  in  prices  this  would  lead  to  on  many  markets.  Nor  could  they  predict  that 
liquidity  would  decline  so  severely  that  the  banks  were  unable  to  sell  their  securities  without  this 
leading to a slump in prices. Asset prices that had earlier moved in the opposite direction and thereby 
reduced the total risk in the portfolio were now suddenly moving in the same direction. The risks were 
thus much greater than the models had indicated. 
These rapid adjustments in market prices with reduced liquidity are one scenario we have repeatedly 
pointed to as a risk scenario in our assessments of financial stability. If the risk premiums are too low 
on asset prices in the financial markets, changes in expectations can lead to instability with large price 
fluctuations and reduced liquidity. If prices of various assets covary to a greater extent than before, the 
financial agents’ risk exposure could increase rapidly. The fact that many investors have gone over to 
new types of asset could in this situation lead to declining interest in these assets and to liquidity partly 
or wholly disappearing from some markets. The events following the collapse of the US hedge fund 
LTCM in autumn 1998 are an example of this. 
Do the risk models take these difficulties into account? Yes, or at least in theory. When making their 
risk assessments, the banks test their risk models with a number of different assumptions, including 
the  risk  that  asset  prices  which  had  not  previously  covaried  suddenly  completely  covary.  But  the 
question is then how much these tests can govern actions. It is not certain that they will ultimately be 
taken  sufficiently  into  account  if  they  appear  less  reasonable  and  if  considering  them  entails  large 
costs. 
   3/5 
There are signs that risk exposure has increased in the international financial markets. Several large 
international  banks  have  increased  their  risks.  The  way  their  risk  models  are  designed,  they  have 
been  able  to  increase  their  exposures  to  higher  risk  investments  and  other  types  of  asset  without 
increasing the total risk measured, partly as a result of low interest rates. Financial institutions have 
increased their investments in high-risk bonds, in various commodities and in various types of credit 
derivatives. 
The question is whether the banks’ opportunities to sell certain risks entail their risks actually being 
reduced, or whether they have increased as a result of their retaining the highest, most complicated 
risks. The banks probably have more volatile risks in their balance sheets. The balance sheets are 
shrinking, but the risks are larger, calculated as a percentage. 
The  question  is  what  it  entails  when  the  banks  sell  their  risks,  primarily  credit  risks.  Risks  can  be 
compared to energy, or heat. They do not disappear into thin air; they are always there somewhere. 
Thus,  is  there  an  increased  concentration  of  risk  among  other  agents,  such  as  pension  fund 
companies and hedge funds, where this could create a problem?  In general, the risks come to those 
who  can  manage  them  and  therefore  bear  the  risks.  The  question  if  whether  we  who  oversee  the 
system and those who operate in the markets know when risks arise? 
How do these developments affect our stability work? 
The reason I have chosen to talk to you about these issues today is partly that developments in the 
financial  markets  affect  one  of  the  Riksbank’s  main  objectives  –  to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient 
payment system. The work on achieving this objective entails identifying potential risks in the financial 
system and assessing resilience to possible shocks. Our analysis is concentrated on the major banks, 
as they play a central role in the system. 
We  are  now  –  even  in  Sweden  –  more  dependent  on  the  financial  markets.  Although  many  of  the 
tendencies  I  have  mentioned  are  not  as  tangible  here,  we  can  still  be  affected  by  events  in  other 
countries, as in the case of autumn 1998. 
There  is  scarcely  any  doubt  that  the  changes  that  have  occurred  have  contributed  to  making  the 
markets more efficient. This is good for the economy as a whole, very good even. The markets have 
probably also become more robust, with the risks better spread over the economy. Events in recent 
years would indicate this is so. 
However, financial crises can never be entirely avoided. They will recur. Those who legislate, regulate 
and oversee the markets will not be able to prevent this. So what can we do? 
To begin with, of course, we need to obtain the best possible overview and knowledge of events. We 
at  the  Riksbank  consider  the  work  in  the  Bank  of  International  Settlements  within  the  G10  to  be 
invaluable in this context. There is also other work, for instance under the auspices of the International 
Monetary Fund, from which we can learn. 
One consequence of this development is that we must take international conditions into account to a 
greater  extent  in  our  own  work  on  stability  analysis.  We  must  also  oversee  developments  in  the 
financial markets more than we have done and not only concentrate on the major banks. We must try 
to be aware of when prices depart from reasonable levels and become a risk. 
With regard to risk management in individual institutions, it is becoming increasingly difficult to gain 
insight into what is happening. It is therefore necessary to spend more time on evaluating the systems 
and person involved. This is the view that has coloured the new oversight system for the banks, what 
is known as Basel II, which is about to be implemented. 
It is also our task to equip the systems and infrastructure so well that the effects of any future crises 
will  be  minimised.  In  addition,  we  must  of  course  maintain  preparedness  for  managing  crises, 
something which has become more complicated as integration has increased and which now requires 
greater efforts by central banks and financial supervisory authorities. 
Agents  in  the  financial  markets  must  also  take  responsibility.  The  risk  management  models  in  the 
financial institutions must be tested to a greater extent with regard to how they will function if market 
conditions  change  rapidly.  VaR  models  need  to  be  supplemented  with  stress  tests  that  capture 
external  events.  Extensive  price  fluctuations  and  changes  in  pricing  dynamics  may  mean  that 
historical relationships no longer apply. 
   4/5 
This is the financial system as we usually refer to it. However, perhaps the greatest difference that has 
occurred in the financial markets is that households have become a significant agent, even in Sweden. 
This  applies  first  and  foremost  to  households  investing  in  mutual  funds  and  pension  companies. 
However,  it  applies  to  an  increasing  number  of  households,  particularly  through  the  new  public 
pension system. Households as a group therefore bear more direct financial risk now. This also raises 
important questions. Are they prepared for this? What role do schools play in providing the necessary 
competence? Should other agents become involved? 
There is also a larger question in the background. How far should this development be pursued? Or, 
expressed another way: what can be done to help households wishing to minimise their financial risks, 
for instance, as they approach retirement age? 
These  are  large,  but  important,  question  that  are raised  by current  developments.  It  is  important  to 
deal with them in time.  
 
   5/5 
