Y V Reddy: Corporate governance in banks in India 
Luncheon  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Seminar  on 
Corporate  Governance  for  Bank  Directors  organised  by  the  Indian  Institute  of  Management, 
Bangalore; International Institute of Finance, Washington and the Indian Banks’ Association, Mumbai, 
16 December 2005. 
 Friends,  
I am thankful to the organisers for inviting me to give a luncheon address. There are several reasons 
why I was compelled to accept the responsibility. First, the eminence of the presentors, namely Indian 
Institute of Management, Bangalore, International Institute of Finance and Indian Banks’ Association. 
Second,  the  persuasive  skills  of  Mr.  Sinor  who  brings  to  bear  the  persona  of  the  whole  banking 
community on any subject. Third, growing importance being accorded to governance in banks by the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in recent years. This is a program addressed to Bank Directors of Indian 
banks  and  RBI  would  like  to  be  seen  to  be  supportive  of  efforts  to  equip  the  Directors  of  banks  to 
address  the  commercial-cum-governance  issues  in  general  and  fulfil  the  fiduciary  responsibilities 
implicit in being on the boards of banks, in particular. Since many substantive aspects of the subject 
are being addressed by highly qualified professionals, I will initially make a few general observations 
on the subject but will devote the rest to an enumeration of the Reserve Bank’s recent initiatives and 
some thoughts on way forward. 
General observations 
As  you  are  aware,  corporate  governance,  as  a  subject  of  significance  for  both  public  policy  and 
markets, is of recent origin. It is useful to recognise that it is a dynamic concept, in terms of scope, 
thrust and relevance. For example, the issue is approached very differently today compared to original 
view of the Cadbury Committee on the subject. East-Asian crisis gave a new dimension to corporate 
governance  in  the  context  of  financial  stability.  In  U.S.A.,  the  regulatory  regimes,  post-corporate 
scandals, are very different from those of the early 90’s. The OECD set out its corporate governance 
principles  in  1999  but  revised  them  in  2004.  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (under  the 
aegis of the BIS) published guidelines on corporate governance in banks in 1999. As an update, in 
July  2005,  the  Basel  Committee  has  issued  a  Consultative  Document  on  enhancing  corporate 
governance for banking organisations, seeking comments by end October 2005. I would advise that 
this document for now and the final document when released by BIS, should be a compulsory reading 
for all the regulators concerned and all the directors on the boards of the banks. The point to be noted 
is that corporate governance should be viewed as an ongoing process subject to rapid changes based 
on experiences, developments and policy-setting.  
There  is  considerable  divergence  in  the  understanding  and  practice  of  corporate  governance  in 
general,  and  in  respect  of  banks,  in  particular,  but  there  is  also  an  increasing  tendency  towards 
convergence. The cultural context may be difficult to capture but the legal, institutional and attitudinal 
contexts  do  vary  perceptibly  across  countries.  Differences  can  be  noticed  even  amongst  the 
industrialised countries – say between Anglo-Saxon, European and Japanese situations. At the same 
time, the trend towards greater convergence is for several reasons. The corporates are getting listed in 
multiple  stock  exchanges  in  different  countries  and  carry  out  corporate  operations  in  several 
jurisdictions while the cross-border financial flows seek an assurance of some commonly understood 
standards of governance, which have a mutually reinforcing tendency. Banks, in particular, have been 
a subject of special interest for governance, especially in view of their fiduciary role. The cross-border 
operations of banks provide an added impetus for convergence in such standards.  
Public policy framework in regard to corporate governance typically involves multiplicity of agencies in 
all  countries.  For  instance,  in  India,  these  are  Department  of  Company  Affairs;  Securities  and 
Exchange  Board  of  India  in  respect  of  listed  entities  apart  from  the  banking  regulator  in  respect  of 
banks. Harmonising their policies in a dynamic setting is a daunting task for policy makers and adds to 
the complexities of the corporates or banks concerned to ensure compliance.  
In regard to sectors such as banking in India where ownership of government is dominant, there are 
additional issues. Government, as an owner, is accountable to political institutions in terms of broader 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
socio-economic  objectives  and  hence,  its  goals  may  not  necessarily  be  compatible  with  purely 
economic  incentives.  Mixed  ownership,  with  the  government  as  a  major  shareholder,  brings  into 
sharper  focus  the  possible  divergent  objectives  of  share-ownership  in  a  corporate  or  a  bank  and 
issues  relating  to  the  rights  of  minority  shareholders.  The  problem  gets  more  complex  if  public 
ownership  is  exercised  through  separate  legislation  and  not  under  the  Company  Law,  normally 
applicable to other competing entities. The role of directors in such divergent organisational settings, 
therefore, needs a nuanced appreciation.  
Let me end these general observations with an anecdote. When I was working in the World Bank in 
late  1970s,  I  joined  the  George  Washington  University  for  getting  a  taste  of  education  in  a  foreign 
university.  I  took  a  course  in  management  services.  The  Professor  emphasised  various  aspects  of 
organisational behaviour. I found that the best interest of the organisation that one serves was missing 
in the analysis. When I queried, he said: “it is your boss who interprets to you, what is good for the 
organisation”.  When  I  persisted,  he  added,  “we  deal  with  the  corporate  behaviour  in  the  context  of 
north American male in the U.S.A.” I must confess that I continue to be old-fashioned. Any institution 
has, and in any case, should have a character, culture and interest that are worth pursuing even if 
they appear to be at variance from the sum of the interests of the individual, or the minority or the 
majority  stakeholders.  I  will  leave  this  thought  of  viewing  corporate  governance  in  broader  terms 
extending beyond its immediate constituent stakeholders on the few occasions when a divergence in 
interests might arise. With this, let me move on to what we have been doing in RBI on this subject.  
Reserve Bank’s approach  
The  formal  policy  announcement  in  regard  to  corporate  governance  was  first  made  by  my 
distinguished predecessor, Dr. Bimal Jalan in the Mid-Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy 
on  October  21,  2001.  Pursuant  to  this  announcement,  a  Consultative  Group  was  constituted  in 
November 2001 under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.S. Ganguly: basically, with a view to strengthen the 
internal  supervisory  role  of  the  Boards.  An  Advisory  Group  on  Corporate  Governance  under  the 
chairmanship  of  Dr.  R.H.  Patil  had  earlier  submitted  its  report  in  March  2001  which  examined  the 
issues relating to corporate governance in banks in India including the public sector banks and made 
recommendations  to  bring  the  governance  standards  in  India  on  par  with  the  best  international 
standards.    There  were  also  some  relevant  observations  by  the  Advisory  Group  on  Banking 
Supervision  under  the  chairmanship,  Shri  M.S.  Verma  which  submitted  its  report  in  January  2003. 
Keeping  all  these  recommendations  in  view  and  the  cross-country  experience,  the  Reserve  Bank 
initiated several measures to strengthen the corporate governance in the Indian banking sector.  
In June 2002, the report of the Ganguly Group was transmitted to all the banks for their consideration 
while simultaneously transmitting it to the Government of India for appropriate consideration.  It may 
be  noted  here  that  there  is  a  basic  difference  between  the  private  sector  banks  and  public  sector 
banks as far as the Reserve Bank’s role in governance matters relevant to banking is concerned.  The 
current  regulatory  framework  ensures,  by  and  large,  uniform  treatment  of  private  and  public  sector 
banks  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  so  far  as  prudential  aspects  are  concerned.  However,  some  of  the 
governance  aspects  of  public  sector  banks,  though  they  have  a  bearing  on  prudential  aspects,  are 
exempt  from  applicability  of  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  B.R.  Act,  as  they  are  governed  by  the 
respective  legislations  under  which  various  public  sector  banks  were  set  up.  In  brief,  therefore,  the 
approach of RBI has been to ensure, to the extent possible, uniform treatment of the public sector and 
the private sector banks in regard to prudential regulations.  In regard to governance aspects relevant 
to  banking,  the  Reserve  Bank  prescribes  its  policy  framework  for  the  private  sector  banks  while 
suggesting to the Government the same framework for adoption, as appropriate, consistent with the 
legal and policy imperatives.  
As  a  follow-up  of  the  Ganguly  Committee  report,  in  Mid-Term  Review  of  the  Monetary  and  Credit 
Policy in November 2003, the concept of ‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors of banks was formally 
enunciated,  and  it  included  the  process  of  collecting  information,  exercising  due  diligence  and 
constitution of a Nomination Committee of the board to scrutinise the declarations made by the bank 
directors.  In this regard, it will be useful to refer to the RBI guidelines on ownership and governance in 
the private sector banks released recently.  
It is heartening to note that based on the guidelines issued by RBI, all the banks in the private sector 
have carried out, through their nomination committees, the exercise of due diligence in respect of the 
directors on their Boards.  In some cases, where the track record of the directors was not considered 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2005
satisfactory,  the  directors  vacated  their  positions.  In  regard  to  some  others,  there  is  an  on-going 
process to ensure ‘fit and proper’ status of the directors.  
In this regard, it may be useful to distinguish the issue of the composition of the Board from the ‘fit and 
proper’ status of individual non-executive directors and chief executives.  The first relates to collective 
expertise  on  the  Board  available  to  meet  the  competitive  challenges  before  the  bank  to  ensure 
commercial  activity  while  maintaining  soundness.  The  existing  legal  provisions  in  regard  to  banks 
stipulate  specific  areas  of  background  that  a  director  should  be  drawn  from  such  as  accountancy, 
banking,  economics,  finance,  agriculture,  etc.,  but  do  not  specify  the  extent  or  degree  of 
professionalism or expertise required in regard to that area.  Hence, it is left to the good faith of the 
shareholders to elect directors from the various specified areas with qualifications and experience that 
is appropriate to the bank. In regard to public sector banks, such good faith is expected when directors 
are nominated by government.  
However, when the issue of ‘fit and proper’ status of non-executive directors comes up, the norms only 
seek  to  ensure  that  the  candidate  should  not  have  come  to  the  adverse  notice  of  the  law  and 
regulations or any professional body so that there is no objection from the RBI. In the case of non-
executive directors not satisfying the ‘fit and proper’ criteria, there is a prescribed due process to be 
followed by the RBI to disqualify such directors, which includes opportunities to be heard. The position 
in regard to the CEOs of the private sector banks is on a different footing where the Reserve Bank is in 
a position to exercise its judgement on the suitability of the candidates proposed, in as much as the 
approval of the Reserve Bank is required for the appointment and the RBI may seek removal also. 
These provisions are broadly consistent with global best practices though there is scope for enhancing 
effective implementation.  
There is no legal provision as of now for the Reserve Bank to insist on the ‘fit and proper’ status of the 
directors  nominated  by  the  government  or  elected  by  the  shareholders  to  the  Boards  of  the  public 
sector banks. The appointment of the CEOs in the public sector banks, as well as their removal, is 
also a matter to be decided only by the Government of India. There is, however, active consultation 
with  the  Reserve  Bank  in  regard  to  appointment  of  CEOs.  Thus,  by  and  large,  there  is  de  facto 
compliance with many governance requirements in public sector banks. .  
Way forward  
As a step towards distancing the regulator from the functioning of the Boards, the Reserve Bank has 
withdrawn  its  nominee  directors  from  almost  all  the  private  sector  banks.  Observers  have  been 
appointed as a transitional measures mostly in respect of those banks which are yet to fully comply 
with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  guidelines  of  ownership  of  governance.    It  is  hoped  that  the  need  for 
observers also will diminish as the quality of governance improves.  
Second, legislative amendments have been proposed in regard to the public sector banks to remove 
the provisions for mandatory nomination of RBI officers on their boards and thus, to bring them on par 
with the private sector banks in this regard.  
Third, the Government has been requested to keep in view the policy framework for governance in 
private  sector  banks  while  deciding  on  the  appointments  of  the  directors  on  the  Boards’  of  public 
sector banks and constitution of various committees of the Board.  
Fourth, the RBI, as far as possible, has recently been refraining from issuing circulars or instructions 
specifically  addressed  to  the  public  sector  banks.    It  is  expected  that  all  the  existing  instructions 
specifically  applicable  to  the  public  sector  banks  will  be  reviewed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  so  that 
uniformity in regulatory framework between different categories of banks is formally established.  
Fifth, several amendments to the Banking Regulation Act have been proposed which would enhance 
RBI’s capacity to ensure sound governance specially relevant to the banks, consistent with global best 
practices.  
In  regard  to  urban  co-operative  banks  (UCBs),  there  are  unique  problems  which  need  to  be 
addressed.  Since  all  the  governance  aspects  of  urban  co-operative  banks  fall  entirely  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  State Governments, while  only prudential  aspects are  in  the  RBI’s  domain,  it  has 
been difficult to ensure effective co-ordination owing to the problems of dual control in the matters of 
governance which have a bearing on prudential regulation. Further, the market discipline in terms of 
shareholders’ influence on governance does not exist in regard to urban co-operative banks since they 
do  not  depend  on  equity  markets  for  their  funds.  Moreover,  the  governance  structure  in  the  UCBs 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 3
seems to be tilted in favour of the borrowers from the UCBs, thus, possibly undermining the interest of 
the  depositors.  Currently,  to  avoid  problems  of  dual  control,  a  mechanism  of  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  (MOU)  with  the  State  Governments,  is  being  attempted.  RBI  has  entered  into  such 
MoUs with Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka and is providing facilities for upgrading the skills of 
the members of the Board and the management of the UCBs, in these States.  
The  problem  of  dual  control  is  even  more  acute  in  regard  to  the  rural  co-operative  credit  structure.  
However,  these  are  being  currently  addressed  by  the  Government  of  India  in  the  light  of  the 
recommendations of the Vaidyanathan Committee.  
The RRBs are yet another category of banks which are actually owned, in a pre-determined pattern, 
by the State, Centre and the sponsor banks.  The sponsor banks are virtually managing the RRBs and 
the  issues  of  governance of  these institutions are  yet  to  be  addressed. Deposit  taking  NBFCs  and, 
perhaps, NBFCs with systemic implications may also need to be considered for a careful review of 
their  current  governance  practices  in  view  of  their  unique  role  and  expanding  importance  in  our 
financial sector.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude with a reiteration that the Reserve Bank is continuously striving to ensure compliance 
with international standards and best practices of corporate governance in banks as relevant to India. 
RBI is also interacting closely with the Government and the SEBI in this regard. Increasing regulatory 
comfort in regard to standards of governance in banks gives greater confidence to shift from external 
regulation to internal systems of controls and risk-management. Each of the directors of the banks has 
a  role  in  continually  enhancing  the  standards  of  governance  in  banks  through  a  combination  of 
appropriate knowledge and values. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2005
