Goh Chok Tong: Riding the Asian tide  
Speech Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the Nomura Singapore Seminar, Tokyo, 8 November 2005. 
 Dr Junichi Ujiie, President of Nomura Securities 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
1. Nowadays, it is popular to focus on the awesome transformation of China and its implications when 
discussing Asia. But doing so risks missing the dramatic changes in another key player - India. My 
theme is simple: the renaissance of China and India is changing Asia. Other countries in Asia, and in 
fact the world, will have to remake themselves to seize the opportunities generated by their rise.  
2. I expect China and India to power Asia's growth over the next few decades. China's GDP today is 
one-seventh that of the US. But Goldman Sachs has predicted that China could overtake the US to 
become  the  world's  largest  economy  by  2041.  Goldman  Sachs  has  also  predicted  that  India's 
economy, currently about one-seventh of Japan's, could be larger than Japan's by 2032. Never before 
in history have we witnessed the simultaneous rise of two gigantic countries, which together make up 
more than one third of mankind.  
3. China and India are altering global patterns of trade, investment, production and travel. Because of 
their sheer size, the earth shakes as the Chinese dragon and the Indian elephant move.  
4. What do we do in the face of these developments? How do we adjust to the new realities and seize 
the opportunities therein? These are the key questions before us. 
5. This fourth Nomura Singapore Seminar is therefore timely. This morning, I hope to contribute to a 
deeper  understanding  of  the  geopolitical  forces  at  work  and  highlight  some  of  the  economic 
opportunities available as the global landscape is being reshaped. 
An ascendant dragon 
6. First, China.  
7. I first went to China in 1971, when I was working for Neptune Orient Lines. We were exploring the 
possibility  of  chartering  ships  to  China.  China  then  was  in  the  grip  of  the  Cultural  Revolution. 
Everybody wore drab blue or grey Mao jackets and cloth shoes. Men and women looked alike but for 
the  length  of  their  hair.  Chairman  Mao's  portraits  were  everywhere.  The  air  was  filled  with 
revolutionary songs praising him and the glory of communism - from morning till night, at the airport, 
on  trains,  in  the  hotel  lobby  and  even  in  the  toilets!  There  was  no  escape!  There  was  no  private 
enterprise either.  
8. My next visit was in 1975. Deng Xiaoping and the Gang of Four were locked in a fierce ideological 
struggle. Deng was branded a 'capitalist roader'. While on a field trip, I asked a worker where he had 
learned his technical skills. He pointed to the pocket of his Mao jacket and said, "The Little Red Book". 
Admission  to  university  depended  not  on  academic  performance  but  how  'red'  a  person's  political 
thinking was. So too the job a person was assigned. 
9. Over the years, I have returned to China many times and witnessed its remarkable transformation 
first-hand. How China has changed! Revolutionary songs in public have given way to pop songs in 
karaoke  lounges.  Mao  jackets  have  been  discarded  in  favour  of  Gucci,  Armani  and  other  luxury 
brands.  I  am  told  that  many  Chinese  go  to  Hong  Kong  to  buy  branded  goods,  while  many  Hong 
Kongers cross over to Shenzhen to buy cheap imitations. China is today the third biggest luxury goods 
market worldwide.  
10. The physical transformation of China is remarkable enough but the mindset change is even more 
impressive. When Deng Xiaoping pronounced that the colour of the cat is not important so long as it 
catches  mice,  pragmatism  supplanted  ideological  purity.  Today,  there  are  more  capitalists  in  China 
than in Japan. According to a recent Xinhua article (13th October 2005) entitled " China's Rich Get 
Gloriously  Richer",  the  total  wealth  of  China's  400  richest  people  grew  by  40  percent  in  2004  and 
amounted to 7 percent of GDP. The Chinese have made a strategic choice to pursue what they call 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 1
'socialism with Chinese characteristics'. But to me, it is capitalism with Chinese characteristics. China 
has  also  embraced  globalisation  and  with  its  admission  to  the  World  Trade  Organisation  in  2001, 
China will have to play by international trade rules. There is no turning back. As China grows, it has a 
vested interest to strengthen the international system that has enabled its success. 
11. I believe China should be able to sustain 8 percent annual growth over the next 20 years. China is 
drawing in investments, capital, technology, foreign management expertise and talent. It is investing 
heavily  in  education  and  human  capital.  Much  of  its  growth  is  also  internally  generated  and 
increasingly consumer-led.  
12. China is forcing the pace of change throughout Asia. This is for the better. The Chinese dragon will 
usher  in  a  new  prosperous  Asian  Century.  For  example,  as  China  grows,  so  will  its  appetite  for 
imports. Credit Suisse First Boston expects China to become the second largest consumer market by 
2014. That is less than 10 years away. The Chinese middle class is expected to reach 45 percent of 
the population by 2020, around 580 million or more than 4 times the current Japanese population.  
13. However, China's growth will not be an upward-sloping straight line. The country faces very real 
challenges.  In  2003  when  I  visited  China,  Premier  Wen  Jiabao  explained  to  me  the  magnitude  of 
problems  facing  China's  development  through  the  concept  of  'division  and  multiplication'.  China's 
wealth  of  resources  became  very  small  when  divided  by  1.3  billion  people,  while  a  small  problem 
became  huge  when  multiplied  by  1.3  billion.  Premier  Wen  also  highlighted  the  divide  between  the 
coastal  and  inland  regions  and  stressed  that  China's  priority  was  on  economic  and  social 
development.  
14. China will also have to cope with the impact of development on the environment. Take for example 
the use of chopsticks. China uses 45 billion pairs of disposable chopsticks per year, which requires 25 
million  full-grown  trees  to  make  (International  Herald  Tribune,  27th  October  2005).  This  means 
massive deforestation and an adverse impact on the environment. Another problem is the widening 
income gap. Bear in mind that there are 26 million Chinese still living in abject poverty, earning less 
than US$80 annually. China will also face the trickier problem of managing the demand for political 
change and greater political participation as it becomes a middle income country. For the first time, 
China recently published a White Paper on 'Building of Political Democracy in China'. 
15. China's leaders know that they will retain the mandate of heaven only if they deliver the economic 
goods and a better standard of living. Having tasted the fruits of market-oriented policies, the Chinese 
people  will  want  more.  To  grow,  China  needs  a  stable  external  environment.  This  is  why  China's 
leaders  have  been  careful  to  assure  the  world  that  it  will  pursue  a  'path  of  peaceful  development' 
(
). They are well aware that China's rapid growth is creating enormous pressures on 
the international system and that they need to craft a development and foreign policy strategy that will 
ensure the peace and stability needed for its growth. 
The trundling Indian elephant 
16. Let me now turn to India, which is also shaking off old mindsets and taking pragmatic steps toward 
reform and liberalisation.  
17. I first visited India as Prime Minister in 1994. Indian leaders and businessmen wanted to convince 
me  of  India's  technical  expertise,  management  skills  and  huge  market.  They  wanted  Singapore 
investments. The late Narasimha Rao, who was then Prime Minister, had just begun to reform India's 
economy, working closely with his then Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh. I encouraged them. I told 
the  Indian  leaders  and  businessmen  that  protectionism  was  the  wrong  development  strategy:  900 
million people should not produce for only 900 million people. They would be better off producing for 
the whole world.  
18. Many observers had doubted whether India could shake off decades of central planning. Indeed, 
in its reform path, India had often taken two steps forward and one step back, sometimes in a zigzag. 
But I knew that India, like a big elephant with constant change of mahouts, would take time to turn 
around.  
19.  Since  then,  India's  economic  reforms  have  been  creating  a  buzz.  The  mindset  change  of 
politicians and business leaders in this new India is palpable. 
20. Today, India is attracting attention from foreign media and investors. Japan has traditionally not 
shown much interest in India. But this may change. I am told that Japanese companies have started to 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2005
explore the new India. Recently, when Nomura Securities launched its India Stock fund in Singapore, 
US$1billion was raised in a week. I urge Japanese companies to quicken the pace of this exploration.  
21. India is changing, albeit not as quickly as China. There are many serious challenges. Like China, 
income  disparity  is  a  major  problem.  Reforms  will  be  uneven  and  politically  complex.  The  Indian 
system, with its decentralisation of power, makes change more difficult. Navigating the bureaucracy 
and  its  regulations  requires  connections,  skill  and  lots  of  patience.  However,  while  the  pace  may 
fluctuate,  reforms  are  irreversible.  Whichever  party  is  in  power  will  have  to  deliver  the  economic 
goods. This, together with the desire not to be left behind by China, will ensure that India stays on the 
path of reform. 
22. India has many strengths, not least of which is its deep source of human capital, including a large 
pool  of  well-educated  English-speaking  professionals  and  workers.  India  has  a  young  population, 
much younger than Japan's and China's. 55 percent of Indians are under 25 years old and 40 percent 
under 15.  
23. India has carved a niche for itself as the world's back office and a global software centre. India is 
also working hard to change its investment outlook. In 2004, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into India 
was US$5.5 billion, less than 10 percent of China's US$61 billion. Under Prime Minister Manmohan 
Singh,  fiscal  consolidation  has  shown  progress.  Customs  duties  have  been  slashed.  Another 
significant  initiative  is  the  development  of  Special  Economic  Zones,  where  superior  infrastructure, 
flexible investment laws and special incentives are designed to draw in foreign investments. 
24. There is strong competition among Indian states and cities for investments and to outperform each 
other. Recently, the Chief Minister of West Bengal called on me. West Bengal has been ruled by the 
Indian communists for almost 30 years. The Chief Minister wanted to promote foreign investments into 
West Bengal. His aim was to capture 25 percent of India's IT outsourcing market by 2010. He said that 
the Indian communists had drawn lessons from the collapse of the former Soviet Union and China's 
economic reforms. The choice was stark and simple: either perform or perish.  
25.  The  recent  bomb  attacks  in  New  Delhi  have  not  affected  India's  growth  trajectory.  The  Indian 
Government has responded swiftly and with determination. I have full confidence that it will be on top 
of the security situation. As India grows, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects that by 2010, 
India's exports will more than double, while imports will nearly triple. The consumer market could then 
be worth US$400 billion, making it one of the top five globally. To sustain an annual growth rate of 8 
percent  would  require  a  huge  injection  of  investments,  both  foreign  and  domestic,  over  the  next 
decade. It is this immense demand for infrastructure, education, healthcare and consumer goods that 
will continue to draw foreign investors and businesses to India.  
A reinvigorated ASEAN 
26. Let me now move on to ASEAN.  
27. Prospects for Southeast Asia have brightened considerably. Regional economies have remained 
stable, despite the recent Bali bombings.  
28.  With  China  and  India  becoming  big  players  in  the  international  market,  Southeast  Asia  has  no 
choice but to respond strategically. ASEAN is becoming increasingly integrated so that its market will 
be at least half as big as China's and India's. ASEAN made a fundamental strategic choice to form the 
ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by 2020. It is also formulating an ASEAN Charter, a visionary 
document that will chart its future direction. 
29. In addition, ASEAN is positioning itself to ride on the growth of China and India. ASEAN's total 
trade with China  and  India  has  grown significantly  over  the  past decade,  and in  2004  amounted  to 
US$80 billion and US$17 billion respectively.  
30. ASEAN is working hard to ensure that its Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with China and India are 
completed and fully implemented by 2010 and 2011 respectively. Besides China and India, ASEAN is 
also  negotiating  FTAs  with  other  major  economies  like  Japan,  South  Korea,  Australia  and  New 
Zealand. 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 3
Japan's role and response 
31. In the past decades, Japan has led the growth of China, South Korea and many other countries in 
the region in a 'flying geese' formation. Japan has been an important source of investments, capital 
and technology, and a major export market for many Asian countries. After a decade of stagnation, 
Japan  is  firmly  back  on  the  path  of  healthy  sustained  growth.  Prime  Minister  Junichiro  Koizumi's 
leadership and overwhelming victory in the recent election give cause for hope that his reforms will be 
sustained. As the second largest economy in the world, Japan will remain an important global player.  
32. Japan, together with the US and China, form the strategic triangle that undergirds regional stability. 
With  India's  rise,  a  new  strategic  triangle  of  US-China-India  will,  in  time,  be  superimposed  upon  it. 
Stable relations amongst the key players will be critical for regional peace and development.  
33.  Recent  tensions  in  Sino-Japanese  relations  are  of  concern.  Such  strains  are  part  of  the  deep 
ambivalence  with  which  Beijing  and  Tokyo  view  each  other.  Both  China  and  Japan  have  their 
respective  positions  on  the  history  issue.  China's  attitude  towards  Japan  is  coloured  by  Japan's 
reluctance  to  come  to  terms  with  its  World  War  II  history,  while  Japan's  attitude  towards  China  is 
shaped by its anxiety over how China's rise will alter the regional balance and affect Japan's interests. 
Domestic politics and rising nationalism in both countries are complicating factors.  
34.  Fortunately,  both  countries want  to avoid  a  collision.  There  are  strong  incentives  for  China  and 
Japan to deepen ties. China needs investments, technology and know-how from Japan, while Japan 
needs the markets and production base in China. 
35.  The  tensions  in  Sino-Japanese  relations  are  understandable  because  there  has  never  been  a 
period in history when China and Japan are simultaneously strong powers. Today, both countries find 
that they must treat each other as equals. Naturally, the search for a new modus vivendi will be fraught 
with anxiety. While not forgetting the past, both sides must find a way to close the history issue and 
write a new chapter of cooperative relations. Working towards a mutually-beneficial future together is 
the best way to prevent history from repeating itself. 
36.  Japan's  relations  with  India  are  less  problematic.  Prime  Minister  Koizumi's  visit  to  India  in  April 
2005 signalled a desire to establish a new basis for relations. But there is an undercurrent of cultural 
unease that needs to be transcended so as to realise the full potential of Japan-India cooperation.  
37. ASEAN, as a group and individually, has much to offer Japan. ASEAN can be a strategic partner 
for  Japan  to  tap  into  the  growing  economies  of  China  and  India.  ASEAN  can  also  offer  Japan  a 
competitive  production  base,  supplies  of  natural  resources  including  oil  and  gas,  and  additional 
markets for Japanese products.  
38.  Japan  is  already  the  top  investor  in  Indonesia.  Under  President  Susilo  Bambang  Yudhoyono's 
leadership,  Indonesia  has  begun  to  develop  its  economy,  attract  investments  and  play  an  active 
regional  role.  President  Yudhoyono  is  also  pressing  ahead  with  difficult  reforms  to  get  the  country 
moving on the fast track. 
39. Vietnam is a relatively new partner for Japan. So it should not surprise you to learn that Japan is 
the third largest foreign investor there, while Singapore is second. Vietnam's bid to join the WTO has 
catalysed FDI flows totalling US$2.6 billion in the first nine months of 2005, about double the amount 
in the same period in 2004. Not surprisingly, Japanese companies are increasing their presence there.  
Remaking Singapore 
40. Singapore has been remaking itself to enhance our competitiveness and seize the opportunities in 
the region. 
41.  Reinventing  ourselves  to  stay  relevant  is  in  our  DNA.  In  the  1960s  and  70s,  when  it  was 
fashionable to be anti-MNC, Singapore welcomed MNCs. Over the past 40 years, we have grown in 
partnership  with  MNCs  in  manufacturing.  This  strategy  will  continue.  The  manufacturing  sector  will 
remain a key driver of our economy.  
42.  But  we  have  started  to  build  a  second  platform  to  drive  an  innovation-  and  knowledge-based 
economy.  New  areas  of  focus  include  Research  and  Development,  biomedical  sciences  and  the 
creative  industry.  We  have  also  undertaken  extensive  measures  aimed  at  strategically  positioning 
Singapore as a leading international financial centre. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2005
43. Singapore is also prepared to break old moulds and be flexible and practical in a changing world. 
For instance, we overturned our longstanding policy of disallowing casino gambling. To remake itself 
into a city with buzz, Singapore is developing Integrated Resorts, with casinos, convention facilities 
and world-class entertainment. 
Japan-Singapore partnership for the future 
44. I see great potential in closer collaboration between Singapore and Japan. The landmark Japan-
Singapore  Economic  Agreement  for  a  New  Age  Partnership  (JSEPA)  provides  an  excellent 
framework.  Japanese  companies  can  use  Singapore  as  a  hub  with  radiating  spokes  to  tap  global 
opportunities. From Singapore, companies can service a combined population of 3 billion. That is why 
7,000 MNCs choose to hub in Singapore. Of these, 4,000 manage global and regional responsibilities. 
Recognising  this  strategic  value-add,  many  Japanese  companies  have  further  expanded  their 
operations in Singapore. 
45. Japanese companies can also take advantage of Singapore as a hub for knowledge and market 
intelligence. Over the years, we have developed a network of institutions that have a deep reservoir of 
knowledge  on  China,  India  and  Southeast  Asia.  Our  businessmen  are  also  familiar  with  these 
countries. We are now building up links with the Middle East. 
46. Japanese companies based in Singapore can enjoy not only benefits from the JSEPA, but also 10 
other  FTAs  that  Singapore  has  concluded  with  major  economies  like  the  US,  South  Korea  and 
Australia.  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  Comprehensive  Economic  Cooperation  Agreement  (CECA) 
between  Singapore  and  India  as  it  is  the  first  comprehensive  FTA  that  India  has  signed  with  any 
country.  
Conclusion 
47.  The  rise  of  China  and  India  will  shift  the  global  economic  centre  of  gravity  from  West  to  East. 
Remaking our economies cannot be an occasional exercise. Governments must respond boldly and 
continuously to the imperatives of our changing times. Likewise for companies. This is the only way to 
ride the rising Asian tide. 
48. Thank you. I will be happy to take your questions. 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 5
