Goh Chok Tong: Strengthening Singapore’s position as a leading financial 
centre in Asia 
Speech  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong,  Senior  Minister  and  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore 
(MAS), at the 2005 MAS Staff Seminar, Singapore, 29 November 2005. 
 Let me begin by welcoming you to the 2005 MAS Staff Seminar. It has been a busy but good year for 
the industry and MAS. 
Positive global and regional outlook 
2. Globally, 2005 looks set to end on a positive note. The IMF has projected world economic growth of 
4.3% this year and sees the potential for further growth next year. The US economy remains resilient. 
It has withstood progressive interest rate hikes and the devastation caused by Hurricanes Katrina and 
Rita. While the oil market remains tight and the US current account and budget deficits continue to be 
cause for caution, the Greenspan era should end positively. 
3. Asia is doing well. East Asia's combined economy has been growing by an average of 3.4% per 
year  between  2000  and  2004.  Take  away  Japan,  East  Asia's  annual  growth  rate  is  even  more 
impressive  - 6.4%,  well  above  the global  average of  3.8%.  East  Asian countries  have accumulated 
massive foreign reserves and now account for nearly 60% of global reserves. Global investors looking 
for better returns have shown strong interest in Asian equities, bonds and alternative investments. 
4. The blockbusters in Asia's growth story are China and India. I have spoken about them in some 
detail  last  year.  China  and  India,  fast  becoming  global  economic  powerhouses,  offer  immense 
opportunities for Asia and the world. 
5. But  we  should  not  overlook  Japan.  It  is,  after  all,  still  the  second  largest  economy  in  the  world. 
Japan is experiencing renewed vigour after more than a decade of economic stagnation and deflation. 
Earlier  this  month,  I  was  in  Tokyo  for  the  Nomura  Singapore  Seminar.  The  political  and  business 
leaders I met exuded a strong sense of confidence that Japan has turned the corner and is firmly on 
the path of sustained growth. 
ASEAN is doing well 
6. Prospects  for  Southeast  Asia  have  improved.  Despite  the  Bali  bombings,  regional  economies 
remained stable. Unless there is an avian flu pandemic, we can expect ASEAN countries to grow at a 
steady 5% this year and next. 
7. ASEAN has been deepening and quickening the pace of integration. ASEAN countries have agreed 
to form an economic community by 2020, with free flow of goods, services and investment. We are 
already seeing greater financial markets integration. The stock exchanges are exploring how to link up 
in terms of trading and benchmarking. The bond markets now have a regional index. The ASEAN sky 
will be freed up in a couple of years. Already, Low Cost Carriers have appeared on the scene. This will 
boost tourism. 
8. ASEAN countries are crafting an ASEAN Charter. It is expected to be a visionary document that will 
chart  the  organisation's  future  direction.  An  Eminent  Persons'  Group  (EPG)  will  be  launched  at  the 
11th ASEAN Summit next month. The EPG will be tasked to come up with bold and practical ideas on 
how to revitalise and strengthen ASEAN. 
Singapore's prospects are bright 
9. Given  the  favourable  external  environment,  the  outlook  for  Singapore  is  good.  In  the  first  nine 
months of this year, we have generated more than 78,000 jobs, almost 7,000 more than the whole of 
last  year.  Inflation  has  stayed  low.  This  year,  we  expect  GDP  growth  to  be  around  5%.  Next  year, 
growth should be between 3% and 5%. 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 1
10. Singapore's financial sector has grown strongly, averaging 5.4% over the first three quarters of the 
year,  slightly  higher  than  the  overall  expansion  in  the  economy.  This  was  supported  by  robust 
contributions from fund management and continued growth in the Asian Dollar Market. 
11. Relations with our neighbours have strengthened considerably. Economic cooperation has further 
deepened. Singapore is the fourth largest investor in Indonesia. In February, we signed the Indonesia-
Singapore  Investment  Guarantee  Agreement  (IGA),  which  serves  to  establish  a  framework  for 
investors to operate in stability and confidence. 
12. Political ties between Singapore and Malaysia have improved. Trade and investments across the 
Causeway continue to grow strongly. Malaysia is Singapore's biggest trading partner and Singapore 
was the second largest group of foreign investors in Malaysia last year. Temasek Holdings acquired 
5% of Telekom Malaysia. In turn, Khazanah Nasional teamed up with Telekom Malaysia to take a 30% 
stake in M1. Such cross-border investments will further intermesh our two economies. 
13. We  are  enhancing  synergy  with  the  Thai  economy  through  the  Singapore-Thailand  Enhanced 
Economic  Relationship  (STEER)  programme.  Last  week's  second  STEER  meeting  in  Bangkok  saw 
the  signing  of  nine  business  agreements  ranging  from  tourism  to  logistics.  MAS  and  the  Thai 
Securities  Exchange  Commission  also  signed  a  letter  of  intent  for  closer  cooperation  in  capital 
markets. 
14. Next month, Singapore and Vietnam will sign the Framework Agreement on Connectivity, which 
will help us leverage on each other's strengths and complementarities. Areas of cooperation include 
finance,  ICT  (Information  and  Communications  Technologies),  investments,  trade  and  services, 
transport and education. Singapore is the second largest foreign investor in Vietnam, after Taiwan but 
ahead of Japan. The Connectivity agreement will further open up opportunities for Singapore firms in 
Vietnam. 
Seizing the opportunities 
15. Governments in Asia see the benefits of economic cooperation and are building closer links, both 
on a multilateral as well as bilateral basis. This will enable the private sector to take full advantage of 
the  rich  array  of  opportunities.  I  strongly  encourage  Singapore-based  companies  and  financial 
institutions to ride the growth momentum. 
16. Let me highlight a few such opportunities. As capital restrictions are gradually liberalised in their 
countries,  Chinese  and  Indian  individuals,  financial  institutions  and  corporates  will  begin  to  invest 
overseas.  Singapore-based  financial  institutions  could  partner  them  to  use  Singapore  as  a  base  to 
expand into the region. 
17. The  Comprehensive  Economic  Cooperation  Agreement  (CECA)  is  a  win-win  outcome  for 
Singapore and India. Singapore can offer a platform for Indian firms to build up their global exposure 
and branding. India is also a promising investment destination for Singapore firms. Under CECA, our 
domestic  banks  are  allowed  to  open  up  to  15  branches  in  India,  and  they  are  in  the  process  of 
preparing for expansion into this market. To deepen the linkage, MAS will allow Indian banks that meet 
our prudential standards to expand their presence in Singapore. We have approved the entry of two 
Indian banks which do not yet have a presence in Singapore. 
18. The  Japan-Singapore  Economic  Agreement  for  a  New  Age  Partnership  (JSEPA)  has  brought  a 
new  era  of  closer  economic  cooperation.  Investments  by  Japan  and  Singapore  in  each  other(cid:31)s 
markets have increased. Japanese companies which are looking to diversify some of their business 
operations into Southeast Asia can use Singapore as the gateway. Singapore-based companies can 
take  advantage  of  not  just  the  JSEPA  but  bilateral  Free  Trade  Agreements  (FTAs)  Singapore  has 
signed with other countries to expand into the region and beyond. When I was in Tokyo, I suggested 
that the JSEPA should be reviewed to see where it could be further broadened and deepened. The 
Japanese leaders were receptive. 
19. The  Middle  East  is  another  promising  region.  Middle  Eastern  investors  are  looking  for  suitable 
investment destinations and products both in their own countries and outside. Singapore has a good 
brand name in the Middle East and awareness about us is increasing. There are many opportunities 
for our businesses there. 
20. During my visits to the Middle East, I sensed their interest in investing in Asia. Many are keen to 
engage  China  and  India  but  their  businessmen  told  me  that  they  were  not  so  familiar  with  doing 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2005
business  in  China.  Singapore  can  serve  as  a  bridge,  given  our  knowledge  and  connections. 
Furthermore, Indian, Chinese and Singaporean financial institutions could tap into Islamic funds from 
the Middle East for infrastructural and other major projects in India and China. 
21. As  an  international  financial  centre,  Singapore  is  well  placed  to  intermediate  and  facilitate 
investment flows between Asia and the Middle East. Already, funds managed in Singapore from the 
Middle East have increased by over 70% to S$22 billion in 2004. But this is still a small figure, given 
the trillions of dollars of wealth in the Middle East. We should work with credible partners to offer a 
wider suite of Islamic financial services and products. 
The role of MAS 
22. MAS  will  continue  to  support  and  partner  the  financial  industry  to  seize  the  opportunities.  Last 
year, I highlighted three strategic priorities for MAS and our financial sector. They are first, strengthen 
our position as a leading financial centre in Asia; second, maintain excellence in a riskier environment; 
and third, leverage and build on our reputation. We have made good progress on all three fronts. 
Strengthening our position as a leading financial centre in Asia 
23. As MAS Chairman, I regularly meet CEOs of global banks and big companies. They give me a feel 
of how Singapore is viewed. One of the top bankers told me that he saw Singapore emerging as one 
of the top financial centres in Asia in the longer term. Our strong fundamentals will enable us to play a 
role  in  Asia's  transformation.  Another  CEO  told  me  that  his  bank  found  skill  levels  and  costs  in 
Singapore  competitive  enough  for  them  to  outsource  processing  work,  including  operations  and  IT 
development from Europe to Singapore. 
24. In 2004, our treasury and capital markets grew strongly. For instance, the Singapore debt market 
grew by 20% to S$123 billion. Our fund management industry has continued to flourish, with assets 
under management (AUM) rising to almost S$600 billion. On the Singapore Exchange, the structured 
warrants market has seen tremendous growth. 
25. A vibrant and dynamic financial centre depends on a vibrant and dynamic talent pool. In today's 
competitive environment, knowledge and talent are what will set businesses and even countries apart. 
In fact, one of the critical factors limiting the quick expansion of Singapore's financial industry is the 
availability of talent. 
26. We seek to build up this talent pool in three broad ways. First, at the pre-employment stage, we 
ensure that the curriculum at our universities and polytechnics prepare their graduates well for entry 
into  the  industry.  This  is  imperative  if  our  graduates  are  to  be  relevant  in  a  fast  and ever-changing 
financial  industry.  MAS  and  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  have  been  facilitating  closer 
interactions between various stakeholders to achieve this. 
27. Second, emphasis is placed on continual skills upgrading. A key initiative is the Financial Industry 
Competency Standards (FICS). Launched in September, FICS will provide the national framework that 
benchmarks  the  competency  level  of  our  workforce  against  top  international  standards.  This  is  an 
industry-led  initiative.  MAS  is  working  on  a  funding  scheme  to  support  financial  institutions  that 
participate in this programme. 
28. Third, we want to develop Singapore into a centre for financial sector research. Research can be a 
strategic enabler for financial institutions to develop innovative products, specialist skills and tap new 
markets. MAS announced a S$10 million "Programme on Risk Management and Financial Innovation" 
scheme in June to support research in risk management. Going forward, MAS is seeking consultation 
to develop a broader industry framework to better steer and facilitate financial sector research. 
29. As  Singapore's  small  population  is  a  constraint,  we  have  to  continue  to  attract  global  talent  to 
complement Singapore's own. However, the competition for global talent is also very keen. We need 
to identify and reach out to new sources of talent and holistically profile Singapore as a country not just 
good to work in, but also to live, play and see the region. 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 3
Maintaining excellence in a riskier environment 
30. We  have  continued  to  strengthen  our  macro-surveillance  functions.  MAS  now  publishes  a 
Financial Stability Review report twice a year, in addition to the Macroeconomic Review. 
31 Earlier this year, we sought feedback from financial sector stakeholders on MAS's performance in 
an  External  Perception  Survey  (EPS).  Stakeholders  have  rated  MAS  favourably  in  most  areas.  For 
example, MAS' role in supervising financial institutions and bringing about a stable financial system in 
Singapore  received  positive  feedback.  I  am  heartened  by  this.  More  importantly,  the  industry  also 
noted areas for improvement. Stakeholders, for instance, felt that MAS officers could be more attuned 
to commercial reality when formulating policies and decisions. MAS could improve the timeliness of its 
decision-making.  MAS  has  taken  note  of  the  feedback  and  will  work  to  improve  its  performance  in 
these areas. 
32. MAS' regular dialogue and consultation with the industry has worked well. We will now take this a 
step further by involving the industry at the early stages of policy formulation. This will give industry 
players the opportunity to shape policies. MAS will also be more open to suggestions of alternatives 
that  achieve the  same  objectives.  But  for  this  new  approach  to  produce  results,  both  MAS and  the 
industry must work together to build a high level of trust between them. 
Leveraging and building on our reputation 
33. Looking  ahead,  we  must  continue  to  build  and  deepen  relationships  with  the  industry  and  our 
foreign counterparts. 
34. To showcase Asia to the international community, the centrepiece for next year is the 2006 IMF 
and World Bank Annual Meetings. In partnership with the private sector and relevant agencies, we are 
organising a host of seminars and events. Collectively, they are known as Singapore 2006 or S2006. 
S2006 is intended to create intellectual buzz and profile the dynamism and optimism in Asia. 
35. A key event is the Raffles Seminar, organised by the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy. It will 
gather leading thinkers to debate the issues and challenges countries face in achieving and sustaining 
good governance. 
36. S2006 will require close collaboration between MAS, other government agencies and the private 
sector,  in  particular,  our  banks.  Some  of  you  are  already  working  with  the  organising  committee.  I 
would like to thank you for your support. Together, we can make S2006 a success for Singapore. 
Conclusion 
37. Let  me  conclude.  Winston  Churchill  said:  "The  optimist  sees  opportunity  in  every  danger.  The 
pessimist sees danger in every opportunity." We should be shrewd optimists - bold but not reckless, 
cautious but not timid. 
38. For we are living in exciting times in Asia. The economic centre of gravity is shifting from West to 
East.  This  could  be  Asia's  Century.  No  doubt  there  are  serious  challenges.  But  I  believe  if  we  are 
innovative,  realistic  and  skilful,  we  can  overcome  them.  And  together  ride  the  Asian  wave  to 
prosperity. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2005
