Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Accounting reforms towards good corporate 
governance 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the 3rd 
Asian Accounting Firms (ASNAF) Conference, Makati City, 11 November 2005. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
I am deeply honored to be part of this gathering of accounting experts from the Asia Pacific Region. I 
understand  there  are  also  delegates  from  Europe,  particularly  France  and  Belgium.  I  wish  to  join 
ASNAF Chair Cherry Bernaldo in welcoming all of you to Manila.  This is a rare opportunity to be with 
the  movers  in  the  profession  who  are  at  the  forefront  of  the  crusade  of  coping  with  the  accounting 
evolution happening globally.  To the men and women who continue to heed the call to serve in this 
noble undertaking, we salute you.  
The accounting profession has truly evolved into a vital catalyst of global convergence particularly with 
the adoption of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The twin objectives of the new 
standards of promoting transparency and comparability in financial reporting transcends all regional 
boundaries and redounds to a greater cause of enhanced corporate governance and oversight.  
The Philippines believes in the cause of adopting  uniform accounting standards across the globe. We 
have expressed an unyielding commitment to the international community that these standards will be 
implemented in the country for the year 2005 and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is spearheading its 
adoption in the financial industry.  
Let me share with you our valuable experiences in adopting the standards in the financial industry.  
Adoption of IFRS in the financial industry– the Philippine experience  
It is fitting to say that the new accounting standards are a phenomenon.  The changes infiltrated the 
backbone of financial reporting, which affected the way transactions are recorded and reported.  The 
old school’s concept of conservatism and materiality were overshadowed with new thoughts on fair 
valuation  and  substance  over  form.   The  new  accounting  standards  modified  our  paradigm  in 
evaluating the financial position and performance of institutions.   
In addition to the already difficult task of adopting the standards, the BSP also has to contend with the 
difference  in  perspective  between  the  principles  of  IFRS  and  the  regulatory  bodies.   A  popular 
example of which is the concept of loan provisioning wherein the IFRS provides losses on financial 
assets based on an incurred loss concept while the regulators provide losses based on incurred and 
expected loss concepts.  Another contentious provision of the standards is the fair value option, which 
has been the subject of criticisms from the regulatory community.  
The  BSP  has  taken  bold  steps  on  these  issues.   At  the  onset,  we  emphasized  that  all  financial 
institutions  under  BSP  supervision  should  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the  new  standards  in  all 
respects  in  preparing  their  audited  financial  statements.   However,  we  remained  steadfast  in  our 
position that financial institutions should provide for both incurred and expected losses.  In this regard, 
they have to comply and reflect the BSP recommended valuation reserves in the prudential reports or 
in the reports submitted to BSP.  
On the other hand, considering the amendments of the iasb on the fair value option provisions, we 
allowed financial institutions to use the said classification, subject to certain regulatory conditions such 
as:  
• 
Having an appropriate  risk  management  system  prior  to  initial  application  of the  fair  value 
option for a particular activity or purpose and on an ongoing basis. 
The fair value option may only be used for instruments for which fair values can be reliably 
estimated; and   
Financial  institutions  should  provide  BSP  with  supplemental  information  as  may  be 
necessary, to enable BSP to assess the impact of the financial institution’s utilization of the 
fair value option.  
  BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
The  adoption  of  the  standards  does  not  only  call  for  alignment  of  existing  regulations  with  the 
provisions  but  also  necessitates  the  establishment  of  the  infrastructure  for  prudential  financial 
reporting.  In this respect, we have revised the manual of accounts and developed a new reportorial 
requirement for banks. The advantage of going through this exercise is that we, as regulators, were 
given an opportunity to design the reportorial structure to create a common platform serving all our 
information requirements. The amount of information that we will be able to generate from the new 
reporting structure will enhance our off-site supervision capabilities.  
 The Philippine transition to IFRS is a consultative process involving the regulators, industry players 
and external auditors. The different perspectives shared in this endeavor helped us in understanding 
the principles behind the standards and the impact of adoption on our interrelated functions.   
Disclosures and good governance  
 One of the key features of the standards is the overwhelming amount of disclosure requirements. This 
has made financial reporting a complex process.  However, looking at the upside of it, these disclosure 
requirements will empower the stakeholders in making relevant decisions.  
The  BSP  believes  that  this  uncovering  of  more  information,  will  help  us  realize  our  vision  of  full 
transparency, which is one of the pillars of good corporate governance.  Disclosures along with the 
other reforms that we have implemented such as requiring the board of directors to create corporate 
governance  and  audit  committees,  imposing  more  stringent  fit  and  proper  standards  for  the 
qualification and disqualification of bank directors, and requiring at least two independent directors in 
the  board,  among  others,  are  keys  in  strengthening  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the  financial 
industry. We believe that gaining the public’s trust is the cornerstone of development.  
Trust  is  what  binds  the  components  of  an  economy  together.  It  creates  a  level  playing  field  for  all 
market  players,  which  fosters  an  environment  conducive  to  investments.  Trust  bestowed  upon  a 
system goes beyond the basic economic infrastructure. It gives an unwavering assurance that through 
progress or crisis, the public would remain committed to pull the strings for development.   
Challenges  
The adoption of the standards only provides the gateway to achieving good governance. Several other 
hurdles  will  bask  along  the  way  as  we  strive  to  reach  this  goal.   Each  discipline  in  the  accounting 
profession would have its share of issues to resolve and responsibilities to carry out that would be vital 
for corporate oversight.   
 Auditors would play a more expansive role in this undertaking.  They would give us an independent 
view  on  how  the  risk  exposures  and  other  activities  of  the  business  ultimately  affect  the  financial 
statements.  They would keep watch over compliance with the standards and maintaining fairness and 
accuracy in the reports.  Accountants in the academe are handed with the noble task of passing on 
the learning from one generation to the next to keep the same passion seamlessly running through 
time.  Corporate accountants would document the evidence of evolution in accounting through their 
books and financial reports.  The regulators on the other hand, would anchor the industry on prudent 
grounds amidst the changing standards and practices.     
An even greater challenge is to channel this harmonious interplay of responsibilities to a regional effort 
of establishing a common set of regulations similar to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States or 
the  EC  8th  Directive  in  Europe.   This  vision  may  already  be  in  the  drawing  boards  in  some  of  the 
countries represented here or better yet this may stir a united stance to echo a regional commitment 
on corporate governance.   
Conclusion  
We are in the middle of a monumental evolution of accounting standards and other best practices. 
Let us not focus on the difficulties and complexities of change, rather let us take this opportunity to 
correct  the  mistakes  done  in  the  past,  strengthen  our  fortress  for  growth  and  seize  the  chance  for 
global convergence.  
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
I would like to congratulate the organizers of this event for this worthwhile endeavor.  Thank you and I 
wish you all a successful conference.  
BIS Review 80/2005 
 3
