Zdeněk Tůma: Monetary policy governance - comments on the institutional 
set-up of inflation targeting in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  Open 
Forum on "Preconditions for launching inflation targeting in Albania", Tirana, 1-2 December 2005. 
 diversity of opinions  
regularity 
separateness 
staff independence 
openness  
dealing with uncertainty 
Monetary policy is without any doubt one of the most powerful tools for macroeconomic management. 
While  the  theoretical  background  for  target-setting  is  well  established,  the  task  of  making  practical 
arrangements for conducting policy in order to achieve targets in an efficient way is certainly a very 
difficult  one.  Designing  a  well-functioning  system  for  decision  making  is  thus  at  the  very  top  of  the 
agenda for any central bank striving to establish a sound monetary policy framework. It is therefore 
highly commendable that the Bank of Albania is addressing the related issues well in advance. 
Today, I would like to make several comments on the issues where I feel the Czech National Bank can 
pass on some observations and know-how based on its almost eight-year experience with decision 
making under an inflation targeting regime. 
The  discussion  about  the  proposed  institutional  set-up  in  Albania  provokes  a  more  general  debate 
about the properties of the ‘ideal’ monetary policy decision-making system. Such a discussion of this 
general issue could reveal some practical implications for the Bank of Albania. Indeed, regardless of 
whether decisions are taken by a general Bank Board or a specialized Policy Committee, the ‘ideal’ 
system for decision-making should encompass the following basic properties: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
Diversity  of  opinions  is  a  consequence  of  the  basic  lesson  we  have  learnt  from  the  history  of 
monetary  policy.  Milton  Friedman  said  in  1968:  ‘The  first  and  most  important  lesson  that  history 
teaches about what monetary policy can do – and it is a lesson of the most profound importance – is 
that monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a major source of economic disturbance’. 
This  implies  that  relative  smoothness  in  practical  decision  making  seems  to  be  desirable  for  any 
monetary  policy  practice.  In  this  regard,  international  experience  and  experimental  research1  have 
shown  that  decisions  taken  by  a  ‘decision-making  body’  seem  to  be  superior  ex  post  to  decisions 
taken by an individual, as the latter are more vulnerable to sudden changes in monetary policy stance. 
It  is  argued  that  a  significant  improvement  in  policy  conduct  can  be  associated  with  policy  makers 
learning from each other’s decisions.  
Regularity  means  not  only  that  the  decision-making  body  should  meet  on  a  regular  basis,  but  in 
particular that the decision-making process should be taken in a standard framework and should be 
based on a standard set of policy documents. All the more, ad hoc policy meetings based on ad hoc 
policy documents should be minimized. This not only helps the central bank in its communication with 
the public, but also helps the decision-making body to maintain internal discipline. 
Separateness  emphasizes  that  special  attention  should  be  paid  to  monetary  policy  in  the  central 
bank’s agenda. In order to avoid any attempt to displace the policy agenda by any other ‘extremely 
                                                      
1  
For  further  details  see  Lombardelli,  Proudman  and  Talbot’s  article  ‘Committees  Versus  Individuals:  An  Experimental 
Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision Making’, published in International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 1, No. 1, May 
2005. 
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
important’  issue,  separate  meetings  should  be  established  for  policy  discussions.  Indeed,  a  policy 
decision is worth a special ‘policy day’, split into:  
(i) 
a staff presentation, when staff present the outcome of their analysis (based on a standard set 
of policy documents)  
a discussion of the analysis 
the policy decision  
communication of the decision to the public 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Staff  independence  should  protect  the  members  of  the  decision-making  body  from  the  filtering  of 
undesirable information which can occur whenever a particular decision maker directly manages the 
‘Economic Department’. Although such behaviour is, with high probability, not intentional, this member 
can influence the interpretation of the ‘staff’ analysis in a way convenient to his own opinions. It could 
happen that the rest of the decision-making body members receive a biased analysis. Moving the role 
of  ‘Chief  Economist’  towards  the  director  of  the  ‘Economic  Department’,  and  letting  him  be  more 
independent of any particular body member (making him responsible to the decision-making body as a 
whole), can help to solve this problem of information filtering. 
Openness  is  a  consequence  of  ‘staff  independence’.  Allowing  staff  to  be  more  independent  at  the 
same  time  requires  the  decision-making  body  members  to  take  an  active  approach  towards  the 
analysis produced by the staff. Since a perfect understanding of the message contained in the ‘policy 
documents’ is a prerequisite for proper policy conduct, interaction between the decision-making body 
members and the staff should be assured at different levels.  
And  finally,  a  need  to  deal  with  uncertainty  properly  arises  as  a  consequence  of  the  uncertainty 
surrounding monetary policy practice. Therefore, it is highly desirable to discuss the implied risks at 
different levels: 
(i) 
(ii) 
First, the risks should be discussed by the staff. 
Second,  an  evaluation  of  the  risks  should  be  performed  interactively  by  the  decision-making 
body  members  and  the  staff  (alternative  scenarios  can  be  produced  on  the  basis  of  these 
discussions).  
Third, the risk and the alternative scenarios should be discussed by the decision-making body 
members during the policy meeting. 
(iii) 
It  is  clear  that  all  the  above-mentioned  properties  can  be  satisfied  when  either  a  Bank  Board  or  a 
Policy Committee are making the decisions. Over the years it has been proven that both systems can 
work  well.  On  the  one  hand,  a  Policy  Committee  automatically  encompasses  the  property  of 
separateness and the full devotion of its members towards monetary policy. On the other hand, Bank 
Board members are probably identified more closely with the institution and offer a more diversified 
view of policy conduct. Indeed, it is really difficult to distinguish which system is superior; the prevailing 
solutions are determined by tradition and other local conditions.  
Nevertheless,  what  is,  in  fact,  of  critical  importance  is  the  legal  framework  that  is  used  as  the 
background for the decision making. The decision-making body’s mandate should arise directly from 
the central bank law, or even the constitution, and should be sufficiently ‘clear’. Any internal agreement 
shifting policy responsibility towards somebody who is not explicitly referred to in the central bank law, 
and  thus  assumed  to  be  policy  responsible,  could  be  highly  vulnerable  and  unstable.  This  could 
become apparent as soon as a period of tough decisions arrives. 
The  implications  of  all  this  can  be  split  in  two  groups.  The  first  group  covers  a  rather  general 
implication that can be summarized as: the policy decision-making role should be performed by a body 
that  is  well  defined  in  the  central  bank  law.  In  addition,  regardless  of  whether  the  decision-making 
body is a Bank Board or a Policy Committee, it should fulfil the properties of diversity of opinions, 
regularity,  separateness,  staff  independence,  openness,  and  dealing  with  uncertainty.  The 
second group of implications then offers more a practical view which can be summarized as follows: 
a) 
b)  
c)  
the ‘policy decision-making’ body should have a strong background in law, 
the meeting devoted to monetary policy should not deal with any other issue, 
the  forecast  and  economic  analysis  should  be  submitted  by  the  staff  so  as  to  constrain 
‘information filtering’, 
the decision makers should interact with the staff. 
BIS Review 88/2005
d)  
2 
 