Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects, October 2005  
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Tasmanian 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry Business Dinner, Hobart, 11 October 2005. 
 It  is  nice  to  be  in  Hobart  and  I  thank  the  Tasmanian  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  for  the 
invitation. It is now a couple of months since the Bank released its most recent quarterly assessment 
of economic conditions, at which time some of our staff paid one of their regular visits to Tasmania to 
consult with local businesses.  
So I intend to offer a brief instalment in the unfolding narrative of the economy, with the benefit of an 
extra couple of months' information. Of course, a few weeks from now we will release our next full 
Statement on Monetary Policy. I won't try to preview that in detail, but rather pick on one or two issues 
of note. I'll begin with the world economy.  
The world economy 
Graph 1 
 The  year  2005  is  turning  out  to  be  another  pretty  good  one  for  global  growth.  In  its  recent  World 
Economic  Outlook  released  during  late  September,  the  IMF  estimates  growth  in  2005  to  be  about  
4¼ per cent. That is lower than in the preceding year, but 2004 was exceptional: in that year, we saw 
the  fastest  global  growth  in  three  decades.  At  this  point,  2006  is  thought  likely  to  be  another  good 
year, though that forecast would be sensitive to events in the next few months.  
The US economy continues to expand at a good pace. The recovery from the dot-com-bust recession 
of 2001 has been quite strong, notwithstanding periodic talk about 'soft patches'. The US now, once 
again, stands pretty close to full employment. The US central bank, having been prepared to lower 
short-term interest rates dramatically to alleviate the downturn, is now well advanced in the process of 
returning  them  to  normal,  as  they  must  if  the  economic  expansion  is  to  continue  for  an  extended 
period. Meanwhile, China has continued to grow rapidly, despite fears of a slump at various stages. 
Japan – for years a dragging anchor on global growth – has posted some better numbers over the 
past year or so, and the debilitating effects of asset price deflation and balance sheet deterioration 
may finally be starting to wane. Japan looks more likely to be able to sustain growth now than at any 
time in over a decade.  
Elsewhere in east Asia, results are a bit mixed but in general show fairly healthy growth, though not at 
the pace seen for many years prior to the crisis of the late 1990s. The economy of continental Europe 
   1/8 
remains a major disappointment both for its own citizens and policy-makers, and for those elsewhere 
looking for the global recovery to be a bit more balanced. Beset by the effects of ageing, high levels of 
government  debt  and  great  difficulties  in  achieving  structural  reform,  the  old  continental  European 
economies are  struggling  to  keep up with  the  newer,  more  dynamic countries  joining  the  European 
project from the east.  
At the same time, global rates of inflation remain low. Across about 50 significant countries around the 
world, the median inflation rate is about 2½ per cent. The scourge of the 1970s and early 1980s has 
been well and truly contained in most countries; there are relatively few really high inflation countries 
now. At the same time, the incidence of deflation (never that wide) has diminished in the past couple 
of years.  
Graph 2 
 There is, of course, the likelihood that the big rise in oil prices will push inflation up over the coming 
year, and some commentators are beginning to worry that this could be the start of an undesirable 
trend.  Much  will  depend  on  how  economies  and  policy-makers  respond  to  the  rise  in  oil  prices,  a 
subject  to  which  I  shall  return  shortly.  For  the  moment,  what  is  remarkable  is  that  the  rise  in  raw 
material  prices  over  several  years  has  not  already  pushed  inflation  rates  up  more  than  it  has.  It  is 
partly as a result of this general climate of price stability that nominal long-term market interest rates 
are at 50-year lows. But even in real terms, long rates are unusually low. Apparently, financial markets 
have a very benign view of the risks associated with the medium-term outlook.  
       2/8 
Graph 3 
 Given  the  prominence  of  discussion  about  'global  imbalances'  –  by  which  people  mean  the 
dependence  of  the  global  expansion  on  the  strength  of  the  US  and  China,  and  the  rising  current 
account deficit of the US – it is all the more remarkable that financial markets seem so sanguine. But 
as stated by the Governor1 a couple of weeks ago, a more careful analysis of the 'imbalances' shows 
that high rates of saving and low rates of investment in Asia have produced a very low cost of capital 
for the developed world, to which the US economy has responded, with the US current account deficit 
a natural result. While everyone agrees this cannot continue forever, forever is a long time and it may 
well  continue  for  a  while  yet.  It  has  already  gone  on  much  longer  than  many  predicted  would  be 
possible, and for it to change, behaviour in Asia, as well as in the US, would need to alter.  
All of the above have been part of the scene for some time now, and were part of the state of play as 
of early August when we last gave our full views. What has changed of late?  
The questions that will naturally be on most people's minds are: what will be the effect on the US and 
global economies of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita? And what will be the effect of rising oil prices?  
Hurricanes  
Clearly  these  were  first  and  foremost  human  tragedies  on  a  massive  scale,  though  thankfully,  the 
death toll looks like it is turning out to be much smaller than was feared early on. As for the economic 
effects, clearly business activity has been hampered in the areas directly in the path of the hurricanes, 
though the impact of this on the US economy as a whole doesn't seem to have been particularly large. 
Longer  term,  those  parts  of  the  US  capital  stock  which  were  damaged  or  destroyed  need  to  be 
repaired  or  re-built.  This will  be  expansionary  as  it  adds  to  the  demand  for  real  resources.  To  give 
some perspective, estimates of damage seem to be around US$200 billion. If it took three years2 to do 
all the reconstruction, then we would see an addition to the level of demand equivalent to about half of 
one  per  cent  of  US  GDP  during  that  period.  This  would  be  in  an  economy  which,  just  before  the 
hurricanes hit, was travelling pretty well according to recent data.  
                                                      
1  
2  
‘What are the Global Imbalances?' (see http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2005/sp_gov_280905.html). 
In the case of Cyclone Tracy, which happened on 24–25 December 1974, Darwin's pre-cyclone population numbers were 
able to be housed again by about the middle of 1978 (see http://www.ntlib.nt.gov.au/tracy). Following Hurricane Andrew in 
August 1992, surveys suggest that about two-thirds of displaced residents had returned to their homes by August  1994. 
Most of those who had not did not intend to do so (see Smith, Stanley K. and Christopher McCarty, ‘Demographic Effects of 
Natural Disasters: A Case Study of Hurricane Andrew', Demography¸ Vol. 33, 1996, pp. 265–275). 
   3/8 
Energy prices  
A  second  key  aspect  of  the  hurricanes,  of  course,  was  that  they  damaged  some  very  important 
infrastructure in the US energy supply chain, which happens to be concentrated along the Gulf coast. 
To some extent this has been addressed by the release of oil from stockpiles, and indeed the price of 
crude oil is now, if anything, a bit lower than it was immediately before Hurricane Katrina. The bigger 
problem  is  that  the  Gulf  coast  area  has  a  large  share  of  US  refining  capacity,  which  also  suffered 
substantial  damage.  Hence  the  margin  between  crude  oil  prices  and  wholesale  prices  for  refined 
products rose sharply, so Americans (and, for that matter, consumers elsewhere) saw substantial rises 
in prices at the pump. 
Graph 4 
 The effect of this, assuming other things equal, is to raise households' cost of living and transportation 
costs  to  businesses.  Any  number  of  commentators  will  remind  us  that,  because  it  is  hard  for 
consumers rapidly to alter their behaviour away from using gasoline, they will, to some extent, simply 
have  to  pay  the  higher  prices  and  spend  less  on  other  things.  This  imparts  a  mild  contractionary 
impact  on  aggregate  demand.  That's  true,  but  over  time,  consumers  can  adapt  their  behaviour 
(towards more fuel-efficient cars, for example) to lessen the real income loss. Most importantly in the 
US,  the  impact  of  the  re-building  will  steadily  make  its  presence  felt.  So  there  is  a  complex  set  of 
forces operating on the US economy, some contractionary but others expansionary.  
For those other economies who are net energy importers, the expansionary impact of the re-building is 
of  course  absent,  so  they  are  left  with  the  uncomfortable  combination  of  higher  prices  and  slower 
growth, at the margin, than would otherwise have occurred.  
But it would be a serious mistake, I think, to focus on the effects of the hurricanes on energy prices in 
isolation. The fact is that energy prices had been rising for some time, as growing demand stretched 
supply  capacity,  before  the  hurricanes  occurred.  It  is  no  secret,  either,  that  Asia  has  been  a  major 
source of additional demand for oil (though demand in the US has also risen). Of the rise in global 
demand since 2000 of over 7 million barrels per day, about 3 million barrels has come from Asia, and 
almost 2 million from China alone. Nor is it only energy prices which have been rising. A great many 
prices  of  resource-type  commodities  have  been  rising  quickly,  largely  for  the  same  reason  as  oil 
prices: Asian and especially Chinese demand has stretched supply capacity.  
Yet this has not derailed the global economic expansion. Unlike the OPEC oil shocks of the 1970s, 
when the supply of oil was sharply curtailed, creating significant disruption for economic activity, over 
the past few years the supply of oil has been increasing – just not fast enough to accommodate rapidly 
rising  demand  at  the  old, low price.  Far  from crippling  global  growth,  the higher  price of  oil  reflects 
strong growth. Higher oil prices do reduce growth compared with what might have been possible had 
the supply of oil been perfectly elastic, but even with that reduction, the world economy is recording 
quite  good  growth.  One  illustration  of  this  is  that,  eighteen  months  ago,  the  IMF  forecast  of  global 
growth for 2005 was 4.4 per cent, with oil prices assumed to be under US$30. The latest estimate for 
   4/8 
2005  is  virtually  unchanged  at  4.3  per  cent  (with  the  same  again  expected  in  2006),  but  with  an 
average oil price now assumed to be US$54 in 2005, and US$62 in 2006.  
Monetary policy and oil prices  
How should monetary policy, in particular, respond to rising energy prices?  
Traditionally,  policy-makers  have  abstracted  from  the  effects  of  short-term  fluctuations  in  oil  prices. 
The case for doing so was that these swings are often driven by temporary supply-side disturbances. 
It would not make sense for monetary policy, whose effects take several years to play out, to respond 
to price fluctuations which might be reversed within a matter of months. Fluctuations in prices for some 
other things affected by supply disturbances – like fresh food – are treated the same way. It is for this 
reason that many central banks compute measures of 'core' or 'underlying' inflation – it helps us get a 
better idea how overall inflation will look when temporary disturbances have passed from the scene.  
Similarly, in cases where there is a large, permanent but one-time change in the level of energy prices 
which  occurs  because  of  a  change  in  supply,  it  is  not  feasible  for  monetary  policy  to  offset  the 
immediate impact on the overall price level. Policy-makers in that situation will focus on ensuring the 
on-going rate of change of prices settles back fairly promptly. This means they will typically respond to 
signs of second-round effects which might emerge if, say, other prices or wages began to change in 
response to the initial oil price effect.  
But  where  there  is  a  persistent  trend  for  some  particular  price  to  rise  quickly  over  a  longish  period 
because demand is strong, the case for ignoring that is weak. If oil prices, for example, rise quickly 
every year, it isn't really credible to abstract from them every year. Rather, the question is simply one 
of  whether  the  combined set  of  all price  movements,  whether  driven  by  energy  prices or any  other 
influence, will cause the CPI to rise quickly for an extended period. If the answer is yes, then that is 
called inflation, and is prima facie evidence that policy-makers should take action. If the answer is no, 
perhaps  because  non-energy  prices  are  moving  in  an  offsetting  way,  then  price  stability  is  being 
maintained, and there is no particular implication for policy.  
In recent years, policy-makers in most countries seem generally, thus far, to have felt that rising oil 
prices will not threaten medium-term inflation performance. This was partly because there was always 
thought to be the possibility of some reversal in the oil price itself, but also because overall inflation 
rates in most countries have remained quite low so far, despite energy price rises. While the strong 
growth  in  energy  demand  in  Asia  for  several  years has contributed  to  inflationary  pressure  through 
higher  prices  for  oil,  Asia  has  also  contributed  to  deflationary  pressure  via  its  growing  role  as  a 
supplier of manufactures and, increasingly, services. The fact that the overall rate of inflation through 
this  period  has  been  fairly  well  behaved,  despite  strong  global  economic  growth,  is  distinctly  in 
contrast to the situation prior to the OPEC episode in 1974. In that instance, inflation in most countries 
was already increasing before the rise in oil prices occurred.  
At  issue,  then,  is  whether  that  situation  could  change  in  the  near  future.  It  is  doubtful  that  the 
hurricane-related shock per se would make a large difference. The bigger questions are, first, will the 
effects of the large cumulative rises in energy prices over several years continue to be accompanied 
by moderation in other prices, including international prices for traded manufactures and services, so 
keeping overall inflation in check? And second, will hitherto well-anchored inflation expectations – an 
important determinant of price and wage behaviour generally – remain that way?  
Policy-makers around the world will grapple with these issues in the period ahead. For now, I shall 
turn to the Australian economy.  
The Australian economy  
The terms of trade  
The Australian economy, like all other industrial economies, is adjusting to higher energy prices. The 
thing we are hearing most about is the negative impact on Australian households as they bear higher 
costs  for  their  personal  transportation,  and  the  effect  on  both  the  goods  and  services  producing 
sectors  of  the  economy  as  they  bear  another  increase  in  costs  of  production  and  distribution.  But 
unlike many industrialised economies, there is also a major positive side for the Australian economy in 
higher prices for energy and raw materials. For those with an income stake in the extraction of these 
   5/8 
resources – such as oil, coal, gas, and a number of other commodities which are inputs into global 
industrial production – times are very good indeed.  
The aggregate summary of this situation is Australia's terms of trade, which have risen by over 20 per 
cent in the past two years alone, and stand about 30 per cent above their average of the period 1975–
2000.  
Graph 5 
 
 
This is a very different story to those of most industrialised economies, for whom recent developments 
represent a decline in the terms of trade and hence national income.  
 
 Terms of Trade 
Percentage change 
         Past Two years 
Australia 
Norway 
New Zealand 
Mexico 
Canada 
United Kingdom 
France 
Singapore 
Germany 
United States 
Thailand 
Taiwan 
Sweden 
Japan 
Sources: ABS, Thomson Financial 
   23.4 
9.3 
8.6 
8.5 
4.2 
0.2 
-3.7 
-4.8 
-5.0 
-7.0 
-9.5 
-12.6 
-14.3 
-16.6 
 6/8 
The  trade  sector  is  just  over  one-fifth  of  the  economy.  So  a  20–25  per  cent  gain  equates  to  about  
4–5  per  cent  of  GDP  –  say,  $40  billion  –  in  additional  annual  income  that  is  available.  Part  of  that 
income  accrues  to  foreign  investors  who  have  ownership  stakes  in  resources  enterprises,  but  a 
substantial  proportion  remains  for  Australians  as  shareholders,  employees  and  citizens  (via 
government taxes). 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  adds  considerable  buoyancy  to  the  economy  which  would  not 
otherwise be there. The first-round effect is clearest in the regions where resources have the greatest 
weight in economic activity. But there are still impacts around the rest of the country – for example, 
through the consumption of higher resource-derived incomes, and higher investment by the resource 
producers. Indeed, the prospects now appear to be for a significant expansion in capacity in various 
resource production areas, judging by the forward-looking indicators of capital expenditure. That will 
continue to exert stimulus for a range of other businesses around the country.  
Housing market  
These income gains have accelerated over the past two years, at a time when the dynamics of the 
Australian housing market have changed. From 1996 to 2003, Australian households borrowed at a 
rapid pace for the purposes of owning dwellings, either to occupy or to let out. The median price of 
dwellings in Australia rose in parallel, by 120 to 150 per cent, depending on the price measure used.3
The peak in prices nationally was about two years ago now, in the last quarter of 2003. Since then, 
median prices have risen further in some regions, but have fallen a little in Sydney and Melbourne, to 
give a flat performance for the national median price. This has been associated with a slowing in the 
pace of borrowing, particularly on the part of investors, though the rate of growth of outstanding credit 
remains, if anything, somewhat higher than one would expect to be a sustainable pace in the long run.  
This has been associated with a waning of an apparent wealth effect which had been in operation, 
where consumer spending rose faster than income for a number of years and household saving rates 
declined.4  Some  estimates  suggest  that,  in  net  terms,  households  actually  withdrew  some  of  the 
accumulated equity in the dwelling stock during the early years of this decade, a small proportion of 
which  was  probably  used  for  consumption  purposes.  (The  rest  appears  to  have  been  placed  into 
financial  assets.)  But  since  mid  2004,  consumption  spending  has  been  proceeding  in  a  more 
moderate fashion. At 3 per cent growth over the past year, it has been rising more in line with income. 
That is not a particularly weak outcome in any absolute sense, but it is a quite notable slowing from 
the earlier 6 per cent pace.  
It is quite fortuitous, of course, that this adjustment has coincided with the large income gains from the 
terms of trade. A scenario where the housing boom had gone on for two or three more years and then 
turned down at the same time as the terms of trade began a cyclical fall would have been much less 
attractive.  
Petrol prices  
I noted earlier that worldwide, rising energy prices over several years did not seem to have pushed up 
inflation  much,  so  far,  partly  because  there  seemed  to  have  been  moderation  in  other  prices.  This 
same point can be nicely illustrated by Australia's Consumer Price Index. The chart below shows the 
change in the CPI, at the sub-group level,5 over the past two years. The figures are up to June 2005; 
new data for the September quarter will be published the week after next.  
                                                      
3  
In  Tasmania,  house  prices  rose by  less  over  the  same  period  though  they  have  continued  to  rise  of  late.  Tasmania  still 
enjoys relatively lower costs of housing than the mainland. Not unrelated, I presume, is the trend in recent years for net 
interstate migration to, rather than from, Tasmania. 
4   Literally speaking, according to the national accounts, household spending on consumption has exceeded income for the 
past three years (i.e. saving was negative). This calculation includes an allowance for notional depreciation of the dwelling 
stock (which is treated as consumption of capital), but even in a gross sense, household saving, while positive, has been 
low. 
5   Here I separate automotive fuel from the transportation sub-group. 
   7/8 
Automotive fuel prices had risen by about 23 per cent over the period. But a number of items which 
are  affected  by  strong  international  competition  had  fallen  in  price.  These  include  most  electronics 
categories,  household  appliances,  clothing  and  footwear,  and  furniture.  Of  course,  changes  in  the 
exchange rate, and in particular an appreciating $A in 2003, have had an effect here, as have tariff 
reductions, but there is no doubt that competition from abroad has been intense. So while the growth 
in demand for energy in China and the rest of Asia has added to petrol costs, the rising production of 
manufactures in those countries has reduced other prices. The total CPI rise over the two years was  
5 per cent, or 2½ per cent per year, which is exactly in line with the Bank's inflation target.  
Graph 6 
 We  will  get  an  update  to  this  picture  when  the  CPI  and  PPI  data  for  the  September  quarter  are 
published. The direct impact of the recent high energy prices will presumably be evident in the result. 
Over a somewhat longer horizon, there might be some indirect impacts of the higher energy costs – 
through the transport system, for example. Just how big these turn out to be will presumably depend 
on, among other things, whether demand conditions allow businesses simply to pass on energy and 
transport cost increases, as opposed to absorbing them by finding offsetting cost savings or accepting 
narrower profit margins.  
Longer term, the question to be asked is whether inflation – be it as a result of rises in energy costs, or 
from any other source – is likely to diverge persistently from a rate of 2–3 per cent. Apart from energy 
prices  per  se,  factors  to consider  in  assessing  the outlook  will be  trends  in  international  prices,  the 
likelihood  of  temporarily  higher  CPI  rises  prompting  second-round  effects  via,  for  example,  higher 
wage  claims  or  other  cost  increases,  and  the  strength  of  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  The 
Bank  will  publish  its  full  updated  assessment  in  its  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  on  7  November 
2005.  
Conclusion  
The Australian economy is in its fifteenth year of expansion, having weathered a number of shocks, 
both favourable and adverse, during that time. The gradual correction of the housing excesses of the 
early part of this decade has gone well so far. It is our good fortune that this is unfolding alongside a 
global scene which is quite favourable at present. Even though there is undoubtedly a cyclical element 
to  the  international  environment  which  will  wane  in  time,  I  suspect  that  the  growing  weight  of  
resource-hungry Asia will mean that our terms of trade will be higher on average in the next decade 
than they were in the last quarter of the twentieth century.  
The issue before us in the next year or two is whether the world and Australian economies can adapt 
to higher energy and resource prices without a significant bout of inflation. If we can, then in a year or 
two  from  now,  the  TCCI  will  be  hearing  about  further  opportunities  for  businesses  and  their 
employees, both in Tasmania and around the nation, to create the sustainable prosperity we all seek.  
   8/8 
