Kristina Persson: Monetary policy yesterday, today and tomorrow 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, Aktiespararna Lindingö, 
Stockholm, 9 November 2005. 
The diagrams for this speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank website www.riksbank.com. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  to  Aktiespararna  Lidingö  this  evening  to  talk  about  monetary 
policy, which is for me a job and – I assume – for you an interest, as you save in shares. It is of course 
important for those investing in companies to obtain a good (risk-adjusted) return on their investment. 
Monetary  policy  that  contributes  to  low  and  stable  inflation  leads  to  less  uncertainty,  clearer  game 
rules and better conditions for growth. I intend to begin with a look back over monetary policy during 
the  past  decade  and  a  description  of  the  sequence  of  events  when  we  changed  over  to  inflation 
targeting  after  the  economic  crisis  in  the  early  1990s.  After  that  I  shall  briefly  discuss  the  current 
economic situation, mention the changed conditions I envisage and what they may entail for monetary 
policy in the future.  
From economic crisis to 10 years of inflation targeting 
Many of you will remember and will have been affected in some way by the economic crisis at the 
beginning  of  the  1990s.    That  was  when  the  foundations  of  the  current  monetary  policy  were  laid; 
when  the  fixed  exchange  rate  was  abandoned  as  a  monetary  policy  objective  and  replaced  by  an 
explicit  inflation  target.  This  process  can  probably  be  most  easily  understood  in  the  light  of  the 
economic policy conducted during the decades prior to the crisis so let me therefore begin with a brief 
look back. 
The economic policy conducted during the 1970s and 1980s meant that nominal wages and prices 
rose more rapidly in Sweden than in other countries. At the same time, our aim was to maintain a fixed 
exchange rate, which assumed that inflation in Sweden had developed at roughly the same rate as in 
the countries that were our most important trading partners. Price and wage trends led time and time 
again to cost crises that finally forced Sweden to make devaluations of the krona and undermined the 
credibility  of  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  The  exchange  rate  adjustments  were  also  one  of  the 
reasons  behind  a  failure  to  implement  necessary  rationalisations  and  streamlining.  Although  the 
devaluations  strengthened  our  competitiveness  temporarily,  they  provided  the  economy  with  new 
inflation impulses and by the time the price and wage spiral had turned around a few times, a new cost 
crisis  had  arisen.  The  fact  that  developments  did  not  favour  real  growth  in  Sweden  or  real  wages 
becomes clear in comparisons with both other time periods and other countries, such as the Nordic 
countries, Germany and Austria (Figure 1).  
When  the  fixed  exchange  rate  target  was  abandoned  in  November  1992,  after  an  unsuccessful 
attempt to defend the krona – you probably all remember the increase in the marginal rate to 500 per 
cent – it followed on from yet another cost crisis. At the beginning of 1993, the outlook for the Swedish 
economy was bleak - we were in the midst of an international economic slowdown, the banking crisis 
was a fact, interest rates were high and unemployment was soaring. During the period with a fixed 
exchange rate fiscal policy had borne the entire responsibility for stabilisation policy, while monetary 
policy  had  been  tied  to  defending  the  krona  rate.  It  was  evident  that  fiscal  policy  had  not  been 
sufficiently tightened in connection with the overheating to which credit deregulation contributed. It was 
high time to break with history – but how should this be done? 
A new stabilisation policy regime 
A comprehensive change in regime was implemented in order to take Sweden out of the crisis and to 
create  the  conditions  for  a  more  stable  and  more  favourable  economic  development.  Central 
government  finances were  consolidated  and  fiscal policy was subjected  to regulations regarding  an 
expenditure ceiling and surplus target to attain a long-term balance in public finances. Monetary policy 
was  aimed  at  safeguarding  price  stability.  The  interest  rate,  which  had  been  a  tool  for  balancing 
currency flows during the period with an exchange rate target, would now be used to affect demand in 
the economy with the aim of stabilising price trends.  
   1/7 
The  new  target  for  monetary  policy,  to  aim  for  a  low  and  stable  inflation  rate,  was  announced  in 
January 1993 and applied in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) with effect from 1995. The fact 
that there was some delay was partly due to the economy having just been exposed to strong inflation 
impulses, mainly due to the weakening of the krona after the fixed exchange rate was abandoned.  
The  target  for  monetary  policy,  which  was  further  manifested  by  being  written  into  the  Sveriges 
Riksbank Act in 1999, is to “maintain price stability” and the Riksbank’s interpretation of this is that 
inflation  should  be  retained  around  2  per  cent  a  year,  measured  as  the  annual  change  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI). There is also a tolerance interval of plus/minus 1 percentage point around 
this  target.  Maintaining  inflation  at  exactly  2  per  cent  all  of  the  time  would  hardly  be  possible  and 
constantly  fine-tuning  the  rate  for  this  purpose  would  probably  risk  reinforcing  fluctuations  in  the 
economy rather than having a stabilising effect.  
When the Riksbank adjusts the key rate, its repo rate, this affects total demand and ultimately also 
inflation through various “channels” in the economy – the cost of borrowing, incentives to save and 
exports and imports, via exchange rate changes. It takes time for an interest rate change to have full 
effect  via  these  channels;  one  usually  estimates  that  it  takes  around  1-2  years.  Monetary  policy  is 
therefore conducted on the basis of this time horizon. By influencing demand in the economy, we try to 
steer inflation 1-2 years ahead towards the target of 2 per cent.  
However,  we  conduct  what  is  known  as  flexible  inflation  targeting.  The  Riksbank  can  choose  to 
disregard  effects  that  contribute  to  inflation  deviating  temporarily  from  the  target.  This  occurs  on  a 
regular basis with regard to, for instance, indirect taxes, household mortgage interest expenditure, or 
supply shocks that are assessed as temporary. In practice, monetary policy is now primarily based on 
a  measure  of  inflation,  UND1X,  which  is  adjusted  for  mortgage  interest  expenditure  and  the  direct 
effects of changes in indirect taxes and subsidies.  
Moreover,  if  a  shock  should  contribute  to  inflation  deviating  substantially  from  the  target  two  years 
ahead,  an  assessment  is  made  of  how  quickly  it  should  be  returned  to  target,  in  order  to  avoid 
unnecessary  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy,  that  is,  growth  and  employment.  The  Riksbank 
published a clarification of monetary policy in 1999, which repeated the original target wording but also 
made clear how these temporary effects would be managed, as well as substantial deviations from the 
target.   
Why an inflation target? 
The main purpose of introducing a price stability target was to break the pattern of inflation shocks, 
devaluation  and  poor  real  growth.  If  we  look  further  back  in  time,  periods  of  economic  prosperity 
appear to have been connected with a low, stable inflation rate (Figure 2). Price stability does not only 
provide better and more secure conditions for making economic policy decisions. A long-term, credible 
commitment to meet the inflation target also reduces uncertainty when assessing future income, which 
ultimately determines the (fundamental) value of various types of asset, such as shares. The larger 
the risk that one will not receive one’s invested funds plus the desired return on the investment, the 
greater the compensation one requires for investing/lending one’s money. Compare, for instance, with 
the situation in Sweden during parts of the 1980s (after deregulation) when the system of tax relief on 
interest, combined with inflation shocks, meant that in principle one could earn money by borrowing 
while  it  cost  money  to  save!  The  conditions  for  making  wise  economic  decisions  will  thus  become 
better when the price stability target has been met.  
The same reasoning can be applied to wage-setting. During the 1970s and 1980s wage-earners were 
repeatedly forced to make large demands for nominal wage increases as inflation was “eating up” their 
purchasing  power.  Real  wage  increases  were  almost  non-existent,  while  nominal  wage  increases 
pushed  up  prices,  resulting  in  recurring  cost  crises.  A  low,  stable  inflation  rate  provides  entirely 
different conditions for more stable and better developments in real wages.  
Monetary policy and the stock market 
As I have the privilege of speaking to a group of shareholders, I would like to take the opportunity to 
make a small digression into the connection between monetary policy and the stock market. I have 
already  mentioned  that  a  low,  stable  inflation  rate  creates  good  conditions  for  favourable  economic 
growth and long-term developments in the stock market. However, the reverse can also apply: stock 
market  developments  also  have some significance  for  the  shaping  of  monetary  policy.  The  price of 
   2/7 
various  assets,  such  as  shares,  is  important  in  itself  for  the  dynamics  of  a  country’s  growth  and 
inflation  trends.  If,  for  instance,  share  prices  rise,  this  stimulates  household  consumption  and 
corporate investment, and vice versa. This in turn affects price trends. Thus, the stock market, like the 
housing market, can affect the Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions.  
Since the 1960s and 1970s, Swedes have been saving more and more in shares, both directly and via 
mutual funds and insurance, and the market has developed considerably during this period. The return 
on shares has been very good, seen over the past 30 years, but it has also been something of a roller 
coaster ride. Here I am thinking of periods of overvaluation, which have been followed by sharp price 
falls, for instance in connection with the financial crisis and the later IT bubble. Despite these periods 
of falling share prices, the percentage of shares in household wealth has increased, and stock market 
developments have thus become increasingly important for households’ consumption decisions and 
for inflation.  
Another reason to be interested in the stock market is its significance for efficiency and thereby for 
growth.  An  efficient  securities  market  fulfils  many  important  functions,  for  instance,  as  information 
bearer, channel for risk management and as mediator of capital. A stock market that functions in the 
optimal  manner,  with  rational  investors,  helps  to  allocate  investment  to  the  projects  with  the  best 
expected  yield.  Of  course,  this requires  rational  behaviour and  active,  competent  and well-informed 
investors. The development of the stock market has progressed rapidly and, in addition to the purely 
technical factors, regulations, better information and education, for instance through associations like 
the  Swedish  Shareholders  Association,  all  contribute  to  creating  a  more  efficient  stock  market. 
However, the market does not always function perfectly and it is not difficult to find episodes of herd 
behaviour and overreaction when pricing has not reflected fundamentals. One example I am thinking 
of is the IT bubble at the end of the 1990s.  
What has happened since the changeover to inflation targeting? 
The Riksbank became the 4th central bank in the world to conduct monetary policy with an explicit, 
low inflation target. First of all was New Zealand, three years ahead of Sweden, followed by Canada 
and  the  United  Kingdom.1    If  one  looks  back  at  developments  since  the  changeover  to  inflation 
targeting, it must be said that monetary policy has worked well in Sweden. Following an initial period 
with  relatively  high  interest  rates  and  a  tighter  policy,  the  inflation  rate  has  moved  downwards  and 
stabilised at a low level (Figure 3).  
One important difference compared with the 1970s and 1980s is that credibility has been established 
for the monetary policy target, which can be said in turn to be a necessary condition for the policy to 
succeed. The fact that confidence in the inflation targeting policy strengthened fairly rapidly from the 
mid-1990s onwards is very clear, if one examines inflation expectations during this period (Figure 4). 
From  relatively  high  levels  indicated  in  the  surveys  made  immediately  after  the  changeover  to  an 
inflation target, the expected inflation rate gradually stabilised at around the target of 2 per cent. Nor 
does it seem to be the case that price stability was attained at the cost of stronger fluctuations in the 
real  economy  than  before,  which  was  a  fear  expressed  by  some  prior  to  the  changeover.  The 
fluctuations in the real economy appear to have declined in comparison with the decades prior to the 
crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, and we have had much more positive developments with regard 
to real growth and real wages.  
Has inflation been too low? 
During the period from 1995 to September 2005, CPI inflation has averaged at around 1.1 per cent, 
which is within our tolerance interval but clearly below the target of 2 per cent. However, the average 
UND1X inflation rate has been higher, around 1.9 per cent between 1995 and 2004, which is mainly 
due  to  interest  rates  and  thereby  also  mortgage  interest  expenditure  gradually  falling  during  the 
period. During the past two years the rate of price increase measured as UND1X has been lower, on 
average  around  0.9  per  cent.  There  are  several  reasons  for  this,  for  instance,  stronger  productivity 
                                                      
1   Chile  and  Israel  also  introduced  an  inflation  target  at  an  early  stage,  1990  and  1991  respectively,  but  inflation  and  the 
targets were much higher there than in the other "pioneering” countries. 
   3/7 
growth than expected and surprisingly low import prices. The reasons for the low inflation rate are to a 
large extent factors that are beyond the Riksbank’s control. Monetary policy decisions are based on a 
forecast of future developments and it is in the nature of things that unforeseen events can and do 
occur.  
However, with the benefit of hindsight, it is in my opinion clear that there would have been scope for 
the  Riksbank  to  conduct  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  than  it  did.  However,  we  were  by  no 
means alone in making incorrect forecasts of inflation. In principle all of the other forecasters, albeit to 
different  extents,  made  roughly  the  same  forecasting  errors.  We  all  underestimated  effects  of  the 
global slowdown in inflation and the low import prices and we incorrectly assessed productivity growth, 
which was much higher than expected.  
When assessing the situation and answering the question of whether excessively tight monetary policy 
has  held  back  demand,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  forecasting  errors  are  primarily  due  to 
supply-side  factors  and  that  monetary  policy  in  recent  years  has  nevertheless  been  expansionary, 
which is reflected not least in the increase in household borrowing and in rising asset prices, primarily 
with regard to housing, but also in equity. Long-term interest rates are also very low, companies in 
general have very good liquidity and good profitability.  
It can also be noted that in connection with the Riksbank cutting its repo rate in June as a result of 
weaker  economic  growth  than  expected  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  some  voices  were  raised 
warning  that  the  low  interest  rates  could  lead  to  an  excessive  credit  boom  and  overly  high  house 
prices. The consideration that has to be made between growth in demand over the coming two years 
and the risks linked to high indebtedness, for instance, are still relevant and current, and I will return to 
this shortly.  
Monetary policy, productivity and jobs 
One consequence of the high level of productivity is that employment has not improved very much, 
despite  several  years  of  good  growth.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  link  between  economic  activity  and 
employment has disappeared but - and this has been clear during the current economic upturn – the 
relationship  may  very  well  vary  from  one  economic  cycle  to  the  next.  We  have  produced  larger 
quantities but using fewer employees. One possible reason for the high productivity growth is earlier 
investment  in  IT,  in  particular.  Another  is  that  the  stiffer  competitive  pressure,  which  among  other 
things  originates  from  the  internationalisation  of  the  economy,  has  forced  companies  to  make  their 
production  more  efficient.  This  is  essentially  positive,  as  productivity  gains  contribute  to  increased 
income, investment and growth, which should in the long term lead to new job opportunities. There are 
many indications that an increasing number of companies are now approaching the limit where they 
can no longer meet the increase in demand without recruiting new staff. We are thus beginning to see 
signs of a turnaround, but the question of the labour market and the significance of monetary policy for 
employment remains important.   
To  what  extent  can  the  problems  in  the  labour  market  be  said  to  be  due  to  the  Riksbank  having 
conducted  an  excessively  tight  monetary  policy?  If  we  had  succeeded  in  predicting  the  high 
productivity we would probably have conducted a slightly more expansionary policy, but my answer is 
nevertheless that one is overestimating the power of monetary policy if one believes that it could have 
solved the problems in the labour market. A large part of unemployment is due to structural reasons 
and therefore does not vary according to the economic cycle. I do not believe that it would have led to 
so much higher consumption and investment if the repo rate had, for instance, been on average half a 
percentage point lower during 2002 and 2003. My assessment is thus that it would probably have led 
only to marginally lower unemployment.  
If  one  wishes  to  achieve  a  lasting  improvement  in  employment,  measures  are  required  that  will 
stimulate  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market  in  different  ways  and  lead  to  investment  and  a  good 
corporate climate.  One reason  behind the  problems  in  the  labour  market  is  that  we  have not  really 
been able to keep up with the structural change process that follows in the wake of globalisation or, 
expressed in another way, that we have not been quick enough in adapting to the increased pressure 
for  change  when,  for  instance,  the  manufacturing  industry  is  challenged  by  low-cost  countries  in 
eastern Europe and Asia.  
To  summarise:  our  look  back  in  time  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  change  in  monetary  policy 
regime was a success, despite the fact that the period since the mid-1990s was a fairly turbulent time 
for  conducting  monetary  policy.  There  have  been,  for  instance,  periods  of  considerable  financial 
   4/7 
unease and extraordinary events of various types. A few of the many examples are: the Asian crisis, 
the Russian crisis, the IT bubble and the acts of terrorism on 11 September 2001. In addition, food 
prices  and  various  energy  prices,  in  particular  oil  prices,  have  periodically  varied  substantially  for 
varying reasons, such as war, natural disasters and dry summers.  
I would now like to give you a brief summary of the current economic situation and then conclude with 
a few thoughts on future challenges for monetary policy.  
The current economic situation 
As you have probably noted, we Executive Board members chose to hold the repo rate unchanged at 
our most recent monetary policy meeting in late October. This decision was also in line with market 
expectations. 
The outlook for the Swedish economy is bright. Our forecast is that economic activity will strengthen in 
the  near  future,  a  development  which  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  economic  policy  remains 
expansionary. There are some causes for concern; primarily the high oil price and global imbalances, 
which contribute to the uncertainty over international economic developments. Our assessment in the 
October Inflation Report was that the risks for inflation were balanced, that is, the risks of weaker price 
development were balanced by the risks of higher inflation. As before, there is also reason to take into 
account the fact that household borrowing and house prices are continuing to rise at a rapid rate. 
I agree with the analysis in the Inflation Report and with the decision to hold the repo rate unchanged. 
At the same time, in my opinion there is reason for some concern with regard to the sustainability of 
the current economic trend. There are already signs of a slowdown in the United States, which are 
probably  linked  to  the  severe  storms  the  country  has  suffered,  as  well  as  to  the  fact  that  inflation 
appears to be accelerating and to the Federal Reserve’s interest rate increases.  
It has long been clear that a slowdown in domestic demand is necessary in the United States in order 
to correct global imbalances. However, there is a risk that the adjustment of the imbalances will occur 
too rapidly and will be combined with a rapid fall in property prices. This type of development could in 
turn lead to a rapid braking of consumption. If this occurs without a simultaneous rise in consumption 
in  the  euro  area,  there  could  be  a  problem  for  the  Swedish  economy,  as  such  a  large  part  of  our 
exports  are  to  the  euro  area.  The  signs  of  an  upturn  in  Europe  are  so  far  few  and  growth  in  the  
United Kingdom has slackened considerably. Such a situation would require more measures than a 
single monetary policy in Europe. 
Weaker growth in the United States could also lead to a decline in interest from China in investment in 
US  government  securities,  which  could  further  push  up  long-term  market  rates.  This  would  occur 
during  a  downturn,  while  the  effects  of  oil  price  rises  continued  to  push up  inflation.  In  my  opinion, 
there  is  thus an  evident risk  that  international economic activity  would  decline,  possibly  as soon as 
next year or the following year. The dilemma is that in this case it would occur in a situation where 
interest  rates  were  already  low  in  many  countries,  which  limits  the  scope  for  monetary  policy  to 
counteract developments. 
If  we  look  at  Sweden  alone,  the  economic  outlook  is  favourable  and  the  conditions  for  a  positive 
economic  development  are  in  place.  Companies  are  showing  good  profitability,  investment  is 
beginning to pick up and there are signs of improvement in the labour market. It is the international 
picture and its effects on Sweden that I consider to be worrying. A possible international slowdown in 
the coming two years could lead to growth failing to reach the level indicated in the main scenario of 
the Riksbank’s Inflation Report. 
Another  question  that  affects  the Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  considerations  is  developments  in  the 
property market. Exaggerated increases in asset prices can lead to subsidence in the future. With a 
larger  percentage  of  debt  in  relation  to  income  and  with  shorter  periods  for  fixing  interest  rates  on 
loans,  it  is  probable  that  monetary  policy  would  have  a  stronger  and  faster  impact  on  household 
consumption.  Moreover,  the  Riksbank’s  tasks  include  not  only  safeguarding  price  stability,  but  also 
financial stability. This is a further reason for closely following developments in indebtedness in the 
economy  and  price  trends  in  the  property  market.  In  the  event  of  economic  shocks  it  might  be 
necessary to weigh price stability, real economic stability and financial stability against one another; it 
might not be possible to achieve all of the objectives at the same time. 
   5/7 
Future challenges for monetary policy 
Some  factors  that  have  monetary  policy  significance  do  not  change  according  to  the  Swedish 
business  cycle.  This  includes  the  effects  of  globalisation.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  globalisation  and 
increased competition from low-cost countries like China and India have contributed to lower inflation 
by way of import prices, increased competition and greater pressure for structural change. This makes 
demands  not  only  of  monetary  policy,  but  also  structural  and  fiscal  policy.  The  moving  of 
manufacturing and services to other countries need not mean higher unemployment and lower growth 
if innovative forces are equally strong in the country from which the jobs are disappearing. In addition, 
flexibility in the labour market needs to be good. Measures to facilitate for the labour force to move 
between  sectors  are  crucial,  in  order  to  avoid  long-term  unemployment,  for  example.  Skills 
development and retraining opportunities must be offered to those losing their jobs in the sectors that 
are closing down. 
The  adjustment  process  can  be  painful  for  those  involved,  but  structural  change  is  also  a  positive 
force. Lower costs and productivity gains enable investment and employment opportunities to move to 
other,  more  refined  products  and  services.  Old  sectors  or  companies  that  are  pushed  out  of  the 
market create scope for new employment in areas where the country concerned has a comparative 
advantage or within domestic services production that does not compete to the same extent as the 
manufacturing industry. It should also be borne in mind that many rapidly-growing low-cost countries 
like  China  will  probably  increase  their  imports  as  much  as  their  exports.  What  can  we  offer  these 
countries  in  the  future?  The  areas  where  we  have  comparative  advantages  contain  future  export 
potential and employment opportunities. 
Monetary policy challenges 
The fact that prices of imported goods have tended to be lower than we had earlier expected over a 
period  of  time  raises  the  question  of  what  measure  of  inflation  we  should  concentrate  on.  One 
question that has been raised is whether the Riksbank should disregard imported inflation and instead 
focus  on  domestically-generated  inflation.  This  argument  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  as  the 
Riksbank is unable to affect imported inflation, it should aim monetary policy towards the areas that 
can be influenced. Let me give a simple example of why I do not consider this viewpoint to be valid. 
Of  course,  the  price  in  a  foreign  currency  that  a  foreign  producer  receives  for  its  goods  is  entirely 
beyond the Riksbank’s control. However, when the product is imported to Sweden, Swedish importers, 
for instance, wholesalers, have to exchange foreign currency in order to pay for the goods. In other 
words, monetary policy plays some role in the price in Swedish krona that the importer has to pay for 
the goods through its effects on the exchange rate. When the importer then wishes to sell the goods in 
the  Swedish  market,  it  must  have  a  network  of  retailers  who  will  sell  the  product.  This  means  that 
Swedish costs, such as wages and rent paid for premises, also play a part in the price the retailer 
charges  for  the  goods.  Naturally,  the  demand  for  the  product  is  also  an  important  factor.  In  other 
words, the traditional supply and demand relationship in the Swedish market is important to the end-
price that Swedish consumers have to pay for the imported goods. There are studies indicating that 
domestic cost components may comprise as much as 75 per cent of the end-price.2  Arguing that the 
Riksbank cannot affect imported inflation is therefore simplifying rather too much. On the other hand, it 
may be the case that during the prevailing changeover process it may be quite reasonable to allow 
inflation to be below (or in a different situation, above) the inflation target for a period of time. This lies 
within  the  boundaries  of  the  flexible  inflation  targeting  the  Riksbank  conducts.  A  policy  of  flexible 
inflation targeting means that we always consider how large a deviation from the inflation target might 
be acceptable, and whether we can allow a little more time before bringing inflation back in line with 
the target. 
Another challenge is the low interest rates. At present, the Riksbank’s key rate is at an historically low 
level, although we are in the upturn phase of the economic cycle, at least this appears to be the case 
in our view of recent growth and our forecast for future growth. At the same time, one cannot rule out 
the  possibility  that  inflation  might  remain  low  for  a  long  period  of  time.  If  economic  activity  should 
                                                      
2   Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2005), "Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange Rate", Journal 
of Political Economy, Vol. 113, No. 4, August 2005, pp. 742-784. 
   6/7 
decline substantially, the problem will be that there is little scope for further stimulation using monetary 
policy. There is then a risk that the Riksbank would lack the means to manage its stabilisation policy 
task. On the other hand, if we continue to have very low interest rates at the same time as the growth 
rate is high, there is a risk of imbalances arising in the housing market. 
Conducting flexible monetary policy means being prepared to deal with this type of economic shock. 
The bank is therefore working on further clarifying the principles published in 1999 that explain how 
the Riksbank’s inflation target will be applied and the considerations that sometimes need to be made 
between  inflation,  stability  in  the  real  economy  and  stability  in  the  financial  system.  This  does  not 
involve any fundamental changes in monetary policy strategy but may make it easier to understand 
how monetary policy is applied. 
 
   7/7 
