Hermann Remsperger: Heavy tails and stable Paretian distributions in finance 
and macroeconomics 
Welcome  address  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Bundesbank Conference Centre in celebration of the 80th birthday of 
Professor Benoît B Mandelbrot, Eltville, 9 November 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear Professor Mandelbrot,  
I have the great pleasure of welcoming you to the Bundesbank Conference on “Heavy tails and stable 
Paretian  distributions  in  finance  and  macroeconomics”  on  the  occasion  of  the  80th  birthday  of 
Professor Benoît Mandelbrot.  
Nowadays,  it  is  common  knowledge  that  prices  in  financial  markets  do  not  always  behave  in  the 
manner that normal distribution would predict. At the same time, modelling financial markets is one of 
the most important tasks a central bank has. 
A  thorough  understanding  of  financial  markets  is  necessary  for  appraising  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy and thus maintaining price stability as well as for preserving financial stability. Either 
way, extracting market expectation is always an important part of the exercise.  
Ultimately,  we  would  like  to  estimate  a  distribution  of  all  the  relevant  economic  variables.  But  the 
complexity  of  the  real  world  does  not  allow  a  meaningful  estimation  of  the  economic  system  as  a 
whole. So far, we have been restricted to concentrating mainly on estimating the conditional expected 
value, knowing that information on dependencies and higher moments would be desirable.  
Models of the monetary transmission channels would suggest that the central bank sets the short-term 
interest rate, which, in turn, influences interest rates over the entire maturity range, the exchange rate 
and,  possibly,  other  asset  prices.  Through  the  different  spending  components,  these  financial 
variables affect output and prices.  
Furthermore, the banking channel has to be taken into consideration. That means that the effect on 
the availability and terms of bank loans and subsequent impacts must be observed. This is especially 
true in a bank-dominated financial system such as the German one.  
Standard  models  used  to  assess  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  decisions,  like  the  expectation 
augmented  Phillips  curve,  need  to  model  inflation  expectations.  It  is  normal  practice  to  deduct  a 
certain formation of expectations from economic theory, which produces an estimation model. Lucas’ 
rational expectations are probably the best-known example.  
A  different  approach  for  extracting  expectations  concentrates  merely  on  reading  financial  data  – 
without  the  underpinning  of  a  comprehensive  economic  model.  Prices  of  financial  instruments  can 
reveal some expectations. And innovative products are widening the scope of this approach. Inflation-
linked  swaps,  for  example,  allow  the  computation  of  an  inflation  curve  similar  to  the  yield  curve, 
providing information on the expected path of inflation.  
Market  participants’  beliefs  will  be  reflected  in  investors’  attitude  towards  risk.  A  widely  regarded 
measure is the Bank for International Settlements ’ risk appetite indicator, which is derived from the 
differences  between  two  distributions  of  returns:  one  implied  by  option  prices,  the  other  based  on 
actual returns estimated from historical data.  
Here, there is the question of finding an appropriate model and a fitting distribution. I shall return to the 
question of distributional assumptions in a few seconds.  
Risk indicators may help us to determine, for example, whether historically low spreads on emerging 
market  bonds  at  one  period  of  time  or  low  corporate  bond  spreads  in  another  reflect  market 
participants’ increased willingness to take risks. Taking risks without an appropriate premium, might 
endanger the ability of some entities to honour their obligations.  
This leads us directly to the field of financial stability which is a major concern for a central bank, both 
from a monetary and a real economy perspective. A stable financial system is of utmost importance for 
monetary  policy,  ensuring  that  monetary  impulses  have  a  reliable  and  predictable  impact  on  the 
economy as a whole.  
   1/2 
The  various  transmission  channels  in  the  financial  sector  are  vital  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  A 
stable  financial  system  is  able  to  absorb  financial  or  business  cycle  shocks  even  if  and  when  they 
exceed the capacity of the individual market participants.  
On  the  other  hand,  major  price  shocks  or  a  credit  crunch  could  harm  the  economic  allocation 
mechanism  which  may  cause  severe  real  losses  in  production  and  growth.  Moreover,  the  threat  of 
crisis-driven excessive price movements on capital markets may push up risk premiums to very high 
levels. And this may further disturb the allocation mechanism.  
With regard to Professor Mandelbrot’s achievements in the analysis of financial markets, let me now 
comment  a  little  further  on  the  close  relationship  between  risk  models  for  the  analysis  of  financial 
stability  and  the  distributional  assumptions  for  financial  data.  The  crucial  question  is:  which 
distributions fit financial data?  
Since  the  work  of  Bachelier  in  1900,  the  normality  assumption  seems  to  have  been  the  dominant 
assumption for the last century, and that is still the case today, at least for many practitioners. But, in 
the early 1960s Professor Mandelbrot observed the behaviour of changes of speculative prices, which 
is much more erratic than the normality assumption would imply.  
In 1963, Professor Mandelbrot wrote in the Journal of Business that "the empirical distributions of price 
changes  in  a  speculative  market  are  usually  too  peaked  to  be  viewed  as  samples  from  Gaussian 
population. … there are typically so many outliers. … I replace the Gaussian distribution throughout by 
L-stable (stable Paretian) laws." 
It is only from this point of view that we are able to understand what Noah and Joseph have to do with 
financial markets, as Professor Mandelbrot explained yesterday in his lecture in Frankfurt.  
Studying  Mandelbrot  influences  our  understanding  of  financial  markets.  He  warns  that  a  restrictive 
distributional  assumption  for  financial  data  –  namely,  the  normality  assumption  –  may  lead  to  the 
underestimation of risk in the financial markets.  
This conference will discuss new theoretical developments in Professor Mandelbrot’s approach and 
present new applications in the fields of risk analysis, exchange rates and portfolio management.  
Therefore,  the  conference  will  make  a  contribution  to  the  ongoing  development  on  Professor 
Mandelbrot’s view on financial markets. Moreover, the conference aims to bring these highly academic 
issues closer to practitioners.  
I wish every participant an exciting and stimulating time during the conference. 
 
   2/2 
