Svein Gjedrem: Risk and growth in the financial industry 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Central Bank of Norway, at the Annual meeting of the 
Norwegian Savings Banks’ Association, Bergen, 27 October 2005.  
The speech does not contain assessments of the economic situation or the monetary stance. Please note that the text below 
may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
The charts in pdf-format 
References can be found on the Central Bank of Norway’s website. 
 can be found on the Central Bank of Norway’s website.  
 Introduction 
1. 
Over the past decades, debt and financial assets have risen sharply worldwide. The financial system 
serving lenders and borrowers has also expanded. The number of participants in these markets has 
soared, some new operators have appeared and a broad range of instruments has emerged. Growth 
in  financial  markets  provides  the  basis  for  more  efficient  use  and  distribution  of  capital  and  for 
improved risk management. Developments in the financial industry have thus contributed to stronger 
and more stable economic global growth over the past decades.  
New instruments have increased banks’ possibilities of managing risk, among other things credit risk 
associated with lending. In many countries, growth in household borrowing has been high for several 
years. In Norway, mortgage loans account for an increasing share of banks’ balance sheets.  
I will now discuss different aspects of this.  
2.  
Developments in the financial sector 
Scale and size of the various markets 
Financial  markets  have  expanded  strongly  in  many  countries,  partly  as  a  result  of  extensive 
deregulation  in  the  financial  sector  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Technological  advances  reduced  the 
effect  of  regulation  and  have,  together  with  institutional  changes,  made  it  possible  for  market 
participants  to  respond  in  improved  and  more  efficient  ways.  Credit  institutions’  total  assets  have 
increased sharply over the past few years in all countries in the comparison.  
Banks’  total  assets,  as  a  share  of  GDP,  are  not  particularly  high  in  Norway  compared  with  other 
countries, even though banks are the main lenders to Norwegian households and enterprises. This 
may  be  because  Norwegian  banks  extend  few  loans  to  the  public  sector  and  to  foreign  borrowers 
compared  with  banks  in  other  countries,  and  because  Norwegian  enterprises  borrow  from  foreign 
credit institutions more than enterprises in other countries.  
Banks’ total assets have increased while the number of employees and person-hours has declined. 
Productivity growth has been strong.  
Direct  mediation  of  assets  and  liabilities  through  the  securities  market  has  also  increased. 
Nevertheless, bonds and notes do not account for more than about 7 per cent of domestic debt. This 
share has remained fairly stable in recent years. Private enterprises borrow less in the domestic bond 
market than enterprises in other countries. Particularly in the US, lending through these markets is well 
established.  
The financial system in Norway is largely dominated by banks. Banks have a total market share of 
over  50  per  cent,  while  mortgage  companies  and  finance  companies  have  a  combined  share  of  
14 per cent.  
Growth  in  financial  markets  makes  it  easier  to  channel  savings  surpluses  to  customers  with  sound 
investment  plans.  It  also  makes  it  easier  to  diversify  risk.  Both  enhance  the  economy’s  growth 
potential.  At  the  same  time,  a  larger  financial  sector  may  increase  the  consequences  of  financial 
instability for the real economy.  
   1/6 
As  a  result  of  globalisation,  debt  and  financial  assets  are  now  more  widely  distributed  across 
countries. Home bias has declined. This has reduced the risk in the financial system and improved the 
relationship  between  risk  and  return.  The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  has  contributed  to  a  sharp 
decline  in  home  bias  in  Norway.  In  recent  years,  Norwegian  life  insurance  companies  have  also 
invested more of their capital abroad.  
Tendency towards larger entities and increased concentration 
National consolidation 
In the past few years, domestic mergers and acquisitions have been a central feature of the European 
banking industry. Concentration, which can for example be measured by the size of the five largest 
credit institutions, varies considerably across countries. However, concentration generally appears to 
be higher in small countries than in large ones. It is not particularly high in Norway, and is lower than 
in Denmark, Finland and Sweden.  
Developments in the number of credit institutions are another measure of market consolidation. The 
total number of credit institutions in the euro area has been sharply reduced over the past eight years. 
The number has declined from 29 institutions per million inhabitants in 1997 to 21 in 2004.  
The high level of concentration in small countries may be an indication that there are economies of 
scale in the financial industry. In large countries, even banks with small market shares can achieve 
economies of scale. Large credit institutions offering a range of services can also achieve economies 
of scope by selling several types of product to the same customer.  
Norway has more banks per capita than the euro area, and the number of banks has remained fairly 
stable over the past few years. One reason may be that bank alliances have allowed smaller banks to 
benefit  from  economies  of  scale  and  scope.  This  occurs  in  part  through  integrated  technology  and 
product development solutions, and the sharing of knowledge and expertise. In addition, the number 
of foreign operators in Norway has increased.  
Concentration in the banking industry also results in a concentration of risk. At the same time, larger 
entities may manage risk better than smaller entities.  
Cross-border activity 
In  countries  with  a  high  level  of  concentration,  more  consolidation  may  weaken  competition. 
Particularly in small countries, it has been necessary for banks to establish activities in other countries 
in order to achieve economies of scale. In the Nordic countries, Nordic financial conglomerates have 
emerged in recent years, and the largest banks now define the entire Nordic region as their domestic 
market. The Nordic region is very advanced in the development of cross-border solutions.  
Foreign bank branches and subsidiaries have more than doubled their market share in the Norwegian 
banking market since 1999. The share is considerably higher than in Sweden and Denmark, although 
the proportion of foreign institutions has also increased markedly in these countries. The sharp rise in 
Finland is due to Nordea’s becoming a Swedish rather than a Finnish bank in 2004.  
Cross-border activity contributes to increased competition, a wider range of options for operators and 
the sharing of expertise. With banks from several geographical markets, the financial system is also 
less vulnerable to cyclical developments in any one country.  
Growth in new, less well-known markets makes risk assessment more demanding. A consequence of 
cross-border institutions may also be that turbulence in financial markets in one country more easily 
spills  over  to  other  countries.  Moreover,  a  crisis  may  be  more  complicated  to  resolve  in  an 
internationally active institution than in a national institution.  
Conglomerates 
The  trend  in  financial  markets  is  moving  towards  large  financial  conglomerates  and  alliances.  In 
addition to traditional banking services, these conglomerates also offer other financial services. Large 
banking and financial groups in Norway have substantial market shares in several sectors. Compared 
   2/6 
with other Nordic banking conglomerates, Norwegian banking conglomerates earn a larger share of 
their revenues from services outside the bank itself.  
Banks  that  grow  into  other  sectors  will  face  challenges  relating  to  risk  management,  product 
knowledge and customer relations. Banks’ exposure to reputation risk also changes since problems in 
another, non-banking part of the conglomerate may influence and damage the bank’s reputation. In 
terms of financial stability, it may nonetheless be an advantage that bank conglomerates spread their 
revenue  base.  This  is  particularly  true  if  earnings  from  new  activities  do  not  fluctuate  in  step  with 
earnings from traditional banking activities. However, this is not entirely certain since most sources of 
bank revenues failed during the banking crisis at the beginning of the 1990s.  
Risk diversification through the securities market 
Credit that is channelled directly through the securities market diversifies risk and thereby eases the 
burden on the banking system. Developments in the securities market have made it easier for banks 
to  vary  their  financing.  In  addition,  the  emergence  of  a  number  of  new  credit  sources  and  new 
instruments has made it possible for banks to engage in risk trading. Therefore, it has also become 
easier for banks to diversify risk.  
The structure  of  the  financial  system  varies  considerably  across  countries.  This  is  illustrated  by  the 
different  ways  enterprises  finance  their  activities.  Norwegian  enterprises  have  a  fairly  low  level  of 
borrowing  in  the  bond  and  short-term  paper  market,  representing  as  little  as  8  per  cent  of  total 
financing.  
Different financing structures mean that the risk associated with extending credit and providing other 
financial services varies across countries. It is an advantage for enterprises and other operators in the 
financial market to have several financing sources to draw on. If problems arise in parts of the financial 
system, operators can find alternative sources of credit. A larger bond market would enhance financial 
stability. This is also the case in Norway.  
New investment and risk management instruments 
Structural  changes  and  strong  growth  over  the  past  decades  have  led  to  more  perfect  financial 
markets. This has made the markets more efficient and improved the distribution of resources and risk 
between operators, sectors and regions, and over time. There is rapid growth in product development 
in financial markets, and trading in instruments for the transfer of credit risk is rising. Greater focus on 
risk  management  by  banks  and  other  operators  generates  demand  for  these  products.  The 
emergence  of  new  instruments  is  being  driven  forward  by  intensified  competition,  technological 
developments and new, more risk-based capital adequacy requirements.  
In many countries, there has been a tendency towards separating those who provide loans and who 
assess  and  price  the  risk,  from  those  who  take  over  the  loans  and  bear  the  risk.  Through 
securitisation, banks can sell entire loan portfolios to special purpose vehicles that issue bonds that 
are  collateralised  by  these  loans.  It  is  the  buyers  of  these  bonds  that  bear  the  risk.  Such  special 
purpose  vehicles  are  not  subject  to  capital  adequacy  requirements  or  supervision.  Asset-backed 
bonds  are  a  similar  instrument  where  bond  holders  have  collateral  in  loans  that  banks  have 
transferred  to  a  mortgage  company.  Mortgage  companies  are  subject  to  supervision  and  capital 
adequacy requirements. Efforts are being made to allow these instruments in Norway. Use of these 
instruments  will  probably  strengthen  the  bond  market  and  thereby  improve  the  diversification  and 
management of risk.  
In recent years, we have seen the development of new instruments that make it possible to sell the 
credit risk associated with a loan while the actual loan remains on the balance sheet. This makes it 
easier to diversify and manage risk. A credit default swap is a type of credit insurance contract linked 
to one or more loans. The purchaser of the contract is guaranteed payment if the loan defaults. The 
contract issuer must pay.  
Collateralised  debt  obligations,  or  CDOs,  are  another  popular  instrument.  Simplified,  this  is  often  a 
corporate loan that has been transferred from a bank and split into tranches with varying risk profiles. 
Debt  instruments  are  issued  for  the  various  tranches.  If  the  loan  defaults,  the  first  losses  will  be 
incurred by the lowest tranche (which has the highest risk). The bank that has transferred the loan 
often holds this tranche. The tranche that incurs losses last will thus be very secure. The return in the 
   3/6 
various  tranches  will  naturally  be  related  to  risk.  In  this  way,  it  is  possible  to  create  many  different 
combinations of risk and return and tailor them to individual investors. Synthetic CDOs involve credit 
default  swaps  rather  than  loans.  This  makes  it  even  easier  to  achieve  the  combination  of  risk  and 
return the investor is seeking.  
In the global market, banks are net buyers of risk protection, whereas insurance companies are net 
sellers.  Nevertheless,  the  majority  of  transactions  are  between  banks  and  not  between  banks  and 
insurance companies.  
In terms of financial stability, there are both advantages and disadvantages to these new instruments. 
Among  other  things,  they  allow  the  transfer  of  risk  to  market  participants  that  are  willing  to  bear  it. 
Such participants are often specialised and well equipped to bear the risk. If the credit risk is spread to 
market participants outside the banking sector, banks’ risk exposure is reduced.  
Disadvantages arise if there is a concentration rather than a diversification of risk on the buyer side. If 
individual  market  participants  take  on  too  much  risk,  their  counterparties  (such  as  banks)  may  be 
exposed  to  losses.  There  is  always  a  risk  that  buyers  lack  sufficient  knowledge  of  new  products. 
Another problem has been that the new markets’ infrastructure has not kept pace with turnover so that 
operational risk in the system has increased.  
Risk  management  implies  that  investors  take  into  account  how  risk  and  return  are  correlated  for 
different  investments.  Normally,  such  assessments  are  based  on  correlations  under  normal 
circumstances, and the challenge lies in dealing with a completely different correlation during a crisis. 
New instruments can make such risk management more demanding. There may be poor liquidity in 
these markets and this can increase price fluctuations during a crisis and spread turbulence from one 
market to another.  
In general, the new instruments for risk management and diversification have probably contributed to 
stronger and more stable economic growth. As a result, economies have become more efficient. Thus 
far,  it  also  appears  that  improved  opportunities  for  risk  management  have  resulted  in  more  stable 
developments. The consequences of considerable financial turbulence, as for example when the IT 
bubble burst in 2000, have become less severe than earlier. Norway is lagging behind international 
developments in this area, together with a number of other European countries.  
Developments in the household sector and house prices 
3.  
In recent years, considerable attention has been focused on higher house prices and strong growth in 
household  debt  in  many  countries,  including  Norway.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  for 
example,  has  expressed  concern  that  house  prices  may  be  too  high  in  relation  to  fundamentals  in 
some countries. A sharp fall in house prices or other financial assets can trigger turbulence in financial 
markets.  
Norges Bank’s analyses show that high house prices may explain most of the growth in household 
debt.  Sales  of  new dwellings have  also  made  a  positive  contribution.  The  contribution  from interest 
rate changes was high in 2003 and 2004, but has diminished recently. Lower unemployment in 2004 
and increased house sales have pushed up debt growth.  
Higher  house  prices  affect  debt  for  a  long  period.  Changes  in  the  loan-to-asset  value  ratio  of  a 
dwelling is closely related to turnover and only a small share of the housing stock is for sale at any 
given  time.  Even  if  house  prices  stabilise  following  a  sharp  rise,  there  will  be  a  long  period  during 
which houses change hands at a higher price level than the last time they were sold.  
What influences developments in the housing market? 
Norges  Bank’s  calculations  show  that  high  wage  income  has  pushed  up  house  prices.  The 
contribution from interest rate changes has also been high in the past two years but has diminished 
somewhat recently. Interest rate changes have a strong and rapid impact.  
From 2004, housing starts were substantially as a result of high house prices, low interest rates and a 
favourable economic outlook. In Oslo in particular, housing starts have been high. A higher supply of 
dwellings will reduce pressures in the housing market.  
   4/6 
When we increase the interest rate, we expect house prices to rise at a slower pace. Norges Bank 
increased the interest rate by ¼ percentage point last summer. Before this increase, banks’ mortgage 
rates  fell,  even  though  Norges  Bank’s  sight  deposit  rate  remained  unchanged.  Stiff  competition  for 
mortgage loans and lower capital requirements for mortgage loans when the Basel II Accord comes 
into force may have contributed to this.  
In recent years, nominal long-term interest rates have fallen more than inflation. The real interest rate 
has declined. This may not only be an expression of economic conditions, but may also reflect a lower 
normal  level  for  real  interest  rates.  A  lower  normal  real  interest  rate  level  will  result  in  higher 
equilibrium prices for all capital goods, including houses, because the present value of future returns 
increases.  
Norges  Bank’s  estimates,  which  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  interest  rates  in  Norway  will 
increase gradually,1 show that the rise in house prices will slow until 2008 and then stabilise. As the 
chart  illustrates,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  associated  with  such  estimates  and  we  may  also 
experience that prices fall.  
Household wealth 
In recent years, higher house prices have resulted in increased housing wealth. There is considerable 
uncertainty associated with estimates for housing wealth, but a conservative estimate indicates that 
housing wealth is 11 per cent higher than household financial assets and more than 40 per cent higher 
than household debt.  
Household gross financial assets have also increased more than debt in recent years (measured in 
NOK).  This  financial  buffer  reduces  some  of  the  concern  related  to  debt  growth.  Nonetheless, 
developments in saving are uncertain. Credit market statistics may indicate that saving has declined 
considerably and is now fairly low after adjusting for the fact that owners are ploughing huge profits 
back into their companies as equity capital. The national accounts present a picture of higher saving.  
Total debt is unevenly distributed 
Developments  in  assets  and  debt  are,  naturally,  unevenly  distributed  among  different  groups  of 
households.  Compared  with  the  1980s,  the  debt  burden  has  increased  in  low-  and  middle-income 
households (deciles 1-6), often younger households in the start-up phase. This partly reflects changes 
in  the  tax  system.  Before  the  tax  reform  in  1992,  extensive  borrowing  was  very  profitable  for 
individuals with high income.  
In order to shed further light on the distribution of debt and assets between households, Norges Bank 
now analyses data for households included in the income and wealth survey published by Statistics 
Norway (2003). The data cover 17,000 households, of which 14,000 have debt. The chart on the left 
presents the relationship between gross income and debt for households with debt. The households 
with the highest debt and income have been excluded. For approximately 1,400 households, debt is 
higher than three times their income. For the entire population, this figure would be scarcely 200,000 
households.  
Income is the first line of defence against debt-servicing problems. The next line of defence is financial 
assets. The chart on the right shows the relationship between debt and financial assets for the same 
households.  Many  of  the  households  have  very  limited  financial  assets.  Households  with  less  than 
NOK 19,000 in financial assets account for a total of NOK 198 billion in debt. This represents a quarter 
of the households.  
                                                      
1   See Norges Bank’s Inflation Report 2/05. 
   5/6 
Consequences of developments in household debt 
The  household  interest  burden,  i.e.  interest  expenses  after  tax  in  relation  to  the  sum  of  interest 
expenses  and  disposable  income,  is  low  despite  strong  growth  in  debt.  The  interest  burden  will 
increase, however, when the interest rate reaches a more normal level.  
Only 14 per cent of household loans are fixed-rate loans. This is low in relation to other countries and 
makes households vulnerable to an interest rate increase that is higher than expected.  
Losses were low on loans to the household sector compared with loans to the enterprise sector during 
the banking crisis at the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s. Despite high real interest rates 
and a decline in income, households were largely able to service their debt. High interest expenses 
and a decline in income, however, led to a reduction in household consumption. This led subsequently 
to  lower  turnover  in  the  enterprise  sector  and  weakened  profitability  and  debt-servicing  capacity.  In 
this way, households contributed to an increase in banks’ losses on loans to the enterprise sector. The 
higher  the  household  debt  burden  is,  the  stronger  the  spillover  effect  can  be  from  households  to 
enterprises.  
The stability of the financial system 
4.  
Given the current picture, a sharp increase in bank losses is not likely in the near future. This is also 
the  assessment  of  the  IMF,  which  recently  evaluated  the  Norwegian  financial  system.  The  IMF 
concluded  that  the  Norwegian  financial  system  is  solid  and  well  managed,  and  that  short-term 
vulnerabilities are low. Even with a strong negative shock to the economy, losses are expected to be 
far lower than during the banking crisis. This is probably because of the increase in the share of loans 
to households, for which losses are normally not very high, and because enterprises are now in a far 
stronger financial position than they were at the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s.  
Long periods of strong growth in debt, asset prices and investment may be a source of subsequent 
instability and problems in the financial system. We have observed this phenomenon both in Norway 
and  in  other  countries.  When  optimism  turns  to  pessimism,  the  financial  system  can  come  under 
pressure. However, it is not possible to determine with any certainty the value of debt, asset prices 
and investment that may constitute an unacceptable risk in this context.  
The pace of growth in household borrowing cannot be sustained over time. It would probably be wise 
for both borrowers and lenders to acknowledge that the root of subsequent problems, and demanding 
corrections, is often to be found during such periods.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
   6/6 
