Axel Weber: Challenges to the global economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  European  Banking 
Congress, Frankfurt, 18 November 2005. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1 
It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honour  to  offer  you  some  thoughts  on  current  challenges  facing  the  global 
economy.  The  European  Banking  Congress  is  always  an  appropriate  forum  for  discussing  global 
matters. This is especially true this year as the motto “ Eurasia – Bull meets Tiger” addresses two of 
the most important players of the international monetary system.  
Many economists tend to view globalisation as a basically benign phenomenon and take comfort in 
the fact that the global economy has been marked by robust growth and tame core inflation in the past 
few  years.  That  is  certainly  true.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  witnessing  several  instances  of 
possible imbalances:  
• 
• 
commodity prices have reached new record highs,  
yet government bond yields are low and corporate bond spreads and emerging market bond 
spreads are also low by historical standards,  
in some economies, low interest rates are fuelling housing price booms,  
additionally, the world economy is awash with liquidity,  
last but not least, global current account imbalances are at unprecedented levels.  
• 
• 
• 
With  regard  to  that  last  point:  The  question  of  sustainability  and  the  unwinding  of  the  US  current 
account deficit is crucial not only for the US economy itself, but also for the world economy. And it will 
have repercussions for Asia as well as for Europe. Especially as both regions are on aggregate largely 
dependent on external demand. For example, exports from emerging Asia have grown by more than 
10 % per annum over the past decade. They now account for 45 % of emerging Asia’s GDP. At the 
same time domestic demand has been subdued in most countries of the region.  
Facts about global imbalances 
2 
Current  account  imbalances  have  widened  considerably  in  recent  years.  The  US  deficit  is  at 
unprecedented levels. According to IMF projections it will reach over 6% (as a percentage of GDP) 
this year and next year. CEC countries will also exhibit significant deficits of nearly 5%. East Asian 
countries on the other hand are characterised by notable surpluses. Here current account adjustments 
in the wake of the Asian crisis have not been reversed. But the regional disaggregation makes clear 
that  it  is  predominantly  the  Chinese  external  surplus  which  is  driving  the  regional  aggregate.  Asian 
economies, excluding China, will – according to IMF projections – witness a significant shrinkage of 
their  current  account  surpluses  owing  to  higher  import  costs  (from  3.8  %  in  2003  to  only  0.7  %  in 
2006). China, however, is projected to further widen its current account surplus from 3.2 % in 2003 to 
nearly  6  %  in  2006.  Finally,  the  euro  area  is  in  a  roughly  balanced  position,  although  underlying 
national  heterogeneity  remains  significant:  Germany  with  a  current  account  surplus  of  over  4  %  in 
2005 ( Netherlands nearly 5 %) and large deficits in Portugal (8.4%), Spain (6.2%) and Greece (3.9%). 
Owing to oil revenues, countries in the Middle East have moved into notable surplus positions over the 
past few years (even higher than Asian countries). In part, the increasing Middle East surpluses come 
at the expense of other regions. This is clearly visible in Asia (excluding China).  
The  US  current  account  deficit  is  increasingly  soaking  up  global  savings,  In  2005  the  US  current 
account absorbs more than 7% of global savings according to IMF projections. Given that savings are 
predominantly  invested  at  home  –  although  home  bias  has  declined  over  the  past  years  –  these 
figures still underestimate the US influence on international saving assets.  
   1/7 
Therefore,  the  topic  of  global  imbalances  is  closely  aligned  to  current  account  developments  in  the 
United States. This does not mean, however, that possible causes of global imbalances are purely an 
US phenomenon. And it does not mean that appropriate policy responses should be required only of 
the US authorities.  
Nevertheless, it is the development of the US current account deficit that lies at the heart of widely 
discussed  concerns  among  policy  makers  and  economists.  There  is  one  reason  for  this:  it  is  the 
question of whether the US current account trajectory is sustainable. And unsustainability, of course, 
means that “things that can’t go on forever, don’t” as Stein’s law of policy reminds us.  
Some brief remarks on sustainability 
2.1 
For sustainability not to be more than just an empty phrase there is, of course, a need for an operable 
definition.  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  universally  accepted  definition  of  an  unsustainable  current 
account.  Economists  who  refer  to  it  commonly  use  the  theoretical  framework  of  the  intertemporal 
approach to the current account. The key message here is that a country must satisfy its intertemporal 
budget constraint: Judged against this benchmark, the sustainability issue for the US current account 
deficit is clear: with a negative net foreign asset position of USD2.5 trillion in 2004, the US economy 
has to produce trade surpluses some day in the future. In other words: a net debtor country cannot run 
trade deficits indefinitely – even if the debtor in case is the world’s most potent economy.  
This,  of  course,  is  a strictly  theoretical  analysis  of  the  sustainability  issue.  A  possibly  more  realistic 
approach  defines  sustainability  as  an  unchanged  net  international  investment  position  (in  relative 
terms). Given the net external indebtedness of more than 20% of GDP in 2004, calculations imply a 
critical  US  current  account  deficit  of  slightly  over  1%  of  GDP  (far  below  the  latest  figures  of  6%  of 
GDP). Here, some qualifications because of valuation effects on the stocks of net foreign assets are in 
order. However, such qualifications do not change the basic message.  
Nevertheless:  this  line  of  reasoning  still  does  not  give  much  practical  guidance  on  the  question  of 
which relative net foreign asset position could be sustainable in the foreseeable future. On the one 
side,  it  would  be  unrealistic  to  expect  the  adjustment  to  lead  to  unchanged  US  net  external 
indebtedness at current levels. On the other side, it is equally true that a net foreign asset position of 
the US economy amounting to over 100% of GDP – which is implied by the current trajectory – would 
mean a further step into uncharted territory carrying with it the risks of an disorderly unwinding with 
repercussion for the global economic and monetary system.  
The  bottom  line  of  these  considerations  is:  The  current  trend  of  the  US  current  account  is 
unsustainable with respect to different concepts and measures of sustainability. We should realistically 
expect a further increase in the net indebtedness of the US economy, but the current trend has to be 
broken in order to minimise unwelcome risks.  
Therefore, it is not a question of whether, but rather of when and how the adjustment should come 
about.  
An answer to these questions calls for an analysis of the causes of the current imbalances. This is of 
particular importance as different opinions about the ultimate causes imply different opinions about the 
likely  stability  of  the  current  situation  which  is,  of  course,  of  prime  relevance  given  the  operational 
difficulties with the concept of sustainability for short-term policy purposes.  
Arguments for and against the sustainability of the US CAD  
3 
At  the  risk  of  oversimplification,  it  might  be  helpful  to  distinguish  three  ways  of  defining  the  current 
account:  
• 
• 
• 
Trade View: Cyclical and growth asymmetries between economic regions worldwide have contributed 
to the emergence of global imbalances. However, trade-related factors cannot explain the magnitude 
of the imbalances observed.  
Trade View,  
Savings/Investment View,  
Asset View.  
   2/7 
Savings/Investment View I: Global imbalances largely reflect low savings in the US (fiscal and private). 
The gloomy side of this perspective emphasises the widening fiscal deficits in the US and/or bubble-
driven wealth effects in private consumption (housing market). The benign perspective focuses on a 
wealth effect rooted in higher US trend productivity growth resulting in higher risk-adjusted returns on 
US assets and correspondingly strengthened demand for US assets by foreigners.  
Savings/Investment View II: Imbalances reflect structural changes in savings and investment patterns 
in other parts of the world. The most prominent advocate of the global savings glut hypothesis is the 
Chairman-designate of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke.  
Trade  and  asset  view:  Imbalances  reflect  more  or  less  stable  policy  incentives  –  export-led  growth 
strategies  in  Asia  and  reserve  accumulation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crisis  (Bretton  Woods  II 
hypothesis).  
Asset View: Globalisation of financial markets reduces home bias and increases room for manoeuvre 
for  financing  of  current  account  deficits.  This  position  has  been  defended  most  prominently  by  the 
current Chairman of the US Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan.  
But let us be clear: Such isolated explanations may be helpful in highlighting certain aspects, but it 
should  not  be  forgotten  that,  for  a  highly  endogenous  variable  like  the  current  account,  the 
fundamental causes of the deficit affect goods and capital markets and a wide range of asset prices 
simultaneously. To quote Roger W Ferguson Jr on this (2005): “but any compelling explanation of the 
current  account  deficit  must  identify  not  merely  the  proximate  influences  on  the  deficit  –  be  they 
exchange  rates,  capital  flows,  or  aggregate  saving  and  investment  –  but  also  the  fundamental  , 
underlying sources of the imbalance”.  
I do not want do go more deeply into the specific empirics of the US current account. Suffice it to say 
that, in my view, all these causes can explain certain parts of the US current account deficit – albeit at 
varying levels of importance:  
Productivity  increases  generally  prove  to  be  significant  explanatory  variables  for  current  account 
changes.  
In general, empirical studies do not find much support for fiscal deficits having a very large influence 
on current account developments. This, of course, puts a question mark behind the popular thesis of 
“twin deficits”. The US over much of the 1990s serve as an illustration (and Germany or Japan are 
also illustrative in this respect). However, for the past five years, the connection between the fiscal and 
the current account deficit seems to be closer for the US than most empirical studies would imply.  
The ongoing integration of capital markets might have facilitated the financing of CA imbalances, too. 
There is empirical evidence that “home bias” has been declining over the past few years. But, in my 
view, one should not be too optimistic with regard to this channel. It is clearly not a panacea for the 
risks  associated  with  the  recent  trend  in  the  US  current  account  deficit.  Moreover,  the  process  of 
deepening  international  financial  markets  –  despite  all  benefits  –  entails  its  own  risks:  Inconsistent 
medium-term macroeconomic policy configurations might lead to marked shifts in investor sentiment 
and  more  volatile  capital  flows.  In  sum:  Globalisation  of  financial  markets  has  certainly  helped  to 
finance larger current account deficits than could have been imagined some decades ago. But it has 
not changed the fundamental nature of the adjustment process to international imbalances.  
The “global savings glut” hypothesis definitely has some merits. However, I would like to stress that it 
should  be  understood  as  a  “global  net  savings  glut”  hypothesis,  as,  besides  changes  in  the  saving 
behaviour,  in  particular  low  investment  in  different  parts  of  the  world  seems  to  be  crucial.  One 
advantage of this argument is that it offers a possible explanation for the low level of real interest rates 
globally  observed  over  the  past  few  years.  The  proposition  that  it  should  better  be  understood  as 
driven by low investment in surplus countries – especially in Asia – instead of excessively high saving 
rates is supported by developments in these countries: Investment rates in emerging Asia (excluding 
China) collapsed by nearly 8% of GDP in the Asian crisis. Since then the rise has been modest (+2% 
of GDP). Both private and public investment are still below pre-crisis levels. What should be taken into 
account, however, is that the pre-crisis investment level does not provide a suitable benchmark owing 
to earlier indications of overinvestment in the region. Moreover, the view that weak investment in the 
region  is  the  more  important  factor  is  validated  by  empirical  analysis  showing  that  Asian  savings 
behaviour is well predicted by traditional specifications, but investment behaviour is difficult to explain 
with the usual factors (WEO 2-2005).  
   3/7 
The  “global  savings  glut”  or  more  precisely  the  “global  net  savings  glut”  argument  has  to  be 
augmented by a description of the relevant transmission mechanisms through which global savings 
have  been  channelled  primarily  to  the  US  economy.  Ben  Bernanke  has  elaborated  on  these 
mechanisms –  something that  is  occasionally  neglected  in  evaluating  this  explanation.  Some  of  his 
findings are, that the relevant transmission channels have been asset markets: prior to 2000, the main 
driving force was equity prices (and exchange rates). Following the burst of the equity price bubble, 
real  interest  rates  have  been  the  main  factor  and  housing  markets  and  prices  most  influential.  The 
linkage between housing market developments and the current account is no phenomena only of the 
recent  past.  As  Alan  Greenspan  has  emphasised,  the  stable  long-term  correlation  between  the  US 
mortgage market and the current account could be observed over the past fifty years.  
With regard to capital flows, there has been a marked shift from private flows to official flows (gross 
and net flows) in the past couple of years – with regard to capital inflows, however, there are some 
tentative  signs  that  private  capital  flows  to  the  US  might  have  gained  more  weight  again  recently. 
Reserve accumulation by Asian central banks has been a major factor in this regard. Asian central 
banks de facto intermediate domestic savings into US assets. This has possibly helped to hold interest 
rates low and has fuelled a housing boom in some industrial countries, especially in the US, though, 
the the interest rate effect due to interventions and reserve accumulation is difficult to quantify. As a 
result, it has been possible to sustain robust demand growth in the US. This has been supported by 
significant fiscal and monetary stimuli.  
The  resulting  configuration  has  been  referred  to  as  “global  macroeconomic  co-dependency” 
(Catherine Mann, 2005).  
To that extent, the “global savings glut” argument is tight-knit to the Bretton Woods II hypothesis. And, 
here, I am quite sceptical as to whether this system can be sustained on a long-term basis. For just 
one reason: the financial needs – given the current trajectory of the US current account deficit – would 
be immense. They would expose the financing central banks to huge financial risks in the wake of a 
declining US Dollar. To be concrete: Since 2001 Asian central banks reserves have doubled. In mid-
2005 they have reached a level of USD2.6 trillion. Roubini/Setser (2005) calculate that, if past trends 
continue, Asian central banks would have to raise their FX reserves to over USD5 trillion in 2008 – an 
annual increase of more than USD500 billion. Here, the current slow-down in reserve accumulation, 
which  came  to  a  virtual  standstill  in  mid  2005,  indicates  that  the  latest  move  to  greater  regional 
exchange rate flexibility in Asia already has its measurable effects on reserve holdings, casting some 
doubts on Bretton-Woods II type explanations. In that regard, one also should not forget, that in the 
original Bretton Woods I system, the United States on average produced current account surpluses.  
In a nutshell: The “global savings glut” argument may be an explanation for the development of the US 
current account deficit; but it is not convincing proof of sustainability in the long run. The same goes 
for the Bretton Woods II hypothesis.  
Taking everything together: The current trend in the US current account deficit is unsustainable. This 
is  hardly  in  dispute.  Realistically,  we  should  not  expect  the  US  deficit  to  move  soon  to  levels  that 
would stabilise the net foreign asset position of the US economy. However, the explanations advanced 
to explain why the current situation might nevertheless be stable for the foreseeable future all have 
their drawbacks and shortcomings.  
As central bankers are paid for paying attention to risks, we should be aware that an abrupt unwinding 
of the current imbalances could mean massive exchange rate and interest rates movements – and, of 
course, a shake-up of the global economy.  
We  should  obviously  avoid  the  global  economy  following  the  lines  described  by  the  late  Rudi 
Dornbusch.  According  to  him,  the  collapse  of  unsustainable  currencies  and  wrong-headed  policies 
typically  follows  a  cycle  of  four  distinct  phases:  1)  enthusiastic  investors  and  speculators  chasing 
immediate short-term returns cause the anomaly to last for longer than economists expect, 2) puzzled 
by the failure of prices to return to fundamentals or the failure of unsustainable policies to generate a 
crisis,  highly  intelligent  economists  evolve  theories  explaining  that  “this”  time  it  really  isn't 
unsustainable,  3)  fortified  by  these  theories,  yet  more  investors  and  speculators  chasing short-term 
returns  flood  into  the  market,  causing  the  anomaly  to  last  for  much  longer  than  economists  had 
originally  expected,  and  finally,  4)  the  supply  of  greater  fools  comes  to  a  sudden  end;  the  crash 
comes; the crisis materialises.  
   4/7 
Adjustment scenarios and policy responses  
4 
One  should  not  forget,  however,  that  current  account  adjustments  in  industrial  countries  historically 
are something different than balance of payments crises in emerging market economies. Accordingly, 
apocalyptic adjustment scenarios are not justified from the current perspective.  
This is supported by recent empirical studies showing that the history of current account adjustments 
in industrial countries in the past does not validate the pessimistic hypothesis that goes along with an 
disorderly  unwinding  scenario  (i.e.  cumulative  effect  of  shortfalls  in  GDP,  massive  currency 
depreciation and sharply rising interest rates). Finally, the US leads the global economy and the US 
Dollar is the reserve currency for the international financial system. Both factors are reasons to believe 
that the US can afford to finance larger current account deficits than other industrial countries.  
Moreover,  the  current  configuration  is  predominantly  the  outcome  of  very  different  decisions  and 
actions by market participants. This limits the room for policy options and it may justify some trust that 
adjustment processes led by market forces will allow for a smooth transition to a more balanced world 
economy. But, given the uncertainty surrounding a purely market-led adjustment process, there is a 
justification for supporting policy responses.  
Global imbalances are, by definition, multilateral in origin. This means that all parties have to step up 
their  efforts  to  resolve  imbalances.  And  numerous  studies  –  including  our  own  work  at  the 
Bundesbank – show that adjustment via different channels in isolation (growth differentials, exchange 
rates,  US  fiscal  consolidation)  would  clearly  not  be  of  much  help  –  unless  the  movements  in  the 
relevant variables attain either unrealistic or damagingly high magnitudes.  
Two  questions  then  remain:  1)  How  can  adjustment  be  smoothed?  2)  How  can  resistance  to  an 
(abrupt) adjustment be increased? The most sensible answer to these questions are, in my view, to be 
found  in  the  well-known  approach  agreed  at  several  IMF  and  G7  meetings:  (a)  US:  increase  in 
domestic savings, (b) Asia: more flexible exchange rate policies, (c) Europe: structural reforms.  
Europe/Euro area 
I will confine myself initially to the European case. And let me make clear: even if the current account 
position of the euro area is nearly balanced, this does not mean that the euro area has no role to play 
in the adjustment process. Like Catherine Mann (2005) has rightly argued: “that no other country faces 
as significant a quantitative change to their trade balance as the United States should not imply ease 
of adjustment. In fact, just the opposite could be the case as each country, facing the policy choices 
and structural challenges to reorienting demand, production, and financing, could argue that someone 
else should go first.”  
However, in my view the European role in facilitating the adjustment process is clearly more modest 
than the tasks for the other players, especially for the US itself.  
There are two reasons for this: First, even if stronger growth in Europe is certainly something we all 
desire, the well-known smaller income elasticity of US exports compared with the import elasticity of 
the  US  economy  (Houthakker-Magee-effect)  means  that  the  quantitative  effect  of  higher  European 
growth rates on the US trade balance will, in all likelihood, be modest. Second: even if higher potential 
growth  is  of  the  essence  in  the  euro  area  and  might  be  spurred  by  suitable  structural  reforms,  the 
effect  on  the  current  account  position  of  the  euro  area  is  anything  but  clear-cut.  For  one  reason: 
Structural reforms have to be directed towards the non-tradable sector of the economy to improve the 
current account. For most of the currently discussed areas of reform – social security, fiscal policy – it 
is quite possible, that they will lead – at least in the short term – to increased savings in Europe. This, 
of course, would not help the adjustment to global imbalances – on the contrary.  
So, all in all, the quantitative dimension of urgently needed structural reforms in Europe with regard to 
the adjustment of global imbalances will – in my opinion – be of secondary importance.  
This does not mean that such reforms are not sensible in the light of risks associated with the current 
imbalances.  There  are,  at  least,  two  good  reasons  for  this:  they  would  enhance  the  flexibility  and 
resilience of euro area economies in times when a smoother shock absorption capacity might probably 
be badly needed. And, of course, these reforms are urgently needed to improve the dismal potential 
growth performance in the euro area in general – and in Germany in particular.  
In the euro area, the latest track-record with respect to growth enhancing policy measures has been 
disappointing. High public deficits and increasing government debt levels in the majority of member 
   5/7 
countries have resulted in widespread difficulties to fulfil the commitment of the stability and growth 
pact. But it is empirically well-documented that solid public finances and low debt levels are important 
factors to support sustainable long-term growth. The sad fortune of the Lisbon agenda is another point 
in  case.  Finally:  The  controversy  about  the  European  service  directive  illustrates  most  visibly  an 
ongoing  lack  to  implement  decisive  structural  reforms.  Increased  competition  in  the  service  sector, 
however, is just the type of reform that is needed on both grounds – strengthening growth for domestic 
reasons and supporting absorption for global reasons.  
The question of decisive structural reforms is especially important for Germany – given its persistent 
weak growth performance and given the current political juncture. To be acknowledged: The starting 
situation  for  the  new  government  coalition  has  been  difficult  and  opposed  interests  needed  to  be 
reconciled.  
The  fundamental  objective  –  improving  long-term  conditions  for  growth  and  employment  and 
rehabilitating government budgets – deserves support. First steps in reforming the federalist structure, 
raising  the  retirement  age,  reducing  subsidies  and  reducing  social  insurance  contributions,  are  in 
particular, welcome.  
But overall the actual outcome is unconvincing: fiscal consolidation is insufficient, especially with an 
eye on 2006. Subsequent to the coalition treaty a federal budget has been announced, in which the 
net  borrowing  increases.  Moreover,  net  borrowing  clearly  exceeds  the  constitutional  threshold.  A 
justification  for  this  along  the  lines  of  the  constitutional  provision  enshrined  in  Article  109  GG  –  i.e. 
declaring  a  disturbance  of  macroeconomic  equilibrium  –  is  certainly  highly  problematic  given  the 
government’s  own  assumptions  for  economic  growth  in  2006.  This  is  certainly  not  strengthening 
confidence  in  the  solidity  of  public  finances.  Economic  conditions  would  have  allowed  smoother 
consolidation  efforts  over  time  with  a  more  ambitious  contribution  already  in  2006.  Moreover,  the 
contribution of expenditure led consolidation is modest; targeted measures focus on the revenue side. 
Historical experiences, however, show that revenue-based consolidations are the less successful and 
sustainable ones. In the consequence, credibility not only of national but also of European budgetary 
rules will be further undermined.  
Finally, fundamental reforms in key areas have not been decided yet but are envisaged for the coming 
parliamentary term: these include income and corporate taxation, statutory health insurance scheme, 
financial constitution and increasing incentives to take on low-paid employment.  
Against  the  challenges  Germany  is  currently  facing  fiscal  policy,  labour  market  and  social  security 
reforms must remain on the political agenda.  
Asia 
Europe  is  currently  “responsible”  for  less  than  20%  of  the  US  current  account  deficit.  Regionally 
disaggregated, Asia – including Japan – accounts for more than 50%. These mere figures emphasise, 
that for global imbalances, the US-Asian perspective is of major relevance.  
The three-pronged approach to global imbalances advocates greater exchange rate flexibility in Asian 
economies. This broad perspective sometimes overlooks the fact that with respect to exchange rate 
flexibility  Asia  is  anything  but  a  homogenous  entity.  Some  Asian  currencies  have  undergone 
appreciations against the US currency which are comparable to those of the euro area. For example: 
In the period 1999–2004 the US dollar depreciated by more than 13 % against the Korean won (25 % 
against the New Zealand dollar and nearly 9% against the Japanese yen). In comparison: At the end 
of 2004 the US dollar had depreciated 9.5 % against the euro since the beginning of 1999.  
And I have already mentioned that the aggregate regional perspective does not take due account of 
the  fact  that  the  short-term  perspective  for  Asia’s  current  account  positions  masks  significant 
heterogeneity. Among the East Asian countries, it is China that heavily influences the Asian surplus 
position.  
China  has  also  been  the  most  frequently  discussed  case  with  regard  to  inflexible  exchange  rate 
regimes. Here, the recent decision to adjust the renmimbi’s exchange rate regime was a welcome first 
step  forward.  Making  further  use  of  the  potential  flexibility  of  the  new  currency  arrangement  will 
certainly  help  to  smooth  the  necessary  adjustment  process.  It  would  also  help  to  minimise  the 
potential collateral damage to current imbalances, such as increased protectionism in some industrial 
countries.  
   6/7 
Nevertheless, it should be borne in mind that, looked at realistically, more flexible exchange rates in 
Asia will also by themselves play no more than a partial role in this issue.  
Taking  the  “global  savings  glut”  argument  seriously  points  to  another  potential  role  for  Asian 
economies:  strengthening  domestic  investment  opportunities.  From  an  economic  point  of  view,  it  is 
indeed  astonishing  that  developing  economies  are  financing  the  savings  gap  in  the  world’s  most 
advanced economy. Therefore, it is certainly necessary to improve investment opportunities in these 
countries  to  support  domestic  absorption  (arguably  with  the  exception  of  China,  where  investment 
rates  have  increased  sharply  and  the  private  savings/investment  balance  is  well  below  pre-crisis 
levels). This is equally important for endowing the young and expanding labour force in most of Asian 
countries with a modern and growing capital stock. In this respect, Asia (with the exception of China) 
has generally more favourable demographics than Europe.  
With regard to reliance on external conditions Europe and Asia face the same kind of problem: Both 
the tiger and the bull show their strength predominantly outside their domestic habitat.  
Conclusion 
Adjusting to current global imbalances will be the easier when all players stick to their responsibilities. 
Structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area  are,  furthermore,  in  the  domestic  own  best  interests  of  our 
economies. The sooner they are implemented, the better. What will arguably be more relevant – and, 
thus,  a  necessary  policy  step  in  any  orderly  adjustment  scenario  –  is  increased  exchange  rate 
flexibility  in  certain  parts  of  Asia.  Improving  investment  opportunities  in  both  regions  is  also  of  the 
essence. But it is certainly true: With regard to measures to reduce the current global imbalances the 
most urgent policy steps have to be taken by the US authorities.  
 
   7/7 
