Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 10th Symposium 
on Finance, Banking, and Insurance, University of Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, 16 December 2005. 
 1.  
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to speak to you today on the occasion of the 10th Symposium on Finance, Banking, 
and Insurance. I would like to congratulate the organisers for arranging this internationally esteemed 
conference at the University of Karlsruhe. 
Karlsruhe,  the  former  residence  of  the  Dukes  of  Baden,  is  not  only  beautifully  located  between  the 
Rhine and the Black Forest, it is also situated right in the middle of Europe. And Europe is at the heart 
of the topic that I will discuss in my speech today.  
This symposium traditionally aims to strengthen the links between theory and practice, addressing the 
latest developments in a wide range of finance issues. This is the second factor underlying my choice 
of topic. 
Today, I will talk about European financial integration. This subject is of interest to market participants, 
policy-makers and academics alike, and is of the utmost interest to the European Central Bank (ECB). 
In fact, the Governing Council of the ECB has formulated the mission of the Eurosystem (comprising 
the  ECB and  the  euro  area  national central  banks) as  follows:  “We  in  the  Eurosystem have  as  our 
primary  objective  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  for  the  common  good.  Acting  also  as  a  leading 
financial authority, we aim to safeguard financial stability and promote European financial integration.”1  
I  will  structure  my  remarks  as  follows.  First,  I  will  explain  the  link  between  financial  integration  and 
monetary policy and financial stability. I will then present the current state of financial integration in the 
euro area based on the indicators of financial integration recently published by the ECB. Finally, I will 
mention some specific activities by which the Eurosystem contributes to fostering financial integration, 
and I will highlight some topical EU policy issues in the field of European financial integration.  
The link between financial integration and monetary policy and financial stability 
2.  
In accordance with the tasks referred to in the Eurosystem’s mission statement, I will first discuss the 
link  between  financial  integration  and  monetary  policy,  before  addressing  the  relationship  between 
financial integration and financial stability. 
In line with good academic practice, I will start with a definition. The ECB defines financial integration 
as  follows:  we  consider  the  market  for  a  given  set  of  financial  instruments  or  services  to  be  fully 
integrated when all potential market participants in such market (i) are subject to a single set of rules 
when they decide  
to  deal  with  those  financial  instruments  or  services,  (ii)  have  equal  access  to  this  set  of  financial 
instruments or services, and (iii) are treated equally when they operate in the market.  
While this definition describes a state of full, or perfect, integration, we know that in practice we are 
faced with a process. The two actors striving to foster financial integration are the market participants 
and  the  relevant  public  authorities.  More  specifically,  the  Eurosystem  is  of  the  view  that  financial 
integration first and foremost is a market-driven process. In addition to this, we believe that it is a basic 
task  of  the  relevant  public  authorities  to  create  a  framework  that  is  conducive  to  fostering  financial 
integration. If the opportunities this creates are exploited by market forces, true financial integration will 
have been achieved. 
                                                      
1   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/ecb/html/mission.en.html. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 1
Financial integration affects the three major components of the financial system, namely the financial 
markets, the related market infrastructures, and the financial institutions. In fact, financial integration 
affects  these  components  simultaneously  and  alters  their  functioning  and  interaction.  Financial 
integration is therefore directly relevant for the ECB’s tasks.  
With  regard  to  the  relationship  between  financial  integration  and  monetary  policy,  first,  a  well-
integrated financial system is essential for the implementation of our monetary policy as it enhances 
the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area, which is 
the  process  through  which  monetary  policy  decisions  affect  the  price  level  in  particular  and  the 
economy in general.  
In fact, if the financial system were not fully integrated, there is a possibility that the single monetary 
policy decisions would sometimes be channelled to countries in a not completely uniform manner. The 
degree  of  financial  integration  is  therefore  important  in  determining  the  effectiveness  of  this 
transmission: the higher the degree of financial integration, the more effectively this transmission will 
work in practice. 
Second,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  financial  integration  is  a  key  factor  in  the  development  and 
modernisation of the financial system, which, in turn, leads to a more efficient allocation of capital and 
an increased potential for economic growth. 
The  recently  renewed  Lisbon  programme  has  two  main  goals:  to  strengthen  growth  and  increase 
employment  in  Europe.  The  ECB  fully  supports  this  programme.  The  structural  reforms  that  are 
necessary  in  this  respect,  such  as  improving  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of  labour  markets  and 
increasing competition in the markets for goods and services, will also enhance the effectiveness of 
monetary  policy  in  maintaining  price  stability  and  minimise  output  volatility  in  response  to  adverse 
price shocks.  
The need to proceed with structural reforms fully applies to European financial integration. Financial 
markets that are not yet fully integrated have a potential to increase economic growth which must be 
exploited. For example, a study estimates the potential resulting from the integration of European bond 
and  equity  markets  in  terms  of  additional  GDP  growth  at  around  1%  over  a  ten-year  period,  or 
approximately EUR 100 billion.2 Moreover, the 311 million people in the euro area, or, more generally, 
the 459 million citizens of the European Union, expect Europe to deliver such economic benefits. As a 
central  banker,  I  am  very  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  which 
increase the economic potential of the euro area also facilitates the conduct of monetary policy. To 
summarise,  enhanced  European  financial  integration  increases  the  potential  for  greater  and  more 
sustained non-inflationary economic growth. 
I now turn to the links between financial integration and financial stability. The task of contributing to 
the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability  is  provided  for  in  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European 
Community. The ECB provides the outcome of its monitoring of euro area-wide financial stability in its 
Financial Stability Review that is made available to the public. Our latest report was published just one 
week ago.3  
Let me first make some general remarks about the task to assess the stability of the financial system. 
Although,  like  it  is  the  case  for  monetary  policy  assessment,  there  is  not  yet  a  widely  accepted, 
rigorous  framework  that  summarises  developments  in  financial  stability  in  a  single  quantitative 
measure,  many  of  the  financial  stability  assessments  that  are  undertaken  by  a  growing  number  of 
central banks around the world are based on a broad and forward-looking notion of financial stability.4  
Financial stability is often seen from the perspective of the avoidance of financial crises, but it has a 
larger  dimension.  Financial  system  stability  requires  the  financial  system’s  principal  components  – 
financial markets, the related market infrastructures, and financial institutions – to be jointly capable of 
                                                      
2   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
3   The December 2005 ECB Financial Stability Review, published on 8 December 2005, is available from the ECB’s website at 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200512en.pdf. 
4  See the special features “Assessing financial stability: conceptual boundaries and challenges”, June 2005 ECB Financial 
Stability  Review,  and  “Measurement  challenges  in  assessing  financial  stability”,  December  2005  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review, 
the  ECB’s  website  at  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200506en.pdf  and 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200512en.pdf, respectively. 
from 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
absorbing adverse disturbances. It also requires that the financial system is facilitating a smooth and 
efficient  reallocation  of  financial  resources  from  savers  to  investors,  that  financial  risk  is  being 
assessed and priced accurately and that risks are being efficiently managed. Financial stability has an 
important forward-looking dimension: inefficiencies in the reallocation of capital or shortcomings in the 
pricing  of  risk  can,  by  laying  the  foundations  for  future  vulnerabilities,  compromise  future  financial 
system stability and, therefore, economic stability. 
A lack of stability can be directly related to inefficiencies that may arise from a non-integrated financial 
system.  Being  aware  of  the  links  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability  is  therefore 
essential.  
The  links  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability  are  twofold.  On  the  one  hand,  more 
integrated  financial  markets  offer  better  opportunities  for  financing  and  risk  diversification,  and  thus 
help  to  improve  the  capacity  of  economies  to  absorb  shocks.  Cross-border  banking  broadens  and 
deepens financial markets and increases liquidity and risk sharing. As the pool of available assets for 
investment  is  broadened,  potentially  enhancing  the  heterogeneity  of  financial  institutions’  portfolios, 
the ensuing wider spread of portfolio-related risks should reinforce the resilience and shock-absorption 
capacity  of  financial  intermediaries,  thus  improving  the  soundness  and  robustness  of  an  integrated 
financial system.  
On  the  other  hand,  as  intermediaries  benefit  from  the  greater  availability  of  assets,  a  parallel 
convergence  of  the  individual  portfolios  may  result.  We  therefore  need  a  good  degree  of 
understanding of the effects of cross-border linkages in an increasingly integrated financial system. 
To summarise, financial integration will progressively strengthen the stability of the financial system 
over  time.  But  the  structural  transformation  of  the  financial  system  through  enhanced  financial 
integration,  including  the  creation  of  intensified  cross-border  financial  links,  requires  that  we  closely 
monitor the financial integration process.  
I  would  finally  like  to  emphasise  that  financial  integration  is  relevant  to  both  monetary  policy  and 
financial  stability.  This  brings  me  neatly  to  the  second  part  of  my  speech,  namely  to  illustrate  the 
current state and the evolution of financial integration in the euro area. 
The state of European financial integration 
3.  
In discussions on this topic, the arguments are often of a qualitative nature, stating the general need 
for  enhancing  financial  integration  in  view  of  the  related  benefits.  Notwithstanding  this,  quantitative 
measures offer the advantage of being able to assess both the current level of financial integration as 
well as its evolution over time, i.e. whether integration is progressing, stable, or even regressive. The 
ECB  has  therefore  sought  to  devise  a  way  to  capture,  in  quantitative  terms,  the  state  of  financial 
integration in the euro area. 
About two months ago, for the first time, the ECB published a set of indicators regarding the state of 
integration  of  euro  area  financial  and  banking  markets.  With  the  accompanying  explanatory  report, 
which will be published on an annual basis, the ECB aims to measure and monitor financial integration 
in the euro area over time.5 
Before turning to the actual assessment of the state of financial integration, let me briefly mention a 
few conceptual issues. 
First, checking the validity of the law of one price is a natural basis for the development of quantitative 
measures of financial integration. The law of one price states that if assets have identical risks and 
returns, they should be priced identically regardless of where they are transacted. The law of one price 
is an implication of our definition of financial integration, which I mentioned earlier. And, in fact, most of 
our integration measures explicitly depend on it.  
Still, there are cases where the law of one price is not directly applicable. For instance, an asset may 
not be allowed to be listed on another region’s exchange. While the law of one price has little to say 
about this case, we would consider this to be an important obstacle to financial integration.  
                                                      
5   The  ECB  report  is  available  at  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/indicatorsfinancialintegration200509en.pdf  on  the  ECB’s 
website. The statistics underlying the financial integration indicators can be accessed at http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/. The 
financial integration indicators will be updated semi-annually. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 3
I should like to note here that our first publication of indicators of financial integration will be further 
expanded. While the first publication contains a total of 20 indicators, covering the main euro financial 
and banking markets, the coverage of our indicators will be further enhanced, in particular by adding 
indicators relating to the integration of market infrastructures and financial institutions.  
Second,  starting  from  our  definition  of  financial  integration,  two  broad  categories  of  indicators  are 
considered:  price-based  indicators  and  quantity-based  indicators.  Price-based  indicators  measure 
discrepancies in asset prices based on their geographic origin. In a perfectly integrated market, prices 
of  assets  with  similar  characteristics  should  mostly  be  influenced  by  common  euro  area  factors. 
Quantity-based indicators are used to investigate the extent to which investors engage in cross-border 
asset portfolios.  
Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  indicators  are  either  computed  or  model-based.  Computed 
indicators – such as standard deviations and ratios – are summary measures of the underlying data, 
whereas the model-based indicators are derived from econometric models. Obviously, these estimates 
depend on the specific set of modelling assumptions.  
Now  that  I  have  addressed  these  conceptual  issues,  I  will  report  some  of  the  results  that  form  our 
assessment  of  the  state  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Now  and  then,  I  will  additionally 
mention some figures for the United States that usefully serve as a comparison for the euro area.  
Our  first  publication  covers  the  money  market,  the  government  bond  market,  the  corporate  bond 
market,  the  equity  market  and  the  banking  markets.  The  euro  acted  as  a  major  catalyst  for  the 
integration of the euro financial markets. However, the degree of integration differs between market 
segments,  with  integration  being  more  advanced  in  those  market  segments  that  are  closer  to  the 
single monetary policy, above all the money market.  
Our indicators measure the financial integration of the euro money market based on the dispersion of 
lending  rates  for  actual  transactions  or  rates  offered  by  EONIA,  EURIBOR  and  EUREPO  panel 
banks.6 
The  unsecured  interbank  deposit  market  was  almost  perfectly  integrated  right  at  the  start  of  the 
Monetary Union. This is a sine qua non for monetary policy implementation, since only an integrated 
interbank market ensures an even distribution of central bank liquidity and a homogeneous level of 
short-term interest rates across the euro area. This rapid integration has been mostly supported by the 
establishment of the related payment system infrastructure, i.e. our TARGET system that has been 
operational since the first day of Monetary Union.  
In fact, the cross-country standard deviation of the average overnight lending rates among euro area 
countries was as low as three basis points in early 1999 and has since decreased even further to just 
one basis point. By comparison, in January 1998, i.e. one year before the start of Monetary Union, this 
indicator stood higher than 130 basis points.  
Our indicators for the one-month and 12-month maturities also consistently show a highly integrated 
unsecured money market. While the respective cross-country standard deviation of EURIBOR lending 
rates among euro area countries stood at more than 100 basis points for the one-month maturity, and 
at  around  50  basis  points  for  the  12-month  rates  in  January  1998,  since  early  1999  both  of  these 
indicators have shown values not higher than, and normally below, one basis point.  
Finally,  our  indicators  also  confirm  a  relatively  high  degree  of  integration  for  the  repo  market.  The 
EUREPO index was launched in March 2002, and since then, the euro area cross-country standard 
deviation  of  the  one-month  EUREPO  rates  has  been  around,  and  normally  below,  one  basis  point. 
The indicator for the 12-month maturity shows a standard deviation of around, and normally below, 
two basis points.  
The decisive role of the euro in enhancing financial market integration is also visible in the interest rate 
derivatives markets. The total of euro interest rate OTC derivatives contracts reaches a daily turnover 
of  around  EUR  380  billion,  and  is  thereby  larger  than  the  US  dollar  segment  (a  daily  turnover  of 
around  EUR  290  billion).  A  particularly  important  segment  is  the  euro  interest  rate  swap  market 
(including, for example, the euro overnight index swap market). This is, in fact, the largest interest rate 
                                                      
6   Data  referring  to  the  time  before  the  introduction  of  EONIA  and  EURIBOR  are  average  overnight,  one-month,  12-month 
rates, respectively, of euro area countries. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2005
swap market in the world. With a daily turnover of around EUR 250 billion, the euro interest rate swap 
market is about one third larger than the equivalent US dollar segment (around EUR 160 billion).7  
The least integrated money market segment is the short-term securities market. Compared with the 
equivalent US commercial paper market, which has an outstanding amount of around EUR 1.3 trillion, 
the aggregate size of the commercial paper and certificates of deposit markets in Europe is around 
EUR  0.8  trillion.  In  addition,  while  the  US  market  is  integrated,  the  short-term  securities  markets  in 
Europe  continue  to  be  segmented,  with  de  facto  several  markets  based  in  several  market  places. 
Issuers  and  investors  in  the  European  short-term  paper  markets  therefore  face  reduced  depth  and 
liquidity and less diversification opportunities than in the US. 
I  now  turn  to  the  government  bond  market.  Our  indicators  of  the  integration  in  government  bond 
markets  encompass  the standard deviation  of  government  bond yield  spreads,  measures  based  on 
regressions, such as the evolution of beta coefficients, and variance ratios. Government bond markets 
have achieved a very high degree of integration, mainly due to the disappearance of intra-euro area 
exchange  rate  risk.  Since then,  government  bond  yields  in  different  euro  area  countries  have  been 
driven mainly by euro area-wide factors and news. Naturally, one should not expect common factors to 
fully explain changes in bond yields, as different assessments concerning credit and liquidity risk will 
continue to have an impact on bond yields in different countries.  
The  euro  corporate  bond  market  has  grown  considerably  since  1999.  While  this  market  had  been 
predominantly  open  to  the  highest  quality  credits,  it  has  since  broadened  to  facilitate  the  funding 
needs of riskier issuers. However, the gap with the US market is still large in terms of absolute size, 
with the outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-financial corporations of around EUR 2.5 trillion in 
the United States being around three times larger than in the euro area. 
The  degree  of  integration  of  the  euro  corporate  bond  market  is  reasonably  high.  The  yield  on  a 
corporate bond depends typically on a number of factors, such as the credit rating, time-to-maturity, 
liquidity and cash flow structure. Our indicators for the state of integration of the euro corporate bond 
market are based on (econometric) models, investigating whether or not risk-adjusted yield spreads 
have  a  systematic  country  component.  Our  studies  suggest  that  this  market  segment  is  fairly 
integrated in the sense that the country of issuance is only of marginal importance in explaining yield 
differentials.  
Other market segments have even more potential for greater integration. In fact, the euro area equity 
markets  are  still  quite  fragmented,  but  a  gradual  integration  process  is  ongoing.  For  example,  our 
indicators show that stock prices across the euro area increasingly react to euro area-wide factors and 
news.  Another  indicator  to  measure  the  degree  of  integration  in  euro  area  equity  markets  is  the 
relative importance of sector versus country-based investment strategies. The indicator is derived by 
calculating  and  comparing  the  cross-sector  dispersion  with  the  cross-country  dispersion  of  equity 
returns.  The  more  integrated  the  euro  area  equity  market,  the  greater  the  benefits  of  spreading 
investments across sectors as opposed to country-based equity investment strategies. Our statistics 
show that the elimination of intra-euro area currency risk has encouraged integration in the sense that 
the  “home  bias”  in  the  equity  holdings  of  institutional  investors  has  been  significantly  reduced. 
Nevertheless, the country effect is still too important for it to be concluded that the euro area equity 
market is satisfactorily integrated.  
As regards banking markets, integration is generally lagging behind, and the degree of integration is 
different  for  the  types  of  banking  activities,  i.e.  capital  market-related  activities,  interbank  (or 
wholesale) activities, and retail banking.  
Cross-border  interbank  loans  and  holdings  of  securities  have,  in  relative  terms,  experienced 
substantial growth. While securities issued by non-monetary financial institutions of another euro area 
country  accounted  for  only  16%  of  the  securities  held  by  euro  area  monetary  financial  institutions 
(MFIs) at the end of 1997, this share has now reached almost 40%, pointing to a higher degree of 
capital market integration in the euro area. In addition, although loans granted between domestic MFIs 
still  account  for  more  than  50%  of  the  total  EU  MFI  loans,  the  respective  euro  area  cross-border 
activity has increased from just 15% at the end of 1997 to around 23% at present.  
                                                      
7   See BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey - Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 (March 2005). 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 5
Last but not least, integration in retail banking has, by contrast, not progressed to any great extent, as 
shown by both price and quantity-based indicators. For example, while the share of euro area cross-
border MFI loans granted to non-MFIs stood at 2% at the end of 1997, this figure has risen to no more 
than 3.5% today. Also, taking a price-based indicator, the cross-country standard deviation of interest 
rates  on consumer credit has been  rather high and  constant,  on  average  0.9%  over  the past  three 
years. To give a final indicator for the level of retail banking integration, the cross-country dispersion of 
interest rates on lending for house purchase amounts to, on average, 0.5% over the past three years, 
with no clear declining trend visible as yet, thereby confirming the not very benign picture of euro area 
credit market integration.  
4. 
Eurosystem contribution to fostering financial integration and topical issues relating 
to the EU policy framework for financial integration 
An  analysis  of  the  state  of  financial  integration  and  the  monitoring  of  its  progress  over  time  are 
prerequisites  for  possible  action  in  those  fields  where  the  analysis  has  identified  gaps  and 
shortcomings. Let me provide you with a few examples of how the Eurosystem contributes to fostering 
financial integration. I will list them using the same sequence of financial and banking markets that I 
used when describing the state of financial integration. 
Starting with the money market, the obvious example for a central banking service that is conducive to 
fostering financial integration is the large-value payment system, “TARGET”, that we run. In addition, 
the  launch  of  the  single  shared  platform,  “TARGET2”,  is  planned  for  November  2007.  This  will 
enhance  financial  integration  even  further,  given  that  it  will  provide  a  harmonised  service  level, 
ensuring  a  level  playing  field  for  banks  across  Europe,  which  will  be  supported  by  a  single  price 
structure for domestic and cross-border payments. 
Another example is the short-term paper market. Here, I expect that its current fragmentation will be 
reduced with the help of the so-called Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative, which was set up 
and  is  being  led  by  ACI  –  The  Financial  Markets  Association.  This  initiative  aims  to  promote  the 
convergence  of  standards  and  practices  prevailing  in  the  European  short-term  securities  markets 
through  market  players’  voluntary  compliance  with  the  standards  set  out  in  the  STEP  Market 
Convention, which covers aspects such as information disclosure, documentation, settlement, and the 
provision of data for the production of STEP statistics. The STEP initiative is expected to provide an 
impulse towards integration, thereby increasing the depth and liquidity of this market in Europe. The 
promoters of this initiative expect the first STEP-labelled programme in early 2006. The Eurosystem 
acts  as  a  catalyst  to  support  this  market-led  initiative.  Specifically,  the  Eurosystem  will  provide 
technical support for the labelling process for some time and will produce and publish STEP statistics 
on yields and volumes on an ongoing basis.  
Furthermore, the European Master Agreement (EMA) is another example of integration relating to the 
legal infrastructure. The EMA, a major European legal documentation initiative, contributes to financial 
integration  by  permitting  cross-border  trading  on  the  basis  of  a  master  agreement  which  is  both  a 
domestic and a pan-European standard. It is the first project undertaken at European level to develop 
a pan-European market standard for trading operations. The EMA is a multi-lingual, multi-jurisdictional, 
multi-product  master  agreement  which  may  be  used,  in  particular,  to  document  repurchase 
agreements, foreign exchange, derivatives and securities loans. The ECB participated in the drafting 
of the EMA and has been using it since 2001 for all its European foreign reserve management and 
own  funds  repo  counterparties.  Since  June  2005,  the  ECB  has  also  been  using  the  EMA  for  its 
derivatives operations in 15 European jurisdictions, thereby maximising cross-product netting, cross-
product margining possibilities and reducing documentation basis risk. 
As regards the further integration of securities (bonds and equity) markets, a prominent role should be 
attached  to  the  securities  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure.  The  Eurosystem  strongly  supports 
further  integration  in  the  securities  infrastructure,  the  lack  of  which  has,  among  others,  also  been 
identified by the Giovannini Group as a barrier to integration that should be removed. To this end, the 
ECB participates in the Clearing and Settlement Advisory and Monitoring Experts Group and in the 
Legal  Certainty  Group,  set  up  by  the  European  Commission.  Furthermore,  and  also  in  the  central 
bank’s capacity to act as a catalyst for collective private-sector activities, meetings are held with the 
Contact Group on Euro Securities Infrastructures, bringing together representatives from the banking 
and  securities  settlement  industry  of  the  euro  area  to  discuss  the  further  integration  of  the  euro 
securities  settlement  industry.  Furthermore,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  work  that  we  have  been 
carrying out since 2001 in cooperation with the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2005
where we published in October last year 19 standards for securities clearing and settlement systems 
in the European Union.8 These ESCB-CESR standards aim to adapt international recommendations to 
the European context. They promote a harmonised approach and are conducive to the integration of 
EU capital markets, placing emphasis on common solutions and interoperability between systems.  
Last  but  not  least,  I  come  to  the  banking  and  retail  markets.  I  will  use  the  mortgage  market  as  an 
example. The importance of this retail market segment is evident from its size, where an outstanding 
volume of more than EUR 4 trillion in residential mortgage debt in the EU corresponds to around 40% 
of EU GDP. I mentioned earlier that the cross-country dispersion of euro area interest rates on lending 
for  house  purchase  did  not  show  a  clear  declining  trend  over  the  past  years.  Furthermore,  if  one 
compares the euro area mortgage market with its US  counterpart, it is revealed that, over the past 
three years, the cross-country dispersion of rates in the euro area was higher than the cross-regional 
dispersion  of  mortgage  rates  in  the  United  States.  All  this  suggests  that  the  euro  area  mortgage 
market is not yet fully integrated. 
In this respect, I highlight a recent initiative by the European Commission that led to a Green Paper on 
Mortgage Credit in the EU. With its public consultation, the Commission launched a broad discussion 
about  the  possible  benefits  and  ways  of  further  integrating  European  mortgage  markets.  The 
Eurosystem is of the view that this kind of investigation into the possible benefits of and obstacles to 
the  further  integration  of  European  mortgage  markets  is  very  much  warranted.  The  Eurosystem 
therefore explained its view on this in detail in a recently published contribution to this consultation on 
the Commission’s Green Paper.9 More generally, this contribution can also be seen as an example of 
the Eurosystem’s role in providing advice on shaping the legislative and regulatory framework for the 
financial system to be conducive to financial integration.  
And, as with securities markets, retail markets also need an integrated infrastructure in order to reap in 
full the benefits of financial integration. The European citizens’ possible cross-border banking activities 
also  depend  on  the  possibilities  and  costs  of  cross-border  payments.  This  brings  me  to  the  last 
example of Eurosystem activities that I would like to highlight today, namely the Eurosystem’s support, 
together with that of the European Commission, for the banking industry’s initiative to create the Single 
Euro Payments Area (SEPA). 
The  first  SEPA  milestone  is  that,  by  2008,  European  citizens  should  be  able  to  make  payments 
throughout the euro area from a single bank account, using a single set of payment instruments, as 
easily and safely as in the national context today. This means that, in parallel to national instruments, 
banks should provide to customers also SEPA instruments. A second milestone involves that national 
infrastructures  migrate  to  a  pan-European  payments  infrastructure  by  the  end  of  2010,  so  that  full 
competition  applies  to  all  euro  area  infrastructures.  The  way  to  achieve  this  would  be  to  demand 
complete interoperability between SEPA compliant infrastructures. 
Acting  as  a  catalyst  for  private-sector  activities,  the  ECB  actively  supports  the  European  Payments 
Council (EPC), and high-level coordination between the Eurosystem and the banking industry takes 
place on a regular basis. Furthermore, the ECB has arranged a number of meetings to involve SEPA 
end-users,  including  consumer  organisations,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  retailers  and 
corporate treasurers. 
The  ECB  recognises  as  a  major  achievement  the  EPC’s  work  on  defining  standards  and  business 
rules for SEPA cards, credit transfers and direct debits. At the same time, we note the large amount of 
work that is still ahead. For this, we count on the industry’s commitment to undertake the necessary 
SEPA investments and to deliver the results of the SEPA project as foreseen.  
My  references  to  the  slower  pace  of  integration  of  banking  and  retail  markets  leads  me  to  the  last 
theme I would like to address today, namely the EU policy framework for financial integration. 
As  you  know,  the  European  Commission  has  recently  issued  a  White  Paper  on  Financial  Services 
Policy  (2005-2010).10  Among  others,  the  further  integration  of  retail  markets  has  been  targeted  by 
ongoing or future projects, such as a White Paper on mortgage credit, to be released in 2006, and a 
                                                      
8   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/escb-cesr-standardssecurities2004en.pdf. 
9   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/eumortgagecreditconsultationen.pdf, dated 1 December 2005. 
10  See the European Commission’s website at http://europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/finances/policy/index_en.htm, dated 
5 December 2005. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 7
proposal  for  a  Payments  Services  Directive.  In  some  ways,  this  also  complements  the  Financial 
Services Action Plan (FSAP) of the past five years that focused mainly on the wholesale markets. 
In line with its provision of advice on shaping the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial 
system  to  be  conducive  to  financial  integration,  in  summer  2005,  the  Eurosystem  provided  its 
response  to  the  European  Commission’s  consultation  on  the  priorities  for  financial  services  policies 
over the next five years.11 As we explained in our contribution, the Eurosystem supports the key policy 
orientations of the financial services policy over the next years. 
With regard to the regulatory framework of the financial system, there is a need to proceed with the 
adoption  of  the  remaining  measures  envisaged  in  the  FSAP  and  hence  with  the  effective 
implementation  and  enforcement  of  such  measures  at  national  level.  Also,  we  agree  with  the 
Commission’s proposal for “better regulation” based on open, transparent and evidence-based policy-
making, including an ex ante evaluation of possible costs and benefits.  
As  far  as  the  supervisory  framework  is  concerned,  in  order  to  realise  the  economies  of  scale  and 
scope offered by financial integration, the framework should facilitate the development of cross-border 
consolidation of financial institutions and the cross-border exchange of services and products, while 
maintaining  the  effectiveness  of  supervisory  standards  and  action  in  a  more  integrated  financial 
system. It is our view that the current institutional set-up, and in particular the Lamfalussy framework, 
provides  the  appropriate  structure  for  achieving  these  broad  policy  objectives,  if  it  is  used  to  the 
maximum extent possible. 
To this end, the work of the Level 3 Committees, i.e. the Committee of European Banking Supervisors 
(CEBS),  the  Committee  of  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Supervisors  (CEIOPS) 
and  the  Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators  (CESR),  is  expected  to  strongly  promote 
supervisory  convergence  and  cooperation.  Furthermore,  in  a  more  and  more  integrated  financial 
system,  increased  supervisory  cooperation  across  financial  sectors  is  required.  In  this  respect,  the 
Level 3 Committees recently signed a joint protocol that aims to foster cooperation and coordination 
on tasks of common interest.12 Overall, the review of the Lamfalussy approach that is due by the end 
of 2007 will provide an opportunity to form a comprehensive judgement about the progress made. 
 In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me tell you how I appreciate today’s Symposium on Finance, 
Banking  and  Insurance.  As  I  have  pointed  out,  financial  integration  is  at  the  heart  of  the  European 
construction and the ECB and the Eurosystem are strongly attached to foster this historical process of 
financial integration through all the means that are in our domain of responsibility. Equally we trust that 
research  in  this  field  is  of  extreme  importance.  We  must  understand  better  the  very  complex 
transformations  that  are  at  stake.  And  that  is  the  reason  why  our  permanent  dialogue  with  the 
academic world is for me of fundamental importance.  
                                                      
11  See at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecgreenpaperfinancialservicespolicy2005en.pdf, dated 1 August 2005. 
12  See  “Banking,  insurance  and  securities  supervisors  enhance  EU-wide  cooperation”,  press  release  dated  24 November 
2005, at www.c-ebs.org, www.ceiops.org, www.cesr-eu.org. 
8 
 BIS Review 86/2005
