Ardian Fullani: Recent banking developments in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  ceremony  dedicated  to  the 
launch of the autumn 2005 issue of the legal journal, Law in transition, online, published by, EBRD, 
Rogner Hotel, Tirana, 18 October 2005. 
 Dear participants,  
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this ceremony dedicated to the launch of the “Autumn 
2005” issue of the legal journal “Law in transition, on-line”. I believe this publication of the European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development shall gather the best experts in the area of law and finance 
in  the  country,  who  shall  find  in  it  an  alternative  source  of  consultation  and  expertise,  for  crucial 
projects interweaving their professions.  
Banks  do  represent  the  main  institutions  of  our  financial  system.  The  total  volume  of  their  activity 
constitutes  around  50  percent  of  the  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  in  the  country.  Currently,  16 
banks are operating, the capital of which is owned by private and institutional, domestic and foreign 
shareholders. Market competition has overwhelmingly strengthened and the service quality provided 
to the public has significantly improved. The banking network has extended to the most part of the 
territory  and  developments  in  this  respect  are  still  robust.  The  role  of  the  banking  system  as  a 
developer  to  the  economy  is  mainly  displayed  in  the  increase  of  crediting  to  the  economy.  Its 
increasing  pace,  especially  in  the  last  15  months  is  remarkable.  At  the  end  of  June  2005,  loans 
constituted around 21 percent of the total assets in the banking system, compared to 14.5 percent at 
the end of 2004 and 12.5 percent at the end of 2003. Moreover, the deposits volume in the banking 
system has increased, representing the main source of growth in the banking system activity. Banks 
also serve as significant employment institutions. Only during 2004 their personnel increased by 26 
percent  and  this  figure  is  expected  to  be  even  higher  at  the  end  of  2005.  The  banking  system 
continues to represent a profitable investment sector.   
These  developments  further  indicate  the  vital  importance  of  the  banking  sector  to  one’s  country 
economy. It is essential that the banking sector activity be supervised cautiously in order to ensure 
sound and safe banking practices, transparent and clear set of rules, fair competition and stable and 
sound  institutions.  It  is  our  duty,  as  a  supervisory  authority  in  the  country,  and  other  governmental 
institutions, as well, which control part of the banking system activity, to care and provide favourable 
development conditions.  
The Bank of Albania is the supervisory authority of the banking system and of some other institutions 
performing financial activities. The role of the Bank of Albania as a supervisory authority is provided 
for  by  the  Law  No.  8269,  dated  December  23,  1997.  The  licensing,  organization  and  functioning 
approaches of banks, their obligations to the shareholders, the public and the supervisory authority, 
are  broadly  stipulated  in  the  Law  No.  8365,  dated  July  07,  1998  “On  the  Banks  in  the  Republic  of 
Albania”. These two laws were approved during ’97-’98, shortly after the country’s emergence from a 
crisis  with  tremendous  consequences  to  the  its  social  and  economical  life.  Accordingly,  the 
established  laws  aimed  at  setting  up  a  robust  supervisory  authority  of  the  banking  system,  and 
ensuring  the  protection  of  the  banking  activity  from  other  illegal  forms  of  financial  intermediation. 
Further,  other  laws  of  particular  significance  to  the  banking  system  were  approved,  where  I  could 
mention  the  Law  “On  Deposit  Insurance”  (2002),  Law  “On  the  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering” 
(2003) and the Law “On Accounting”.    
The Law “On the Bank of Albania” and “On Banks in the Republic of Albania” have been followed by a 
number  of  regulations  and  instructions  established  pursuant  to  their  implementation  by  the  Bank  of 
Albania. These sub-legal acts have aimed at resolving the law principles, mainly in the operational and 
banking  supervision  area.  In  this  way,  several  regulations  bearing  the  same  purpose  have  been 
established, such as, the Regulation “On the licensing of entities performing banking activities”, “On 
capital  adequacy”,  “On  regulatory  capital”,  “On  required  reserve”,  “On  bank  related  persons”,  “On 
credit  risk  administration”,  “On  the  prevention  of  money  laundering”,  “On  the  approval  of  bank 
administrators” etc. We believe that the regulative framework on the whole, has so far satisfactorily 
provided  the  progress  of  banking  activity  and  it  serves  as  a  solid  foundation  to  upcoming 
developments.  
Let me focus deeper on this issue: 
   1/3 
the 
transparency  of 
A regulative framework is considered to be good, provided that it does not contain a static concept of 
the  issues  it  regulates;  that  is,  a  regulative  framework  established  not  only  as  an  outcome  of  the 
instant  needs,  but  bearing  the  ability  to  provide  the  law  entities  with  the  necessary  principles  for  a 
sustainable and controlled activity development even in the foreseeable future. At the same time, the 
regulative  framework  needs  to  be  unambiguous  and  applicable.  This  could  be  attained  if  its 
requirements also take into considerations the concerns that its subjects might have, through a wide 
and  formal  communication  and  discussion  process.  The  regulative  framework,  at  any  area  of  the 
economic activity and beyond, must also consider our country’s objectives relating to the integration 
into the European family, since in this way the integration process shall be easier, more natural and 
quicker.  With  respect  to  the  banking  area,  the  regulative  framework  must  aim  at  determining  and 
implementing similar requirements as stipulated in the European Directives or in the publications or 
various organisms operating under the framework of European institutions, relating to principles and 
standards in this matter.  
The main laws, which have determined the development of the banking activity, for the time when they 
were established, have performed their function at their best, but we believe it is the proper time when 
their  revision  has  become  necessary.  I  could  mention  here  the  Law  “On  Banks  in  the  Republic  of 
Albania”, the revision of which is under process by the Bank of Albania. Currently, the project is in its 
final phase of clarity and soon discussion with the banking industry and other significant institutions is 
about to begin. The prepared project uses the requirements basis of the existing law, but at the same 
time  it  provides  a  few  changes  which  aim  at  addressing  some  issues  emerging  from  banking  and 
supervisory practice to date, as well as the best approach to the international standards in the banking 
area.  More  concretely,  the  requirements  regarding  banks’  activity  with  respect  to  their  capital  have 
been  made  more  precise;  banks’  activities  with  the  related  persons  have  been  reviewed;  the 
managing  structures  of  banks  and  their  obligations  have  been  determined  in  a  clearer  way;  the 
requirements  concerning 
the  banking  activity  have  been  re-enforced; 
requirements  regarding  the  consolidated  supervision  have  been  provided;  corrective  measures  and 
penalties have been clarified; the requirements and definitions concerning the taking of the bank under 
administration  or  leading  it  to  liquidation  have  also  become  clear;  the  relationship  with  the  Deposit 
Insurance Agency has been provided; a specific chapter dedicated to the consumer protection in the 
banking  activity  has  also  been  provided,  etc.  At  the  same  time,  some  of  the  essential  regulations, 
mainly  those  related  to  the  regulative  capital  and  capital  adequacy  are  being  assessed  in  order  to 
introduce  in  them  some  elements  of  new  standards  defined  in  the  new  Accord  of  the  Basel 
Committee, also known as Basel II.  In particular, banks’ activities with its related persons have been 
reassessed in the context of defining the relationships leading to conflict of interest between the bank 
administrators,  employees  and  shareholders  and  the  function,  the  duty  and  the  role  they  have  with 
regard to the bank.    
One of the main directions of the banking activity is crediting. Its regulation and supervision approach 
bears a special significance considering that this activity is being rapidly expanded, both in form and 
volume.  Specific  aspects  of  this  activity  have  been  treated  separately,  one  by  one,  under  the 
framework of a special Regulation of the Bank of Albania. A remaining crucial issue is the execution of 
the collateral (in particular, the one related to mortgage), in the conditions when the borrower presents 
problems  relating  to  the  credit  settlement.  With  regard  to  this  issue,  we  think  that  the  proposals 
deriving  from  the  banking  industry  concerning  suggestions  on  some  amendments  in  the  Civil 
Procedure  Code,  aiming  at  making  the  complaining  procedures  and  time  procedures  of  the  asset 
auction shorter, the asset dealing during the sequestration, etc, need to be taken into consideration. It 
is also necessary to begin the work on drafting the Law “On the Auction Procedures”, provided for by 
the Article 573, paragraph 4 of the Civil Procedure Code, as well as make the respective amendments 
in  the  Law  “On  the  Registration  of  Real  Estate”  and  the  respective  regulative  framework.  These 
measures  shall  have  positive  effects  over  the  progress  of  the  crediting  activity  serving  as  a  better 
support  to  the  economic growth  in  the  country. We  aim at  having  an  executing  title,  which  is  really 
executable. 
Another law calling for a greater attention from the authorities to assess its applicability is the Law “On 
the Prevention of Money Laundering”. Undoubtedly, the reputation of the banking system, the obstacle 
of the economic development through the deviation of sources from the legal activities, the obstruction 
of necessary investments and the fiscal policy sabotage, the criminal activity which violates the human 
life  and  freedom,  are  some  of  the  consequences  that  the  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of 
terrorism brings, which very often could be carried out on the grounds of a banking system. But, I have 
to  emphasize  that  under  the  conditions  of  our  country  where  the  informal  economy  is  quite 
considerable  and  where  information  technology  infrastructure  in  the  data  processing  and  analysis 
   2/3 
collected on the purpose of money laundering prevention is insufficient, a new approach needs to be 
adopted;  an  approach  which  would  focus  the  authorities’  efforts  on  combating  the  phenomenon 
according to the risk profile of different sectors and certain social groups that are considered as more 
vulnerable to the phenomenon. For this reason, we think that more attention must be paid to other 
sectors in the economy, where there is a need for a greater and more coordinated imposition of the 
law requirements. Moreover, according to the Bank of Albania, and other foreign experts as well who 
have been working with us, and other specialists from the state institutions being engaged in the field 
of  money  laundry  prevention,  the  actual  law  needs  to  be  revised  because  it  causes  premises  for 
significant  formalism,  especially  in  the  activities  related  to  the  reporting  of  transactions  and  the 
identification of doubtful transactions. Being a member of the working group led by the International 
Monetary Fund experts, the Bank of Albania has contributed to the drafting of a new project of this 
law.     
At the same time, the Bank of Albania is working on the adaptation of a regulative framework related 
to  the  financial  activity  performed  by  non-bank  financial  institutions.  There  is  room  for  further 
improvement in the expansion and extension of the regulative requirements and the improvement in 
the existing framework concerning the supervisory practice and their activity report. In this context, the 
reporting  system  of  these  institutions  activity  has  been  approved,  along  with  it  a  regulation  on  the 
activity of savings and credit associations and their unions has also been approved. Regarding these 
latter,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  working  on  the  establishment  of  the  accounting  manual  and  the 
inspection manual.  
In  February-March  during  this  year,  our  financial  system  was  subject  to  an  assessment  process 
organized  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  In  the  final  report,  sent  to  the 
Albanian  Government  and  the  supervisory  authorities  in  the  country,  several  issues  were  identified 
which involve the need of changes in the regulative framework. Many of these elements related to the 
Bank of Albania activity and the entities licensed and supervised by it, are part of the changes in the 
aforementioned regulative projects.  
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again the commitment of the Bank of Albania in granting its 
greatest  contribution  to  the  improvement  of  the  regulative  framework,  related  to  both  banking  and 
financial  system.  I  believe  that  in  pursuing  our  objective  in  approaching  our  legal  and  regulative 
framework in the financial area to the best standards, this journal issue that we are promoting today 
shall serve at its best. I wish it success! 
Thank you! 
 
   3/3 
