Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at Danmarks 
Nationalbank, Copenhagen, 3 October 2005. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Bodil, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When Danmarks Nationalbank invited me to speak today, I had no hesitation in accepting its 
invitation,  although  my  feelings  towards  the  occasion  being  marked  are  somewhat 
ambivalent.  When  our  host,  Ms  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  leaves  her  post  as  Governor  of 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  at  the  end  of  this  month  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks 
(ESCB) and the ECB will lose a highly esteemed member of its General Council. As much as 
we regret saying farewell to you, dear Bodil, we are also looking forward to an equally fruitful 
cooperation with your successor, Mr Nils Bernstein.  
Dear  Bodil,  during  our  many  years  of  collaboration,  I,  like  so  many  others,  have  come  to 
admire  your  manifold  achievements.  Let  me  name  but  one:  the  skill  with  which  you  have 
managed the Danish exchange rate regime. During your tenure, the credibility of this policy 
has gone from being very high to being exceptionally high. This is illustrated by the fact that 
during the past year the exchange rate of the Danish kroner to the euro has fluctuated by 
less than 0.5%. 
This  is  a  remarkable  success  on  the  part  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  but  it  is  also  your 
personal success. The exchange rate policy is undisputed in your country, not least because 
the central bank and its Governor enjoy such a high degree of credibility. This also means 
that, in an economic sense, Denmark is closely linked to the euro area economy and is thus 
also in a position to participate to a large extent in financial integration. This brings me to the 
topic of my speech today. 
Today, I would like to speak about European financial integration. In so doing, I will address 
two main questions:  
1. 
2. 
Why is the Eurosystem so deeply interested in European financial integration? and 
What  can  the  Eurosystem  do  to  contribute  to  fostering  European  financial 
integration?  
Let  me  mention  here  also  that  I  use  the  term  “European”  financial  integration  in  a  broad 
sense. Of course, as the President of the ECB, my primary area of responsibility lies with the 
euro area. However, there are numerous links between the euro area and the remainder of 
the European Union. 
The Eurosystem’s interest in European financial integration  
2.  
There are several reasons for the Eurosystem’s interest in European financial integration. 
The  basic,  institutional  reasoning  is  that  under  Article  105  of  the  Treaty  the  ECB  and  the 
entire Eurosystem “shall without prejudice to the objective of price stability, […] support the 
general economic policies in the Community”.  
As we know, financial integration is an important component of the general economic policy 
of the European Union. While I will explain in a moment that financial integration is indeed 
conducive to the smooth implementation of the single monetary policy within the euro area, 
let  me  reiterate  that,  as  the  Treaty  states  and  as  the  ECB  has  demonstrated  since  its 
inception, monetary stability is the primary objective of the Eurosystem.  
   1/11 
the 
financial 
institutions,  markets  and 
Of course, financial integration is not an end in itself but it has various economic benefits.  
Financial  systems  –  composed  of 
financial 
infrastructure – serve a number of basic purposes, such as trading, hedging, diversifying and 
pooling  risk,  as  well  as  allocating  resources  and  mobilising  savings.  These  functions 
determine the economic benefits that can be derived from financial integration. Two widely 
accepted economic benefits of financial integration are better sharing and diversification of 
risk and the potential for higher economic growth. Let me explain this in more detail. 
First, the better diversification and sharing of risk brought about by financial integration helps 
to  fulfil  the  conditions  for  the  optimality  of  a  currency  area.  In  recent  years,  an  interesting 
development with regard to the theory of optimal currency areas has been the idea that the 
optimality  of  a  currency  area  is  not  necessarily  something  that  needs  to  be  fully  reached 
before  monetary  union  but  can  be  helped  achieving  by  monetary  union  itself.  The 
introduction of the euro clearly fostered financial integration. Economic agents from a given 
region can, by more easily investing in other regions of the area, diversify the risk of potential 
shocks.  Steps  towards  increased  financial  integration  reduce  the  risk  of  local  factors 
impacting on the income and consumption of a given region within the area, thereby helping 
to fulfil the conditions for an optimal currency area.  
Second,  financial  integration  is  a  key  factor  in  the  development  of  the  financial  system, 
which,  in  turn,  increases  the  potential  for  greater  and  more  sustainable  non-inflationary 
economic  growth.  It  is  generally  accepted  that  financial  integration  fosters  financial 
development  and,  ultimately,  economic  growth.  Financial  integration  allows  economies  of 
scale and increases the supply of funds for investment opportunities. The integration process 
fosters  competition  and  the  expansion  of  intermediation  and  markets,  thereby  leading  to 
further financial development. Financial development, in turn, leads to lower intermediation 
costs, a more efficient allocation of capital and, thus, a potential for higher economic growth.  
You  will  probably  share  the  view  that  the  growth  performance  of  the  euro  area  cannot  be 
deemed fully satisfactory. From 1999 to 2004, real GDP in the euro area grew by an average 
of 1.9% per annum. Looking back over the last ten years, the average annual growth rate in 
the 12 countries that today form the euro area has been 2.1%. But it is equally true to say 
that the single monetary policy, geared torwards price stability and the anchoring of inflation 
expectations,  lends  ongoing  support  to  economic  activity.  Across  the  maturity  spectrum, 
interest rates in the euro area are low by historical standards. Thus, if you will allow me to 
look at a third time span, it is worth noting that we are in fact delivering today a nominal yield 
curve at historically low levels, as low as ever observed in Europe since the beginning of the 
20th century!1  
Allow me now to look briefly at the “real” side of the economy.  
Long-term  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  estimated  to  be  between  2%  and  2.5%, 
probably much closer to 2% than to 2.5%, given demographic trends and prevailing market 
structures, and assuming that economic policies remain unchanged.  
As regards structural reforms, the European Commission recently presented the “Community 
Lisbon  Programme”,  which  contains  a  list  of  measures  at  the  EU  level  for  relaunching  the 
Lisbon strategy. The programme focuses on enhancing knowledge and innovation in order to 
strengthen  growth,  on  making  Europe  a  more  attractive  place  to  invest  and  work,  and  on 
creating more and better jobs. The Community Lisbon Programme will be complemented by 
the introduction of national action plans for growth and jobs, which the Member States will 
present this autumn.  
                                                 
1   See ECB Monthly Bulletin, “Long-term and short-term nominal interest rates in the largest euro area countries 
from a historical perspective”, p. 29-31, August 2005. 
   2/11 
integrated  and  efficient 
financial  markets  enhance 
That  such  economic  reforms  can  indeed  be  implemented  in  a  successful  way  has  been 
demonstrated by the Nordic European countries. 
Structural  reforms  are  urgently  needed  for  labour,  goods  and  services  markets  in  Europe. 
Labour markets need to become more flexible in order to support the creation of new jobs. 
Structures in goods and services markets still present considerable barriers to competition, 
hindering  the  process  of  Schumpeterian  “creative  destruction”  and  preventing  possible 
productivity gains. 
And while not confined to the “real” side of the economy, one such structural reform along 
the lines of the Lisbon strategy is the process of European financial integration. To give a 
concrete figure (despite all caveats that apply to the model underlying the simulations), let 
me mention that a recent study estimates that financial integration of the European bond and 
equity markets would result in additional growth of around 1% over a ten-year period.2 It is 
worth noting that 1% of EU GDP amounts to around EUR 100 billion! 
But  in  addition  to  the  general  economic  benefits  of  financial  integration  that  I  have 
mentioned, fostering financial integration is of particular importance for the ECB’s tasks. 
First, 
the  smooth  and  effective 
transmission of monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area. The higher the degree of 
financial integration, the more effectively this transmission will work in practice.  
In this context, I should also mention another basic task of the Eurosystem under the Treaty, 
namely  the  promotion  of  the  effective  operation  of  payment  systems,  as  well  as  the 
Eurosystem’s interest in the smooth running of securities settlement systems. Payment and 
settlement systems are the main channels through which liquidity flows, and only if the whole 
infrastructure is adequately integrated can the system function smoothly. The integration of 
these  financial  infrastructures  is  therefore  very  relevant  for  the  smooth  implementation  of 
monetary policy.  
Furthermore,  the  integration  of  the  financial system  is  highly  relevant  to  the  ECB’s task  of 
safeguarding financial stability. On the one hand, deeper financial integration can increase 
the  capacity  to  absorb  economic  shocks.  It  can  also  offer  more  possibilities  for  financial 
institutions to better manage and diversify their relevant risks and realise economies of scale, 
leading to greater efficiency of the financial system. On the other hand, particular attention 
has to be given to the profound changes of nature of the financial stability challenges due to 
the structural transformation of the financial system, including intensified cross-border links. 
Let  me  mention  here  that  among  the  ECB’s  various  contributions  to  the  discussions  on 
financial  stability,  we  have,  since  December  2004,  provided  the  public  with  our  biannual 
Financial  Stability  Review,  which  is  the  outcome  of  our  euro  area-wide  financial  stability 
monitoring activities, conducted with the support of the Banking Supervision Committee.  
Danmarks  Nationalbank  also  introduced,  in  2002,  an  annual  financial  stability  report  for 
Denmark,  and  this,  dear  Bodil,  is  another  of  the  many  achievements  of  your  term  as 
Governor of Danmarks Nationalbank.  
So  let  me  conclude  my  response  to  the  first  of  the  two  main  questions  which  I  wish  to 
address  today.  I  have  explained  the  institutional  and  economic  reasoning  underlying  our 
interest in European financial integration, i.e. the “Why?”. In fact, all of these reasons have 
found  expression  in  the  Eurosystem’s  mission  statement  formulated  by  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB, the relevant part of which reads as follows: 
                                                 
2   London  Economics  (2002),  “Quantification  of  the  macro-economic  impact  of  integration  of  EU  financial 
markets”, Report to the European Commission. 
   3/11 
“The  Eurosystem,  which  comprises  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national  central 
banks  of  the  Member  States  whose  currency  is  the  euro,  is  the  monetary  authority  of  the 
euro  area.  We  in  the  Eurosystem  have  as  our  primary  objective  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability  for  the  common  good.  Acting  also  as  a  leading  financial  authority,  we  aim  to 
safeguard financial stability and promote European financial integration.”3  
The mission statement of the Eurosystem brings me neatly on to the second question which I 
would  like  to  address  today,  namely  the  “What?”  –  i.e.  what  kind  of  contribution  can  the 
Eurosystem make to fostering European financial integration?  
The Eurosystem’s contribution to the fostering of European financial 
3.  
integration 
We generally distinguish four types of activity.  
First,  we  contribute  to  financial  integration  by  providing  central  banking  services  that  also 
foster European financial integration.  
Second, we can act as a catalyst for private-sector activities by facilitating collective action 
and assisting with possible coordination problems.  
Third, we give advice on shaping the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial 
system.  
And fourth, we try to enhance knowledge and raise awareness of the state of and need for 
European 
its 
achievement.  
I  will  examine  all  these  four  kinds  of  activity.  I  will  start  with  the  one  I  mentioned  last,  i.e. 
enhancing  knowledge  and  raising  awareness  of  European  financial  integration,  and 
measuring  the  progress  made  torwards  its  achievement.  In  this  respect,  I  will  take  the 
opportunity  to  present  a  number  of  facts  about  the  state  of  integration  of  the  euro  area 
financial markets. 
integration,  and  we  measure 
the  progress  made 
torwards 
financial 
Measuring the progress of European financial integration 
3.1  
Only  last  Friday  the  ECB  published,  for  the  first  time,  a  series  of  indicators  regarding  the 
state of integration of euro area financial and banking markets, together with an explanatory 
report entitled “Indicators of financial integration in the euro area”. This publication, aimed at 
measuring and monitoring financial integration in the euro area on the basis of quantitative 
indicators, is a new initiative by the ECB and is in line with our understanding of our mandate 
to contribute to the process of European financial integration. The indicators will be regularly 
updated and published on the ECB’s website.  
The publication provides an overall assessment of the degree of financial integration in the 
broad spectrum of segments of the euro area financial markets, ranging from retail loans to 
wholesale equity trading. Let me now present our findings in more detail. 
Our 20 indicators cover the money market, the government bond market, the corporate bond 
market, the equity market and banking markets.  
While the euro has undoubtedly acted as a catalyst for financial integration in general, it is 
true  that  the  degree  of  integration  differs  from  market  segment  to  market  segment,  with 
                                                 
3   See http://www.ecb.int/ecb/html/mission.en.html. 
   4/11 
integration  being  more  advanced  in  those  market  segments  that  are  closer  to  the  single 
monetary policy.  
Money market  
The money market is broadly defined as the market for interbank short-term debt or deposits 
and  consists  of  various  segments.  Our  report  suggests  three  indicators  for  measuring 
financial  integration,  based  on  the  dispersion  of  lending  rates  –  namely  overnight  rates, 
unsecured lending rates, and repo rates – offered by banks among euro area countries, with 
the data referring to actual transactions or offered rates by EONIA, EURIBOR and EUREPO 
panel banks. 
These  indicators  point  to  a  high  overall  degree  of  integration.  The  unsecured  interbank 
market has, since shortly after the introduction of the euro, been integrated to a quasi-perfect 
extent, shown by the respective indicators that display a euro area cross-country standard 
deviation of only around one basis point and below. While some lower degree of liquidity of 
the  repo  market,  in  particular  in  the  longer-term  segment,  should  be  borne  in  mind,  the 
indicator  for  this  market  also  suggests  a  high  degree  of  integration.  In  this  respect,  the 
indicators reveal that the euro area cross-country standard deviation of 1-month repo rates is 
today at around 0.5 basis points, while the one for the 12-month maturity stands at around 
1.5 basis points.  
Government bond market  
As  we  know,  the  integration  of  euro  area  government  bond  markets  had  already  been 
progressing before the start of Monetary Union, in particular from the mid-1990s in the run up 
to  Monetary  Union.  Given  comparable  relevant  characteristics,  measures  of  integration  in 
government  bond  markets,  of  which  we  suggest  five  indicators,  are  based  on  yield 
differentials with respect to a benchmark bond for different maturities, namely ten, five and 
two  year  maturities.  A  simple  measure  is,  for  example,  the  standard  deviation  of  yield 
spreads  over  time:  the  lower  the  dispersion,  the  higher  the  degree  of  integration.  The 
available  indicators  show  that,  with  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  removal  of  the 
exchange  rate  risk,  government  bond  yields  have  converged  in  all  countries,  with  the 
standard  deviation  in  yield  spreads  being  less  than  0.1  percentage  point  for  all  three 
maturities. 
The  indicators  therefore  show  that  the  euro  area  government  bond  market  has  reached  a 
high degree of integration, increasingly driven by common news. Local factors, however, will 
continue  to  have  an  impact.  Among  those  are  differences  in  liquidity,  in  the  availability  of 
derivatives  markets,  and  of  course  of  perceived  credit  risks.  The  impact  of  these  factors 
should,  from  our  own  standpoint,  not  be  seen  as  indicating  a  lack  of  integration  since  we 
consider it important that the markets assess the quality of the signatures concerned. 
Corporate bond market  
The  euro  area  corporate  bond  market  has  grown  considerably  in  recent  years.  But  let  me 
mention the fact that, despite this exceptional growth, the gap between the euro area and the 
United  States  is  still  large.  For  example,  the  outstanding  volume  of  bonds  issued  by  non-
financial corporations is now around EUR 2.4 trillion in the United States, as compared with 
around EUR 900 billion in the euro area.  
The  yield  differential  between  corporate  bonds  can  be  explained  by  a  number  of  factors, 
such  as  the  credit  rating,  time-to-maturity,  liquidity  and  cash  flow  structure.  Under  full 
integration, the respective impact of such factors should be totally independent of the country 
of  issuance.  Using  such  a  set  of  specific  factors,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  measures  of 
   5/11 
corporate bond market integration by investigating whether or not risk-adjusted yield spreads 
have  a  systematic  country  component.  In  an  integrated  market,  the  proportion  of  the  total 
yield spread variance attributable to country effects should be close to zero. 
We published three (model-based) indicators of the state of integration of the corporate bond 
market.  The  indicators  show  that  the  euro  area  corporate  bond  market  is  fairly  well 
integrated,  in  the  sense  that  the  country  of  issuance  is  only  of  very  minor  importance  in 
explaining yield differentials. 
Equity market  
It is very important for monetary policy-makers to understand the dynamics of equity market 
integration.  As  equity  markets  grow  in  size,  wealth  effects  on  consumption  become 
increasingly  relevant,  resulting  in  a  tighter  link  between  stock  market  fluctuations  and 
fluctuations in real economic variables.  
Overall, we published three (model-based) indicators of the degree of integration of the euro 
area equity market. These measures for the euro area equity market indicate that the degree 
of integration is rising, although room for further integration remains. 
One means of measuring the degree of integration in euro area equity markets is to look at 
the  relative  importance  of  sector  versus  country-based  investment  strategies.  Generally 
speaking,  the  more  integrated  the  euro  area  equity  market,  the  greater  the  benefits  of 
spreading  investments  across  sectors  as  opposed  to  country-based  equity  investment 
strategies.  By  comparing  the  cross-sector  dispersion  with  the  cross-country  dispersion  of 
equity returns, it is possible to derive indicators of financial integration.  
One finding is that, since the end of 2000, the advantages of sector diversification seem – for 
the first time in the last 30 years – to have surpassed those of a geographical diversification 
among euro area countries. Still, diversifying across sectors and countries at the same time 
might result in portfolios with a lower risk than those constructed on a country or sector basis 
only. Thus, the importance of the country effect is still too great for it to be concluded that the 
euro area equity market is satisfactorily integrated.  
Furthermore,  equity  returns  in  the  euro  area  countries  are  increasingly  determined  by 
common  factors.  Based  on  a  factor  model,  our  finding  is  that  the  average  sensitivity  to 
common shocks has increased significantly over the last 30 years, in particular as regards 
euro  area-wide  return  shocks.  This  can  also  be  interpreted  as  an  indication  of  increased 
integration of euro area equity markets.  
Banking markets  
The assessment of integration in banking is conceptually complex. While banks are a well-
defined type of firm, banking is a multi-product industry, in which various banking products 
can be exchanged in different markets of different size and geographical coverage and with 
different  counterparts.  One  generally  distinguishes  between  interbank  (or  wholesale) 
activities, capital market-related activities and retail banking.  
In our report, we started with a set of six indicators related to banking markets. We found that 
retail  banking  markets  in  particular  are  generally  far  less  integrated,  while  the  euro  area 
interbank  (or  wholesale)  market  and  capital  market-related  activities  show  solid  signs  of 
increasing integration. 
Indeed,  cross-border  inter-bank  loans  and  cross-border  holdings  of  securities  have,  in 
relative  terms,  experienced  substantial  growth.  For  example,  although  domestic  loans 
granted between monetary financial institutions (MFIs) still account for more than 50% of the 
total  of  EU  MFI  loans,  the  respective  euro  area  cross-border  activity  has  increased  from 
around 15% at the end of 1997 to around 23% at the current time. Capital market-related 
   6/11 
activities have been even more impressive. While securities issued by non-MFIs of another 
euro area country accounted for around 15% of the securities held by euro area MFIs at the 
end of 1997, this share has now reached almost 40%.  
By  contrast,  integration  in  retail  banking  has  not  progressed  to  any  great  extent.  This  is 
suggested  by  both  price  and  quantity-based  indicators.  Integration  in  the  retail  banking 
markets  can  be  measured  by  the  cross-country  dispersion  (standard  deviation)  of  interest 
rates on consumer credit, lending for house purchase and deposits with an agreed maturity, 
with  a  high  degree  of  cross-country  dispersion  indicating  a  low  degree  of  integration.  Our 
finding  was  that  the  degree  of  dispersion  remains  relatively  high.  This  picture  of  a 
comparatively low degree of integration is also borne out by the level of banks’ cross-border 
retail lending activity within the euro area, which, while increasing slightly from around 2% at 
the end of 1997 to around 3.5% today, remains low.  
Let me now make a few brief comments on an important retail market, namely the European 
mortgage market. The importance of this retail market segment is evident from its size alone: 
an outstanding volume of more than EUR 4 trillion in residential mortgage debt in the EU, 
corresponding to around 40% of EU GDP.  
Very clearly, there are costs incurred through incomplete integration, such as the costs for 
households arising from differences in prices and products, and for issuers and investors as 
a result of unrealised economies of scale and higher funding costs. 
Indeed, the secondary market for mortgage funding is still quite fragmented within the EU. 
Overall,  retail  funding  via  deposits  still  accounts  for  the  largest  part  of  the  funding  of 
mortgage  loans.  However,  securitisation  is  becoming  more  and  more  important  as  the 
markets  for  covered  bonds  (i.e.  on-balance  sheet  securitisation)  and  mortgage-backed 
securities (i.e. off-balance sheet securitisation) are growing. For example, euro-denominated 
bonds 
around  
EUR 0.4 trillion by now, as, over the last few years, we have seen issuance of covered bonds 
begin to increase in several European countries.  
Such  capital  market  funding  instruments  could  indeed  also  facilitate  the  integration  of 
mortgage  markets,  as  mortgage  loans  could  more  easily  be  granted  cross-border,  without 
first  requiring  costly  access  to  a  local  deposit  base  for  their  funding.  Accordingly,  we  are 
witnessing  numerous  initiatives  by  the  private  sector  to  achieve  some  progress  in  the 
integration of these important market segments.  
The  situation  of  the  European  mortgage  market,  and  that  of  retail  financial  services  in 
general, has also been brought to our attention by the European Commission.  
First,  in  December  2004,  the  report  of  the  European  Commission’s  Forum  Group  on 
Mortgage Credit was published, in which a number of recommendations for tackling barriers 
to the further integration of EU mortgage credit markets were made. Second, the European 
Commission’s Green Paper on the priorities of the financial services policy over the next five 
years,  which  was  open  for  public  consultation  until  1  August,  identified  retail  financial 
services as one of the areas in which financial integration is clearly lagging behind. And third, 
in July, the European Commission issued a Green Paper on “Mortgage Credit in the EU” for 
public consultation by end November.  
Connected  to  this  Green  Paper  consultation,  the  European  Commission  asked  a  research 
institute  to  prepare  a  study  on  the  estimated  costs  and  benefits  of  the  integration  of  EU 
mortgage markets, to assess the degree to which EU mortgage markets are integrated and 
to identify the obstacles to their further integration. The study, which was published in August 
of  this  year,  concludes,  with  all  caveats  that  apply  to  the  model  underlying  the estimation, 
mortgage 
covered 
amount 
loans 
by 
to 
   7/11 
that full integration of EU mortgage markets would raise EU GDP by 0.7% and EU private 
consumption by 0.5% in 2015, i.e. ten years from now.4 This would thus constitute a further 
step in the direction of raising the EU’s growth potential which I referred to earlier.  
Having  dealt  with  how  the  Eurosystem  can  foster  European  financial  integration  by 
enhancing  knowledge  and  raising  awareness  of  the  state  of  and  the  need  for  fostering 
European financial integration and by measuring the progress made, let me now turn to the 
other  three  kinds  of  activity  mentioned  earlier:  providing  central  banking  services  that  are 
also  conducive  to  fostering  financial  integration,  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  private-sector 
activities and advising on the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system. I 
will begin with the latter. 
Advising on the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system 
3.2  
As  we  see  it,  the  basic  task  of  public  authorities  with  regard  to  the  process  of  financial 
integration  is  to  create  a  framework  whereby,  generally  speaking,  all  potential  market 
participants in a given financial instruments or services market, are subject to a single set of 
rules  when  they  decide  to  deal  with  those  financial  instruments  or  services,  have  equal 
access  to  this  set  of  financial  instruments  or  services  and  are  treated  equally  when  they 
operate in the market. 
The Eurosystem is fully committed to this principle of integrating financial markets and the 
financial system as whole, both in the euro area and the European Union. We are committed 
to  it  both  because  it  is  required  by  European  law  and  because  we  think  it  is  good  for  the 
economy of the euro area and the European Union, and for the best possible functioning of 
the  level  playing  field  in  this  sector.  In  line  with  this  commitment,  we  also  advise  on  the 
legislative  and  regulatory  framework  for  the  financial  system.  Let  me  give  you  a  few 
examples. 
Very recently, at the start of August, the Eurosystem provided an opinion in response to the 
European Commission’s consultation on the priorities for financial services policies over the 
next  five  years.5  As  detailed  in  our  opinion,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  key  policy 
orientation  of  the  Green  Paper,  in  particular  the  proposal  for  “better  regulation”  based  on 
open,  transparent  and  evidence-based  policy-making,  and  the  need  to  focus  on  the 
consolidation  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  legislative  framework  for  financial 
services.  To  this  end,  we  are  of  the  view  that  the  potential  of  the  Lamfalussy  framework 
should  be  exploited  as  far  as  possible.  In  this  respect,  let  me  also  recall  the  position 
expressed  earlier  this  year  by  the  Eurosystem  in  relation  to  the  review  of  the  so-called 
Lamfalussy process.6
With regard to the supervisory framework, the Eurosystem fully supports the Commission’s 
view that the current institutional set-up should be exploited to the maximum extent before 
any potential structural change is considered. In particular, the Eurosystem agrees that the 
main  policy  objective  in  the  area  of  financial  supervision  is  twofold:  first,  to  enhance  the 
competitiveness of EU financial markets and institutions and to facilitate the development of 
cross-border finance both in terms of institutions and in terms of products and services; and 
second,  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  standards  for  oversight  and  supervision  in  a  more 
integrated financial system.  
                                                 
4   London  Economics,  “The  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Integration  of  EU  Mortgage  Markets,  Report  for  European 
Commission, DG Internal Market and Services”, August 2005. 
5   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecgreenpaperfinancialservicespolicy2005en.pdf. 
6   See http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/lamfalussy-reviewen.pdf. 
   8/11 
In addition to giving advice, the Eurosystem also provides standards and conditions for its 
own operations, or by issuing its own regulations – for example in the field of promoting and 
ensuring  efficient  and  sound  clearing  and  payment  systems.  In  the  field  of  promoting  the 
integration, efficiency, and security of the European securities infrastructure, let me mention 
the “Standards for Securities Clearing and Settlement in the European Union” developed by 
the ESCB in cooperation with the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR). 
The  field  of  securities  clearing  and  settlement  is  an  area  in  which  further  integration  is 
needed  to  exploit  in  full  the  benefits  arising  from  a  pan-European  securities  market.  As  a 
directive  can  complement  the  market-led  removal  of  the  “Giovannini  barriers”,  which  is  a 
necessary condition for competition, cost savings and improved efficiency to come fully into 
effect, the Eurosystem also supports the Commission’s intention to put forward a proposal for 
a Directive on securities clearing and settlement.  
I  should  now  like  to  move  on  to  the  third  kind  of  activity,  namely  the  provision  of  central 
banking services that are also conducive to fostering financial integration  
3.3  
Providing central banking services conducive to European financial 
integration 
I  have  just  mentioned  the  area  of  securities  settlement  systems.  From  a  central  bank 
perspective, securities settlement systems play a crucial role in the Eurosystem’s collateral 
framework as they provide the infrastructure that allows counterparties to transfer collateral 
to  the  Eurosystem.  In  the  current  framework,  counterparties  can  transfer  cross-border 
collateral to the Eurosystem via two main channels: via links between securities settlement 
systems (SSSs) and via the correspondent central banking model (CCBM). I would like to 
say a few words on the CCBM.  
The  CCBM  was  created  as  an  interim  model  that  would  cease  to  operate  as  soon  as  the 
market had developed comprehensive and reliable alternatives. That said, it is still the main 
instrument for mobilising cross-border collateral, with a share of over 80% at the end of 2004. 
Despite  considerable  improvements  in  the  efficiency  of  CCBM  processing  procedures, 
market participants have on various occasions expressed the view that the CCBM is not yet 
able to meet all of banks’ needs. Taking note of these trends in collateral business practices, 
the Eurosystem has invited market participants to rethink current arrangements by focusing 
on possible future alternative cross-border collateral facilities. 
Another obvious example in the area of providing central banking services is our payment 
system, TARGET, which has clearly fostered European financial integration. TARGET was 
operational from the first day of Monetary Union as a platform for balancing liquidity surplus 
and  deficits.  TARGET  today  represents  around  90%  of  the  total  traffic  in  large-value 
payments  in  euro  and  is  one  of  the  two  largest  wholesale  payment  systems  in  the  world, 
alongside  Fedwire  in  the  United  States.  And  TARGET2  will  further  improve  financial 
integration, as it will enable the provision of a harmonised level of services across Europe, 
supported  by  a  single  price  structure  for  domestic  and  cross-border  payments  and  new 
functionalities to enable banks to better integrate their euro liquidity management. Our next 
TARGET2 progress report, to be issued in November 2005, will provide further information 
on our work.  
Acting as a catalyst for private sector activities 
3.4  
I  now  turn  to  the  fourth  way  in  which  we  contribute  to  the  process  of  European  financial 
integration. 
the  establishment  of  common 
infrastructures, cooperation between private agents of the financial sector is as necessary as 
competition. However, cooperation often fails to materialise without the aid of a catalyst. In 
most countries, the central bank plays the crucial role of catalyst, thanks to its acknowledged 
In  areas  such  as  standard-setting  and 
   9/11 
for 
competence and objectivity and the numerous contacts with market participants which ensue 
from its basic tasks. With regard to financial integration in the euro area, the Eurosystem can 
assume such a catalyst function in several areas. Let me mention two examples.  
Having touched, some moments ago, on the wholesale payment system, let me also express 
the Eurosystem’s support for the integration of retail payments, i.e. for the banking industry’s 
initiatives to create the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). 
A real SEPA will benefit consumers, corporates, banks, and the economy as a whole. The 
European Payments Council, the main body administering the SEPA project, has declared its 
intention to deliver pan-European payment instruments by the start of 2008, i.e. the “SEPA 
for citizens”. By the end of 2010, we expect progress to have been made in developing the 
“SEPA 
infrastructure”,  
i.  e.  complete  interoperability  between  SEPA-compliant  infrastructures  in  order  to  enable 
competition and market-driven consolidation.  
The Eurosystem will continue its dialogue with the banking industry and other stakeholders, 
in close collaboration with the European Commission. The Eurosystem will also continue to 
monitor progress in this field by issuing its fourth SEPA progress report at the end of 2005. 
A  second  example  of  our  role  as  catalyst  for  private  sector  activities  is  the  Short-Term 
European Paper (STEP) initiative that was set up by the ACI Financial Markets Association. 
As we know, this market segment is not only smaller than its counterpart in the United States 
(the US market for commercial paper has an outstanding volume of around EUR 1,3 trillion, 
compared 
some  
EUR 750 billion in Europe), but it is also not yet integrated on a pan-European scale. The 
ACI initiative aims to promote the convergence of practices through market players’ voluntary 
compliance with the standards set out in the STEP Market Convention. 
The  Eurosystem  supports  this  market-led  initiative  in  the  context  of  the  introduction  of  the 
STEP  label  and  the  production  and  publication  of  related  STEP  statistics  on  yields  and 
volumes  which  would  foster  integration  and  reduce  issuers’  costs  through  greater  market 
transparency. 
with 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In  conclusion,  I  will  reiterate  the  importance  of  a  market-driven  process  of  financial 
integration.  When  I  said  earlier  that  the  responsibility  of  public  authorities  is  to  create  a 
framework whereby all potential market participants are subject to a single set of rules, have 
equal access to financial instruments or services and are treated equally when operating in 
the market, the opportunities thus created have to be exploited by market forces. It is then 
that true financial integration will have been achieved and we can reap in full the benefits of a 
single and integrated financial market in Europe.  
In this historical process of building up a genuine and efficient single financial market with a 
single currency, I would insist on the particular importance of the catalyst role of the ECB and 
of the Eurosystem. I consider it to be a major responsibility at the present juncture.  
Dear Bodil, 
Let me now wish you all the very best for your life outside the central bank. You are now 
returning  to  your  “Alma  Mater”,  the  University  of  Copenhagen,  as  Chairperson  of  the 
university’s  board.  I  am  sure  that  this  position  will  leave  time  for  you  to  participate  in  the 
academic debate among economists. We at the ECB would be very pleased to see you as 
guest at our own conferences and seminars.  
You  know,  dear  Bodil,  that  you  will  remain  a  member  of  our  ‘Club’,  and  I  say  without 
hesitation  that  you  will  be  the  most  honorary  member  of  the  European  System  of  Central 
   10/11 
Banks. We count on you in the future as well as we could count on you so efficiently in the 
past.  We  count  on  your  remarkable  intellectual  capacity,  on  your  wisdom,  on  your 
experience, and on your unique professional and personal elegance. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
   11/11 
