Xiang Junbo: Exclusive interview with the People’s Daily 
Xiang Junbo, Deputy Governor of the People’ s Bank of China, in a recent interview with a reporter of 
the People’s Daily. 
 Reporter: The establishment of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) Shanghai Head Office has drawn 
broad attention from the financial circle and the media. Thank you for having this interview with us to 
answer questions of common concern. 
Xiang: Thank you. As you said, the establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office has been widely 
covered by the media. I have read the relevant reports and commentaries. I would like to thank the 
press for their concern and support for the PBC Shanghai Head Office. 
Reporter:  Since China  adopted  the  reform  and  opening-up  policy,  the  central  bank has undergone 
several  institutional  changes.  In  1984,  the  State  Council  decided  to  have  the  PBC  act  solely  as  a 
central bank. In 1995, the law of the People’s Republic of China on the People’s Bank of China legally 
confirmed the central bank status of the PBC. In 1998, the PBC dismantled its provincial branches and 
set up regional branches. In 2003, the banking supervisory function was transferred from the PBC to a 
separate regulatory institution. Does the establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office constitute 
another important institutional reform of the PBC? And what impact it will have on China’s financial 
sector? 
Xiang:  Since  the  reform  and  opening  up  and  with  the  gradual  improvement  of  the  socialist  market 
economy, the central bank has been undergoing institutional changes. The establishment of the PBC 
Shanghai Head Office is an important step to improve the central bank system and to strengthen the 
role of the central bank in macroeconomic management. With the Shanghai Head Office established, 
the PBC will enhance its macro-adjustment and service capability by facilitating the development of 
the  financial  markets  and  financial  center.  As  Governor  Zhou  Xiaochuan  pointed  out  at  the 
inauguration  ceremony  of  the  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office,  as  the  economy  gets  increasingly  
market-oriented  and  transportation  and  communication  further  improve,  cross-regional  economic 
activities  will  increase,  and  financial  markets  and  financial  services  will  increasingly  benefit  from 
economy of scale. The development of financial center indicates strong international competitiveness 
and significant improvement in the efficiency of financial services. The financial sector including the 
central bank needs to improve their functions by focusing on the development of financial markets and 
financial centers.   
Shanghai has become the hub to various financial institutions. The national unified inter-bank lending 
market, bond market and foreign exchange market are all located in Shanghai. Shanghai also has a 
stock  exchange,  a  commodity  exchange  and  a  gold  exchange.  Building  Shanghai  international 
financial center has been set as a national strategy. The PBC Shanghai Office has been established 
against such a background.  
The PBC Shanghai Head Office has been set up with a view to further improve the decision-making 
and operating system of the central bank, strengthen its macroeconomic management capability, take 
advantage of the first-hand contacts with the financial markets, and enable the central bank to better 
serve the financial markets. It will also reinforce the role of Shanghai as a domestic financial center 
and promote the development of Shanghai as an international financial center.  
Reporter: It is speculated by some media that the establishment of PBC Shanghai Office indicates 
that  the  central  bank  intends  to  set  up  organizational  structure,  decision-making  and  operating 
systems similar to those of the Federal Reserve System of the United States. Moreover, some people 
think that the PBC Shanghai Head Office will play a role similar to that of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. What are your comments in this regard? 
Xiang: It’s true that in establishing the PBC Shanghai Head Office, we have drawn experiences from 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Nevertheless, given that China and the United States differ in 
political systems, traditions and cultures, the PBC Shanghai Head Office has been established taking 
into  account  China’s  specific  situation.  As  an  integral  part  of  the  PBC  Headquarters,  the  PBC 
Shanghai  Head  Office  will  perform  its  functions  under  the  guidance  and  authorization  of  the  PBC 
Headquarters. In particular, it will perform its functions in the following major areas: conducting open 
market operations in accordance with the operating targets set the by the Headquarters; conducting 
   1/4 
rediscount  operations  for  the  commercial  banks  and  other  institutions  engaging  in  bill  business  in 
Shanghai;  regulating  the  inter-bank  markets,  tracking  the  development  of  financial  markets  and 
guiding the innovation of financial products; assessing regional financial stability and financial security; 
collecting, compiling and analyzing the financial market data; conducting research on monetary policy 
operation, the development of financial markets and the construction of financial centers; engaging in 
regional  financial  exchange  and  cooperation  and  conducting  international  financial  business; 
managing part of the state foreign exchange reserves and gold reserves; and carrying out some of the 
businesses currently conducted by the PBC Shanghai Branch.  
The PBC Shanghai Head Office will administer the PBC branches and sub-branches currently under 
the  jurisdiction  of  PBC  Shanghai  Branch,  and  administer  and  coordinate  the  work  of  some  of  the 
enterprises  and  institutions  in  Shanghai.  Entities  under  direct  administration  by  the  PBC  Shanghai 
Head Office include China Foreign Exchange Trade System, China Anti-Money Laundering Monitoring 
and  Assessing  Center,  the  PBC  Data  Processing  Center,  and  the  PBC  Credit  Information  Service 
Center.  The  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office  will  also  coordinate  the  work  of  China  UnionPay  and 
Shanghai Gold Exchange.  
Our goal is to build Shanghai Head Office into a platform for the operation of monetary policy and the 
monitoring of financial markets, an important window for international exchange and cooperation, and 
a center for some financial services and related research and development work. 
Reporter: Just now you mentioned the goal you are seeking to achieve in building the Shanghai Head 
Office. How will the central bank be operated so that it can take advantage of the close contacts with 
the markets? 
Xiang:  In  a  market  economy,  the  central  bank  mainly  relies  on  indirect  instruments  to  implement 
monetary policy. It adjusts market liquidity and interest rates by conducting transactions in the financial 
markets, and transmits monetary policy signals to the financial sector through the financial markets, 
thus influents the output and overall price level of the real sector. Indirect monetary policy instruments 
are mainly open market operations supplemented by other means such as rediscount window. 
Market-based  monetary  policy  operations  rely  on  accurate  judgment  of  market  development.  At 
present,  China’s  financial  markets  are  centered  in  Shanghai.  By  establishing  a  Head  Office  and 
conducting monetary operations in Shanghai, the central bank can enjoy several benefits. First, the 
staff  conducting  such  operations  will  be  able  to  formulate  optimal  strategy  by  monitoring  market 
development  in  real  time  and  make  timely  judgment  on  market  trend.  Second,  timely  exchange  of 
information with market organizers and participants will help form a correct market expectation. Third, 
the  establishment  of  the  Shanghai  Head  Office  will  enable  the  central  bank  to  timely  respond  to 
abnormal movements of the market. This will contribute to the stable operation of the market.  
Reporter: To provide better services to the market, how will the PBC Shanghai Head Office improve 
its  capacity  for  monitoring  and  managing  the  market?  And  what  roles  will  it  play  in  promoting  the 
development of money market and foreign exchange market and the innovation of financial products? 
Xiang:One of the important roles of the PBC is regulating the inter-bank money market and foreign 
exchange market. After transferring its function of monitoring and managing the financial markets to 
the Shanghai Head Office, thus getting closer contacts with the markets, the PBC will be able to better 
understand the need of the market, and formulate and revise relevant rules accordingly. It will also be 
able to conduct real-time and on-site monitoring of market transactions, and intervene in the market as 
necessary.  Moreover,  closer  contacts  with  the  markets  will  facilitate  the  timely  collection  of  market 
data, which will enable the central bank to formulate and implement monetary policy more effectively. 
As  to  promoting  market  development  and  product  innovation,  we  will  take  the  following  measures. 
First, more participants will be allowed to enter the inter-bank market and the market will be further 
expanded with a view to build the inter-bank market into a unified and well-developed market. Second, 
steps will be taken to encourage the adoption of new ways of trading. Third, the development of new 
products,  including  futures,  options,  forwards  and  swaps,  will  be  encouraged  to  enable  market 
participants  to  better  hedge  market  risks.  Fourth,  to  better  serve  market  participants,  the  PBC  will 
make continuous efforts to improve market regulations and rules to guide market development. 
Reporter:  In  a  visit  to  Shanghai  in  July  2004,  President  Hu  Jintao  stressed  the  importance  of 
Shanghai in serving the whole country, and called for efforts to develop Shanghai into an international 
economic,  financial,  trade  and  transportation  center.  How  do  you  see  the  relationship  between  the 
establishment of PBC Shanghai Head Office and the development of Shanghai international financial 
center? 
   2/4 
Xiang: To build Shanghai into an international financial center is an important strategic decision made 
by  the  Central  Party  Committee  and  the  State  Council.  Mr.  Deng  Xiaoping  pointed  out  in  the  early 
1990s that China must rely on the development of Shanghai to raise its international status in financial 
affairs.  In  1992,  Mr.  Jiang  Zemin  pointed  out  in  the  report  of  the  14th  CPC National  Congress  that 
accelerated  efforts  should  be  made  to  build  Shanghai  into  an  international  economic,  financial  and 
trade  center  to  promote  the  economic  development  of  Yangtze  River  Delta  and  the  whole  Yangtze 
River  valley.  In  a  visit  to  Shanghai  in July  2004,  President  Hu Jintao  called  for  continued efforts  to 
develop Shanghai into an international economic, financial, trade and transportation center.  
International  experiences  show  that  the  establishment  of  central  bank  headquarters  and  the 
development of international financial centers beneficially promote each other. International financial 
centers have emerged in places where trade and transportation activities are centered and where the 
country’s  capital  and  its  central  bank  are  located.  The  emergence  of  Amsterdam,  London,  Tokyo, 
Hong  Kong,  Singapore  and  New  York  as  international  financial  centers  reflected  part  or  all  of  the 
above  features.  Although  Frankfurt  is  not  a  port  city  like  Hamburg  or  Dusseldorf,  it  finally  replaced 
Berlin  as  Germany’s  financial  center,  partly  because  the  central  bank  of  Germany,  the  Deutsche 
Bundersbank, is located there. The European Central Bank has also been established in Frankfurt, 
conducting unified monetary policy and inter-bank fund clearance and settlement within Europe. This 
has  in  turn  strengthened  Frankfurt’s  status  as  an  international  financial  center  in  the  European 
Continent.  Similarly,  although  Zurich  is  not  the  capital  of  Switzerland,  it  has  developed  into  an 
international financial center partly because the central bank was previously located there.   
The establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office is expected to produce similar effects. On the 
one  hand,  by  improving  monetary  policy  operation  and  providing  better  services  to  the  market,  we 
expect that more domestic financial institutions will move some of their businesses or departments to 
Shanghai  and  more  professionals  will  be  attracted  to  work  in  Shanghai.  On  the  other  hand,  with 
expanded exchange and cooperation of the PBC Shanghai Head Office with other central banks and 
financial organizations, Shanghai is expected to play a larger role in the financial affairs in the Asian-
Pacific  region,  which  will  help  accelerate  the  development  of  Shanghai  as  an  international  financial 
center.  
Reporter: Could you briefly describe the internal organizational structure of the PBC Shanghai Head 
Office? 
Xiang:  The  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office  consists  of  7  functional  departments  and  3  supporting 
departments  to  ensure  the  effective  performance  of  duties.  Functional  departments  include  Open 
Market  Operations  Department,  Financial  Market  Management  Department,  Financial  Stability 
Department,  Statistics  and  Research  Department,  International  Department,  Financial  Services 
Department and Foreign Exchange Management Department. The 3 supporting departments are the 
General Management Department, Human Resources Management Department and Staff Disciplinary 
Department.  
Reporter: How will the PBC Shanghai Branch be consolidated with the PBC Shanghai Head Office? 
Will the PBC Shanghai Branch still exist after the consolidation? And do you have a timetable for the 
consolidation? 
Xiang: According to the functions designated to the PBC Shanghai Head Office, it will be established 
based on the existing Shanghai Branch. The businesses currently conducted by the Shanghai Branch 
will partly be transferred to the Open Market Operations Department, Financial Market Management 
Department,  Financial  Stability  Department,  Statistics  and  Research  Department,  and  International 
Department, respectively, and partly be taken over by the Financial Services Department. The foreign 
Exchange business will be conducted by the Foreign Exchange Management Department.  
Meanwhile, to maintain business consistency, the PBC Shanghai Branch and the State Administration 
of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) Shanghai Branch will still exist in nominal sense after the consolidation. 
Since  the  establishment  of  the  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office  involves  the  transfer  of  some  functions 
from the Headquarters, the restructuring of the PBC Shanghai Branch and the reallocation of staff, it 
will take some time, but the consolidation will proceed in a steady and orderly manner. We will make 
active and steady efforts to put the new institution and the new system into operation at an early date. 
Reporter: How will the PBC Shanghai Head Office and the Beijing Headquarters coordinate with each 
other? 
Xiang:  As  I  mentioned  just  now,  as  an  integral  part  of  the  PBC  Headquarters,  the  PBC  Shanghai 
Head Office will perform its functions under the guidance and authorization of the PBC Headquarters. 
   3/4 
The  Headquarters  is  mainly  responsible  for  policy  formulation  and  decision  making,  while  the 
Shanghai  Head  Office  will  act  as  an  operating  center  for  implementing  the  policies.  A  Deputy 
Governor and an Assistant Governor of the Headquarters will act as President and Deputy President 
of the PBC Shanghai Head Office respectively. For some operations that have to be conducted with 
the  authorization  of  the  Headquarters,  heads  of  relevant  departments  of  the  Headquarters  will  take 
concurrent posts at the Shanghai Head Office. In addition, remote office automation systems will be 
set  up  linking  the  Headquarters  and  the  Shanghai  Head  Office.  The  application  of  modern 
telecommunication  technologies  will  significantly  shorten  the  time  lag  between  the  formulation  and 
implementation of policies. 
Reporter:  Is  it  an  important  task  for  the  PBC  to  ensure  that  the  Shanghai  Head  Office  employ 
qualified staff? Through which channels will the Shanghai Head Office recruit personnel? 
Xiang:Yes, we need a large number of qualified people to work in the Shanghai Head Office. In 2003, 
Governor  Zhou  Xiaochuan  pointed  out  in  the  PBC  working  report  that  the  PBC  will  seek  to  build  a 
team of staff with high learning spirit, strong research ability, rich professional knowledge, pragmatic 
working  style  and  creative  spirit.  A  broad-based  staff  team  is  needed  to  achieve  this  goal.  Besides 
taking  advantage  of  the  rich  human  resources  in  Shanghai,  we  will  also  supply  personnel  to  the 
Shanghai Head Office through the following channels. First, some staff from the Headquarters will be 
selected to work in the Shanghai Head Office. Second, there will be regular transfer of staff from the 
Headquarters to the Shanghai Head Office to work for a specified period of time. Third, some young 
staff  from  the  PBC  branches  and  sub-branches  will  be  sent  to  the  Shanghai  Head  Office.  Fourth, 
senior professionals with related working experiences and academic backgrounds will be hired both 
domestically  and  from  overseas.  We  will  provide  equal  opportunities  for  all  staff,  and  create  a 
favorable environment to enable them to fully tap their potentials. 
Reporter: Some people describe you as a scholar-styled leader. Your have academic background in 
many  areas  including  finance,  economics,  audit  and  laws.  It  is  said  that  you  are  also  interested  in 
writing  TV  plays  in  your  spare  time.  How  will  such  academic  background  and  the  experiences  in 
auditing benefit your work in the Shanghai Head Office? And what implications will the establishment 
of  the  Shanghai  Head  Office,  a  new  play  that  has  just  started,  have  on  China’s  entire  financial 
industry? 
Xiang: I must admit that I am still a new hand in the financial sector. Although the knowledge I learned 
in the university on finance and western economics is relevant to the work I currently do, I still need to 
make efforts to recharge myself with new knowledge and to adapt to the new environment. I will try my 
best to shorten this break-in period. Of course, diversified academic background enables me to look 
upon  issues  from  different  perspectives.  And  in  the  formulation  of  macroeconomic  policies,  I  will 
benefit from my front-line working experiences. I will seek to make great contributions to the work of 
the PBC Shanghai Head Office.  
As writing a TV play, managing the financial system is also an art. With the establishment and further 
development  of  the  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office,  we  will  be  able  to  fully  take  the  advantage  of  the  
first-hand contacts with the financial markets and to more effectively make use of financial resources.  
Establishing and strengthening the Shanghai Head Office is a new task for us. As China’s socialist 
market economic system further improves, we need to make breakthroughs in the financial sector, and 
bring  the  performance  of  China’s  financial  industry  up  to  high  international  standards.  To  achieve 
these goals, I and all staff in the PBC Shanghai Head Office will make our best efforts to contribute to 
the work of Shanghai Head Office and to the development of China’s financial industry.   
 
   4/4 
