Stanley Fischer: Monitoring healthy and sustained growth in Israel 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Banks, Tel Aviv, 24 November 2005. 
 I would like to start by thanking the Association of Banks for inviting me here, and for giving me the 
opportunity to address you. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate Eitan Raf and Galia Maor on the privatization 
of Bank Leumi. That is certainly an important event signifying the end of a sad era in Israel's economic 
history, an era which started with the collapse of bank shares more than twenty years ago, in 1983, 
and which obliged the government to nationalize almost the entire banking system. Now, at last, we 
have reverted to a situation in which the banking system has regained its natural position as far as 
ownership is concerned, and it is currently in the hands of the business sector. The main thing is to 
draw the right conclusions from the whole episode. Some lessons have been learned, viz. the reform 
of the capital market proposed by the Bachar Committee. But that is by no means the end of the road, 
and the important goals facing the banking system in the near future are related to it. I will revert to 
those goals later. 
The banking system plays a very important role in Israel's economy-it is affected by it, and affects it. 
Israel's economy does not stand isolated, however, but is part of the world economy. That is the result 
of the globalization process that has taken place since the end of World War II and particularly since 
the  1980s.  Stated  quite  simply,  Israel's  economy  cannot  be  reviewed  in  isolation  from  the  global 
economy. 
The global economy is currently experiencing a growth trend, and according to various forecasts the 
global growth rate in 2006 is expected to be between 3.3 percent, according to the World Bank, and 
3.6 percent, according to most investment houses. Europe's economy, which has merely marked time 
in the last few years, is also expected to show a growth trend. 
Nevertheless,  these  developments  are  not  without  certain  risks.  These  are  expressed  by  some 
acceleration in world inflation, expected to be close to 3 percent in 2006 according to most investment 
houses, and this brings in its wake forecasts of further rises in central banks' interest rates, not only in 
the US but in Europe too. These risks derive mainly from the trend of rising energy prices - specifically, 
but not only, oil prices. The problem of the US balance of payments has also cast a cloud over the 
global economy for a considerable time. Having said all this, the overall global picture is a relatively 
optimistic one. 
The same global growth is one of the factors providing a boost for the growth which Israel's economy 
is  currently  enjoying,  but  it  is  not  the  only  one.  Israel's  growth  derives  from  the  government's 
macroeconomic policy during the last few years, expressed in fiscal discipline-in accordance with the 
fiscal targets it determined-and in a series of reforms (in the labor market, the capital market, the ports, 
etc.), privatization (of banks, and companies like Bezeq and El-Al), and investment in the infrastructure 
(for  example  in  the  railway  system).  Another  aspect  of  the  same  strategy  is  the  monetary  policy 
pursued  by  the  Bank  of  Israel,  which  focuses  mainly  on  maintaining  low  inflation  in  line  with  the 
government's target. 
Against this background, and assuming that the government will persist in the macroeconomic policy, 
the Bank of Israel recently published its forecasts for 2006, which show an expected growth rate of 
about  4.3  percent  for  GDP,  and  an  even  higher  rate  of  5.4  percent  for  business-sector  product. 
Investment is expected to rise by 4.5 percent, and it must be understood that economic growth in the 
last two years has not led to a resurgence of investments; if growth is sustained, the day will come 
when a resurgence of investments will provide it with additional momentum. 
It is only natural that at the present time, in the run-up to a general election, questions should arise as 
to whether these forecasts, and those from other sources, are still valid. We are in a period of political 
uncertainty, which goes together with economic uncertainty, even if we are talking of a relatively short 
period of a few months, and it is good that the period of uncertainty should be relatively short. It is 
therefore well worthwhile to dispel all this uncertainty here and now, at least in the economic area. It is 
vital  that  the  new government,  however  it  is  composed,  be committed  to  the  same  macroeconomic 
strategy and structural reforms that created the conditions for healthy and sustained growth. Domestic 
BIS Review 82/2005 
 1
and foreign investors must be sure that this strategy is not at issue, and that everyone is committed to 
it. And it is important that they should feel that right away. On our part, the Bank of Israel will continue 
to pursue an interest-rate policy consistent with the inflation target of between 1 percent and 3 percent 
a year, with the intention of reaching the mid-point. 
The economy does have the problem of poverty, and this should, indeed must, be tackled responsibly 
by adopting the necessary measures. But it must be tackled with open eyes, with reality constantly in 
view, and with a commitment to the strategy of long-term growth. Without such growth, problems such 
as poverty cannot be resolved, and it is therefore essential that economic policy be constantly directed 
towards the achievement and maintenance of growth. 
As I stated at the outset, the banking system is very important in every economy, and of course Israel 
is no exception. The importance, however, clearly lies in the banking system being healthy, stable and 
competitive. 
I have also mentioned the important, even dramatic, development that affected the financial system as 
a  whole,  and  in  particular  the  banking  system-and  that  is  the  reform  proposed  by  the  Bachar 
Committee. I am pleased to see that the banks, or most of them, are already preparing themselves for 
this, and sales of provident funds and mutual funds are already taking place, and with some measure 
of success, so it seems to us. When I see this I am happy that the pessimistic scenarios predicted by 
some  are  not  being  realized.  In  the  past,  too,  such  scenarios  preceded  successful  reforms,  for 
instance in the foreign-currency market. It is natural that concern is felt before reforms and changes, 
but it must be understood that Israel's financial system is in need of additional reforms. 
It is up to the banking system today, and to a great extent also up to the Bank of Israel, to prepare 
itself to confront the new targets it faces in a proper manner: 
At the top of the list I would put Basel II. The Bank of Israel has placed high on its list of priorities the 
preparedness  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  to  adopt  the  rules  of  the  New  Basel  Capital 
Accord (Basel II). This also requires the banking system to organize itself accordingly, and that is no 
small matter. 
The  second  target  is  gearing  up  to  meet  the  internal  audit  standards  set  out  in  Section  404  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley  Act  of  2002  ("SOX  404").  This subject  is also high  on  the priorities of  the Banking 
Supervision Department, and of the whole banking system, and will be for the next two years. I have 
learned  from  my  experience  in  Citigroup  that  SOX  404  is  a  burden,  but  I  also  know  that  it  greatly 
improves management's internal control. 
These two important projects together constitute an overall format of management and control that will 
instill the highest standards in Israel's banking system, standards consistent with the most advanced 
world wide. 
The third target relates to the implementation of the Bachar reform. This involves the sale of provident 
funds and mutual funds by the banks; redefining banks' activity and profit centers in general and in the 
capital  market/their  capital-market  activity;  reorganization  in  the  field  of  consultancy  regarding 
pensions; preparations for competition in the credit markets from nonbank alternatives, etc. 
The fourth target is for the banking system to face up to current and future changes (we hope) in the 
capital  and  money  markets,  for  example,  the  development  of  the  interbank  market  following  the 
abolition of transactions with "previous day's value date" by the Bank of Israel; future development of 
sophisticated 
the 
introduction of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in which the Bank of Israel is deeply 
involved. 
Obviously that is not the whole story. These targets will result in a more efficient banking system and 
in greater competition in the capital and money markets and in the credit market. Competition on the 
retail  banking  side  leaves  much  to  be  desired.  Although  some  steps  have  been  taken  to  improve 
competition in this area, such as the directive issued by the Supervisor of Banks making it easier for 
customers to transfer from one bank to another, the situation is still far from satisfactory. As long as 
there is no increase in the number of large banks - whether through the merger of small and medium 
banks or through the entry of foreign banks into the field of full retail banking in Israel - we will have to 
continue  examining  ways  of  removing  the  barriers  in  this  area.  It  should  be  clear  that  this  goal  of 
strengthening competition in the banking system is one of the prime objectives of the Bank of Israel, 
and, I would assume, of every government in Israel. 
future  development  of  mortgage  securitization;  and 
instruments; 
financial 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2005
