Mr.  Stals  discusses  financial  sector  reforms  and  their  implications  for  the
banking  industry  in  South  Africa      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve
Bank, Dr. C. Stals, at the official opening of the new Head Office Building for Mercantile Bank
in Sandton on 9/4/97.
1. The need for financial sector reforms
In many countries in the world there is at this stage a need for major reforms of
the financial sector, which invariably holds important changes for the banking industry. Looking
around the world, at least three reasons can be found for financial restructuring.
Firstly,  there  are  the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  where  major
transitions  are  taking  place  in  the  economies  of  the  former  centrally-planned  countries  of  the
now  defunct  Communist  world.  The  transition  from  socialist  to  market-oriented  economies
requires in most of these countries a major reform of the functions and of the role of the central
bank,  the  introduction  of  private  sector  banking  institutions  driven  by  the  profit  motive,  the
development of financial markets, and the acceptance of macroeconomic monetary policies that
played no role in the previously centrally-planned systems.
In  these  countries,  it  was  necessary  to  introduce  certain  basic  minimum
requirements  first,  such  as  a  recognised  system  of  business  laws  including  corporate,
bankruptcy,  contract,  consumer  protection  and  private  property  laws  that  can  be  consistently
enforced and will provide a mechanism for fair resolution of disputes. In most of these countries
until  a  few  years  ago  there  did  not  exist  well-defined  accounting  principles  and  rules,  and
independent auditors were not available to certify financial statements and accounts of banking
institutions.
In summary, the public infrastructure for the management and running of modern
banking activity did not exist and had to be established before modern financial market systems
could be developed.
Secondly,  a  number  of  developing  countries,  particularly  from  the  African
continent, have recently embarked on major macroeconomic restructuring programmes, in many
cases in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
In  a  recent  publication  of  the  United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for  Africa
the need for the reform of the financial sectors of African economies was described as follows:
“Financial  systems  in  Africa  are  characterized  by  the  low  level  of  financial
intermediation  which  takes  place  in  the  formal  sector,  the  distressed  nature  of  financial
institutions,  the  high  risk  profile  of  financial  asset  portfolios  due  to  the  concentration  of
numerous  countries’  economies  in  only  a  few  commodities  and  industrial  sectors  and  the
vulnerability  of  financial  asset  portfolios  to  price  and  supply  shocks.  In  addition,  very  few
formal financial institutions have shown the capacity or willingness to provide financial services
to the small-scale entrepreneur and the rural operators.
“Furthermore, the range of financial institutions and instruments is narrow. Public
ownership of financial institutions is pervasive. Institutions are plagued by a large proportion of
non-performing  loans  in  their  portfolios.  Management  lacks  the  relevant  management  skills.
Financial market depth and breadth is still very limited.”
BIS Review   47/1997
- 2 -
Reforms  in  these  developing  countries  have  focused  on  improving  the  legal,
regulatory, supervisory and judiciary environment, reducing financial repression, restoring bank
soundness,  rehabilitating  financial  infrastructure,  and  have  included  programmes  designed  to
downsize publicly-owned banks, privatising them where possible and encouraging new entrants.
Thirdly,  reference  can  be  made  to  financial  sector  reforms  in  the  emerging
economies of the world. In these countries some stage of advancement has already been reached
in the development of financial systems. However, new demands are now being made in light of
a  new  global  financial  environment,  characterised  by  a  liberalisation  of  financial  markets,  an
integration  of  major  global  markets  and  an  exposure  of  individual  countries  to  relatively  large
international capital movements.
In  these  countries,  exchange  controls  have  been  or  are  being  removed,
multinational  financial  institutions,  including  banks,  are  granted  unrestricted  entry,  and
international  rules  for  financial  regulation  and  supervision  are  being  introduced  that  must  be
complied with to the satisfaction of international investors. Domestic monetary policy objectives
must  be  brought  to  terms  with  the  requirements  of  international  market  operators,  and
governments must accept some eroding of their sovereign autonomy for the management of the
national economy.
2. Financial sector reforms in South Africa
South  Africa  is  part  of  the  latter  group  of  countries.  Together  with  the  major
social and political reforms of the past few years, we also had to contend with some important
restructuring of the financial system.
Firstly,  the  South  African  financial  sector,  not  unlike  other  countries  on  the
African continent, had to adapt to the changes in the socio-political environment. Provision was
made in the banking legislation for the existence and continuation of numerous informal savings
clubs (“stokvels”) operating outside the normal  constraints  of  bank  regulation  and  supervision,
but also then, of course, without access to central bank accommodation at the discount window.
New legislation to provide for communal ownership of a banking institution was introduced in
the  form  of  the  Mutual  Banks  Act.  South  African  banking  institutions  also  adopted  their  own
internal policies to provide for greater participation in the social upliftment programmes of the
country.
Secondly, bank regulation and supervision underwent major changes over the past
ten  years  to  apply  the  world-wide  supported  directives  of  the  Basle  Committee.  At  this  stage,
bank regulation and supervision is based primarily on risk identification and management, with
clearly defined roles for shareholders, boards of directors, senior management and internal and
external auditors.
Thirdly the South African banking scene was opened up for foreign banks. South
African banks, in turn, were allowed to establish branch offices, subsidiaries and representative
offices in many countries around the world.
Fourthly,  major  changes  were  introduced  in  the  operations  of  the  financial
markets. The Johannesburg Stock Exchange led the way with a major restructuring last year to
provide for electronic screen trading, corporate and non-resident participation, and provision for
negotiated commissions and principal versus broking trade by members of the Exchange.
BIS Review   47/1997
- 3 -
Fifthly, with the gradual removal of exchange controls, the South African market
in foreign exchange became more competitive and volumes increased to an average of more than
$6 billion per day.
Sixthly,  with  South  Africa’s  active  participation  in  the  Southern  African
Development Community (SADC), the way has been opened up for South African banks to play
an enhanced role in the Southern African region.
The  process  of  financial  sector  reform  in  South  Africa  is  continuing.  Exchange
controls  have  only  been  removed  partly,  and  South  African  banks  are  only  gradually  adapting
themselves  to  the  environment  of  greater  freedom  in  their  international  financial  operations.
Further  important  changes  will  be  introduced  in  the  structure  of  the  domestic  capital  market,
particularly in so far as the primary issues of government bonds are concerned, and also in the
secondary  market-making  activities  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  A  major  revision  of  the  national
payment,  clearing  and  settlement  system  is  now  under  way  to  provide  for  real-time  on-line
settlement  on  a  gross  basis  of  large  transactions,  and  a  daily  netting  and  settlement  of  small
transactions in the money market.
3. Implications for the banking sector
These  financial  reforms  have  important  implications  for  the  South  African
banking sector. Not only did the liberalisation of the markets bring greater competition  for  the
traditional domestic South African banks, but they were also more exposed to the vicissitudes of
volatile  international  capital  movements.  Our  banks  were  forced  to  adopt  a  more  open  and
global  attitude  in  the  daily  management  of  their  activities.  Not  only  the  policies  of  the  South
African  monetary  authorities,  but  also  developments  in,  for  example,  the  United  States  of
America, the European Union, the Far East, and in other emerging economies of the world, now
have a profound effect on the South African money, capital and foreign exchange markets.
There are now more than ten foreign banks with formally established branches or
subsidiaries in South Africa, and more than 60 international banks with representative offices in
the  country.  These  foreign  banks  provide  enhanced  competition  for  the  South  African  banks,
particularly in the field of wholesale banking, international trade financing, and in the market for
foreign exchange.
The  liberalisation  of  the  financial  market  also  opened  up  opportunities  for
unscrupulous financial operators that are making use of the opportunity to exploit ignorant South
Africans with offers of unrealistic yields on deposits, and promises of instant miraculous profits
on financial investments. It is amazing that so many South Africans still fall for deceptions such
as the ill-fated pyramid schemes that has just recently pushed Albania over the edge of complete
social and political collapse. It is even more amazing that the efforts of the Registrar of Banks to
protect  the  South  African  public  against  inevitable  losses  through  these  exploitations  must  be
defended  in  courts  and  in  time-consuming  litigations.  In  his  efforts  to  avoid  an  Albanian
situation from developing here, the Registrar is even accused of acting against the Constitution.
The  changing  financial  environment  also  holds  important  implications  for
monetary  policy  in  South  Africa.  The  explosion  in  the  volumes  of  transactions  in  all  the
financial  markets,  the  greater  participation  of  all  South  African  residents  in  financial  market
operations, the reintegration of South Africa in the world financial system and the liberalisation
of  financial  operations  such  as  foreign  exchange  transactions,  have  had  an  important  effect  on
the  amount  of  bank  credit  extension  and  the  money  supply.  These  conventional  anchors  of
BIS Review   47/1997
- 4 -
monetary policy also increased at unacceptably high rates over the past two years, partly because
of structural changes, and partly because of normal pressures of demand increasing at a rate in
excess of real income increases.
For  both  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  individual  banking  institution  the  changing
environment brings many challenges. Banks operating in the new environment must be aware of
the increased risk exposures that are inevitably associated with an extended  process  of  change.
Conventional  bank  prudency  becomes  even  more  important  in  this  situation  than  under  more
stable  conditions.  In  many  other  countries  a  period  of  major  financial  sector  reforms  ended  in
major  restructuring  and  rationalisation  of  the  banking  sector,  often  because  of  unsustainable
over-expansion  in  individual  institutions.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  concerns  about  the  excessive
increases in bank credit extension are not only for the effect it has on the total money supply, but
also because of the inherent dangers of a concerted future major default in the servicing of the
debt under less favourable macroeconomic conditions. The capacity of borrowers to meet future
commitments  of  interest  and  debt  repayment  must  not  be  over-stretched  during  this  period  of
structural change and rapid expansion in the financial markets.
4. Mercantile Bank and financial sector reforms in South Africa
The Mercantile Lisbon Bank Holdings Group has been and continues to be part of
the financial sector adjustment process in South Africa. With a substantial  shareholding  by  the
Banco  National  Ultramarino  of  Portugal,  Mercantile  is  firmly  linked  to  the  expanding
international  participation  in  South  Africa.  Furthermore,  this  association  brings  to  Mercantile
Bank the experience of Portugal’s largest commercial bank in its participation  in  the  structural
financial  adjustment  of  a  country  that  is  preparing  itself  for  the  major  reforms  demanded  of
prospective participants in the European Union’s integrated financial system and common Euro
currency.
South  Africa  obviously  has  a  great  interest  in  these  developments  now  taking
place in Europe. Our recent successful negotiations for qualified access to the Lomé Convention
provide proof of the importance attached to our future relations with the European Union. The
supportive role of Portugal in these negotiations was appreciated. We believe that Portugal will
be  able  to  comply  with  the  Maastricht  requirements  for  full  participation  in  the  first  round  of
Economic and Monetary Union scheduled for 1 January 1999, and will therefore also continue
to carry South Africa’s interests into the European Union.
Mercantile Bank has also been part of the domestic South African financial sector
reforms in recent years. Since the acquisition in 1994 of Central Registrars, the operations of the
two  companies  were  gradually  integrated.  The  changes  in  the  operations  of  the  Johannesburg
Stock Exchange last year had a significant impact on Mercantile Registrars, and its contribution
to  the  non-interest  income  of  the  Group  had  increased  considerably  with  the  larger  volumes
traded on the JSE.
Finally, Mercantile Bank is also expanding its interests to other African countries,
for  example  Mozambique,  and  is  therefore  taking  up  the  challenge  of  greater  financial  co-
operation in the SADC region.
I  can  only  wish  you  well  in  your  future  operations,  and  may  this  new  building
contribute  to  your  future  successes,  in  the  interest  of  the  development  of  a  sound  and  well-
managed banking sector in South Africa.
BIS Review   47/1997
