Mr.  Erçel  reviews  central  bank  operations  in  1996  and  discusses  the
philosophy of central banks   Remarks by the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of
Turkey, Mr. Gazi Erçel, on the occasion of the 65th Shareholders’ Ordinary General Meeting in
Ankara on 15/4/97.
I  expressed  my  views  concerning  the  main  functions  of  a  central  bank  in  my
speech  to  last  year’s  General  Assembly.  Today  I  would  like  to  summarize  the  past  year’s
operations and share with you my thoughts on the philosophy of central banking.
You  will  find  detailed  assessments  of  economic  developments  in  Turkey  and
abroad in the Bank’s Annual Report for 1996, which has already been distributed to you. Instead
of  repeating  these  details,  I  will  describe  the  implications  of  the  events  of  1996  for  the
operations of the Central Bank.
The  most  important  circumstance  affecting  the  economy  last  year  was  the
long-lasting  period  of  political  uncertainty.  After  the  general  elections,  it  took  the  first  six
months of the  year  to  put  together  a  coalition  government.  Political  instability,  Turkey’s  entry
into the Customs Union, and lack of the political determination needed to fight inflation created
uncertainty  in  the  financial  markets.  The  Central  Bank  responded  by  aiming  its  monetary
policies at achieving and protecting stability in the financial markets instead of aiming them at
decreasing the rate of inflation.
While  withholding  announcement  of  its  targets  for  the  second  half  of  1996,  the
Central Bank  implemented  a  monetary  program  in  keeping  with  its  inner  discipline.  The  main
points of monetary policy under this program were as follows:
     The Central Bank set a ceiling on increases in net domestic assets.
The Central Bank paid close attention to keeping increases in reserve money
in line with increases in demand. Open market operations were actively used
during the year to mop up excess liquidity created by the increases in our net
foreign assets.
The Central Bank monitored exchange rates throughout the year, with special
attention to maintaining stability in the foreign exchange market.
Continuous domestic borrowing by the Treasury made a positive contribution
to achieving all targets.
Turkish lira interests rates were determined mainly by the borrowing strategy
of  the  Treasury.  The  Turkish  Central  Bank  has  played  no  direct  role  in  the
determination of interest rates.
In  an  economy  with  market-determined  interest  and  exchange  rates,  where  a
persistent  public  deficit  is  being  financed  mainly  through  the  domestic  markets,  the  monetary
policy tools available to the central bank are few and of limited effectiveness. As noted above,
interest rates are determined primarily by the borrowing activities of the Treasury. By the same
token, foreign exchange rates are determined as a function of the external trade deficit (itself a
function  of  growth)  and  the  level  of  interest  rates.  Under  these  conditions,  the  central  bank  is
absolutely obliged to keep the items on its balance sheet under careful control.
BIS Review   47/1997
- 2 -
I  would  like  to  point  out  that  efforts  since  the  second  half  of  1980  to  keep  the
central  bank’s  balance  sheet  healthy  have  greatly  streamlined  control  over  the  items  on  that
balance sheet. In 1998, the evaluation account held 45 percent of the assets of analytical balance
sheet.  In  1996,  when  it  showed  a  negative  balance  for  the  first  time,  the  evaluation  account’s
share  in  the  assets  of  the  balance  sheet  fell  to  zero.  Similarly,  foreign  assets  accounted  for  30
percent of total assets in 1988, compared to 76 percent in the balance sheet for 1996. In short,
the principal source of the increase in central bank assets shifted from increased domestic assets
to increased foreign assets, mainly borrowed.
The Central Bank considers controlling the increase  in  domestic  assets  to  be  the
most  important  aspect  of  its  monetary  program.  Only  by  controlling  the  increase  in  domestic
assets  can  we  keep  the  increase  in  Turkish  lira  liabilities  in  line  with  increasing  demand.  The
1994 law requiring the Central Bank to gradually phase out its advances of short-term credit to
the  Treasury,  formerly  the  main  source  of  domestic  assets,  has  been  of  great  assistance  in
curbing their increase.
The  continued  lowering  of  this  ceiling  in  coming  years  will  certainly  make  it
much easier for the Central Bank to implement its monetary policy.
It  is  my  wish  that  in  the  near  future,  the  Turkish  Central  Bank  will  see  this
practice abolished altogether, as  it  has  been  in  other  modern  central  banks.  The  elimination  of
Central Bank credit to the public sector will go far to create the confidence needed to launch the
crucial struggle with inflation.
Central banks are responsible for keeping prices stable as well as for ensuring that
the financial system runs smoothly. A stabilized financial system and stable prices are essential
conditions  for  steady  economic  growth  in  the  medium  term  because  only  a  stable  financial
system can provide the necessary link between savings and investments. Price stability is needed
to reduce uncertainties for investors and encourage investments.
In  the  long  run,  stabilizing  prices  is  likely  to  increase  both  living  standards  and
productivity. For this reason, the price stability that is the main goal of central banks is valid and
urgent  not  only  in  the  short  run,  but  also  in  the  long  run.  And  once  countries  like  ours  have
achieved price stability after long effort, they must continue the effort to maintain it. For central
banks, price stability is a permanent goal.
Inflation inflicts several burdens on a society:
· Overall, it introduces uncertainty into economic decisions and profit seeking.
   It reduces the discipline of price and market systems.
It has negative effects on the cost of capital.
It  directs  resources  to  unproductive  activities.  In  periods  of  high  inflation,
investments in real estate and financial investments become more desirable.
· Growth declines as inflation rises.
In  countries  with  high  inflation,  it  has  been  observed  that  most  resources  are
directed to the financial system. It is also known that the financial system undergoes a relative
expansion  during  such  periods.  Resources  which  have  accumulated  in  the  financial  system
cannot be rechannelled by the financial system to more productive sectors.
BIS Review   47/1997
- 3 -
A  stable  financial  system  and  stable  prices  therefore  represent  the  normal
environment  that  central  banks  are  committed  to  pursue  and  maintain.  A  central  bank  that
stabilizes prices increases its credibility.
A  central  bank  that  protects  the  value  of  the  currency  also  helps  increase  the
credibility of the country.
The  success  of  the  monetary  policy  implemented  to  stabilize  prices  depends  on
whether  or  not  the  financial  system  is  stable.  And  the  price  stability  and  financial  system
stability  that  are  the  primary  responsibilities  of  the  central  bank  are  necessary  for  achieving
economic growth in the medium term.
Let me mention some qualities that a central bank should have:
   It  should  have  continuity.  Central  banks  should  not  be  diverted  from  their
permanent goal of price stability by short-term political pressures.
It  should  be  competent.  A  central  bank  should  be  completely  professional.  It
should  be  technically  dedicated  in  its  structure,  thorough  and  clear  in  its
expression, and transparent in its actions.
It should be a responsible institution. In other words, it should be an institution
that is reliable and able to justify its monetary manoeuvres.
These  are  the  characteristics  of  a  modern  central  bank.  Central  banks  that  have
these qualities will unquestionably occupy a distinguished place in the international environment
of  the  21st  century.  I  am  sure  that  its  long  experience,  accumulated  knowledge  and  proficient
staff  make  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  an  institution  that  can  fulfil  these
expectations. I am proud of this institution. I owe a great debt of gratitude to my colleagues, who
have greatly contributed to our accomplishments and to our policy implementation.
BIS Review   47/1997
