Mr.  Erçel  explains  developments  in  the  Turkish  economy  that  help  in
understanding the country’s market opportunites    Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Central
Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr. Gazi Erçel, on the occasion of the Conference on “Private
provision of infrastructure in Turkey” held at Çiragan Palace in Istanbul on 3/4/97.
For  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  opportunities  offered  by  Turkey’s
market, I should stress the implications of our journey toward liberalisation. In 1980, with world
conditions  changing  and  the  domestic  economy  in  crisis,  Turkey  launched  a  structural
adjustment program  based  on  free  market  principles  and  an  outward-looking  economic  policy.
Since  then,  a  series  of  liberalisation  measures  have  been  taken.  The  most  significant
accomplishment  of  the  Turkish  liberalisation  process  is  that  it  has  restructured  economic
relations.  Both  the  financial  system  and  the  foreign  exchange  system  have  been  liberalised.
Before discussing Turkey’s economic performance, I would like to describe some features of our
foreign exchange system and financial system. Let me begin with the foreign exchange system.
Efforts to liberalise Turkey’s balance of payments go all the way back to the Great Depression,
and  ever  since  the  1930’s,  the  issue  has  been  whether  to  liberalise  the  current  account  or  the
capital  account.  Now  these  questions  have  been  settled.  Let  me  summarise  the  state  of  the
foreign exchange regime under five headings:
1. Residents are permitted to buy, sell, and use foreign exchange freely.
2.  Residents  are  also  allowed  to  purchase,  through  authorised  financial
institutions,  shares  quoted  on  foreign  stock  markets,  and  are  permitted  to  transfer  foreign
exchange abroad to pay for purchases of such securities.
3.  By the same token, non-residents are allowed to buy and sell Turkish securities
quoted on the Turkish stock market. They are also allowed to buy and sell Turkish government
securities through intermediary institutions operating in Turkey.
4. A substantial part of the controls on capital movements were removed, greatly
easing inflows and outflows of credit. Turkey has accepted the provisions of Article VIII of the
Articles of Agreement.
5.  To  avoid  excessive  risks  for  the  banks,  new  regulations  were  adopted
governing the foreign exchange position of the commercial banks. The banks are free to set their
own rates for buying and selling foreign exchange.
Our  foreign  exchange  system,  described  above,  is  very  convenient  for  foreign
capital flows. Now let me describe the main characteristics of our financial system. Even though
our  efforts  to  liberalise  the  financial  system  did  not  begin  until  1980,  the  Istanbul  Exchange
Market has existed and operated since 1858. It grew out of the activities of Non-Muslim bankers
in  the  Galata  district  of  Istanbul.  These  operators,  mostly  Levantines,  Jews,  Armenians,  and
Greeks, used to risk their own capital by extending credit to the government, secured by pledges
of future tax collections. Even though during the early years of the Exchange Market’s operation
in the 1860’s, the amount of foreign direct investment in Turkey was negligible, foreign capital
was being encouraged to form joint stock companies. Up until the beginning of the 20th century,
the  Market  helped  the  government  find  funds  to  finance  its  obligations.  In  1906,  the  Istanbul
Exchange  Market  was  re-organised  and  once  more  became  a  source  of  new  capital  for  young
private ventures.
BIS Review   42/1997
- 2 -
Without  giving  the  whole  history  of  the  Istanbul  Exchange  Market,  I  want  to
emphasise that Turkey’s experience with free markets did not begin in 1980 but goes back more
than  a  century  before.  What  the  reforms  of  1980  did  accomplish  was  to  institutionalise  the
markets and put them on a solid legal footing.
Besides  liberalisation,  the  structural  reforms  begun  in  1980  included  measures
providing investment and tax incentives. I would like to review these issues briefly. The aims of
these incentives were to encourage activities that would earn foreign exchange on the one hand,
and to help foreign sources of capital finance investments in Turkey on the other. It can be said
that  by  liberalising  its  capital  account  and  introducing  structural  tax  changes  to  improve
investment  returns,  Turkey  issued  an  invitation  to  foreign  capital.  Under  these  new
arrangements,  the  tax  incentives  aimed  at  deepening  the  securities  market  and  encouraging
investment in it are of two kinds:
- Double taxation of dividends was prevented by raising the corporate income tax
rate and making it the only tax on dividend income.  In  addition,  the  income  tax  rate  for  small
shareholders was lowered. 
-  For  residents,  capital  gains  on  shares  became  exempt  from  taxation  if  the
security  was  listed  on  an  exchange.  Capital  gains  from  the  sale  of  through  licensed
intermediaries  were  made  tax  free.  Premiums  from  the  issuance  of  stock  are  also  tax  free  for
stocks listed on a stock exchange that does not distribute dividends to shareholders.
There are also tax facilities for government securities.
Privatization  is  an  important  part  of  our  modernisation  and  liberalisation  effort.
Turkey  embarked  on  a  privatization  program  in  the  1980s.  Turkey’s  telecommunications  and
energy  sectors  are  great  targets  for  global  partnership.  Despite  extensive  exemptions  from  the
program, by 1994 total proceeds derived from privatization since it began in 1986 had reached
US$2.4 billion, which is not so bad. Moreover, 25 percent of this total came from sales on the
Istanbul  Stock  Exchange.  More  than  60  percent  of  the  sales  were  direct  sales  to  domestic  and
international  buyers.  The  main  purpose  of  privatization  is  to  get  the  government  out  of  the
business of business and increase the efficiency of the privatised enterprises.
Let  me  follow  this  account  of  the  general  framework  of  regulation  governing
financial  investments  denominated  in  foreign  exchange  with  a  description  of  the  structure,
strengths  and  weaknesses  of  our  economy.  The  basic  economic  features  of  our  country  are
attractive.  A  liberal  trade  and  exchange  rate  regime,  a  modern  and  competitive  private  sector,
abundant and vigorous consumer demand, and extremely attractive investment opportunities.
 This rosy picture is clouded by three economic problems that can be solved by a
firm  commitment  to  macroeconomic  discipline.  These  three  problems--high  and  persistent
inflation,  high  public  sector  deficits,  and  large  current  account  imbalances--are  interrelated.
Persistent high inflation has been Turkey’s main economic problem for the last two decades. Its
main  cause  lies  in  the  sizeable  public  deficit.  Its  other  causes  include  entrenched  inflationary
expectations,  exchange  rate  movements,  monetary  developments,  interest  rates,  and  price
increases  initiated  by  public  enterprises.  Under  conditions  of  an  open  capital  account,  large
public deficits can generate imbalances in the current account. Turkey’s current account tends to
be volatile. For this reason, what Turkey really needs is to accept fiscal discipline. A sustainable
and consistent fiscal policy is evidently the key to solving other economic problems. Achieving
fiscal discipline will require political will as well as persistence.
BIS Review   42/1997
- 3 -
Even  though  we  have  economic  problems,  we  unquestionably  also  have  the
ability to overcome them. Turkey needs to make  use  of  this  potential.  I  therefore  now  wish  to
draw  your  attention  to  the  considerable  strengths  of  our  economy.  For  purposes  of  this
discussion, I will split our economy in two--the real economy and the financial economy. Let me
begin my explanation of the present structure of the economy with real variables.
-  The  Turkish  economy  is  a  continuously  growing,  dynamic  economy.  Its  long-
term average annual growth rate is over 4 percent and its average annual productivity increase is
around  2  percent.  In  each  of  the  last  two  years,  GNP  has  increased  by  around  7  percent,  well
above  most  OECD  countries.  Along  with  this  rapid  growth,  the  composition  of  the  gross
domestic  product  (GDP)  has  shifted  during  the  last  two  decades,  toward  the  industrial  and
services sectors, while the GDP share of agriculture has greatly declined. The share of the public
sector in industrial output has also decreased. 
-  Spending  on  investments  has  been  increasing  since  the  first  quarter  of  1995.
Normally,  periods  of  investment  aimed  at  increasing  production  capacity  last  for  about  20
months,  but  the  increase  in  investment  activity  spending  remained  focused  on  increasing
production  capacity  throughout  1995  and  1996.  The  Economic  Trend  Analysis  of  the  Central
Bank of Turkey shows that no earlier period of expectation of rising investments has ever lasted
longer. 
- Official records show that Turkey’s unemployment rate has been holding fairly
constant at around 7 or 8 percent, which is very low compared to the other OECD countries. In
April  1996,  total  employment  rose  by  2.6  percent  and  unemployment  fell  to  6.3  percent.  The
urban and rural unemployment rates were estimated at 9.3 percent and 3.8 percent respectively.
  In addition,  Turkey  was  among  the  top  ten  countries  in  terms  of  improving  its
score on the United Nations’ human resource development index, which is based on a country’s
literacy rate, per capita income, and life expectancy. Of course, such a nation-wide measurement
takes no account of the wide differences between urban and rural conditions. Be that as it may,
the strong growth of the working age population, the high degree of urbanisation, and increased
numbers  of  well-educated  young  workers  are  all  favourable  to  strong  growth  in  labor
productivity.
-  Turkey  has  a  strong,  dynamic  and  competitive  private  sector.  The  non-
agricultural  private  sector  recovered  quickly  from  the  financial  crises  in  spite  of  unsettled
political conditions and extremely high interest rates. In addition, it is the private sector that has
been mainly responsible for capital formation. ·
-  There  have  been  interesting  developments  connected  with  Turkey’s  foreign
exchange  earnings.  Even  though  the  official  trade  account  and  current  account  figures  reflect
sizeable deficits, I would like to emphasise that the level of merchandise exports is significantly
understated  due  to  its  omission  of  rapidly  growing  but  unrecorded  “shuttle”  trade  with
neighbouring  countries.  We  are  on  the  verge  of  being  able  to  include  these  activities  in  our
balance of payments figures. In addition, there has been serious underreporting of the  value  of
transactions  connected  with  some  of  Turkey’s  foreign  direct  investments,  a  problem  that  the
Central Bank is working to resolve.
Now let me touch briefly on Turkey’s financial system. Turkey’s financial sector
is still dominated by the banking  sector.  In  other  words,  most  financial  savings  are  channelled
through the banking sector. The banking sector’s total assets amount to 66 percent of GNP. The
BIS Review   42/1997
- 4 -
reformation  of  the  financial  sector  had  the  effect  of  reinforcing  the  privileged  position  of  the
banks.  Turkey  has  a  universal  banking  system,  which  is  another  way  of  saying  that  Turkish
banks are allowed to participate directly in all forms of financial activity except insurance. The
Banking Act of 1985 governs the establishment of banks, their capital structure, branch banking,
foreign banking, credits, deposit insurance, and all other activities related to banking. Today our
banking sector is highly competitive and efficient. It is integrated with the international financial
markets.  Its  strength  is  based  on  an  up-to-date  technical  infrastructure,  a  well-educated  work
force  and  experienced,  and  a  well-qualified  management.  The  banking  sector’s  adaptability,
shown by its rapid introduction into the system of new financial instruments, has increased the
available  range  of  financing  sources.  Financial  reform  has  increased  the  efficiency  and
competitiveness of our banking sector.
The  Istanbul  Stock  Exchange  is  one  of  the  best  performing  of  all  the  emerging
markets. Its total market capitalisation is increasing, both in nominal terms and as a percentage
of  GNP,  which  indicates  that  it  is  playing  an  increasing  role  in  the  transmission  of  domestic
financial savings. The GNP share of market capitalisation has increased to 22 percent, while the
GNP share of M2y, which is the total of financial savings held in the banking sector, is around
40  percent.  In  addition,  the  return  of  the  Istanbul  Stock  Exchange,  though  volatile,  increased
substantially this year. Market volatility creates liquidity and great trading opportunities.
When I talk about money markets I mean the Turkish lira money market and the
foreign  exchange  cash  and  deposit  market,  open  market  operations,  and  government  securities
auction markets. These markets, which were introduced as a part of the financial sector reforms,
have increased the effectiveness of the central bank’s control over the liquidity in the financial
system,  and  increased  the  role  of  market  mechanisms  in  money  management.  When  market
mechanisms began to play a  larger  part  in  the  allocation  of    resources,  the  responsibilities  and
instruments of the central bank also changed, bringing the issue of central bank autonomy onto
the agenda of the Turkish economy.
Turkey now has a well established and efficient system of financial markets. The
main  obstacle  at  present  to  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets  is  our  large  public  sector
borrowing  requirement,  which  crowds  out  other  demands  for  financing.  The  inability  of
domestic resources to cover the financing needs of the public sector has kept real interest rates
very high for over a decade. Bold privatization efforts, broadening the tax base, and reforming
the social security system are the best ways to correct this situation, and I may say that they are
all  under  way.  Macroeconomic  stability  and  political  stability  are  the  keys  to  achieving
sustainable growth in a low inflation environment.
BIS Review   42/1997
