Mr.  Heikensten  gives  a  review  of  recent  developments  in  the  Swedish
economy  and  monetary  policy      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,
Mr. Lars Heikensten, given on Real-Estate Day in Stockholm on 15/5/97.
Let me begin with a word of thanks for being invited to talk with you about the
Swedish economy and monetary policy.
Today I shall be considering three issues. First some words about the construction
of monetary policy and why low inflation is a good thing. Then a look at what has happened in
the  Swedish  economy  since  the  crisis  culminated  in  1993.  Finally  I  shall  be  saying  something
about the future outlook for the economy and for monetary policy.
1. Low inflation and economic stability
The objective is low inflation
The  Riksbank  conducts  monetary  policy  with  a  target  that  is  clear  and
unmistakable: the annual rate of change in the consumer price index is to be kept at 2 per cent,
with a tolerance interval of – 1 percentage point. In order to fulfil the target the Riksbank varies
its instrumental rate (the repo rate), which influences the level of economic activity and thereby
inflation. Experience has taught us that the time lag before an interest rate adjustment has its full
effect  on  inflation  ranges  from  one  to  two  years.  This  means  that  the  Riksbank  has  to  operate
with a forward-looking perspective - the interest rate must be set in the light of forecast inflation
one to two years ahead.
The central function of the Riksbank is to achieve price stability or at least keep
the  rate  of  price  increases  low  and  stable.  This  approach  to  monetary  policy  is  based  on  the
insight  that  in  the  longer  run,  higher  price  increases  cannot  generate  growth  and  employment.
Growth  stems  from  other  factors,  such  as  technological  advances,  the  way  the  economy
functions, demographic trends, etc. Attempts to stimulate economic growth by accepting higher
inflation soon tend to boomerang. This is clear both from our own experience in recent decades
and from what has happened in other countries. The players in the economy adapt to the higher
inflation; prices, wages and interest rates rise; the end result is normally an economic trend that
is weaker instead of stronger.
Throughout  the  western  world  today,  economic  policy  is  less  concerned  with
“stop  and  go”  policies  to  influence  short-run  activity  and  focuses  more  on  creating  good  and
stable  long-term  conditions  for  economic  growth  and  employment.  In  such  an  approach,  the
function of monetary policy is to safeguard the value of money. In the past decade support for a
policy of this type has also grown markedly in Sweden. This year’s Spring Economic Bill states
that  “The  overriding  task  for  monetary  policy  is  price  stability”.  In  keeping  with  this  and  in
order  to  facilitate  the  implementation  of  a  credible  monetary  policy,  more  and  more  countries
are  striving  to  separate  monetary  policy  decisions  from  day-to-day  policy-making.  The  latest
instance of this comes from Britain, where one of the first things the new government did was
relinquish control of interest rate policy to the Bank of England.
The harm done by inflation
High  inflation  impairs  the  workings  of  the  economy.  General  price  increases
make it more difficult for households and firms to keep tabs on how the prices of certain goods
BIS Review   56/1997
- 2 -
and  services  are  moving  in  relation  to  others.  It  then  also  becomes  more  difficult  for  firms  to
know which products are worth marketing, which investments will pay best and so on.
A  case  in  point  and  one  that  is  certainly  familiar  to  some  of  you  is  Sweden’s
property boom in the 1980s. The combination of high inflation and the tax system in those days
made speculation in real estate profitable. The property market then collapsed in the early 1990s
and occasioned huge economic costs. The overheated real estate market had crowded out other,
more productive investments and when the bubble burst, finance companies and banks were hit
by loan losses at the same time as the ensuing adjustment entailed massive costs in the form of
lost production and unemployment.
There are also grounds for supposing that low, stable inflation moderates cyclical
fluctuations in economic activity. This seems to be the case, at least, in the United States, where
since 1982 there have been two long expansionary phases separated by a single, relatively brief
downturn. Experience in Sweden points to the same conclusions. The first two post-war decades,
for example, when inflation was low, were considerably more stable than the 1970s and 1980s,
when inflation was left to rise  and  there  was  a  series  of  devaluations,  with  negative  effects  on
productivity and growth.
Moreover, the higher the rate of  inflation,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  the  rate  will
fluctuate,  which  accentuates  the  uncertainty  about  future  inflation.  Savers  and  creditors  then
require  higher  compensation  for  risk:  besides  compensation  for  the  expected  rate  of  inflation,
they  will  demand  a  premium  for  the  degree  of  uncertainty  about  future  inflation.  This  means
higher real interest rates, which weaken the propensity to invest.
Furthermore, the more inflation fluctuates and is difficult to forecast, the greater
will be its arbitrary and random effects on the distribution of income and wealth. Inflation tends
to redistribute from savers and lenders to borrowers, from those with fixed nominal incomes to
those who pay such incomes, and so on. Clearly, such arbitrary redistributional effects are hardly
in line with a distribution policy based on fairness.
2. Developments since the crisis
Several years of good growth
Since  the  upturn  from  the  profound  crisis  in  1991-93,  economic  growth  in
Sweden  has  averaged  2.8  per  cent,  which  is  higher  than  we  were  accustomed  to  in  the
inflationary 1970s and 1980s.  Moreover,  the  composition  of  growth  has  been  favourable,  with
exports and investment predominating (Diagram 1). It should be underscored that this has been
accompanied by the lowest level of inflation for decades.
The  low  inflation  as  such  has  no  doubt  helped  to  make  the  economy  function
better.  The  conditions  for  a  long,  stable  upswing  have  improved.  Together  with  clearer  price
signals, this makes it easier for households and firms to plan and make decisions. The workings
of the economy have also been improved by the tax reform, various deregulations and changes
to social security systems. Competitive pressure has grown as a result of EU membership and the
globalisation of trade. The result is discernible in a higher rate of capital formation and structural
changes in the economy.
In both 1994 and 1995 GDP growth topped 3 per cent. In 1996 the growth of final
demand remained fairly high, 2.1 per cent, and the rate accelerated in the second half-year to 2.6
BIS Review   56/1997
- 3 -
per  cent  from  the  corresponding  period  the  year  before.  Total  production,  however,  did  not
match the growth of final demand, the reason being that firms chose to trim stocks. The growth
of GDP, which represents total output, stopped at 1.1 per cent in 1996.
Diagram 1
Co m p o sitio n  o f Gr o wth
Pe r ce n tage  co n tr ib u tio n s
44
33
22
11
00
--11
--22
--33
--44
--55
--66
NNeet t eexxppoorrttss
SSttoocck k bbuu iill ddii nn gg
GGrrooss s s ccaappii ttaal l ffoorrmmaattii oonn
CCoonn ssuu mm ppttiioonn
11999393
11999494
11999595
11999696
11999797
11999898
SS oouu rr cece: : SS ttaattii ss ttii ccs  s  SS ww eeddeenn ; ; 19919977--98 98 ff oorr ecaecass t t bby  y  
      NNaa ttii oonn aal  l  IInn ss ttii ttuu tte e oo f  f  EE ccoo nn oo mm ii c c RR ee ss eaearr cchh
Stock  trimming  in  the  current  cyclical  phase  is  not  uncommon;  it  occurred  at
much  the  same  juncture  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  It  has  to  do  with  the  tendency  to  produce  in
excess of demand when activity is rising so as to avoid being unable to deliver if demand grows
rapidly. In time, firms find they have accumulated surplus stocks and initiate an adjustment. This
has the reverse effect - production rises more slowly than final demand.
Under  certain  circumstances  stock  adjustments  may  trigger  a  more  marked
economic slowdown. This may happen, for instance, if effects of the adjustments either spread
to  private  consumption  or  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  labour  market  and  household
confidence.  The  Riksbank  was  therefore  alert  to  the  risk  of  private  consumption  being  weaker
last  spring  and  summer,  which  would  have  pointed  to  a  further  curb  on  inflation.  In  practice,
however, private consumption went on rising  in  the  summer  and  its  growth  became  somewhat
stronger in the autumn.
Low inflation and interest rate reductions
The rate of inflation decreased during 1996 and the rates that different economic
agents  expected  in  the  future  also  moved  down  markedly  (Diagram  2).  This  enabled  the
Riksbank to lower the repo rate from 8.91 to 4.10 per cent. As a result, the initial position for the
ongoing growth phase in Sweden’s economy is more favourable than for many years.
The drop in the rate of consumer price increases was appreciably accentuated by
the Riksbank’s repo rate cuts in that these contributed to the reduction of mortgage interest costs.
Under normal circumstances the tolerance interval around the price stability target should suffice
BIS Review   56/1997
- 4 -
to absorb transitory effects on the price level. Last year, however, the fall in  interest  rates  was
very  marked  because  many  factors  had  a  concerted  effect  that  rapidly  altered  the  picture  of
inflation. The magnitude of that  interest  rate  fall  is  also  largely  responsible  for  the  weak  price
trend to date in 1997.
Diagram 2
M o n e y M ar ke t Age n ts’ In flatio n
Exp e ctatio n s
P e r  ce n t
C P I
NN oo vv . ’. ’9696
55
44
33
22
11
00
--11
OO cc tt. . ’’9494
FF ee bb . ’. ’9977
OO cc tt. . ’’9595
MM aa y  y  ’’9696
55
44
33
22
11
00
--11
9494
9595
9696
9797
9898
9999
0000
0101
S ources: S ta tistics S weden and P rospe ra R ese arch
Diagram 3
Com pon en ts of th e CPI
 percen tage 12-m on th  ch an ge
IImm ppoorrt t ((2244%%))
DDoomm eess ttiic c ((6767%%))
HHoouuss e e mm oorrttggaagge e 
iinn tteerreess t t ccoosst t ((99%%))
99
66
33
00
--33
--66
--99
--1212
--1515
9922
9933
9944
9955
9966
9977
SSoouurrcceess : : SSttaattiiss ttiiccs s SSwweeddeen n aannd d tthh e e RRiikkssbbaannkk
99
66
33
00
--33
--66
--99
--1212
--1515
BIS Review   56/1997
- 5 -
Different indicators of underlying inflation also show a declining rate of increase,
though the picture measured in this way is not quite as dramatic (Diagram 3). Excluding house
mortgage  interest  costs,  the  current  rate  of  inflation  is  about  1  percentage  point  higher  than
indicated by the CPI.
It  seems  reasonable  to  conclude,  however,  that  an  evaluation  of  the  Riksbank’s
policy for inflation must recognise that a part of the changes in the rate of inflation stems from
transitory effects occasioned by the Riksbank’s own measures.
3. The current assessment
The March inflation report
I should now like to turn to the outlook for inflation in the coming years. In order
to  provide  as  open  and  clear  a  picture  as  possible  of  how  the  Riksbank  analyses  the  future
prospect for inflation and approaches the construction of monetary policy, we present reports on
this four times a year. In the latest report, published this March, it was considered that the GDP
growth rates for 1997 and 1978 would be 2 and 3 per cent, respectively. It was also foreseen that
no  appreciable  capacity  restrictions  should  arise  in  these  years.  With  an  unchanged  monetary
stance  and  given  that  households  and  firms  continue  to  count  on  inflation  remaining  low,
underlying domestic inflation  (the  CPI  change  excluding  transitory  effects  on  inflation)  one  to
two years ahead was judged to be between 1.5 and 2 per cent.
In that the transitory effects will be dropping out of the 12-month change figures,
however, registered inflation will move up by degrees in 1997 and 1998. In March we counted
on the annual rate of inflation in  1997  being  around  0.5  per  cent,  which  would  still  be  clearly
below the inflation target. We also envisaged that in 1998 inflation would be somewhat below 2
per cent.
As we all know, forecasting economic activity and prices is not a simple matter.
Since such assessments cannot be very exact, one has to weigh up risks and probabilities. Two
secondary alternatives were therefore discussed in the March report, where future inflation might
be lower and higher, respectively, than in the main scenario.
In the former alternative, lower inflation might result from a weaker development
of  consumption.  In  the  latter,  on  the  other  hand,  higher  inflation  might  stem  from  a  weaker
exchange  rate  that  leads  to  higher  growth  for  exports  and  GDP,  thereby  generating  stronger
inflationary pressure.
Against  this  background,  I  want  to  say  something  about  our  current  view  of
tendencies for private consumption and the exchange rate.
Private consumption
In 1996 household disposable income fell, unexpectedly, by 0.1 per cent despite a
strong increase in the wage  bill.  The  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research  and  many  other
observers had expected a 2 per cent increase in disposable income. The growth of consumption
was  therefore  financed  entirely  from  a  reduction  of  the  saving  ratio  to  5.4  per  cent.  This  has
altered the starting point for assessing private consumption’s future path.
BIS Review   56/1997
- 6 -
In  recent  years  household  income  has  been  greatly  affected  by  measures  for
consolidating  government  finance,  mainly  increased  taxes  and  decreased  transfers.  But  for  the
impact of public systems, household income in each of the years 1994-98 would have been 3 to
4  per  cent  higher  (Diagram  4).  As  it  is,  the  level  is  likely  to  be  virtually  unchanged.  The
withdrawal of household income probably peaked in 1996 but even in the two following years
the fiscal stance measured in this way is tight.
Diagram 4
H ou seh old  Sector’s Real Disp osable
In com e, Gross an d  Net of Pu blic Sector
GGrroosss s ddiissppoossaabbllee
  iinnccoommee
Tran sfers, Direct Taxes an d  Ch arges
%
55
44
33
22
11
00
--11
--22
--33
--44
--55
--66
DiDissppoossaabblle e ii nnccoomm ee
nneet t oof f ppuubblilic c sseeccttoorr
Diagram 5
19199900
19199911
19199922
19199933
19199944
19199955
19199966
19199977
19199988
Source: National Institute of E conomic R esearch
H ouseh old Savin g as a percen tage of
Disposable In come
1212
1010
88
66
44
22
00
--22
--44
--66
--88
7575
7777
FFiinnaanncciiaal l ssaavviinngg
SSaavviinngg
RReaeal l ssaavviinngg
8383
8181
7979
SSoouurrcecess: : SSttaattiissttiiccs s SSwweeddeen n aannd d NNaattiioonnaal l IInnssttiittuutte e 
8585
8787
8989
9191
9393
9595
9797
     
     oof f EEccoonnoommiic c RReesseaearrcchh
BIS Review   56/1997
- 7 -
A  number  of  structural  reforms  (cuts  in  transfer  systems,  the  tax  reform,  etc.)
have  probably  elicited  a  permanent  increase  in  the  household  saving  ratio  but  the  future
tendency is difficult to foresee. One approach is to compare with countries where the economic
framework for households resembles that in Sweden. This suggests that both the household net
saving ratio and the ratio of total wealth to disposable income are relatively low  in  Sweden.  It
then  seems  unlikely  that  in  a  long-term  perspective  the  saving  ratio  will  fall  back  to  the
historically low levels in the 1980s (Diagram 5).
Leading  indicators  point  to  a  continuation  of  private  consumption’s  upward
tendency  in  the  first  quarter  of  1997.  House  prices  have  shown  signs  of  moving  in  recent
months.  A  growing  money  supply  and  lending  to  the  household  sector  likewise  point  to  a
continued  increase  in  consumption.  Retail  turnover,  above  all  for  consumer  durables,
strengthened in February and March, as is  also  evident  in  the  March  business  tendency  survey
from  the  National  Institute.  In  the  first  four  months  of  this  year  the  number  of  cars  newly
registered in the household sector rose in annual terms by around 60 per cent. Households have
become  more  optimistic  about  their  own  economy;  in  April  a  majority  envisaged  an
improvement 12 months ahead.
There is no cause at present to modify the main assessment in the inflation report
- that consumption will show a stable but by no means dramatic rise in the coming years. But an
appreciably weaker development of consumption, which was a prominent component of one of
the alternative scenarios, seems to have become somewhat less probable.
Exchange rate
The  Riksbank  does  not  target  the  exchange  rate.  The  monetary  policy  target  is
price  stability.  But  the  exchange  rate  does  feature  as  one  important  factor  in  the  Riksbank’s
assessment of inflation in the coming two years.
The exchange rate conditions demand in the economy,  particularly  in  the  export
sector,  and  also  affects  inflation  directly  in  the  form  of  import  prices.  The  latter,  more
immediate effect is, however, transitory and of secondary interest provided it does not influence
inflation expectations and thereby price and wage setting behaviour.
An assessment of future inflation therefore requires a forecast or judgement of the
exchange  rate  in  the  coming  two  years,  yet  this  is  a  variable  that  is  notoriously  difficult  to
predict and has fluctuated widely for Sweden since 1992. A natural starting point for this is the
current exchange rate together with an estimate of what a reasonable long-term level might be in
relation to competitiveness, financial saving, etc.
The past  six  months  provides  an  example  of  how  the  argument  might  go.  Since
October 1996 the krona’s effective exchange rate has weakened by about 7 per cent. Most of this
change  stems  from  the  appreciation  of  sterling  and  the  US  dollar  against  currencies  in
continental Europe (Diagram 6). Cyclical factors have been at work here; the United States and
Britain  are  leading  an  upward  phase  and  there  have  been  expectations  about  future  monetary
policy that tended to strengthen both their currencies.
But  the  krona  has  also  fallen,  particularly  during  the  winter  and  spring,  against
most Central European currencies, including the German mark. At times this has had to do with
unrest in Europe over the  EMU  process.  Many  market  observers,  however,  also  point  to  some
uncertainty about the durability of Swedish economic policy.
BIS Review   56/1997
- 8 -
In the longer run there are good grounds for a stronger krona. Productivity in the
Swedish economy has risen rapidly in  recent  years.  The  current  account  shows  a  large  surplus
and  the  expansion  of  export  production  should  ultimately  spread  to  the  domestic  sector.  The
outlook for inflation is favourable and government finance shows a considerable improvement.
Still, there is reason to take the weakening of the krona seriously. Policy must continue to focus
on  consolidating  government  finance;  budgetary  improvements  in  connection  with  strong
economic activity cannot be used for easing the fiscal stance.
Under these circumstances, neither are there grounds as regards the exchange rate
for appreciably modifying the March assessment. To date in 1997, however, the krona has been
somewhat  weaker  than  envisaged  and  this,  together  with  the  available  indicators,  points  to
marginally higher export growth.
All in all, today there is no reason to revise the overall picture of the economy and
inflation that was presented in the March inflation report. The tendencies to date seem to broadly
confirm the assessments there.
 Various forward indicators suggest that the Swedish economy is again entering a
period of increased growth. At the same time, most things point to price increases remaining low
this year and next, which is the period we can assess at present.
The  repo  rate  was  lowered  most  recently  last  December.  Since  then  we  have
frequently declared that the monetary stance is well balanced. This still applies.
BIS Review   56/1997
