Mr. Ingves discusses retail trade, EMU and the Euro with respect to Sweden
Text  of  a  speech  by  Mr.  Stefan  Ingves,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  held  on
14/4/97.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to speak about EMU. Less than  twelve
months have passed since the Riksbank last attended a meeting of  the Swedish Retail Federation
with information about EMU. Perhaps some  of you were present on that occasion. Whereas the
issue  of  EMU  was  still    fairly  new  a  year  ago  and  not  much  discussed  by  most  people,  the
situation today is different. In the interval we have experienced a marked  increase both in what
people know about EMU and in  their  interest  in  the    matter.  This  naturally  has  to  do  with  the
rapid approach of the starting date.  Today the move to Stage Three lies fewer than 500 working
days  ahead.    Moreover,  there  is  no  mistaking  the  strength  of  the  political  determination  in
Europe  to  start  on  time.  This  was  evident  not  least  at  the  recent  Ecofin    meeting  in  the
Netherlands  when  the  EU  finance  ministers  agreed  on    several  important  matters  such  as  the
stability and growth pact and ERM2.  Today I shall be outlining the process leading up to Stage
Three  of  EMU    and  the  changes  that  we  already  know  will  occur.  I  will  also  say  something
about EMU's consequences for retail trade.
 Before considering practical  aspects of EMU, permit me to begin with a look at
some general economic  features.
Sweden should join from the start
The Riksbank is in favour of  Sweden participating in the euro area right from the
start  in  1999.  The    reasons  for  this  have  been  spelled  out  in  our  submission  on  the  Calmfors
report, for example. As regards the economic arguments, we do not  believe that, by remaining
outside the euro area, Sweden would incur  particularly large costs for stabilisation policy; in the
event  of  economic    shocks,  it  is  structural  changes  rather  than  monetary  policy  that  should  be
used in the first place to counter rising unemployment, for instance.
On the  political side, we share the report's assessment that the  political  costs  of
not  participating  would  be  substantial;  as  an  outsider  Sweden  would  not    belong  to  the  inner
circle of countries that will be deciding Europe's future.  It should also be realised that countries
which  belong  to  the  euro  area  from    the  start  will  have  more  influence  on  how  the  European
Central Bank (ECB)  develops in the crucial early years, when the forms for its work are being
established.  Our  possibility  of  influencing  important  decisions  is  also  likely    to  be  reduced  in
other fields beside monetary policy. If Sweden were to  refrain from joining the euro area at all,
there would be a risk of being  marginalised as an outsider.
The preparations
What progress has been  made in the move to EMU? The work of preparing for
Stage Three is now  in full swing in every EU body and all the member states. A green paper on
the  practical  arrangements  for  a  changeover  to  a  single  currency  was    presented  by  the
Commission in May 1995 and the European Council,  meeting in Madrid in December, adopted
a changeover scenario which  fixed the timetable for the main decisions. It was agreed that Stage
Three    of  EMU  is  to  start  on  1st  January  1999  and  that,  in  the  light  of  which    member  states
fulfil the convergence criteria on the basis of statistics for  1997, as early as possible in 1998 the
Council  is  to  confirm  which  countries    will  participate  in  the  European  currency  area.  On  1st
January 1999  exchange rates are to be locked and responsibility for  monetary  policy  is  to    be
transferred  to  the  ECB.  The  euro  is  to  be  introduced  as  an  independent    currency  and  all
-BIS Review   41/1997
- 2 -
monetary policy transactions are to be in euro. For a time  the national currencies will continue
to circulate alongside the euro but  legally they will be one and the same currency. If this seems
odd,  remember that Sweden's currency, for example, can be expressed in  kronor as well as öre.
Euro, however, will not be available for our wallets  from 1st January 1999; euro banknotes and
coins are to come into  circulation on 1 January 2002 at the latest. That will initiate a  massive
exchange of existing national banknotes and coins. By 1st July 2002 at the  latest the krona will
cease  to  be  legal  tender,  though  of  course  the    Riksbank  will  continue  to  exchange  kronor  for
euro.
Which countries will be  included?
The EU countries are now striving to fulfil the economic criteria for  participation
in  the  euro  area.  This  is  being  accompanied  by  strenuous    political  efforts  to  remove  any
remaining  obstacles.  Today  I  can  only  say    that  it  is  not  until  the  spring  of  1998  that  we  will
actually  know  which    countries  will  be  establishing  the  union.  The  EMI  and  the  Commission
will    each  be  publishing  a  report  and  the  Commission  will  issue    recommendations  on  which
countries should participate. On the basis of  these reports and recommendations, the opinions of
the  European    Parliament  and  the  national  parliaments  are  to  be  heard,  which  is  expected    to
occur in April. The decision about which countries will participate is to be  taken around the turn
of April at a weekend meeting of the Ecofin Council  and the Heads of State or of Government.
It is therefore unnecessary to  speculate about this today. As far as Sweden is concerned, it looks
as    though  we  will  in  fact  fulfil  the  convergence  criteria.  Whether  or  not  we    participate  will
therefore depend on the decision by the Riksdag (Sweden's  parliament).
What is the Riksbank doing?
The  Riksbank  has  to  contribute    to  a  situation  whereby  Sweden  is  able  to
participate  in  practice  if  a  majority    in  the  Riksdag  so  decides.  That  is  why  preparations  are
already    necessary.  A  basic  principle  in  this  work  is  that  it  shall  be  voluntary  -  the    requisite
adaptations are a matter for each organisation to decide. All those  concerned must of course also
solve  any  problems  they  encounter  as  a    consequence  of  EMU.  For  the  Riksbank,  a  highly
important  task  in    Sweden's  preparations  is  information  about  and  consultations  with  the
financial  sector  on  matters  to  do  with  the  changeover.  To  this  end  we  have    formed  a
consultative  group  (SIFS)  and  five  sub-groups  to  work  on  the    practical  preparations  together
with the financial sector. This collaboration  has led us to conclude that the financial sector can
cope  with  a  changeover    to  euro  on  1st  January  1999.  We  also  consider  that  in  some  respects
joining later would make the preparations more difficult. The worst  alternative would be a long
period  of  uncertainty  about  our  participation,    what  we  usually  call  a  "soft  no".  Costly  double
systems would then be  required in several areas. We have also observed concern in the financial
sector that staying outside the euro area would entail increased costs,  competitive disadvantages
and risk various forms of discrimination.
"Wait-and-see" may be less attractive
A common opinion at present  seems to be that a soft no is not unlikely and would
not  involve  appreciably    higher  economic  costs  than  participation  from  the  start.  Deferring
participation  for  some  years  would  not  exclude  us  from  the  euro  area  for    good.  In  our
cooperation  with  the  financial  sector,  however,  we  have  seen    that  uncertainty  about
participation is causing many financial agents to  make preparations for handling euro as well as
kronor. The nub of the  matter is that euro services will be called for whether or not we join the
area. The use of euro will be directed by the market. Naturally the euro  would not replace the
BIS Review   41/1997
- 3 -
krona as Sweden's currency if we remained outside  but we could probably expect a demand for
euro from some agents.  According to the Stockholm Stock Exchange, trading in the shares  of
major  companies will gradually switch to euro because handling two currencies  would be too
costly. In time the money and bond market may be affected  in that renewals and new issues are
denominated in euro and  account  for    a  growing  proportion  of  bond  trading.  According  to  the
Securities  Dealers    Association,  for  instance,  large  companies  and  financial  markets  will  also
become less interested in kronor. It is too early to say how this transition  from kronor to euro
will occur in detail. Neither can we foresee how quickly  it will proceed or how far. Probably it
will be gradual and ultimately also  affect private individuals. If the euro turns out to be stable
and strong,  households will also prefer to have pension savings, for example, in euro  securities.
Thus,  this  scenario  points  to  a  development  where  financial    markets,  companies  and  even
individuals are active in euro, while the  public sector continues to  use  kronor  as  declared,  for
instance, in the  report from the Ministry of Finance on practical preparations for the euro.  Such
a situation would no doubt lead in time to the public authorities also  encountering a demand for
euro  services,  perhaps  ultimately  leading  to  the    euro  being  accepted  to  a  greater  extent  than
desired at present. If so, the  "wait-and-see" alternative would finally amount in practice to the
adoption  of    the  euro.  We  can  only  speculate  about  the  practical  consequences  of  a    gradual
transition but it would probably entail increased costs as well as  greater uncertainty for firms as
well  as  society.  If  we  intend  to  join  the  euro    area  in  a  not  too  distant  future  after  1999,  the
recommendation  therefore    seems  to  be:  participate  from  the  start  and  avoid  unnecessary  and
costly  solutions for firms as well society.
Still a large need of information
When    talking  about  the  monetary  union  we  should  be  clear  that  in  Sweden  the
debate about Europe and EMU is relatively new. Elsewhere in Europe the  issue of integration
has been discussed much more and for far  longer.  The    debate  in  Sweden  has  been  rather  low
key and not particularly  widespread. So it is hardly surprising that people here are hesitant and
want more information. That the discussion has now got going is all to the  good. I was therefore
pleasantly surprised by the submissions to the  Ministry of  Finance  on  the  EMU  report.  Of  56
submissions,  only  4  were    negative  about  EMU.  The  proportion  in  favour  of  Sweden
participating from  the start in 1999 was as high as 46 per cent, while 13 per cent wanted to  wait
and  see  and  33  per  cent  did  not  voice  an  opinion  about  participation.    Many  of  the  interested
parties are for EMU: the Federation of Swedish  Industries, the Retail Federation, the Bankers'
Association, the  Confederation of Professional Associations and the Employers'  Confederation,
to  mention  just  a  few.  In  general  it  seems  that  the    discussion  of  EMU  has  spread  from  the
financial  sector  to  companies,    authorities  and  large  organisations  but  has  not  yet  reached  the
man in the  street. The time ought now have come for us all to consider the matter.
How does EMU affect retail trade?
The details of how EMU will affect  retailing in Europe are not yet clear. We do
not  even  know  which  countries    will  make  up  the  euro  area  from  the  start.  Still,  I  shall  try  to
present some  general features. EMU is intended to strengthen and deepen European  integration
and promote the mobility of capital, goods and services. In time,  therefore, a single currency is
likely  to  make  retailing  more  efficient  and    cheaper.  Inside  the  area,  prices  will  be  more
transparent  and  there  will  be    no  exchange  risk.  Decreased  costs  for  currency  exchange  and
hedging    suggest  that  in  time  retailing  will  benefit  from  EMU,  an  opinion  I  share  with    the
Wholesale & Retail Research Institute. In the short run, however, the  union involves retail trade
in  a  great  deal  of  work.  Shops  will  be  in  the  firing    line  when  the  euro  notes  and  coins  are
introduced. Cashiers will have to  handle kronor and euro side by side for a time and customers
BIS Review   41/1997
- 4 -
will  no    doubt  have  many  questions  about  prices  and  conversion  rates.  Besides    calling  for
resources as well as training, this will require a good deal of  adjustment in retail trade. I shall
now consider some of the foreseeable  changes and also take this opportunity of commenting on
the requirements  formulated by the Research Institute for a changeover to euro.
Banknotes and coins
The  Madrid  meeting  in  1995  agreed  that  euro  notes  and  coins    are  to  be
introduced at the latest by 1st January 2002. Many people have  reacted to an introduction at the
turn  of  a  year,  which  is  when  retailing  tends    to  be  most  hectic.  The  agreement,  however,
stipulates 1st January 2002 as  the latest date, so perhaps a start might be made in the autumn of
2001.  The alternative of spring 2002 has also be mentioned. This matter is still  being discussed;
the Riksbank shares the trade's opinion that the turn of a  year should be avoided and is therefore
working for another date. The  timing of the practical changeover arrangements is to be decided
by  each    country;  for  Sweden  the  Riksbank  hopes  that  it  can  be  managed  in  a  much    shorter
period than the maximum of six months. The public will be  informed in good time about how
the changeover is to be carried out.  Information about security details and appearance will also
be made  available. We now know that there will be seven banknotes and eight coins,  which is
somewhat  more  than  Sweden's  denominations  at  present.  One    face  of  the  coins  will  carry  a
national motif that each country decides. The  notes may also display a national symbol.
Nickel in the coins?
The question  of nickel in the coins has also been discussed, for instance among
finance    ministers  and  central  bank  governors.  Swedish  retailers  have  demanded    that  coins
denominated  in  euro  and  cent  are  not  to  contain  nickel;  the    Riksbank  and  the  Ministry  of
Finance  have  both  worked  hard  to  achieve    this  but  are  fighting  rather  a  lone  battle.  Today  it
does look as though four to  six out of eight coins will be nickel-free, which must be regarded as
a  major success for the Swedish position. A decision, however, is not due  until the summer.
Double currencies
For  a  period  of  up  to  six  months  there    will  be  two  currencies  to  handle  and
retailers  have  demanded  that  the    period  be  limited  to  three  months.  We  can  understand  their
argument  in    principle.  Much  will  be  required  of  traders.  Instead  of  the  present  five
denominations  of  notes  there  will  be  twelve  and  instead  of  four  coins  there    will  likewise  be
twelve. The value of cash holdings in retail trade (cash  liquidity) will be greater than usual, with
an  increased  risk  of  counterfeit    notes  and  robbery,  for  example.  Retailers  will  also  have  to
consider    temporary  storage  space  for  cash-boxes  and  additional  transport    requirements.  The
Riksbank  is  likewise  working  to  make  the  period  with    double  currencies  as  short  as  possible.
There are, however, other aspects  to consider. Incorporating euro in the system will take time.
Just the work  of distributing the new banknotes will be time-consuming. We shall be  looking
into what is feasible in practice. Time will also be needed to adapt  the automatic teller systems
(Bankomat and Minuten) to the new currency.  Another matter to be investigated is whether the
distribution  of  euro  to    banks,  post  offices  and  possibly  retailers  can  start  before  the  date  on
which the new currency becomes legal tender. Moreover, some consumer  interests, for instance,
have said than many consumers would prefer a  relatively  long  changeover  period  in  which  to
get used to the new currency.  The question of the period with double currencies therefore calls
for further  discussion in order to arrive at a solution that everyone can accept.  Retailers have
also put forward the  view  that  it  should  be  possible  to    provide  change  only  in  euro  from  day
one.  We  believe  this  may  be  difficult    both  in  practice  and  on  the  grounds  of  the  accepted
BIS Review   41/1997
- 5 -
changeover  principle    of  "no  compulsion  -  no  prohibitions".  It  has  been  said  that  people  in
general  are to be free to decide whether to use euro from the start on  1st  January    1999  or  to
wait until the changeover is completed in 2002. During this  period no one is to be compelled to
use  euro,  though  this  will  be    encouraged.  Kronor  and  euro  will  both  have  the  status  of  legal
tender, so  we must be prepared to handle them both during this period. But the  discussion of
this question should continue.
Responsibility for information
The retail trade report considers that society must be responsible for  information
about the new currency system. At the same time the Ministry  of  Interior  and  others  consider
that  information  at  points  of  sale,  for    example,  is  primarily  a  business  responsibility.  This
makes  me  somewhat    uneasy.  I  believe  we  must  all  be  prepared  to  accept  an  additional
responsibility  for  information  about  these  matters.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk    of  people  feeling
they are getting insufficient guidance, with an increased  risk of the changeover  being  arduous
for  everyone.  At  the  Riksbank  we  will    try  to  do  our  bit.  Brochures  about  the  new  means  of
payments  will  be    distributed,  possibly  accompanied  by  ready-reckoners  for  the  conversion
rates. Our Payment System Department is working on this.
Price  information
Retailers will be obliged to work for a period with some form of  double pricing.
The  practical  arrangements  for  this  are  mainly  a  matter  for    the  retail  trade  and  consumer
interests.
Rounding
In Sweden we have  grown used to having the total sum rounded to the nearest 50
öre. Retailers  have expressed a wish that this should continue to be possible with the  euro, in
which case an active introduction of the 1 and 2 cent coins would  not be called for and we could
round to the nearest 5 cents (approximately  43 öre). We appreciate this view and have promoted
it at various levels but  without gaining much support. So we do not yet know the outcome. It
must  be realised, however, that if we join the euro area, even the smallest  denominations will
be legal tender. So there is no way of entirely avoiding  the small coins in Sweden.
Cash receipts
Today's  cash  registers  are    capable  of  recording  total  sums  in  two  currencies.  If
each  item  is  to  be    registered  in  both  currencies,  however,  it  seems  that  all  the  existing  cash
registers  would  have  to  be  replaced.  I  agree  intuitively  with  retailers  that  it    would  hardly  be
reasonable to do this throughout Sweden in order to  register two currencies for a period that is
likely to be shorter than six  months. Perhaps we can make do with receipts that give the total in
euro    as  well  as  kronor  together  with  the  conversion  rate.  That  would  be  much    the  same
information  as  the  banks  have  agreed  to  provide  on  statements    of  account.  Once  again,
however, this is a matter where retailers and  consumers must get together and discuss what  is
reasonable. As I have  said, EMU will affect each one of us. So let me conclude by mentioning
some other changes in fields where retailing is not directly involved.
Other  changes: Securities
BIS Review   41/1997
- 6 -
 The  countries  in  the  euro  area  may,  and  should,    denominate  new  sovereign
issues in euro. A country wishing to convert its  outstanding debt into euro will be allowed to do
this, too. We can also pass  national laws enabling, for instance, the Stockholm Stock Exchange,
OM    and  the  Securities  Register  Centre  (VPC)  to  switch  to  euro  right  from  1999.    Many
institutions and agents are in favour of this. The above institutions as  well as participants in the
Swedish  securities  market,  banks,  financial    institutions  and  others  unanimously  recommend  a
big-bang solution - a  quick, concerted changeover from kronor to euro right from the beginning
of  1999.  With  a  single  monetary  policy  and  no  exchange  risk,  the  only  factor    behind  interest
rate  differentials  for  sovereign  securities  will  be  the  credit    risk.  The  market  for  Swedish
government  paper  will  be  more  or  less    integrated  with  the  euro  market  for  government
securities.  Given  a    reasonably  similar  debt  situation,  government  bonds  issued  by  different
countries can then be handled in a similar way.
Banks.
During 1996 the  banks have worked on strategies and routines for changing over
to  euro.  It    has  been  agreed  that  during  the  changeover  period  banks,  the  postal  giro,    the
bankgiro  and  the  private  giro  will  handle  kronor  as  well  as  euro.    Cashiers  will  redenominate
payments  in  the  currency  used  for  the    institution's  system,  regardless  of  which  currency  the
customer has used.  Bank branches will provide two versions of their forms, one for kronor and
one for euro; new cheques and other forms will therefore be produced.   Statements  of  account
will  specify  the  rate  at  which  the  currency  has  been    converted.  The  automatic  teller  systems
(Bankomat and Minuten) will also  have to be adapted. Moreover, banks must  be  prepared  for
people who  want to make giro payments in euro right from the beginning of 1999. Some  large
companies may also wish to pay out wages in euro before the new  currency is available in the
form  of  banknotes  and  coins.  As  mentioned    earlier,  it  is  difficult  to  foresee  the  magnitude  of
demand for euro services  and how soon companies and individuals will switch from kronor to
euro.
Monetary and exchange rate policy.
A  single  currency  implies  a  single    monetary  policy,  which  in  EMU  will  be
decided by the ECB. The  Riksbank    and  the  other  national  central  banks  will  have  the  task  of
executing  this    policy.  The  changes  for  Swedish  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  will
probably  not  be  all  that  great.  The  Riksbank  is  likely  to  remain  the  financial    sector's
counterparty. The main differences from today for Swedish banks  are a much larger market for
intra-day money and counterparties located  all over Europe. The detailed conduct of monetary
policy is not yet clear.  The final decisions are due when the ECB has been established in 1998.
Consequently  it  is  the  countries  participating  from  the  start  that  will  be  able    to  influence  the
conduct of policy and the organisation of activities in the  new European central bank.
Target
The conduct of a single monetary  policy calls for a single system with which to
handle the associated  payments. TARGET, the payment system that is now being built up, will
link  up all the national systems. A  payment  from,  say,  Stockholm  to  Milan  will    normally  be
executed  in  a  matter  of  seconds,  whereas  at  present  it  often    takes  a  day  or  more.  TARGET's
main  purpose  is  to  enable  the  ECB  to    conduct  monetary  policy  but  it  also  amounts  to  the
establishment of a new  expressway for commercial transactions. The extent to which banks and
other companies use the system will probably depend on the price. What  this will be is not yet
clear but costs are to be covered in full. All the national   central  banks  in  the  EU  area  will  be
BIS Review   41/1997
- 7 -
entitled  to  join  TARGET,  whether  or  not    they  are  participating  in  the  euro  area.  There  is  a
significant  risk,  however,    that  countries  outside  the  latter  area  will  have  more  limited
possibilities of  using TARGET, for instance due to restrictions on intra-day euro credit,  which
is important for countering fluctuations in payment flows. One of the  matters discussed is that
outsider banks should close the system at an  earlier hour. The Riksbank has acted forcefully to
oppose this threat of  discrimination. The decisions on this and certain other matters have been
deferred,  however,  and  will  now  be  taken  by  those  countries  that  join  the    euro  area  from  the
start. TARGET is to be tested this summer and is to be  fully ready for use by 1st January 1999.
Summary and conclusions
Most of  the evidence today suggests that the economic and monetary union will
move to Stage Three on 1st January 1999. For Sweden the question is  whether we should join
the euro area from the start, wait a while or try to  remain outside for good. I hope that we will
soon  be  having  a  more  lively    debate  on  this  very  important  issue.  The  question  of  EMU  has
now  been    largely  examined  and  discussed  by  the  financial  sector,  the  authorities  and    big
businesses. The time has come to spread the debate and information  to other groups in society.
In time the krona will lose ground
Even  if  Sweden    decides  to  stay  outside,  the  single  currency  will  affect  us.  Our
analyses,    together  with  other  organisations,  of  what  might  happen  in  that  event  point    to  a
relatively sizeable use of euro, particularly in the securities market. In  time, the use of euro may
spread like water rings to other parts of society.  The extent to which the euro is used will among
other things depend on its  strength relative to the krona but also on market assessments of the
probability  of  Sweden  joining.  A  good  guess  seems  to  be  that  the  shorter    the  interval  before
participation, the quicker will be the changeover to euro.
The world will not be the same
The creation of a monetary union just  outside Sweden's borders will change the
world  as  we  know  it.  Individuals    and  firms  will  both  be  affected  by  the  euro's  introduction
whether we  participate or not. In our efforts to keep the financial sector informed about  EMU
we can see that good progress has been made with the  preparations. Among those concerned we
also  experience  a  strong  desire    to  participate  as  early  as  possible  so  as  not  to  get  left  behind.
Swedish  banks and other companies want to have a chance of competing on equal  terms and do
not wish to risk losing business opportunities. Finally I  therefore wish to underscore that saying
no to the single currency is not  the    same  as  status  quo.  As  I  said,  the  euro's  introduction  will
affect  us  all,    whether  or  not  we  participate.  EMU  will  probably  accelerate  the    globalisation,
concentration  and  integration  of  the  world's  financial  markets.    It  is  therefore  of  the  utmost
importance that we all do what we can to find  out more about these complex matters.
BIS Review   41/1997
