Mr. Wellink looks at European economic and monetary cooperation from an
historical perspective  Address by A.H.E.M. Wellink, an Executive Director of the Netherlands
Bank ,on the occasion of AEGEE’s EMU campaign 1997, delivered in Rotterdam on 16/4/97.
If  everything  goes  according  to  schedule,  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  -
EMU, in short  -  will  start  on  1st  January  1999.  As  of  that  date,  the  central  banks  of  countries
which are part of EMU at that time will join the European Central Bank (ECB), to be located, as
you  know,  in  Frankfurt.  From  then  on,  this  institution  will  conduct  a  monetary  policy  aimed
primarily at stabilising the internal value of the future single European currency, the euro.
When  the  euro  is  officially  initiated  on  1st  January  1999  -  and  I  have  no  doubt
that it will - a process will have been completed which can be considered unique from various
points of view. Firstly, because the euro will become the pre-eminent symbol of economic and
monetary  union  which  is  taking  shape  between  sovereign  states  abolishing  their  national
currency  in  exchange  for  a  single  currency.  Secondly,  because  when  it  is  introduced,  the  euro
will not immediately be both a unit of account and means of payment: on 1st January 1999 the
euro  will  become  the  unit  of  account,  whereas  it  will  not  begin  to  circulate  as  a  concrete,
physical means of payment until three years later, on 1st January 2002. Finally, and befitting the
age we live in, because the euro will be the first single currency which is available in electronic
form right from the start.
Hence,  the  euro  marks  the  completion  of  a  process  which  is  unique  from  a
historical perspective. It is this process which I want to discuss with you this afternoon. Not so
much because I was asked to give an outline of economic and monetary cooperation as from the
Treaty of Rome to the present day, but particularly to outline the near future. Outlines which are
essential to make the euro a lasting success.
Travelling from Rome to Amsterdam, where the Maastricht Treaty will shortly be
reviewed, we will have to make several stopovers.
1.         From Rome to The Hague
There is nothing new about the pursuit of a single European currency. Ideas about
a  single  currency  are  mainly  rooted  in  idealistic-political  motives.  When  a  single  European
currency was propagated in the past, this was usually done in the form of a plea in favour of a
politically united Europe. This idea was also expressed shortly after the end of World War II. It
was Winston Churchill, who in 1946 in Zürich, argued in favour of “a kind of United States of
Europe”. In April of that same year, the need for a single European currency was voiced by the
new  post-war  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  Marius  Wilhelm  Holtrop,  who  wanted  a
strong and sound guilder which in due course would merge into one European currency.
The  past  fifty  years  have  shown,  that  the  advent  of  a  single  European  currency
will certainly not include the “United States of Europe” that Churchill was talking about. Soon
after 1946, Europe became politically divided into Eastern and Western hemispheres due to the
Cold War. With the foundation of the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957, Western
Europe took the lead by starting economic cooperation. The objective of the Treaty of Rome, on
which  the  EEC  was  based,  was  to  create  a  common  market  between  France,  West  Germany,
Italy  and  the  Benelux  countries.  This  objective  resulted  in  a  customs  union  which  became
effective on 1 July 1968. However, the Treaty remained vague about other aspects of economic
cooperation.  Economic  policy,  for  example,  was  considered  a  matter  of  common  interest.  As
BIS Review   42/1997
- 2 -
regards monetary cooperation, coordination  was  recommended,  the  exchange  rate  policy  being
regarded as a matter of common interest as well. The plan for economic integration designed in
Rome  was  not  an  objective  in  itself.  It  was  based  on  political  grounds.  After  all,  the  Treaty
aimed  at  achieving  an  “ever  closer  union  among  the  European  peoples”  through  economic
integration.
During the 1969 summit in The Hague, representatives of the six Member States
agreed with the idea of the newly elected  German  Chancellor  Willy  Brandt  that  this  had  to  be
realised via Economic and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  The  then  Prime  Minister  of  Luxembourg,
Paul  Werner,  came  up  with  a  detailed  plan  that  was  named  after  him.  According  to  this  plan,
EMU would be materialised in stages. In the final stage, monetary and budgetary competences
of the national states were to be transferred to Community bodies established for  that  purpose.
And  so,  Werner’s  ideas  were  considerably  more  far-reaching  than  the  agreements  reached  in
Rome thirteen  years  earlier.  Nonetheless,  the  philosophy  of  economic  integration  advocated  in
Rome  remained  the  moving  spirit  behind  political  cooperation:  “it  is  true  that  we  need  not
achieve a European confederation or federation tomorrow. But to arrive at this ultimate goal, we
must first take the step of creating an economic and monetary currency union”, Werner said at a
press conference at the time.
In  the  Europe  of  the  Six,  France  and  Germany  played  a  leading  role  right  from
the  start.  Nonetheless,  during  the  preparation  of  the  Werner  Report,  both  countries  differed  in
view  about  the  aim  of  integration.  So  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun.  For  the  German
Minister Karl Schiller, EMU was inextricably connected to the idea of a political union. France,
personified by Raymond Barre, considered this idea of political union far too drastic. Fixing the
exchange rates was  as  far  as  he  wished  to  go  for  the  time  being,  hoping  that  this  would  make
economic  integration  inevitable.  Due  to  political  pressure  exerted  by  France,  the  final  date  of
EMU  was  left  open  in  the  end.  On  1  January  1971,  the  first  phase  commenced.  It  was  to  last
three years, and in this period the Member States would aim at narrowing the fluctuation margin
of the exchange rate between their currencies.
The  first  phase  however  started  under  unfavourable  circumstances.  In  August
1971,  turmoil  on  the  international  foreign  exchange  markets  forced  the  US  Administration  to
suspend the convertibility of the dollar. This jeopardised the international exchange rate system
of Bretton Woods. At  the  end  of  1971,  it  was  agreed  to  devalue  the  dollar  and  to  broaden  the
exchange rate margins of the currencies participating in  the  international  exchange  rate  system
from  0.75  to  2.25%  on  either  side  of  the  dollar  parity.  Needless  to  say  that  under  these
circumstances, it became extremely doubtful, whether the first phase of EMU could be heralded.
For  that  reason,  the  EC  Member  States  agreed  in  March  1972  to  limit  the  exchange  rate
fluctuations between their currencies vis-à-vis each other to 2.25%. This is how the “snake in the
tunnel”  originated,  soon  to  become  the  “snake  in  the  lake“  when  the  dollar  started  to  float  as
from August 1973. This was the final blow to the Bretton Woods System.
2.         From The Hague to Maastricht
In  the  1970s,  cooperation  in  Western  Europe  was  characterised  by  the  priority
given  to  enlarge  the  Community  over  deepening.  At  the  beginning  of  1973,  the  United
Kingdom,  Ireland  and  Denmark  joined  the  Economic  Community.  Reviewing  policy
coordination  between  the  original  Six  at  that  time,  the  European  Commission  came  to  the
conclusion  that  it  had  been  insufficient  in  this  first  stage.  Therefore,  “the“  second  phase  was
changed  into  “a”  second  stage  in  early  1974.  In  the  following  years,  the  lack  of  policy
coordination frequently led to new exchange rate crises, although these were fuelled by external
BIS Review   42/1997
- 3 -
circumstances  as  well,  including  two  oil  crises.  The  most  striking  reaction  came  from  France,
which left the snake in early 1974, returned to it in July 1975, and left again in March 1976. The
seriousness  of  the  situation  was  aptly  described  by  the  Frenchman  Robert  Mariolin,  who
characterised the integration process as follows: “... if there has been any movement, it has been
backward:  national  economic  and  monetary  policies  have  never  in  25  years  been  more
discordant, more divergent than they are today”.
The  discussion  about  how  Europe  should  proceed  was  set  off  in  early  1978  by
Roy  Jenkins,  chairman  of  the  European  Commission  at  the  time.  After  it  appeared  that  a
committee established by Jenkins made little progress, the German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
and  the  French  President  Giscard  d’Estaing  joined  forces.  These  two  politicians  demonstrated
how quickly plans can be turned into action when backed up by political will and determination.
In March 1979, only a few months after they had  met,  the  European  Monetary  System  (EMS)
entered into force, which aimed at creating a “zone of monetary stability”.
The  EMS  marked  the  introduction  of  the  European  Currency  Unit  (ECU)  as
single unit of account and as starting point for the new exchange rate system. Yet it was no more
than  a  technical  arrangement.  After  all,  monetary  stability  has  a  chance  to  succeed  only  if  the
economies  of  the  participating  countries  achieve  sustainable  convergence  and  the  governments
of these countries pursue  stability-orientated  macroeconomic  policies.  However,  that  point  had
not  been  reached  yet.  By  conducting  a  policy  which  gave  high  priority  to  fighting
unemployment, France opposed the primacy Germany had attached to price stability since 1945.
A large number of exchange rate adjustments were required to make France realise in 1983 that
a radical turnabout was necessary. France’s adoption of a policy of the “hard” franc was a move
in the direction of the German objective of price stability. The calming effect of this turnabout
within the EMS, was enhanced when an agreement was reached in the Danish city of Nyborg on
monetary policy adjustments which were needed in the event  of  exchange  rate  tensions.  In  the
meantime,  the  expansion  of  the  Community  had  widened  further.  Greece  joined  in  1981,
followed by Spain and Portugal in 1986.
In  the  decision-making  process  regarding  the  EMS,  EMU  was  not  explicitly
formulated  as  the  system’s  objective.  The  Delors  Report,  which  was  published  in  April  1989,
contained concrete proposals to that end. According to Delors, fixed and unchangeable exchange
rates should be the core of EMU. This implied a single monetary policy, to be conducted by a
European  central  bank  which  had  to  ensure  that  domestic  price  stability  would  be  maintained.
The  road  to  EMU  was  to  be  completed  in  three  stages  which  were,  however,  not  subject  to
expiry dates. As did Werner, Delors thought that EMU could be realised within a period of ten
years.  An  important  difference  was  that  Delors  did  not  propose  a  transfer  of  national  fiscal
competences to the Community. Delors’ plan had a sequel in June 1989, when it was agreed that
an  Intergovernmental  Conference  would  be  held  to  decide  about  the  necessary  amendments  to
the Treaty of Rome. Six months later, the French-German proposal to hold a conference about
political cooperation was accepted in Dublin. At both conferences, preparations were made that
led to the Treaty on European Union (EU)  at  the  end  of  1991,  better  known  as  the  Maastricht
Treaty.
From the tensions that characterised the EMS in the early 1990s, it seemed to be
clear that the first stage of EMU did  not  go  entirely  as  planned.  The  uncertainties  in  countries
such  as  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom  which  hesitated  to  sign  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the
interest-increasing effect of the unification of Germany, and the fact that the exchange rates of
some  currencies  had  become  overvalued  since  Nyborg,  culminated  in  August  1993  in  the
BIS Review   42/1997
- 4 -
decision  to  broaden  the  fluctuation  margins  of  the  EMS  currencies  from  ± 2.25%  to  ± 15%,
except for the Deutsche Mark and the guilder which maintained the original margin of ± 2.25%.
 Despite this setback, the European leaders were determined not to allow further
delays  on  the  road  to  EMU  mapped  out  by  Delors.  This  determination  was  also  prompted  by
external  circumstances  which,  contrary  to  the  1970s,  now  had  a  positive  impact  on
developments. The collapse of the  Berlin  Wall  in  October  1989  ended  the  political  division  in
Europe.  This  opened  the  door  to  the  reunification  of  East  and  West  Germany,  of  which  the
Deutsche Mark had meanwhile become the anchor of stability within the EMS. These changes,
which coincided with worldwide deregulation of capital transactions, increased the necessity of
forming a front in Western Europe. At rapid pace, the Member States of the Community worked
to  realise  the  single  market,  which  was  as  good  as  completed  on  1st  January  1993.  A  logical
complement to this single market was the single currency.
However, the acceleration of the integration process was not based on  economic
motives alone. In political terms, the Maastricht Treaty has sometimes been interpreted as a kind
of  trade-off:  West  and  East  Germany  were  allowed  to  unite  provided  this  locomotive  would
continue to pull European economic and monetary unification at a rapid pace in order to hedge
the feared German supremacy in the new Europe. Be this as it may, the Treaty officially entered
into  effect  in  November  1993,  harbouring  the  prospect  of  a  single  European  currency.  On  1st
January  1994,  Europe  stepped  into  the  second  stage  of  EMU  and  the  European  Monetary
Institute  (EMI),  the  forerunner  to  the  ECB,  was  established  in  Frankfurt.  The  EMI’s  primary
task  is  to  strengthen  the  coordination  of  monetary  policy  between  the  EU  Member  States  -  in
early 1995, Finland, Austria and Sweden joined the EU - and to prepare the third stage of EMU.
 As  mentioned,  EMU  cannot  be  seen  separate  from  the  wish  to  establish,  in  the
longer term, a politically unified Europe as well. In order to prevent economic reality from being
subordinated to this more than honourable wish, stringent entry requirements were set. These so
called convergence criteria pertain to permissible values for inflation rates, interest rates, public
deficits and public debts. The Maastricht Treaty does not hold the ultimate wisdom. Economic
theory  has  not  yet  advanced  to  a  level  where  it  can  objectively  and  accurately  determine  the
optimal  size  of  public  deficits  and  debts.  It  probably  never  will.  The  Maastricht  budgetary
criteria, which are criticised from various  sides  -  some  arguing  that  the  entry  requirements  are
too stringent, others believing them to be too lenient - are based on practical experience and, put
in  a  longer  historical  perspective,  are  too  lenient  rather  than  overly  stringent.  This  is  another
reason why these criteria must be stringently applied.
3.         From Maastricht to Amsterdam
The  last  stage  that  I  want  to  complete  in  this  introduction,  is  the  journey  from
Maastricht  to  Amsterdam.  On  16  and  17  June,  Amsterdam  will  host  the  biannual  European
summit, where the Maastricht Treaty could well be transformed into the Amsterdam Treaty. It is
worth  mentioning  to  foreign  guests  present  here  this  afternoon  that,  from  a  geographical
perspective,  Maastricht  is  the  last  and  only  real  mountain  to  be  conquered  on  the  road  to
Amsterdam.  In  other  words,  the  journey  from  Maastricht  to  Amsterdam  is  free  of  obstacles.  I
hope  that  the  same  applies  to  the  last  stage  of  EMU.  The  likelihood  of  obstacles  has  been
reduced  considerably  because,  as  I  have  explained,  stringent  entry  requirements  were  set  in
Maastricht. Gradually, a group of countries  is  emerging  in  Europe  which  may  be  able  to  meet
these  criteria.  In  the  spring  of  1998,  they  will  be  formally  appointed  as  EMU  participants.  In
order  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  this  core  group,  the  participation  of  France  and  Germany  -
forming as they do the axis of Western European cooperation - is a prerequisite. But with a view
BIS Review   42/1997
- 5 -
to  the  credibility  of  EMU,  France  and  Germany,  in  particular,  have  to  strictly  observe  the
conditions of accession.
The  creation  of  a  core  group  gives  rise  to  continuous  speculations  about  the
question which countries will join it. In this stage of EMU, such speculations are not productive.
Instead of excluding countries in advance, each country should be stimulated to do its utmost to
complete  the  budgetary  consolidation  process.  Of  course,  this  does  not  call  for  tricks  or  non-
recurring measures, but requires, - as stated in the Maastricht Treaty - a sustainable and therefore
permanent consolidation, not only in the interest of EMU but also in the interest of the country
involved.
Apart  from  the  question  which  EU  countries  will  be  in  the  core  group,
participation in EMU implies at any rate that the country involved transfers its monetary policy
powers to an independent ECB. In that field, we will continue to see rearguard action, because
the tradition of central bank independence is not equally rooted across the whole of Europe. On
the other hand, one should not worry about these recurring discussions too much, as the Treaty is
rock-solid  with  regard  to  the  prohibition  to  exert  political  influence  on  the  ECB  Governing
Council.  Obviously,  the  independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank  should  not  be  confused
with a lack of democratic legitimacy. After all, the democratic legitimacy of the ECB has been
safeguarded in many ways. For example, the designated ECB-President can be questioned by the
European  Parliament  and  the  chairman  of  the  Council  of  Ministers  plus  a  member  of  the
European  Commission  may  participate  in  meetings  of  the  ECB  Executive  Board  without,  it  is
true, voting rights. But apart from this, it should be kept in mind that the Masstricht Treaty has
been  ratified  by  the  national  parliaments.  In  other  words,  the  ECB’s  task  to  achieve  price
stability is based on a democratic decision of the national parliaments.
The fact that the other forms of policy will remain the  responsibility  of  national
authorities  may  make  EMU  unique,  but  fragile  too,  e.g.  if  no  measures  are  taken  to  guarantee
that  national  competences  are  not  abused.  Fortunately,  European  leaders  have  agreed  to  the
stability  pact  proposed  by  Germany.  This  pact  will  enable  EMU  to  impose  sanctions  on  EMU
Member States whose public finance is not in order. The Netherlands has always been a strong
proponent  of  this  proposal,  because  it  is  an  important  instrument  to  guarantee  budgetary
discipline. After all, the budgetary policies of the participants will have to be aligned in such a
way that they may be used to strengthen the European currency. But even then major efforts will
have to be made to clear the  road  to  EMU  of  any  remaining  obstacles.  The  Intergovernmental
Conference which started a year ago and will be completed in Amsterdam, will have to provide
an answer to the question how the EU can remain institutionally manageable when a number. of
Eastern European countries accede in the near future. Answers are also required to the questions
regarding  more  effective  decision-making  and  the  role  which  the  European  Parliament  could
play in that respect. Of course, these issues do not have to stand in the way of establishing EMU
in  1999.  Nevertheless,  they  show  that  the  long-term  success  of  EMU  as  part  of  the  EU  is  not
guaranteed until, more so than in the past, the widening of the Union runs parallel to a deepening
in  the  direction  of  an  “ever  closer  union  among  the  European  peoples”,  as  envisaged  by  the
signatories to the Treaty of Rome.
Ladies and Gentlemen
With Amsterdam as the last station on this trip, I have arrived at the conclusion of
my  address.  In  short,  it  may  be  argued  that  the  process  of  European  economic  and  monetary
cooperation from 1957 to the present has been one of trial and error or - analogous to our train
journey - of stopping and moving on. Nonetheless, the fact remains that the journey, also thanks
BIS Review   42/1997
- 6 -
to  visionary,  creative  and  energetic  drivers,  has  always  been  resumed  with  greater  speed,  and
that the problems encountered were resolved in an  inventive,  not  always  perfect,  but  workable
way. This, I think, is the power underlying the post-war European drive towards integration and
it is this power which makes me confident that the euro will arrive in due time. If the Treaty of
Amsterdam is realised, the switches are definitively turned and the signal will be at clear for the
final stage of EMU, which will lead to Frankfurt and can be completed on a beaten track in the
high-speed train.
BIS Review   42/1997
