Mr.  Patrikis  discusses  the  monetary  policy  and  regulatory  implications  of
banking on the Internet   Address by the Vice-President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Mr. Ernest T. Patrikis, at the Queen Mary & Westfield College University of London &
UNISYS  International  Management  Centre  held  in  Saint  Paul  de  Vence,  France  from
22-24/1/97.
A. Introduction
I want to share with you today some observations and speculations gathered this
and  last  year  about  banking  and  the  Internet.  I  will  be  speaking  in  my  capacity  as  a  central
banker  --  which  includes  monetary  policy,  banking  services,  bank  supervision,  and  payments
system oversight -- and as a surfer of the ’Net. Let me state, at the outset, that, while the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  does  not  conduct  “Internet  banking”  as  such,  we  do  have  a  home
page (http://www.ny.frb.org) with much useful information about our institution, with over three
million recorded hits to date. Finally, let me add that some of what I say here today could, very
easily,  be  obsolete  in  two  months’  or  even  two  weeks’  time.  But  I  will  try  to  point  out  those
areas in advance.
The title of this portion of the program gives rise to two issues of definition. The
first  is  “What  is  the  Internet?”  The  second  is  “What  is  banking?”  As  I  am  sure  you  are  well
aware,  in  the  United  States  we  are  a  litigious  sort.  We  even  have  a  legal  definition  of  the
Internet.  According  to  one  recent  case,  the  “Internet”  is  “an  international  computer
’supernetwork’  of  over  15,000  computer  networks  used  by  about  30  million  individuals,
corporations,  organizations,  and  educational  institutions  worldwide.”1  Another  case  described
the  “Internet”  as  “a  global  communications  network  linked  principally  by  modems  which
transmit  electronic  data  over  telephone  lines  [with]  approximately  20  million  to  30  million
users.”2
“Banking”  raises  a  host  of  issues  in  the  United  States.  There  is  commercial
banking and investment banking.  The  products  offered  by  “banking”  firms  range  from  deposit
taking  (including  payment  services),  investment  advisory  and  management  services,  trading  in
financial  instruments,  brokering  and  underwriting  financial  instruments,  lending,  and  trust
services.  A  bank  can  offer  all  of  these  services  on  the  Internet.  For  the  purposes  of  this
discussion,  I  will  basically  confine  myself  to  deposit  taking  (including  payment  services)  and
lending.
A Central Banker’s View
From a United States central bank perspective, the most fundamental question of
banking  and  the  Internet  is:  What  are  the  monetary-policy  implications,  especially  were  we  to
assume the enormous, widespread scale that some have been predicting? From this perspective,
the answer appears to be: probably not much. If the Internet is used merely to facilitate existing
banking  and  payment  transactions,  such  as  executing  electronic  bill  payments  or  transferring
funds  from  one  bank  account  to  another  (which  more  or  less  describes  what  electronic  bill
payment really is anyway), the combination of banking and the Internet should have few, if any,
implications for the conduct of United States monetary policy, or the measurement of the United
States money supply. “Money,” as defined by M1, M2, or M3, would still be held in accounts at
                                                  
1
2
judicial description of the Internet can be found in American Civil Liberties Union v. Reno, 929 F. Supp. 824,
830-48 (E.D.P.A. 1996).
Panavision Int’l, L.P. v. Toeppen, 938 F. Supp. 616, 617 (C.D. Cal. 1996).
In Systems, Inc. v. Instruction Set, Inc., 937 F. Supp. 161, 164 (D. Conn. 1996). The most comprehensive
BIS Review   17/1997
- 2 -
banks that would be reported to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System through
the existing mechanisms that such funds are reported today.
If,  however,  Internet  banking  evolved  to  the  point  where  digital  “coins,”
account-based  cards  and  PCs,  or  other  private-sector 
initiatives  produced  electronic
representations  of  money  that  began  to  be  used  and  circulated  like  currency,  the  potential
implications  for  United  States  monetary  policy  are  much  greater.  The  key  questions  here  are
related to amount and velocity -- that is, (1) how would digital bills or notes, or digital coins, be
represented on the books of a bank or depository institution; and (2) how many times would this
electronic coin or bill  circulate  in  the  general  economy  without  somehow  being  processed  and
recorded by a bank? In this regard, the October 1996 Bank for International Settlements report
“Implications  for  Central  Banks  of  the  Development  of  Electronic  Money”  states  “E-money
could lead to shifts in the velocity of money which might temporarily reduce the usefulness of
the monetary aggregates, especially narrower ones, for countries that rely on them as targets or
indicators.”  In  a  June  1996  speech  before  a  cyber-payments  conference,  Governor  Edward
Kelley of the Board of Governors stated that, with respect to a bank’s liabilities incurred through
issuing stored-value cards, such liabilities should be included in the statistical reports that banks
must  currently  submit  to  the  Board  of  Governors.3  It  is  difficult  to  argue  that  bank  liabilities
resulting  from  the  issuance  of  electronic  “coins”  or  electronic  “bills  and  notes”  should  be
reported any differently.
A  more  problematic  question  arises  when  considering  the  matter  of  nonbank
issuance  of  electronic  coins  or  bills.  Currently,  the  largest  nonbank  issuers  of  travelers  checks
are not required, but do volunteer to the Fed, the outstanding balances of their travelers checks,
so  that  this  information  can  be  statistically  recorded  and  reported  in  United  States  monetary
aggregates by the Fed. If the issuance of private electronic money grows to a significant level in
the  real  economy,  and  if  much  of  that  growth  is  provided  by  nonbank  issuers  of  electronic
money,  there  could  be  a  similar  request  for  nonbank  issuers  to  provide  information  about  the
volume  of  their  issuance  and  their  outstanding  electronic  money  liabilities,  to  the  extent  these
liabilities are not recorded on the books of a bank every time they are circulated in the general
economy.
A Bank Supervisor’s View
From  this  perspective,  combining  banking  and  the  Internet  offers  both  great
opportunity  and  great  potential  risk.  First,  the  good  news  --  it  is  primarily  cost-related.  It  has
been reported by several banking studies that the cost of a typical transaction at a bank branch is
now over $1.00; the cost of an ATM transaction is approximately $0.25. The cost of an Internet
transaction, however, has been estimated at about a penny. I do not vouch for this statistic, but
the difference is substantial. Such figures make a compelling argument for banks to get on  the
Internet  sooner  rather  than  later,  and  to  move  as  many  of  their  customers  on  to  electronic  or
Internet banking as soon as they possibly can. Indeed, some banks offer low-fee accounts where
the  customer  is  not  expected  to  enter  an  office  physically  --  mail,  phone,  and  ATM  are
sufficient.
As  stated  by  Board  of  Governors  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan:  “it  is  useful...to
begin by reminding ourselves just why there is bank supervision and regulation. At  bottom,  of
course,  is  the  historical  experience  of  the  effects  on  the  real  economy  of  financial  market
                                                  
3
the Cyberpayments Conference ’96 (June 18, 1996).
Remarks of Edward W. Kelley, Jr., Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, at
BIS Review   17/1997
- 3 -
disruptions  and  bank  failures,  especially  when  the  disruptions  and  failures  spread  beyond  the
initial impetus.”4
A bank supervisor should have concerns other than cost,  and  these  comprise  the
bad news -- the “risk” aspect of banking on the Internet. In the simplest terms, while we strive to
ensure  that  banks  remain  efficient  and  cost-effective,  we  also  have  to  ensure  that  banks  know
what  they  are  getting  into,  and  that  they  are  capable  of  handling  the  risks  that  accompany
banking  on  the  Internet.  The  tension  between  the  two  is  very  constant  and  real,  particularly
because  the  technology  today  seems  to  be  moving  so  much  faster  than  bankers  or  bank
supervisors can fully absorb.
At  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  we  are  being  proactive  in  this  area.
We currently conduct on-site, information systems examinations of State member banks in our
district -- in addition to commercial, trust, trading, and compliance examinations -- in which we
try to review and constructively criticize the examined bank’s entire MIS infrastructure. There is
no  separate,  independent  electronic  or  Internet  bank  exam  as  such.  However,  a  part  of  the
information systems examination reviews the bank’s electronic and Internet activities and plans,
and  all  examiners  ask  general  questions  that  we  feel  that  any  bank  offering  on-line  banking
services should be able to answer responsively.
In addition, we have convened a special task force at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York to review security issues involving on-line and Internet banking. The goal of this task
force  is  two-fold:  (1)  to  gather,  review,  and  benchmark  current  and  future  on-line  security
procedures  and  policies  of  State  member  banks  in  our  district;  and  (2)  to  then  somehow
disseminate, without unduly disadvantaging any specific depository institution that provided us
with its information, the best of these policies and procedures into  a  kind  of  “sound  practices”
security guide for banks to use for their electronic and Internet banking services. The task force
should issue its first report in the summer of 1997.
In a similar vein, I believe that the United States Federal bank supervisors, while
mindful of the risks, have tried to be as supportive of electronic and Internet banking as possible.
Each of the various bank supervisory agencies, i.e., the Board of Governors, the Office of Thrift
Supervision  (“OTS”),  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (“FDIC”),  and  the  Office  of
the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (“OCC”),  has  dealt  in  some  immediate  way  with  the  issues
posed by electronic and Internet banking. Both the OTS and the Board of Governors have dealt
directly with Internet banking through the bank applications approval process. In May of 1995,
the OTS approved the application of a  new  thrift,  the  Security  First  Network  Bank  (“SFNB”),
that  sought  explicitly  to  provide  the  majority  of  its  electronic  banking  services  over  the
Internet.5 In May of 1996, the Board of Governors approved the application of SFNB’s parent, a
bank  holding  company,  for  SFNB  to  acquire  a  data-processing  firm  specializing  in  data
processing  activities  that  would  provide  nationwide  banking  and  financial  services  over  the
Internet.6  In  December  of  1996,  the  Board  of  Governors  approved  the  application  of  a
Minnesota  bank  holding  company  and  two  foreign  banks  to  join  a  consortium  of  15  North
                                                  
4
Associations of Japan (Nov. 18, 1996).
Alan  Greenspan,  Banking  in  the  Global  Marketplace,  address  before  the  Federation  of  Bankers
5
See OTS Order No. 95-88 (May 8, 1995).
6
See Cardinal Bancshares, Inc., 82 Fed. Res. Bull. 674 (1996). In this Board Order, the Board stated that
“The Board believes the provision of computer banking services by SFNB to its customers in accordance with the
authority granted by the OTS, and as specifically described in this proposal, is consistent with Cardinal’s existing
authority under the [Bank Holding Company Act] and Regulation Y to operate a savings association.” Id. at n.1.
BIS Review   17/1997
- 4 -
American  banks  and  IBM  to  form  Integrion  Financial  Network,  LLC.7  Integrion  itself  has
announced that it will not provide electronic or home banking services, but will instead design
and  operate  a  secure  electronic  gateway  or  interface  system  linking  bank  customers  to  their
depository  institutions,  including  links  via  the  Internet.8  Finally,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of
New  York  and  the  Board  of  Governors  are  currently  processing  an  application  from  a  foreign
bank, with a United States securities brokerage subsidiary, to acquire a software firm planning to
design software for customers of brokerage firms to place securities buy-and-sell orders over the
Internet.9  The  OCC,  meanwhile,  confirmed  in  correspondence  in  August  of  1996  that,  in
addition  to  providing  home  banking  services  to  its  customers  through  the  Internet,  a  national
bank subsidiary  could  also  provide  Internet  access  to  customers  and  nonbank  customers  in  the
bank’s service area.10
In  the  midst  of  all  this  supervisory  “support,”  however,  I  should  also  mention
some of the as-yet unsettled issues dealing with the unique regulatory burdens facing depository
institutions  offering  financial  services  over  the  Internet.  Among  the  most  difficult  will  be  the
proper  application  of  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act  (“CRA”),  a  United  States  statute  that
requires  depository  institutions  to  meet  the  credit  needs  of  the  communities  where  they  accept
deposits.  What  exactly  is  a  deposit  community  in  cyberspace?  Nobody  really  knows.  This  has
not yet become a significant issue because most depository institutions offering on-line services
still have brick-and-mortar branches, on to which current definitions of a  CRA  community  are
based.  Still,  for  exclusively  on-line  depository  institutions,  the  CRA  issue  will  become
increasingly  important  as  their  market  share  grows.  Some  early  discussions  with  the  relevant
compliance supervisors may be in order. I also note that this also raises interesting questions on
the definition of the relevant geographic market in the analysis of bank mergers.
Furthermore, considering the CRA issue brings forth another, broader issue: what
is the role of nonbanks in the realm of Internet financial services, particularly payment services,
which are still largely the province of banks and other regulated depository institutions? Because
banks have been so intricately involved in the United States payments system, banks today face
unique  regulatory  burdens:  CRA,  reserve  requirements,  deposit  insurance  premiums,  and  the
costs  of  good  supervision  and  good  supervisors.  If  nonbanks  begin  to  take  significant  market
share away from banks because of an inherently lower cost structure,  that  raises  real  questions
about a level playing field and whether or not banks can ever fairly compete. If nonbanks begin
offering  through  the  Internet  many  of  the  payment  services,  or  alternatives  to  the  payment
services now offered exclusively by banks, that raises real concerns about the ultimate value of a
bank charter, and what it really means to be a “bank.” Or is this “banking”? Another issue that
may be relevant here is the implication of a firm that has a balance sheet that looks like that of a
bank but does not have direct access to the lender-of-last resort.
Finally, and especially in light of the issues just raised, I think it is important for
me to emphasize that the bank supervisors have expressed a clear willingness  to  listen  to  what
the banking community has had to say on the issues involving electronic and Internet banking.
Regulation  E,  promulgated  by  the  Board  of  Governors,  implements  the  Electronic  Funds
Transfer  Act  of  1978,  and  establishes  primarily  for  consumer  protection  purposes  the  basic
                                                  
7
8
electronic link to one.
9
Toronto Dominion Bank (Dec. 19, 1996).
10
See Royal Bank of Canada, et al., 83 Fed. Res. Bull. _____, (Order approved Dec. 2, 1996).
Integrion also stated  that  it  will  not  function  as  an  Internet  service  provider,  but  will  provide  a  secure
See  Notification  to  the  Board  of  Governors  Regarding  Investment  in  Marketware  International  Inc.  of
See OCC Interp. Letter No. 742 (Aug. 19, 1996).
BIS Review   17/1997
- 5 -
rights, liabilities, and responsibilities of consumers who use, and financial institutions who offer,
retail  electronic  funds  transfer  services.11  Among  the  protections  provided  are  required
disclosures,  error  resolution  procedures,  and  loss  protection.  In  1996,  when  the  Board  of
Governors  issued  its  proposed  regulations  concerning  the  applicability  of  Regulation  E  to
stored-value cards, the Board of Governors explicitly requested that commenters to the proposed
revisions indicate whether the commenters believed that part or all of Regulation E should apply
to  electronic  “money”  or  “value”  residing  on  a  computer  system  or  a  personal-computer  hard
drive.12
Similarly,  the  FDIC,  while  holding  public  hearings  on  its  General  Counsel
Opinion  No.  8  on  stored-value  cards  and  Federal  deposit  insurance  coverage,13  specifically
requested  additional  commentary  on  Federal  deposit  insurance  coverage  and  electronic  value
represented on computer systems or personal computers. I believe the message is clear: as bank
supervisors,  we  are  open  to  what  the  banking  community  has  to  say  on  this  rapidly  evolving
market. New ideas and reasoned arguments are welcome. We must try not to restrain important
new  services  developed  by  the  banking  industry  but  should  remain  vigilant  as  banking-type
services are offered by nonbank institutions.
A Payments Systems Overseer’s View
From the perspective of a payments system overseer, I see much activity, but thus
far,  few  genuinely  revolutionary  innovations  with  respect  to  banking  and  the  Internet  in  the
United  States.  Mainly,  I  see  the  application  of  faster,  cheaper  electronic  processing  of  older,
more  established  paper-based  methods  of  transferring  payments  between  parties.  Credit  card
payments on the Internet are one example.  Instead  of  using  a  telephone,  a  normal  card  reader,
and a customer’s signature, one leading Internet payments company has devised a secure method
of allowing a bank customer to shop on-line with a credit card, by never releasing “in the clear”
the customer’s credit card number on the Internet itself. Instead, the company only releases the
credit card number and a merchant’s request for payment to the customer’s issuing bank, away
from the Internet, after verifying on-line with the customer that the purchase was authentically
made. The bank processes the transaction as it would any other credit card purchase; the value
added  by  the  company  is  that  the  customer’s  credit  card  number  is  never  on-line,  a  benefit
indeed in today’s security-poor Internet.
It  is  not  hard  to  imagine  that  another  step  in  this  direction  is  for  a  third-party
organization (perhaps even a bank subsidiary) to issue secure, encrypted electronic checks on the
Internet  on  behalf  of  bank  customers,  or  even  unaffiliated  parties,  wishing  to  make  purchases
on-line. Much legal uncertainty remains in the United States about establishing such a process,
however. Basic questions remain unanswered. What, exactly, would be an authorized signature
on  an  electronic  check?  Put  another  way,  what  types  of  entities  would  be  authorized  to  act  as
certification authorities on the Internet for such commercial conveniences as electronic purchase
orders,  electronic  negotiable  instruments,  or  their  bases,  digital  signatures?  Would  these
See 12 C.F.R. Part 205.
I should note here that other consumer-protection regulations issued by the Board of Governors address
                                                  
11
12
consumer credit transactions.
13
FDIC General Counsel Opinion No. 8 stated, in essence, that the FDIC would consider granting Federal
deposit insurance coverage for electronic value residing on stored value cards issued by a bank, only if the value
on  the  stored  value  card  represented  an  obligation  definitively  linked  to  an  existing  bank  customer’s  deposit
account.
BIS Review   17/1997
- 6 -
certification  authorities  be  entirely  private  sector  derived?  Or  would  they  be  established  and
operated by the government, by the individual states, some of whom already have enacted digital
signature statutes? What is the role of banks in this process? In particular, what are the risks to
the  bank,  in  allowing  a  nonaffiliated  third  party  to  act  as  a  certifying  authority  for  electronic
checks drawn from the accounts of bank customers?
I  could  ask  some  even  more  basic  commercial  law  questions  about  banking  in
cyberspace.  When  is  an  Internet  payment  final?  More  specifically,  when  a  payment  over  the
Internet is made, has the maker of the payment made a provisional payment, as with  writing  a
check, or a final payment, as with giving a certified check or making a wire transfer? Articles 3,
4 and 4A of the Uniform Commercial Code (“UCC”) govern the above circumstances, but have
nothing  to  say  on  Internet  payments.  Currently,  private  contract  law  governs;  agreements
between  each  of  the  parties  in  an  on-line  transaction  should  be  very  carefully  drafted  and
reviewed.  Still,  if  Internet  banking  and  commercial  transactions  were  to  grow  in  volume  and
complexity,  it  is  quite  possible  that  private  contract  law  could  evolve  into  a  specialized
commercial law of cyberspace, and eventually be codified into parts of the UCC.
On a less theoretical note,  I  should  mention  that  a  multi-national  Task  Force  on
the  Security  of  Electronic  Money,  established  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement
Systems and the Group of Computer Experts of the Group of Ten Central Bank Governors, and
chaired  by  Israel  Sendrovic  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  issued  a  report  on  its
findings  entitled  “Security  of  Electronic  Money”  in  August  1996.  This  Task  Force  examined
primarily  consumer-oriented  stored-value  payment  products  by,  among  other  activities,
surveying  the  leading  global  suppliers  of  both  card-based  and  software-based  stored-value
systems, and concluded that the technical security measures of these systems are being designed
to  achieve  an  adequate  level  of  security  relative  to  other  forms  of  common  retail  payment,
assuming they are implemented appropriately. I recommend the report to anyone interested in a
general discussion about security issues and stored-value systems, Internet-based or not.
Moving  away  from  consumer  banking  and  the  Internet,  and  looking  perhaps
not-so-distantly into the future, I have also had occasion to question what the repercussions are
for large-value payments transfer systems, such as Fedwire, with the  emergence  of  a  different,
much  more  secure  Internet.  Generally  speaking,  the  Internet  today  is  a  “somewhat”  secure
environment  in  which  to  conduct  banking  and  financial  service  activity.  The  current  level  of
security  is  not  adequate  for  large-value  payments.  Some  Internet-based  payment  products  are
becoming more secure, but only after the  creators  of  these  products  have  spent  a  great  deal  of
time,  effort  and  resources  making  their  products  secure.  Consistent  fast  transmission  and
processing  are  also  essential  for  large-value  payments.  The  Internet  today  has  no  authorized,
universal  means  of  prioritizing  specific  electronic  messages  from  other  messages.  Faster  and
better hardware helps, certainly, but offers no guarantee.
One  of  my  responsibilities  is  to  serve  as  the  Product  Director  of  the  Wholesale
Payments  Product  Office  of  the  twelve  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  This  includes  the  Fedwire
transfer of funds, transfers of securities against payment, and net settlement. In providing these
payment services, the Reserve Banks must charge a fee designed to cover their costs, plus what
we refer to as a “private sector adjustment factor,” a proxy for the capital, taxes, and other costs
incurred by private-sector service providers. Thus, I am keenly interested in the next stage of the
Internet.
If  messages  sent  across  the  Internet  could  be  made  timely,  become  much  more
secure at reasonable cost, and, if a widely-accepted prioritization scheme for electronic messages
BIS Review   17/1997
- 7 -
could  be  implemented  so  that  large-value  payment  messages  could  move  instantaneously,  it  is
not  inconceivable  that  the  effect  on  existing  large-value  payments  transfer  systems  could  be
substantial.  Within  a  five-to-ten  year  time  frame,  I  could  see  at  least  a  portion  of  Fedwire
large-volume transfers of funds and securities -- with real-time gross-settlement -- handled over
the Internet. Please do not ask me exactly when this will come about. On the  other  hand,  with
potentially enormous, secure, bilateral netting arrangements occurring between clearing banks in
real  time  over  the  Internet,  volume  on  existing  large-value  transfer  systems  could  decrease
dramatically. The clearing banks could, conceivably, save themselves some real money.
Jurisdictional Issues
Any  discussion  of  banking  or  any  form  of  commerce  over  the  Internet  today
would  not  be  complete  without  at  least  a  few  words  on  the  legal  jurisdictional  issues  that  the
Internet presents. This is arguably the area of law most in flux, the most subject to change on a
monthly or even daily  basis,  depending  on  the  specific  jurisdiction  and  long-arm  statute  under
discussion.  In  the  United  States,  cases  have  already  been  decided  regarding  court  jurisdiction
and  the  Internet  over  alleged  trademark  violations,14  contract  disputes,15  and  advertising
disputes.16  Although  I  am  as  yet  unaware  of  any  banking  organizations  that  have  become
embroiled  in  litigation  over  jurisdictional  issues  from  being  on  the  Internet,  I  cannot  promise
you  that  such  a  suit  will  never  occur.  If  a  State  banking  agency  or  a  State  attorney  general
decided one day that a Web-site or an Internet-based transaction conferred sufficient minimum
contacts with a state resident so that the state’s long-arm statute applied to the bank, a suit could
easily  be  filed.  Minnesota  Attorney  General  Hubert  Humphrey  III  filed  six  lawsuits  in  1995
against six companies accusing them of engaging in illegal business practices or running outright
pyramid schemes over the Internet, although none of the six companies was based in Minnesota,
and no Minnesota citizen ever came forward to complain about the  companies.  The  fact  that  a
Minnesota  resident  could  have  accessed  the  scams  run  by  the  companies,  claimed  Attorney
General Humphrey, was sufficient to confer jurisdiction of his lawsuits in the Minnesota courts.
Lest  this  argument  sound  wildly  and  improbably  expansive,  it  should  be  noted
that the “Internet access = jurisdiction” idea has already been accepted by some  of  the  Federal
district  courts  that  have  decided  such  cases,  although  it  must  also  be  noted  that  these  courts’
decisions have been inconsistent, have all had slightly different facts, and have taken great pains
to distinguish themselves from one another. New case law on the issue of jurisdiction conferred
by Internet access is undoubtedly being made as we speak. At a minimum, then, banks offering
services through the Internet should have signed contracts with electronic and Internet banking
customers  that  specify  to  the  courts  where  claims  or  disputes  may  be  brought.  Web-sites
designed  merely  to  advertise  a  bank’s  financial  services  should  be  designed  to  be  as
controversy-free as possible, although that may be difficult without making the sites content-free
as well. Banks should err on the side of caution until the jurisdictional issues have had more time
to sort themselves out.
I  would  like  to  present  a  hypothetical  fact  situation  to  you  which  I  think
demonstrates  some  of  the  thorny  legal  and  supervisory  issues  that  could  be  raised  by  the
existence  of  offshore  banking  entities  doing  business  over  the  Internet  with  individuals  in  our
                                                  
14
See Panavision Int’l, L.P. v. Toeppen, 938 F. Supp. 616, (C.D. Cal. 1996) ; Bensusan Restaurant Corp. v.
King, 937 F. Supp. 295 (S.D.N.Y. 1996) ; Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Chuckleberry Publishing, Inc., 939 F. Supp.
1032 (S.D.N.Y 1996).
15
Int’l Corp., 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18279 (D. Ariz. 1996).
16
v. Instruction Set, Inc., 937 F. Supp. 161 (D. Conn. 1996).
See CompuServe, Inc. v. Patterson, 89 F.3d 1257 (6th Cir.  1996)  ;  Edias  Software  Int’l,  LLC  v.  Basis
See Maritz, Inc. v. Cybergold, Inc., 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14978 (E.D. Mo. 1996) ; Inset Systems, Inc.
BIS Review   17/1997
- 8 -
jurisdictions.  I  travel  to  the  island  of  Atlantis,  where  I  obtain  a  Class  Z  banking  charter.  I  am
permitted  under  this  charter  to  engage  in  the  business  of  banking  every  place  in  the  world,
except  with  residents  of  Atlantis.  As  you  have  probably  suspected,  Atlantis  is  founded  on  the
principle of free and open markets, unfettered by supervision and regulation of banks with Class
Z charters. Atlantis also provides for strict adherence of the principles of  banking  secrecy.  My
bank  is  named  The  Internet  International  Bank  (“IIB”).  The  IIB  offers  a  full  spectrum  of
banking services to Atlantis nonresidents. Being a modern bank, it conducts business principally
on the Internet. IIB has a series of quite attractive Internet pages where its products are offered.
These pages spell out the products, deposit terms and interest rates, and loan terms and interest
rates. All agreements are governed by the law of Atlantis. All deposits are deemed received over
IIB’s  “counters”  in  Atlantis,  and  all  loans  are  paid  out  of  Atlantis.  Atlantis  has  an  enjoyable
ambiance even exceeding that of Nice and Saint Paul de Vence; therefore, I see no need to leave
the  island.  I  do  receive  and  entertain  customers  when  they  visit  Atlantis.  I  do  place  telephone
calls  to  customers  who  have  responded  to  my  Internet  page,  but  I  do  not  make  cold  calls  to
customers.  Communications  with  customers  over  the  Internet  are  state-of-the-art  secure.
Customers receive account statements over the Internet, issue payment  instruments  to  IIB  over
the Internet, and request loans over the Internet. All payments to and from accounts are made by
wire transfer to IIB’s correspondent account maintained on the books of Atlantis Bank, the only
bank  chartered  under  Atlantis  law  authorized  to  engage  in  banking  transactions  with  Atlantis
residents.  Customers  may  instruct  IIB  to  make  payments  for  their  account.  These  too  are
consummated by means of payments out of IIB’s account at Atlantis Bank. Loans are disbursed
and paid the same way.
The  question  presented  is  whether  IIB  is  violating  the  law  of  the  countries  in
which  its  customers  are  located.  While  I  have  my  own  views  as  to  the  application  of  United
States  banking  and  securities  laws  to  this  fact  situation,  I  prefer  not  to  spell  those  out  in  my
prepared  remarks.  Instead,  we  all  might  prosper  by  sharing  our  views  as  to  the  proper
application  of  our  home  country’s  laws  to  individuals  in  our  countries  who  might  do  business
with  IIB.  I  should  note  that  this  fact  situation  is  a  pure  figment  of  my  imagination.  The
cooperative  efforts  of  bank  supervisors  over  the  world  should  be  designed  to  ensure  precisely
against this sort of bank. In other words, like Atlantis, IIB should never surface above water.
Our  discussion  should  include  responses  to  the  following  questions:  (1)  is  IIB
engaged  in  an  impermissible  activity  in  your  home  country;  (2)  if  it  is  impermissible,  what
authority has responsibility for enforcing that law; (3) if impermissible, is that a civil or criminal
violation; (4) if impermissible, is there any way for IIB to qualify to do business in your home
country; and finally, (5) does your home-country court have jurisdiction to hear cases brought by
a customer against IIB?
Conclusion
To conclude, I simply  wish  to  commend  the  banking  and  legal  communities  for
learning as much about electronic and Internet banking as they can, now, and for trying to stay
ahead of the curve of ever evolving and improving technology. I fully agree with the philosophy
of  letting  the  markets  decide  what  will  work  and  what  will  not.  We,  as  supervisor  and  central
banker, will try to stay out of the way as much as possible, unless because of criminal activities
or systemic risk concerns we have to jump in. The private sector seems to have done fairly well
so  far.  To  this  end,  I  point  out  a  recent  creation  of  the  Banker’s  Roundtable,  an  organization
composed  of  some  of  the  largest  United  States  banks,  in  organizing  the  Banking  Industry
Technology Secretariat (“BITS”).
BIS Review   17/1997
- 9 -
BITS, as I understand it, is in the process of designing and implementing common
technological  standards  for  the  inter-operability  of  systems  linking  banks  and  their  customers,
and is also hoping to act as a certification authority for its member banks for third-party system
and software providers, to ensure that when an electronic  or  Internet  banking  transaction  takes
place, the bank’s name is the only name the customer ever sees. Similarly, a certified software or
systems provider would agree that the customer’s payment information would stay with the bank
and not the provider.
I mention this not as an endorsement of BITS, but as an  example  of  the  type  of
innovation and cooperative or collaborative effort that can occur when the banking community
realizes the enormous challenge and opportunity it has in the next few years. Central banks and
bank  supervisors  must  also  be  equal  to  these  challenges.  In  order  for  us  to  fulfill  our
responsibilities, it will be necessary for the private sector financial institutions to keep educating
and  challenging  us.  It  is  those  dynamics  that  will  help  ensure  good  public  policy  in  banking
supervision and regulation of banking transactions over the Internet.
BIS Review   17/1997
