Mr. Brash looks at economic developments and their bearing on inflationary
trends   Speaking notes of Mr. Donald Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
on the release of the September, 1997 Economic Projections in Wellington on 17/9/97.
Introduction
Good  morning,  and  welcome  to  this  briefing  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  September
1997 Economic Projections.
You  will  recall  that,  in  contrast  to  our  June  and  December  Monetary  Policy
Statements, which the Bank is obliged to produce by statute, the Economic Projections which we
release  each  March  and  September  are  more  in  the  nature  of  ‘self-initiated’  documents.  Their
primary  purpose  is  to  assist  us  in  assessing  economic  developments  that  have  a  bearing  on
inflation trends, and thereby to assist us in forming judgements on how monetary policy should
evolve. In publishing our Projections, we take the  opportunity  to  inform  financial  markets  and
the  public  generally  on  what  is  driving  our  day-to-day  policy  decisions.  Typically,  you  can
expect  to  see  in  our  Economic  Projections  more  discussion  of  matters  such  as  investment
behaviour, labour market trends, the balance of payments and so on than is to  be  found  in  our
Monetary Policy Statements, which concentrate more on assessments of past and future financial
market conditions, and the stance of monetary policy.
However,  both  documents  require  us  to  produce  a  comprehensive  view  of  the
future trends in the New Zealand economy, and to test our previously articulated views against
the stream of emerging data and opinion. A key ingredient in that process is our new forecasting
and policy system (FPS) -- the system of models we now utilise in developing our Projections.
One  important  change  which  that  new  system  of  models  has  made  possible  was
introduced  with  our  June  Monetary  Policy  Statement.  Whereas  we  had  previously  projected
inflation  on  the  basis  of  an  assumed  track  for  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate,  in  June  we
shifted to a structure that constrains our Projections of inflation to converge on the mid-part of
the  0  to  3  percent  inflation  target,  while  allowing  the  track  of  monetary  conditions  to  vary  as
necessary to produce that outcome. You can see that process at work again in these Projections .
One point made  in  relation  to  FPS  when  it  was  first  introduced  bears  repeating.
While it is an important  tool  which  helps  shape  our  view  of  the  economy  and  its  likely  future
path, it is not a ‘black box’. FPS provides a coherent framework for thinking about the economy,
but  considerable  judgement  is  still  required  to  arrive  at  a  final  projection.  There  are  clearly  a
number of different paths through which the economy can evolve to essentially the same point.
What  is  portrayed  in  this  document  is  just  one  of  those  paths,  but  one  that  we  feel  is  both
realistic and sound as a base for our policy judgements.
The real economy
Shortly  after  our  June  Monetary  Policy  Statement  was  published,  the  release  of
March quarter GDP data seemed to suggest that the economy was significantly weaker than we
had  allowed  for.  Our  subsequent  analysis  indicated  that  there  were  particular  factors  (notably
that Easter, unusually, fell into the March quarter) which explained much of the small decline in
GDP in that quarter.
BIS Review   84/1997
- 2 -
Since then, the emerging data have suggested that the economy is a little weaker
than  we  had  portrayed  in  June,  but  that  it  is  also  resuming  a  robust  growth  path.  Whereas  we
were projecting an annualised growth rate through the first half of calendar 1997 of a little over
1  percent,  the  estimate  incorporated  in  these  Projections  is  closer  to  0.5  percent.  Having  said
that,  data  released  since  we  completed  the  Projections  are,  if  anything,  suggestive  of  stronger
rather  than  weaker  outcomes  for  June  quarter  GDP.  In  any  event,  we  remain  of  the  view
expressed in June that activity will pick up in the second half of the year. Over the year to March
1998,  we  expect  the  economy  to  expand  by  around  2.5  percent,  accelerating  further  to  4.6
percent growth in the year to March 1999.
The  factors  driving  that  expansion  include  a  robust  global  economy,  gradually
increasing household expenditures, improved productivity, stronger exports (partly the result of
a  lower  exchange  rate),  business  investment  and  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy  --  both  from
increased government spending under the Coalition Agreement and from the tax cuts scheduled
for July 1998. Easier monetary conditions since earlier this year are also supportive of stronger
growth.
It  seems  clear  that,  in  the  middle  of  this  decade,  the  New  Zealand  economy
became somewhat over-stretched in terms of its ability to support the pace of spending. It seems
equally clear that the economy has entered a period in which there is some spare capacity. Given
the  current  and  imminent  expansionary  forces  that  I  have  described,  the  spare-capacity  phase
should  be  short-lived,  but  long  enough  to  take  the  pressure  off  inflation,  and  long  enough  to
make it unlikely that we will experience the kind of destructive crunch that has so often brought
past cycles to a shuddering halt. In this sense, we are describing a growth profile that reflects the
steadying  influence  of  maintaining  low  inflation,  which  in  turn  should  contribute  to  New
Zealand’s future growth potential.
We expect continued job creation throughout the period to March 2000, continued
growth  in  real  disposable  household  income  (averaging  over  3  percent  per  annum  through  the
projection  period),  continuing  modest  fiscal  surpluses,  further  declines  in  the  government’s
debt-to-GDP ratio, and an improvement in the current account deficit from nearly 6 percent of
GDP to around 4 percent of GDP.
Inflation
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  our  new  Projections  framework  takes  as  given  that
inflation  should  converge  on  the  mid-part  of  our  target  range,  and  derives  the  monetary
conditions that are needed to achieve that outcome. In that sense there is no particular news in
the  fact  that  we  expect  underlying  inflation  to  be  close  to  the  middle  of  the  target  over  the
projection period. But there are some aspects of the inflation track that require comment.
In particular, we now expect inflation outcomes over the next two quarters to be
rather higher than was the case in June. There are two principal sources of that upward revision.
First,  the  last  few  months  have  seen  a  6  or  7  percent  depreciation  of  the
trade-weighted exchange rate. The increased inflation now expected over the next two quarters
is, in part, a direct consequence of that depreciation.
Secondly,  domestic  inflation  continues  to  be  strongly  influenced  by  the  policy
decisions of the Government. We now estimate that, over the  next  two  quarters,  policy-related
increases  in  Housing  New  Zealand  rentals  and  tertiary  education  fees  could  well  exceed  the
BIS Review   84/1997
- 3 -
materiality threshold which is applied in determining our measure of underlying inflation. In that
event, underlying inflation would be slightly lower than the estimates given in these Projections.
Policy Implications
We now view an MCI level of 725 as being appropriate for the next quarter. This
is 100 basis points lower than the desired MCI level which has applied for the last quarter, but
roughly equivalent to actual monetary conditions over recent weeks. You will recall that a 100
point reduction in the MCI is equivalent to a 1 percentage point decline in 90 day bill rates, a 2
percent  decline  in  the  TWI,  or  some  equivalent  combination.  You  may  also  recall  that  the
average MCI for the December 1996 quarter was 1000. The extent of easing over the past nine
months has clearly been significant, although certainly off a high base.
Our Projections point to further, but quite small, easings in the first two quarters
of  1998  before  emerging  inflationary  pressures  lead  us  to  expect  monetary  conditions  to  enter
another tightening phase. However, as we make clear in our policy assessment section, whether
those further easings eventuate in 1998 is very much dependent on how the economy develops
over  the  next  few  months.  Financial  market  participants  eager  to  bring  forward  the  small,  and
conditional, easings shown in these Projections clearly do so at their own risk! On the face of it,
with inflation over the next two years, and especially over  the  next  two  quarters,  being  a  little
higher than we thought likely back in June, easing now by more than we foreshadowed in June
may seem surprising. The explanation is straightforward, and relates to the lags inherent in the
operation  of  monetary  policy.  While  inflation  is  a  little  higher  in  the  short  term  than  we  had
previously  expected,  it  is  still  well  within  our  target  range,  and  has  been  boosted  by  factors
which  should  be  essentially  transitory,  such  as  the  impact  of  moving  Housing  NZ  rentals  to
market. Of more relevance to the outlook in 18 months to two years’ time is the margin of spare
capacity in the economy. That now looks somewhat larger than it did previously, and warrants
somewhat easier monetary conditions. Although activity will be accelerating through 1998, it is
not  until  1999  that  the  inflation  pressures  associated  with  strong  growth  begin  to  emerge.  A
gradual tightening of monetary conditions from mid-1998 fits with that profile.
There  are,  of  course,  alternative  paths  for  monetary  policy  that  could  deliver
inflation within our target range. As was discussed in June, one alternative path would involve
more  aggressive  easing  now,  followed  by  earlier  and  more  aggressive  tightening  next  year.
Another  path  would  involve  holding  conditions  relatively  flat  at  about  current  levels  until  the
latter part of 1998 before beginning a somewhat gentler tightening beyond that date. Inevitably,
there  is  rather  more  art  than  science  in  selecting  the  best  of  these  alternatives.  What  we  have
chosen reflects the risks that we see around us at present, and also reflects the benefits we see in
providing a relatively smooth path for monetary conditions over time.
The mix of monetary conditions
On  numerous  occasions  over  the  past  year  or  two,  I  have  indicated  that  the
particular  mix  of  monetary  conditions  was  unhelpful  --  that  the  exchange  rate  was  too  high,
putting excessive  pressure  on  exporters,  and  that  interest  rates  remained  too  low  to  discourage
borrowing for housing purposes, or to encourage increased domestic savings.
The past quarter has seen a substantial, and welcome, shift in the mix of monetary
conditions in the direction we believed appropriate. The fall in the exchange rate will boost the
incomes  of  exporters  and  those  competing  with  imports,  and  will  ultimately  increase  export
volumes. The projected improvement in the current account balance reflects that. The increase in
BIS Review   84/1997
- 4 -
interest  rates  is  also  helpful,  given  the  continuing  pressures  we  have  seen  in  the  domestic  or
non-tradeables sector of the economy, and especially in real estate markets. There is no benefit
to New Zealand in seeing real estate prices increase to a point where they become vulnerable to
a sudden, and damaging, correction. (Anyone who has been observing events in South-East Asia
over the past couple of months will be conscious of the enormous damage that can be inflicted in
those circumstances. Our own experience post-1987 is also instructive in that regard.)
The  shift  in  the  mix  of  conditions,  while  substantial,  has  occurred  in  a  manner
which is fully consistent with our inflation target, and fully consistent with our use of an MCI in
assessing the overall stance of monetary policy. It is certainly the case that the sharp decline of
the exchange rate will boost inflation to some degree in the short term. That is already apparent
in our Projections. But even with that increase, projected inflation remains well within our target
range. And the increase in interest rates that has accompanied the exchange rate fall will work in
the opposite direction, dampening inflation in the longer-term.
The MCI
At the time when the exchange rate was declining, and interest rates were rising,
we heard a good deal of criticism of our MCI. It was, it was claimed, too rigid; it was forcing up
interest  rates  at  a  time  when  the  economy  was  already  in  recession;  it  was  based  on  a
relationship between interest rates and the exchange rate which was no longer valid; and so on.
As I made clear in my speech to the Counties Kiwifruit Growers Association on
22  August,  I  regard  those  criticisms  as  ill-founded.  I  think  the  MCI  structure  has  performed
admirably over the past three months. In making that assessment, I think it is important to reflect
on  just  how  volatile  international  exchange  rates  have  been  over  that  period.  Any  of  the
alternative monetary policy arrangements we could have adopted in place of the MCI would also
have been subject to a good deal of stress. I certainly see no reason to change the MCI approach
at this point.
Likewise,  the  description  I  offered  in  June  of  how  the  Bank  might  react  to
deviations in actual market conditions from the central or ‘desired’ MCI track appears to us to
have  weathered  the  tests  of  the  past  quarter  rather  well.  I  see  no  reason  to  modify  that
description now, and our response to evolving market conditions over the next three months will
be consistent with my comments of June.
BIS Review   84/1997
