Mr. George conveys his reflections on the development of bond market yields
over recent years   Remarks by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J. George, at the
Euromoney International Bond Congress held in London on 25/2/97.
I’m  honoured  to  have  been  invited  to  open  this  3rd  Euromoney  International
Bond  Congress.    I  remember  with  great  pleasure  launching  your  initial  Congress  in  October
1994 in the Barbican.  It is an even greater pleasure now to launch the QEII!  That first Congress
was an ambitious and imaginative venture.  But it immediately established itself as a major event
in the international financial calendar.  I congratulate Euromoney  on  that  achievement,  and,  to
judge  from  the  program,  on  organising  an  even  bigger  and  better  Congress  on  this  third
occasion.  I am delighted to welcome you all here.
I remember  our  debate  at  that  first  Congress  particularly  well,  Mr. Chairman.    I
remember  it  because  I  looked  up  my  notes  over  the  weekend!    The  context  then  was  one  in
which  yields  had  fallen  very  sharply,  to  unusually  low  levels,  almost  everywhere  during  1993
only  to  back  up  just  as  sharply  during  1994.    We  concluded,  I  think,  that  none  of  us  really
understood either the earlier strength of the market or its  subsequent  weakness!    But  we  had  a
very enjoyable two days of discussion.
One concern at the time was that we were facing  a  global  capital  shortage,  with
increasing  demand  from  the  emerging,  transitioning  and  developing  countries  at  a  time  of
strengthening  economic  activity  and  large  government  deficits  across  the  industrial  world.
Referring generally in my remarks this morning to 10 year maturities, real yields - measured by
our own indexed gilts - had indeed risen in 1994 by ¾% or more to close to 4%.  But nominal
yields had risen by substantially more - by something like 2% in the major markets - reflecting
increased uncertainty no doubt, but clearly also worsening inflationary expectations.
In  my  remarks  on  that  occasion,  I  ventured  to  suggest  that  bond  markets  might
just be exaggerating at least the inflationary risks, by underestimating three factors in particular:
First, the commitment of governments and central banks all
around the world to disciplined macro-economic policies.
Secondly, the restraining effect of both the level of real
yields and of structural unemployment particularly in Europe.
And thirdly, the counter-inflationary effect of global
competition and technological innovation.
Now I seem to recollect that this suggestion was met with a degree of scepticism.
That  was  not  at  all  surprising.    You  had  all  heard  that  sort  of  optimism  from  the  authorities
before!
But the fact is that since around the time of that first Euromoney Congress bond
yields have nevertheless trended fairly consistently lower, and are now in many cases close to or
even below the low point they had reached around the end of 1993.  Real yields, again measured
by our own indexed gilts have fallen back to a little more than 3¼%;  and the first US indexed
bond issue yields much the same.  And nominal yields have fallen by 200 basis points or more in
continental Europe and Japan - though rather less in  the  United States  and  the  UK.    There  has
been  more  excitement  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  with  the  dollar  in  particular  first
weakening against the yen and the major continental currencies until the spring of 1995 and then
progressively recovering.
BIS Review   22/1997
- 2 -
These developments were certainly influenced by the factors which I mentioned a
moment  ago.    In  particular  they  have  been  influenced  by  the  continuing  broadly-based
consensus - in  countries  all  around  the  world,  and  across  a  large  part  of  the  political  spectrum
within countries - on the importance of macro-economic policy discipline.
Macro-economic policy is no longer seen as an instrument for short-term demand
management, which can be used to trade-off the conflicting demands of growth and stability in
the short run.  It is now much more widely understood and accepted that the rate of growth that
can be sustained, or the  level  of  employment  that  can  be  achieved  and  maintained  in  anything
other than the short run, depend fundamentally on the structural, supply-side, characteristics of
the  economy,  and  not  just  on  the  level  of  demand.    So  today’s  orthodoxy  ascribes  to
macro-economic policy the job of keeping demand in line with the capacity of the economy to
meet that demand in the medium and longer term.
Within  this  overall  framework,  monetary  policy  is  allocated  the  specific  task  of
achieving and maintaining effective price stability.  This is not, as some commentators still seem
to  suggest,  simply  some  doctrinaire  end  in  itself.    Inflation  is  seen  rather  as  a  symptom  of
imbalance between demand and supply in the economy.  So what we are essentially aiming to do
through monetary policy is to anticipate the emergence of that imbalance and head it off before
it  becomes  entrenched.    If  we  are  successful  in  that,  inflation  will  be  lower,  there  will  be  less
need  for  violent  interest  rate  movements  than  in  the  past,  and  the  economy  will  grow  at  a
steadier, and more sustainable and predictable, rate.  That, in turn, will encourage more rational,
longer-term,  economic  decision-making  and  investment,  which  will  help  indirectly  to  improve
underlying, supply-side, performance.
Similarly, today’s macro-economic orthodoxy requires fiscal policy to be directed
to restricting government borrowing to levels that can be sustained into the medium and longer
term,  without  either  forcing  up  real  yields  or  implying  the  prospective  need  for  progressively
rising  tax  rates  -  which  could  otherwise  damage  the  development  of  private  sector  economic
activity.
Now  in  some  respects  we  have  made  considerable  progress  over  the  past  two
years and more.  Inflation in many countries - including virtually all the industrial countries but
not  confined  to  them  -  is  now  consistently  lower  than  it  has  been  for  ages.    That  in  itself  has
contributed to lower interest  rates  and  to  the  lower  nominal  bond  yields  that  I  have  described.
But,  in  addition  to  that,  fiscal  consolidation,  which  has  lowered  the  combined  government
deficits of the G7 countries from around $600 billion in 1994 to around $540 billion last year,
has  helped  to  reduce  real  yields,  notwithstanding  the  continuing  demand  for  capital  from  the
developing  world.    And  the  really  good  news  is  that  this  macro-economic  discipline  has  been
accompanied  by  sustained  economic  expansion,  with  world  GDP  as  a  whole  growing  at  an
annual rate of some 3½ - 4%.
Now  of  course  there  have  been  quite  marked  differences  in  the  performance  of
individual countries within this overall  picture.    Some  of  the  transition  economies  have  seen  a
brutal  contraction  of  output  which  is  only  now  beginning  to  stabilise.    And  there  have  been
marked fluctuations in the growth rates of some of the emerging countries.  Growth in parts of
Asia,  for  example,  is  now  moderating,  cyclically,  to  a  more  sustainable  pace,  while  parts  of
Latin America continue to recover from the set-back they suffered two years ago.
Among the industrial countries, too, economic developments have diverged over
the  past  two  years.    In  the  United  States  and  in  this  country,  for  example,  inflation  has  been
BIS Review   22/1997
- 3 -
contained  to  around  3%  with  continuing  growth  and  low  or  falling  unemployment.    And  this
pattern looks set to continue.  In Japan and on the Continent of Europe, on the other hand, while
inflation has been even lower, activity has been disappointingly weak, and unemployment on the
Continent at least has risen to quite frightening levels.  And while there is now the prospect of a
moderate pick-up in activity in these countries, that is not yet assured.  Japan, which is in many
respects a unique case, faces substantial fiscal consolidation.  And in Europe, too, the prospects
are  clouded  by  pressure  to  bring  budget  deficits  down  sufficiently  to  meet  the  Maastricht
convergence criteria this year, notwithstanding the weakness of the domestic economies, and in
an environment of longer term structural inflexibility.
These  divergent  developments  go  a  long  way  towards  explaining  recent
differences in the behaviour of both bond markets and exchange rates.
In  both  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  the  sustained  expansion  of
domestic demand and of ouput has generated market expectations of an essentially cyclical rise
in short-term interest rates.  Sluggish economic activity elsewhere, on the other hand, means not
only  that  short-term  interest  rates  are  significantly  lower  in  Japan  and  the  core  European
countries;  but it also means that they are thought, by the market, to be less immediately likely to
rise.    This  cyclical  difference  in  the  short-term  interest  rate  prospect  largely  explains  the
pronounced  yield  differential  between  the  US  and  the  UK  and  the  other  countries  at  the  very
short end of the curve.  Out to 2 years, for example, whereas yields in the US and UK are within
½% either side of 6%, yields in Germany and France are below 3½%, and they are below ½% in
Japan.    These  differences  in  the  short-term  interest  rate  prospects  feed  through  into  yield
differentials  on  longer  term  bonds,  and  changes  in  them  also  help  to  explain  the  recent
movements in exchange rates.
But rather more interesting is the relative slopes of the yield curves further ahead,
US and UK yields are only about 1% above present short-term yields,  at +/-7%;  but they are
3% or more above present short term yields in Germany and France, also at +/-7%;  and they are
3% higher than short-term yields even in Japan, at 3¾%.  The implication is that, if you abstract
from  immediate  cyclical  influences,  longer-term  economic  performance  -  and  particularly
performance  with  respect  to  inflation  -  is  not  expected  to  be  very  different  between  the  major
countries, though Japan remains an outlier.
It is difficult to know what interpretation to put on this observation.  The fact that
the yield curves in Germany and France are practically identical is consistent at least with EMU
going ahead - at least with a narrow membership.  But the steep rise in implied future yields five
years ahead suggests that inflation is expected to be higher in the medium term.  That could be
associated  with  expectations  of  softer  macro-economic  discipline,  perhaps  more  specifically
reflecting  market  uncertainty  about  EMU  in  the  light  of  the  ongoing  debate  about  prospective
membership and about how far  the  ECB  will  in  practice  be  free  to  pursue  its  statutory  task  of
maintaining  price  stability.    It  may,  on  the  other  hand,  simply  reflect  some  kind  of  market
imperfection.
The same analysis can be applied to Italy and Spain, for example, to try to assess
market expectations about their possible membership of EMU as part of the first wave.  It shows
that  notwithstanding  the  recent  falls  in  short-term  interest  rates  in  those  countries  -  which  can
largely be explained by their improved economic performance - 5 years forward  yields  remain
significantly higher than those in Germany and France suggesting that early EMU membership
is not at all certain in the eyes of the markets.
BIS Review   22/1997
- 4 -
What can we conclude from all this, Mr. Chairman?  Well, the conclusions that I
draw are essentially threefold and hardly very surprising.
I conclude, first, that markets at present are reasonably persuaded that the world
economy as a whole will remain relatively stable at least by comparison with much of the post
war period.  Excluding short-term influences, bond yields in the major countries - apart from the
special case of Japan - are converging around a level of around 7% which suggests that relative
macro-economic,  monetary  and  fiscal  discipline  will  be  sustained,  though  it  will  stop  short  of
effective price stability.
I conclude, secondly, that the markets see current developments in the US and the
UK  as  essentially  cyclical;    and  that  they  anticipate  a  pick-up  in  activity  elsewhere  somewhat
further ahead.
And  I  conclude,  thirdly,  that  there  remains  some  considerable  uncertainty  about
the  prospect  for  European  Monetary  Union,  in  particular  about  its  initial  membership  but  also
about the extent of the discipline it will involve.
Now, of course, these conclusions are based on the bond markets as they currently
are, which is a bit like forecasting the past!  What you really need to know is how the markets
will evolve in the future.  Happily it is not my task to venture down that path.  It is during our
next session that the market experts will seek to “forecast the future”.  But I do hope they will
tell  us  whether  they  agree  that  relative  stability  will  indeed  persist,  in  the  medium  and  longer
term, how they see the different national situations evolving in the more immediate future, and
what prospects they see for EMU.  These seem to me to be the key issues for  the  future  and  I
look forward to listening to what they have to say.
BIS Review   22/1997
