Mr.  Stals  looks  at  the  future  of  financial  co-operation  in  Southern  Africa
Speech by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr. Chris Stals, at a conference on
Southern Africa: Resources, Investment and Trade, arranged by Forum Southern Africa Limited
in London on 10/7/97.
1. The reintegration of South Africa in the world economy
Good  progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  four  years  with  the  reintegration  of
South Africa in the world economy. The political and social changes introduced in South Africa
paved the way for the removal of international economic punitive actions that partly isolated the
country’s  economy  from  the  rest  of  the  world  during  the  ten  years  preceding  the  fully
democratic election of a Government of National Unity in April 1994.
Even before the election took place, the rest of the world gave its support to the
moves  towards  democracy  by  lifting  sanctions,  boycotts,  disinvestment  campaigns  and  trade
restrictions. Since 1994, the following major changes took place in South Africa’s international
economic relations:
(i)  South  Africa  became  a  full  participating  member  again 
in  various
multinational institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the United
Nations and the African Development Bank.
(ii)  Agreements  were  entered  into  with  the  World  Trade  Organisation  for  a
substantial revision over a five year period in the protective import tariff structure,  and  certain
discriminatory export subsidies were removed.
(iii) Exchange controls were substantially relaxed to introduce  full  convertibility
for current account transactions, to remove all exchange controls applicable to non-residents and
gradually to lift the remaining exchange controls applicable to the outward investment of capital
by South African residents.
(iv) An extensive liberalisation programme of the South African financial markets
included major changes in the capital market, e.g. to allow for foreign and corporate ownership
of stock broking members of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, and the opening up of the South
African banking sector for foreign competition. There are now 17 foreign banks with branches
and subsidiaries in South Africa, and about 60 foreign banks with representative offices.
(v) A number of new bilateral, regional and international economic co-operation
agreements were entered into, such as the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the arrangements with the European Union for closer economic co-operation.
These  changes  have  had  a  material  effect  on  South  Africa’s  international
economic  relations  and  are  reflected  in  a  very  visible  way  in  the  South  African  balance  of
payments.  Over  the  three  years  1991  to  1993,  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments
showed a surplus of US $5.8 billion, and the capital account a net outflow of $7.1 billion. The
official  foreign  reserves  therefore  declined  by  $1.3  billion.  When  the  new  Government  came
into power in April 1994, the country had virtually no official foreign reserves left.
Over  the  past  three  years,  that  is  from  1994  to  1996,  the  current  account  of  the
balance  of  payments  showed  an  accumulated  deficit  of  $5.1  billion.  During  this  period,  a  net
BIS Review 69/1997
- 2 -
capital  inflow  of  $7.4  billion,  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to  replenish  the  exhausted  foreign
reserves gradually. At the end of June 1997, the Bank held an amount of $4.9 billion in reserves,
which  was  still  relatively  low  (sufficient  cover  for  7  weeks’  imports),  but  nevertheless  much
better than four years ago.
The balance of payments developments merely reflected the changes in total gross
domestic economic activity. The average rate of change in gross domestic product over the three
years 1991 to 1993 showed a decline of 0.6 per cent, compared to an average rate of increase of
3.1 per cent over the next three years. The average rate of change in gross domestic expenditure
changed  from  a  decline  of  0.3  per  cent  per  annum  from  1991  to  1993,  to  4.9  per  cent  growth
over the next three years.
2. South Africa’s role in Southern Africa
The developments over the past few years enabled South Africa to take on a more
active part in the economic development of the Southern African region. Economic co-operation
in Southern Africa has been formalised through the Southern African Development Community
Treaty of August 1992, which incorporated the following goals:
*  To  achieve  development  and  economic  growth,  enhance  the  standard  and
quality  of  life  of  the  peoples  of  Southern  Africa,  and  support  the  socially
disadvantaged through regional integration;
*  To  promote  and  maximise  productive  employment  and  the  utilisation  of
resources of the region; and
*  To  achieve  sustainable  utilisation  of  natural  resources  and  effective  protection
of the environment.
To achieve its objectives, SADC shall:
* Harmonise political and socio-economic policies and plans of member states;
*  Mobilise  the  peoples  of  the  region  and  their  institutions  to  take  initiatives  to
develop  economic,  social  and  cultural  ties  across  the  region,  and  to  participate
fully in the implementation of  the  programmes  and  operations  of  SADC  and  its
institutions;
*  Develop  policies  aimed  at  the  progressive  elimination  of  obstacles  to  free
movement  of  capital  and  labour,  goods  and  services,  and  of  the  peoples  of  the
region generally among member states;
* Promote the development of human resources;
* Promote the development, transfer and mastery of technology, and
* 
co-operation.
Improve  economic  management  and  performance 
through 
regional
The  Treaty  provides  for  other  political,  social  and  cultural  objectives  which  are
not of direct relevance for the enhancing of financial co-operation in the region.
South  Africa  has  been  given  the  task  to  manage  the  Finance  and  Investment
Sector  of  SADC,  and  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  was  given  the  important  role  to
co-ordinate the functions of the central banks of the twelve member states in the  promotion  of
the SADC objectives. For this purpose, a Committee of Governors of Central  Banks  of  SADC
BIS Review 69/1997
- 3 -
was created, with a small secretariat in the South African Reserve Bank, and a research unit to
provide assistance to the Governors’ Committee.
In drafting its mission statement, the Committee of Governors designed a model
for financial co-operation that was described as a “bottom-up” approach. This approach is based
on  building  financial  co-operation  by  first  laying  an  appropriate  foundation  in  the  form  of  an
effective  institutional  framework  for  the  financial  system  in  each  country.  More  ambitious
schemes  for  the  harmonisation  or  integration  of  macroeconomic  monetary  policies  can  be
considered  at  a  later  stage,  i.e.,  once  central  banks,  competitive  private  banking  sectors  and
financial markets have been established on a firmer basis, and are functioning effectively in most
of the participating countries.
In  its  work  programme,  the  Committee  of  Governors  has  made  good  progress
with the following projects:
* The development of a monetary and financial  statistical  data  base,  captured  in
the  computer  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  Pretoria,  with  the  intention  of  providing
real-time on-line access to the information to all participating central banks;
 *  The  development  of  an  information  bank  on  the  policies,  structures  and
functions of the 12 SADC central banks;
*  The  harmonisation  of  the  development  of  national  payment,  clearing  and
settlement  systems  within  each  one  of  the  twelve  SADC  countries,  and  the
eventual provision for a network of cross-border settlements in the region;
*  The  co-ordination  of  exchange  controls,  and  the  gradual  removal  of  exchange
controls,  in  the  region.  South  Africa  is  now  relaxing  its  exchange  controls  still
applicable to foreign capital investment by South African residents in respect  of
investments in other SADC countries faster than for the rest of the world;
* The co-ordination of training of officials of all SADC central banks. The South
African Reserve Bank has introduced a specialised Training Institute for Central
Banking,  and  is  now  providing  specialised  courses  in  central  banking  and
financial management for its own staff and officials of other central banks in the
SADC region.
*  There  is  also  a  more  ambitious  training  programme  provided  through  the
Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Management  Institute  (MEFMI),  with 
its
headquarters  in  Harare.  The  objective  of  MEFMI  is  to  assist  Governments
(Treasuries)  and  central  banks  to  develop  internal  capacity  for  macroeconomic
management;
* The development of the quality of, and capacity for, proper bank regulation and
supervision.  Some  harmonisation  is  encouraged  on  policies  such  as  bank
licensing,  minimum  prudential  financial  requirements,  and  regular  auditing  of
banking institutions. A joint effort is also being made to take the necessary steps
against  illegal  banking  activities  in  the  region,  such  as  money  laundering  and
pyramid schemes.
* The forum for closer co-operation amongst the central banks of the region has
now  been  firmly  established.  The  work  of  the  Committee,  apart  from
consolidating the projects so far undertaken, will now be extended to the level of
the  private  banking  sector,  and  of  the  development  of  financial  and  capital
markets in the common interest of the region as a whole.
BIS Review 69/1997
3. Economic challenges for South Africa
- 4 -
South Africa now finds itself in the challenging situation that, in one direction, its
financial  markets  are  rapidly  being  integrated  in  the  global  financial  system,  and  in  the  other
direction  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  part  of  the  difficult  process  of  supporting  and
stimulating economic development in the Southern African region. At the same  time,  daunting
problems still remain unsolved in the internal economy of the country. The new Government has
had remarkable success over the past few years in the implementation of disciplined fiscal and
monetary  policies,  and  has  gained  confidence  from  investors  and  business  people  in  its
determination to apply sound economic policies in general.
Little  progress,  however,  has  been  made  in  solving  one  of  the  most  urgent
problems  of  the  South  African  economy,  and  that  is  to  create  sufficient  jobs  for  the  growing
population.  Total  employment  in  the  country  is  now  hardly  more  than  what  it  was  at  the
beginning of the nineties.
South  Africa’s  economic  policies  must,  at  this  stage,  maintain  good  balance
between  the  process  of  globalisation,  the  satisfaction  of  the  dire  basic  needs  of  the  domestic
population,  and  the  desire  to  assist  in  the  economic  development  of  the  region.  In  a  holistic
approach, these various objectives are not in conflict with each other, but are in many respects
supplementary.  Successful  participation  in  the  global  financial  markets  will  lead  to  a  larger
inflow of foreign investment capital into South Africa, that will enable the country to do more
for the upliftment of its own people, and for the development of the region. But this will subject
all  the  macroeconomic  initiatives  of  the  country  to  the  disciplines  of  the  global  investment
community.  These  disciplines,  tested  by  world-wide  experience,  amply  reward  successes,  but
severely punish failures.
With its economic policies of the past few years, South Africa has already proved
that  it  is  determined  to  stand  up  to  this  challenge.  The  process  of  economic  liberalisation  and
integration  into  the  global  markets  must  continue;  economic  co-operation  in  Southern  Africa,
and  with  countries  further  North  in  Africa,  will  be  extended;  the  implementation  of  the
Government’s  Reconstruction  and  Development  Programme,  and  the  Strategy  for  Growth,
Employment and Redistribution, will be pursued with vigour and determination.
The  task  ahead  is  not  an  easy  one.  South  Africa,  and  Africa,  will  need  all  the
assistance  it  can  get  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  There  is  growing  optimism  that,  in  the  early
years  of  the  21st  century,  Africa  will  succeed  in  its  concerted  efforts  to  improve  the  living
conditions of all the people of our Continent.
BIS Review 69/1997
