Mr. Matsushita considers the role of monetary policy in Japan   Translated
excerpts of a speech given by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr. Yasuo Matsushita, at the
Research Institute of Japan in Tokyo on 06/11/96.
I. Introduction
I am greatly honored to have been invited by the Research Institute of Japan to
address this distinguished audience.
Today,  I  would  first  like  to  discuss  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  views  on  recent
economic developments in Japan and the thinking behind the Bank’s current monetary policy.
Then, I would like to review some of the basic issues related to monetary policy management,
such as  the  significance  of  price  stability,  which  is  the  objective  of  monetary  policy,  and  the
points for consideration in achieving it.
There  has  been  much  debate  since  the  beginning  of  this  year  about  Japan’s
central  bank  system,  and  the  Central  Bank  Study  Group,  an  advisory  panel  to  the  Prime
Minister, is planning to publish a report in the near future. I myself have, on several occasions,
addressed the basic issues involved, such as the status of the central bank within the framework
of  a  democratic  society,  and  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  maintaining  financial  system
stability.1 As my previous speeches focused on the institutional framework of central banking,
there has not been an opportunity to discuss the  Bank  of  Japan’s  views  on  the  central  bank’s
policy management.
I have thus selected monetary policy as the theme of today’s speech. However,
there is another reason. Over the past decade, it seems that a new thinking has been developing
among the industrialized countries regarding monetary and fiscal policy management, or more
broadly, the economic policy management of a country. This has prompted heated discussions
in  various  countries  in  recent  years  on  monetary  policy  and  central  banking,  and  this  new
thinking  will  be  of  great  significance  in  contemplating  the  future  framework  of  the  Japanese
economy. I would therefore like to examine the role of monetary policy, bearing in mind this
new thinking on economic policy management.
II. Domestic Economic Conditions and Current Monetary Policy
A. Domestic Economic Conditions
I  would  like  to  begin  by  reviewing  domestic  economic  conditions.  In  spring
1995, the recovery of the Japanese economy came to a pause and, at one time, there were even
concerns  about  a  deflationary  spiral.  In  view  of  these  economic  developments,  substantial
monetary easing and large-scale fiscal policy measures were implemented. Since the beginning
of this year, the economy has once again been on a recovery path, owing to the permeation of
policy  effects  and  the  depreciation  of  the  yen.  The  Bank  currently  judges  that  a  moderate
economic recovery continues, but there are concerns as to why the economy has not shown a
recovery that is any stronger than “moderate” for nearly a year.
This  slow  recovery  can  be  explained  by  the  tug-of-war  between  the  forces
encouraging recovery and the structural adjustment pressures constraining recovery. Therefore,
                                                       
1For details, see previous speeches entitled "The role of the Central Bank" and "Recent Monetary and
Economic Conditions and Issues facing the Japanese Financial System", given on 14/06/96 and 03/04/96,
respectively. Both speeches are included in the August 1996 issue of the Bank of Japan Quarterly Bulletin.
BIS Review   142/1996
- 2 -
to predict future economic developments, we must first understand how these two factors are at
work in the economy.
One of the forces encouraging recovery is the permeation of policy effects. For
example, there is no doubt that the decline in interest rates has been contributing significantly
to  the  recovery  in  housing  and  business  fixed  investments.  At  the  same  time,  fiscal
expenditures  have  underpinned  domestic  aggregate  demand.  However,  forces  encouraging
economic recovery are not limited to the supporting policy measures. As the economy follows
a recovery path  supported  by  policy  effects,  a  larger  number  of  firms  with  improving  profits
have begun to show a more positive stance toward business fixed investment and employment.
As a result, the risk of a deflationary spiral, which was an issue of concern last year, has been
practically  eliminated.  It  can  thus  be  said  that  the  cyclical  forces  of  the  economy  based  on
domestic private demand have been slowly but steadily at work for the past year.
However,  the  factors  that  constrain  economic  recovery  have  also  been
persistent.  For  example,  while  business  fixed  investment  continues  to  recover  owing  to
progress  in  capital  stock  adjustment,  it  has  not  yet  gained  the  full  momentum  seen  in  past
economic recoveries. This is because firms, in spite of improved profits, have given priority to
repaying  debts  in  order  to  improve  their  balance  sheets,  or  have  limited  their  gross  fixed
investment to the amount of cash flow generated from depreciation of existing facilities.
Intensified competition with other  Asian  countries,  which  has  brought  changes
to the international environment, is also affecting the Japanese economy in various ways. The
inflow  of  low-priced  goods  from  other  Asian  countries,  for  example,  seriously  affects  firms
producing  competing  products.  Furthermore,  the  relocation  of  production  bases  overseas  by
Japanese  manufacturers  not  only  decreases  domestic  business  fixed  investment  by  those
manufacturers,  but  also  restrains  the  investment  by  their  domestic  subcontractors,  due  to
decrease  in  orders.  It  seems  that  management  of  firms  have  not  been  able  to  dispel
uncertainties  over  the  future,  as  the  path  toward  a  new  industrial  structure  remains  obscure
under the current circumstances.
B. Structural Adjustment Pressures
The  Japanese  economy  is  thus  faced  with  two  types  of  adjustment  pressures:
pressures  for  balance-sheet  adjustment  in  the  corporate  sector;  and  pressures  for  structural
adjustment of the industries created by the intensifying competition with other Asian countries.
These  are  the  factors  that  have  caused  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  to  remain  moderate.
These two adjustment pressures are, however, significantly different in nature.
Adjustment of balance sheets is about reducing debts which accumulated during
the “bubble” period, in other words, disposing of the burdens from the past. To that extent, this
adjustment is regrettably of a negative nature.
In order to reduce the burdens, it will be necessary to enhance the functions of
the capital markets to strengthen firms’ capital bases, and to revitalize the real estate market to
facilitate the liquidation of firms’ real estate holdings. Ultimately, however, it is only increase
in profits  that  provides  the  funds  necessary  to  write  off  latent  losses  on  real  estate  and  repay
accumulated loans. In other words, the burdens from the past need to be reduced gradually with
each year’s income arising from economic activity.
In this regard, although it may sound paradoxical, revitalizing economic activity
and boosting corporate profits, or more fundamentally, supporting the recovery of the economy
will be important preconditions for the smooth progress of balance-sheet adjustment. Realizing
a  recovery  of  the  economy  encumbered  with  impaired  balance  sheets,  therefore,  requires  a
stronger  policy  support  than  otherwise.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  Bank  has
implemented substantial monetary easing measures to date.
BIS Review   142/1996
- 3 -
As  a  result,  the  economy  has  resumed  recovery,  although  moderate,  and
corporate profits have been increasing. Accordingly, balance sheets have also been improving
gradually. Regarding debt servicing ability, the ratio of firms’ long-term debts to cash flow has
been declining slowly for the past two years, after rising rapidly during the “bubble” period. It
can  be  said  that  firms’  balance  sheets  have,  in  general,  begun  to  show  steady  improvement,
although differences remain between individual sectors and firms.
While  the  balance-sheet  adjustment  is  an  attempt  to  recover  from  a  negative
situation,  structural  adjustment  of  the  industries  in  response  to  a  new  global  economic
environment is essentially a positive challenge in that the restructuring process itself introduces
the possibility of creating renewed economic development.
The  increasing  supply  capacity  of  other  East  Asian  economies  and  their
transition  to  market  economies  have  intensified  competition  facing  Japan’s  labor-intensive
sectors.  At  the  same  time,  however,  these  factors  have  expanded  markets  and  business
opportunities  for  the  Japanese  economy.  Therefore,  if  the  Japanese  economy  can  adapt  itself
successfully  to  this  new  international  division  of  labor,  these  developments  should  bring
significant benefits to the Japanese economy in the long run.
In fact, a  careful  look  at  the  Japanese  economy  will  reveal  indications  of  such
positive industrial restructuring. The change in Japan’s trade structure is one example. Until a
decade ago, the top five imports were mostly fuels and raw materials, usually crude oil, wood,
petroleum products, coal, and natural gas, although the order varied from year to year. In 1995,
however, while crude oil maintained its top position, the other four major imports were office
machinery,  electronic  parts,  automobiles,  and  wood.  The  share  of  manufactured  goods  in
Japan’s total imports has doubled from 30 to 60 percent over the decade. This change by itself
would  merely  suggest  that  the  manufacturing  sector,  which  had  long  been  Japan’s  mainstay,
now faces severer competition with imported goods. What is notable is that the composition of
exports  has  also  changed  significantly  during  the  same  period.  Automobiles,  ships,  and
household electric appliances such as television sets and radios used to appear at the top of the
list  of  export  items.  In  1995,  however,  while  automobiles  stayed  as  the  number  one  import,
electronic parts, office machinery, automobile parts, and scientific and optical apparatus ranked
second to fifth, indicating that capital goods and parts have replaced consumer durables.
As labor-intensive sectors such as the consumer durables industry grow in other
East  Asian  economies,  exports  of  labor-intensive  products  from  Japan  have  been  declining,
while  those  of  capital-intensive  products  with  higher  value  added,  such  as  capital  goods  and
related  parts,  have  been  increasing.  This  is  a  typical  illustration  of  the  Japanese  economy’s
strong ability to adapt to changes in the global environment.
The  emergence  and  expansion  of  new  leading  industries  in  Japan  are  also
indications  of  industrial  restructuring.  The  mobile  telecommunications  market,  for  example,
has grown rapidly to a ¥3.5 trillion market and the business fixed investment  of  this  industry
has expanded to almost ¥2 trillion, which is equivalent to the sum of business fixed investment
by  the  automobile  and  iron-and-steel  industries.  Furthermore,  in  these  three  years  when
economic recovery has been unable to obtain a firm footing, some industries achieved earnings
growth comparable to or even exceeding that attained in  the  three  years  during  the  economic
boom of the latter half of the 1980s: namely, the electrical and precision machinery industries,
which have succeeded in adjusting to the new international division of labor; and the pulp and
paper industry in the raw materials  sector,  which  has  been  able  to  benefit  from  the  increased
volume of information processed and distributed in today’s technological age.
I  have  so  far  emphasized  the  brighter  side  of  the  domestic  economy  with  the
hope of further encouraging the efforts of  domestic  industries,  but  reality  is  obviously  not  so
simple. During periods of transition of industrial structure, the contrast between the bright and
dark  sides  tends  to  become  stronger.  Focusing  on  the  dark  side,  the  mismatch  between  labor
BIS Review   142/1996
- 4 -
supply and demand has become greater, and restructuring burdens have been particularly heavy
on small and medium-sized firms.
Looking  back  at  the  postwar  period,  the  Japanese  economy  successfully
underwent  several  major  changes  in  the  industrial  structure  and  shifts  in  leading  industries.
There  is  no  doubt  that  during  the  periods  of  transition,  management  of  firms  faced  great
uncertainties  about  the  future,  and  that  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  accurately  predict  which
would be the growth industries in the coming years. However, during the era of high economic
growth,  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  economy  absorbed  the  negative  impact  arising  from  the
structural  adjustment  of  the  industries.  The  main  difficulty  that  the  current  economy  faces
seems to lie not in the industrial restructuring itself, but in the  fact  that  the  current  economic
growth is not strong enough to provide a similar “shock absorber” effect.
For this reason the implementation of structural policy, such as deregulation, has
become  an  urgent  issue.  In  order  to  promote  industrial  restructuring,  it  is  necessary  to  create
new  investment  opportunities  and  to  encourage  unrestricted  and  creative  business  activity
through  deregulation.  It  is  also  important  to  increase  labor  mobility  and  facilitate  land
transactions.
C. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Management
In order for the Japanese economy to be put firmly on a self-sustaining recovery
path in the face of reduced fiscal support, it will be necessary for the structural adjustment to
continue to progress and for the virtuous circle between production, income, and expenditure to
gain  further  strength.  In  this  respect,  firms  have  been  responding  steadily  to  the  structural
adjustment pressures. The decline in net exports, which had been a drag on economic recovery,
has  been  slowing  recently.  In  addition,  inventory  adjustment,  which  has  been  under  way  in
certain sectors since this spring, has virtually been completed in the iron-and steel-industry.
In light of these facts, it is most likely that production will be further revitalized,
strengthening  the  virtuous  circle  of  the  economy  led  by  expanded  private  demand.  However,
this remains to be seen.
In view of this economic situation, the Bank will continue, in the management
of current monetary policy, to monitor monetary and economic developments closely, placing
emphasis on further strengthening the foundation for an economic recovery. And to repeat my
earlier point, it is also important to carry out structural reforms including drastic deregulation.
In this respect, I hope that the new administration will continue to exercise strong leadership.
III. New Thinking on Economic Policy Management
The industrialized countries today attach more importance to structural policies,
such as the strengthening of the competitiveness of domestic industries and the improvement of
market infrastructure. In addition, these countries  are  making  steady  efforts  to  promote  fiscal
consolidation,  to  reform  their  central  bank  systems,  and  more  broadly,  to  review  national
economic policy management and its framework.
This common trend among the industrialized countries is  closely  related  to  the
recent changes in the global economy. The collapse of the former socialist bloc, for example,
demonstrated the superiority of a market economy over a government-controlled economy: that
is, the superiority of a decentralized economy over a centrally-planned  economy.  In  addition,
the  transition  to  a  market  economy  and  the  progress  of  industrialization  of  these  former
socialist  countries  and  the  developing  Asian  countries  have  stimulated  the  industrialized
countries to strengthen the competitiveness of their economies.
BIS Review   142/1996
- 5 -
Furthermore,  past  experiences  of  economic  fluctuations,  such  as  inflation  and
the  asset-price  “bubble”,  and  the  concurrent  accumulation  of  budget  deficits  have  prompted
countries to closely  re-examine  fundamental  thinking  on  economic  policy  and  the  underlying
economic  theories.  This  year  happens  to  be  the  50th  year  since  the  death  of  John  Maynard
Keynes. There have recently been  renewed  discussions  on  the  evaluating  of  Keynes’  theories
and  Keynesian  economics,  which  in  many  respects  formed  the  basis  of  postwar  economic
policies.
The approaches currently adopted by various countries in addressing economic
policies have several points in common.
The first point is the growing emphasis placed on improving the supply side of
the  economy.  The  conventional  approach  to  economic  policy  emphasizes  the  control  of
aggregate  demand  through  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  and  this  remains  dominant  when
seeking short-term adjustments of the economy. At the same time, however, there is a growing
perception that the driving force of long-term economic growth owes much to firms’ efforts to
improve their productivity. It is thus necessary to strengthen the supply side of the economy by
promoting  the  introduction  of  new  technology  and  by  improving  infrastructures  such  as
transportation and telecommunications.
In fiscal policy management, greater importance is being attached to the details
of fiscal expenditures from the viewpoint of evaluating the contribution of each portion to the
improvement  of  economic  infrastructures,  rather  than  to  their  effects  in  generating  additional
demand.  There  is  also  a  stronger  awareness  that,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  it  is  more
desirable to curtail inefficient fiscal expenditures thereby reducing budget deficits and to utilize
economic  resources  more  efficiently  in  the  private  sector.  All  this  reflects  the  growing
emphasis on the supply side of the economy.
The second point in common in the approaches to addressing economic policies
is the emphasis placed on the utilization of the market mechanism. Related to the first point, it
can  be  said  that  this  emphasis  calls  for  fully  utilizing  the  inherent  forces  of  the  market
mechanism  of  promoting  greater  economic  efficiency  and  of  inducing  technological
innovation, in order to achieve higher productivity.
The  global  trend  toward  deregulation  and  promotion  of  market  competition
obviously  originates  in  this  common  thinking.  The  effectiveness  of  the  market  mechanism  is
not limited to revitalization of industries and improvement of financial markets. For example,
in  Europe,  there  is  a  growing  understanding  that  the  main  cause  of  the  high  unemployment
rate,  which  has  persisted  for  some  time,  is  the  lack  of  mobility  in  the  labor  markets.  The
solution to the problem, therefore, is considered to lie in facilitating the mobility in  the  labor
markets so as to efficiently adjust labor market conditions.
The  third  common  element  is  the  growing  emphasis  placed  on  the  public’s
expectations  regarding  future  developments  and  its  confidence  in  economic  policies.  For
example, the effectiveness of fiscal  policy  depends  significantly  on  the  public’s  views  on  the
controllability  of  the  fiscal  deficits  in  the  future.  In  the  European  countries  and  the  United
States, there is a growing perception that doubts about a government’s ability to control budget
deficits  could  bring  about  an  unfavorable  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates.  This  is  one  of  the
major reasons why fiscal consolidation is considered to be an important task.
It has also become clear that changes in expectations regarding price and interest
rate developments significantly influence the effectiveness of monetary policy.
There is a theory which even suggests that discretionary economic policy would
not have any effect if people always had rational expectations about the future. While this may
be an extreme example, in general it has come to be considered that the efficacy of economic
policy cannot be discussed without taking into account its effects on people’s expectations.
These recent changes in the thinking on economic policy naturally have a close
bearing on the fundamental thinking about central banking and monetary policy management.
BIS Review   142/1996
- 6 -
For example, even when implementing short-term demand management policy, it is necessary
to  ensure  that  the  policy  is  compatible  with  the  objective  of  price  stability  --  the  medium  to
long-term  objective  of  monetary  policy  and  a  precondition  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  the
market  mechanism.  It  is  also  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  public’s  confidence  in  monetary
policy  be  strengthened  by  clearly  establishing  the  independence  and  accountability  of  the
central bank. Bearing these points in mind, I would now like to move on to the other theme of
today’s speech, the fundamental issues concerning monetary policy management.
IV. The Basic Thinking on Monetary Policy Management
A. Price Stability and the Central Bank
Most people agree  that  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  the  maintenance  of
price stability. I would like to explain why it is that this particular economic policy objective,
among others, is assigned to monetary policy.
Price  stability,  in  this  context,  is  not  necessarily  the  stability  of  prices  of
individual  goods  and  services,  in  other  words,  the  stability  of  relative  prices  of  individual
items. In fact, fluctuation of  relative  prices  in  response  to  changes  in  the  supply  and  demand
conditions  reflects  the  most  basic  principle  of  the  market  mechanism.  Central  banks  aim  at
achieving  the  stability  of  prices  in  general  by  taking  the  prices  of  individual  items  in  their
totality. If prices in general increase, that is, if inflation occurs, the amount of goods that can be
purchased for ¥10,000 will decrease, which means that the value of ¥10,000 will decline. It can
thus  be  said  that  “prices  in  general”  is  another  way  of  expressing  “currency  value”.  The
maintenance  of  price  stability  naturally  becomes  one  of  the  most  important  missions  of  the
central bank as the issuer of the currency, together with the mission of maintaining the stability
of the financial system.
Moreover, in the long run, it is the monetary policy  of  the  central  bank  that  is
able to most effectively achieve stability of prices in general. It is true that prices, in the short
term, fluctuate due to various factors: overseas market prices, such as crude oil  prices;  or  the
supply and demand conditions of particular goods. However, from  a  longer-term  perspective,
prices  in  general  are  determined  by  the  amount  of  money  relative  to  the  amount  of  traded
goods and services. For this reason inflation is often said to be a  monetary  phenomenon,  and
the  task  of  achieving  price  stability  is  necessarily  assigned  to  monetary  policy.  This  then
explains  why  the  monetary  policy  of  the  central  bank  is  so  vital  and  why  the  central  bank  is
called the guardian of the currency.
There  is  a  question  of  how  asset  prices,  such  as  land  prices  and  stock  prices,
may  be  considered  in  the  management  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  believes  that  it  is
unsuitable to consider asset prices in the same way as it does the prices of ordinary goods and
services. For example, land  is  not  produced  by  everyday  economic  activity.  In  addition,  land
prices are determined in part by the perception of earnings that will be generated from the land,
in  other  words,  by  the  projection  of  economic  activity  and  prices.  Asset  prices  are  therefore
different  in  nature  from  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  that  are  produced  daily  through
economic activity  and  consumed.  It  is  also  apparent,  however,  from  the  bitter  experiences  of
the “bubble” economy that major fluctuations in asset prices are related to large swings in the
economy. Therefore, the Bank believes that in order to ensure price stability in the medium to
long  term,  due  attention  must  be  paid  to  asset-price  developments.  Later,  I  would  like  to
discuss in more detail the meaning of price stability in the medium to long term.
BIS Review   142/1996
B. The Significance of Price Stability
- 7 -
Let me now consider the significance of price stability. It seems self-evident that
inflation  and  deflation  are  not  desirable.  As  large  fluctuations  in  prices  are  usually
accompanied  by  economic  overheating  or  recession,  the  stabilization  of  prices  will  lead  to  a
stable economy. Furthermore, price fluctuations lead to an uneven distribution of income and
assets, thereby threatening the stability of people’s everyday lives.
In  addition  to  the  above,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  stability  of  prices  in
general  is  the  most  important  precondition  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  market
mechanism.  The  market  mechanism  adjusts  production  and  demand  according  to  the  signals
sent by the changes in relative prices. Once inflation or deflation occurs, it becomes extremely
difficult to read the signals received from the changes in individual prices, and as a result, the
price  mechanism  ceases  to  function  properly.  This  is  because  it  becomes  impossible  to
distinguish whether changes in individual prices reflect shifts in relative prices or in prices in
general.  It  is  as  if  there  is  no  reliable  yardstick  for  economic  activity.  Under  such
circumstances,  firms  trying  to  formulate  future  business  plans  based  on  their  estimation  of
profitability  of  investments,  and  households  making  plans  for  savings  and  consumption  face
growing uncertainties, and this impedes economic development.
In the past, some argued that inflation is desirable to a certain extent in order to
further stimulate economic growth, or that firms’ activities would become more vigorous under
inflation. The 50 years of postwar experience and the evolution of economic theories, however,
have  forced  serious  reconsideration  of  this  argument.  There  is  every  likelihood  that  a  mild
inflation will  eventually  lead  to  full-scale  inflation.  In  addition,  once  inflation  takes  root,  the
achievements of business activity are masked by nominal increases in profits, and accordingly,
technological innovation and improvement in productivity are likely to be discouraged. Actual
examples demonstrate that, from a longer-term perspective, countries with stable prices tend to
enjoy higher economic growth.
For these reasons, the current emphasis is on the significance of price stability,
which  is  in  line  with  the  global  trend  in  economic  policy  management  placing  stronger
emphasis on the supply side of the economy and on the utilization of the market mechanism.
C. The Meaning of Price Stability and Assessment Criteria
How can price stability be defined? This remains a difficult question as it is not
easy to draw a line between acceptable and an unacceptable rate of price increase.
In theory, zero inflation would be desirable. If prices are to be the yardstick for
economic  activity,  zero  inflation  allows  the  yardstick  to  be  reliable  and  unchanging,  and  in
addition avoids the adverse effects of price fluctuations on income distribution.
I said that this is true “in theory” for several reasons. First, there are limitations
to the accuracy of price statistics  in  that  it  is  difficult  to  exclude  price  increases  arising  from
improvements in product quality or to reflect changes in the market share of products. As the
statistics become biased due to such technical limitations, some argue that it is undesirable to
aim  at  zero  inflation  based  on  a  specific  price  indicator.  In  addition,  if  there  is  a  downward
rigidity  in  certain  prices  and  wages  due  to  business  practices  and  contractual  constraints,  the
cost of achieving zero inflation could become substantial.
In  view  of  the  significance  of  price  stability  as  discussed  earlier,  a  more
practical  criterion  would  be  the  sustainability  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  to  long  term.
This  is  because  prices  serve  as  a  yardstick  not  only  for  deciding  current  production  and
consumption,  but  also  for  deciding  the  activities  that  lead  to  future  economic  developments,
such  as  business  fixed  investment  and  savings.  The  perception  that  prices  influence  future
BIS Review   142/1996
- 8 -
developments  has  led  to  an  increasing  tendency  to  view  price  stability  as  being  the  state  in
which firms and households need not consider prospective price fluctuations in their economic
decision-making.
Even when price indexes remain stable during a certain period, price stability in
the medium to long term could be at risk if the economy is overheating and creating potential
upward  pressures  on  prices.  Monetary  policy  must  thus  be  managed  not  only  to  minimize
current fluctuations in prices, but also to contain the potential risk of price fluctuations in the
future. This is why price stability is  said  to  be  a  medium  to  long-term  objective  of  monetary
policy.
The  maintenance  of  price  stability  does  not  conflict  with  the  achievement  of
stable  economic  growth  and  employment  conditions.  For  example,  measures  to  prevent
overheating  (or  recession)  of  the  economy  can  at  the  same  time  contain  inflation  (or  avoid
deflation), and provide medium to long-term price stability; and this price stability, in turn, is a
prerequisite for achieving sustainable growth of the economy, as I mentioned earlier.
D. Features of Monetary Policy
I  would  now  like  to  examine  the  important  elements  in  managing  monetary
policy.
There  are  two  features  of  monetary  policy  that  differentiate  it  from  other
economic policies. The first feature is that monetary  policy  uses  market-oriented  measures  to
transmit  policy  effects  to  market  participants  and  therefore  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy
depends  on  the  market’s  reaction  to  the  measures  taken  by  the  central  bank.  In  this  respect,
monetary policy differs significantly in nature from the government’s economic policy, which
aims to achieve its objectives through administrative means such as laws and regulations.
Specifically,  monetary  policy  affects  the  supply  and  demand  of  funds  in  the
financial markets through the implementation of the Bank’s daily operations, such as bill and
bond  transactions.  The  mechanism  is  initiated  in  changes  made  to  the  money  market  interest
rates, or in technical terms, changes to the overnight rates in the interbank market, which can
be referred to as the wholesale market for cash and reserves. Changes in these rates affect other
short-term interest rates and longer-term rates through arbitrage in the markets, which in turn
influence changes in the deposit and lending rates offered by banks. These changes in interest
rates as a whole then influence the economic activities of the corporate and household sectors.
With  the  completion  of  the  deregulation  of  interest  rates,  use  of  the  market
mechanism  is  currently  the  most  effective  way  of  transmitting  policy  effects  throughout  the
financial  markets  and  the  economy.  However,  in  order  to  effectively  utilize  this  mechanism,
public and market confidence in monetary policy is of decisive importance. Unless the policy
intentions of the central bank are fully understood and considered to be credible, the effects of
interest  rate  policies  will  not  permeate  adequately,  and  market  interest  rates  may  fluctuate
independently  of  the  intentions  of  the  central  bank,  affected  by  unnecessary  conjecture  and
rumors.
The  second  distinct  feature  of  monetary  policy  is  that  considerable  time  is
required  before  its  effects  materialize,  in  other  words,  there  is  a  long  time  lag  before  policy
effects permeate throughout the economy.
The  mechanism  through  which  changes  in  interest  rates  are  transmitted  to
economic activity is complicated. Interest rate changes may have a relatively rapid influence on
firms  planning  to  make  an  investment  in  the  near  future.  Theoretically,  the  effect  of  interest
rate changes should be swiftly transmitted to fluctuations in asset prices.
On  the  other  hand,  it  takes  a  considerable  time  for  the  effects  of  interest  rate
changes to appear in actual corporate profits and household income levels. One reason is that
BIS Review   142/1996
- 9 -
there  are  various  types  of  borrowing  and  investment  with  short  and  long  maturities.  As  new
interest rates are applied to these instruments only at the time of maturity, considerable time is
required  before  the  overall  interest  rate  level  changes  and  before  the  new  level  takes  effect
throughout the economy. In addition, changes in corporate profits and income levels will only
bring about a gradual change in the confidence of firms and households in their investment and
consumption,  and  after  some  delay  in  time,  new  decisions  will  be  made  on  investment  and
consumption. Further time is then needed before these decisions materialize as actual spending.
It has been said that pre-emptive policy responses are necessary to ensure price
stability. This is because, as mentioned earlier, price stability must be achieved in the medium
to  long  term,  and  because  there  will  always  be  a  considerable  time  lag  before  policy  effects
permeate throughout the economy. As this time lag in permeation of policy effects has become
more  widely  recognized,  greater  emphasis  has  come  to  be  placed  in  the  management  of
monetary policy on assessing the potential risks in the economy, to enable pre-emptive policy
responses.
E. Considerations in Monetary Policy Management
The  requirements  for  monetary  policy  are  thus  “maintenance  of  market
confidence”  and  “pre-emptive  response”.  It  is,  however,  extremely  difficult  to  achieve  these
two requirements simultaneously.
Let  me  explain  how  the  two  requirements  conflict.  In  order  to  make  timely
policy responses, it will be necessary for the central bank to act based on its projections of the
economic and price situations one or two years ahead. However, considering the difficulty of
accurately predicting economic developments, such action may not necessarily result in market
confidence in the Bank’s policy. Nevertheless, it would  be  impossible  to  act  pre-emptively  if
the Bank waited until a consensus was reached on future economic developments and desirable
policy actions.
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  key  to  monetary  policy  management  is  in
finding how these two requirements can be fulfilled simultaneously.
Central  banks  have  tried  to  meet  the  two  requirements  through  various
techniques. For example, many central banks in the past adopted “money supply targeting”, in
which monetary policy is aimed at achieving an intermediate target of money supply  growth.
This  is  a  method  based  on  the  causality  that  fluctuations  in  money  supply  influence  real
economic  activity  with  some  time  lag.  However,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  financial
innovations  have  made  it  difficult  to  discern  the  relationship  between  money  supply  and
economic activity, and that although the relationship between the two is stable in the long term,
it  may  be  unsteady  in  the  short  term.  Accordingly,  many  of  the  central  banks  which  set  a
money supply target today mainly use it as a general guideline for monetary policy or refer to
it as one of the major indicators in making policy  decisions,  rather  than  attempting  to  adhere
rigidly to it.
Some  central  banks  now  adopt  “inflation  targeting”,  in  which  a  certain  target
range is set for the inflation rate. This method aims to secure the confidence of the market by
declaring  beforehand  the  central  bank’s  commitment  to  a  specific  target.  For  those  central
banks  employing  inflation  targeting,  another  challenge  besides  setting  the  target  range  is
devising  how  to  take  appropriate,  individual  policy  actions  under  the  price  target.  Countries
with  high  inflation  rates  have  succeeded  in  containing  these  rates  by  employing  inflation
targeting. However, the fact that the method has been effective in curbing a high inflation rate
does not necessarily indicate that it will also be effective in sustaining already stable prices.
Recently,  some  academics  in  the  United  States  have  suggested  evaluating  the
potential risks of price and economic fluctuations based on such concepts as the output gap and
BIS Review   142/1996
- 10 -
the  expected  inflation  rate,  and  then  utilizing  these  evaluations  as  guidelines  in  managing
monetary policy.
Unfortunately,  it  is  difficult  to  establish  rules  or  other  convenient  guidelines
which  are  by  themselves  sufficient  to  ensure  an  optimal  policy  response.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  never  adopted  stringent  targeting  or  specific  rules  to  date,  but
instead has consistently emphasized the judgement of the overall economic conditions and has
made efforts to improve underlying research and analytical skills.
Learning  from  the  bitter  experiences  of  the  emergence  and  the  bursting  of  the
“bubble” economy, the Bank attaches utmost importance to realizing price stability and thereby
economic stability in the long run, and, to this end, identifying and assessing the potential risks
within the economy. The Bank has also been making increased efforts to explain its actions and
policy in detail in order to gain the better understanding of the public.
One  of  the  aims  of  last  year’s  series  of  monetary  easing  measures  was  to
eliminate  the  possibility  of  a  deflationary  spiral,  in  other  words,  a  potential  risk  of  excessive
price  declines.  The  Bank  also  made  efforts  to  provide  a  clearer  explanation  of  the  details  of
policies  implemented  and  the  thinking  behind  these  policies.  Announcements  of  the  Bank’s
stance on money market operations and improvements in the monthly and annual reports of the
Policy Board are results of these efforts.
The Bank intends to continue investigating ways of fulfilling simultaneously the
two  requirements  of  pre-emptive  policy  responses  and  of  the  maintenance  of  market
confidence,  by  learning  from  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  and  from  the  experiences  of
other central banks.
I  would  like  to  emphasize  that,  in  order  to  maintain  market  confidence  in  the
central bank which is an essential task for achieving price stability in the medium to long term,
the institutional independence of the central bank becomes very important. Accordingly, it will
be necessary to enhance the transparency of policy decisions  and  to  establish  a  framework  to
ensure the Bank’s accountability.
V. Conclusion
The  review  of  the  central  bank  system  in  Japan  is  likely  to  develop  into  a
revision of the Bank of Japan Law after the Central Bank Study Group submits its report.
When  seen  from  the  vantage  point  of  reconsidering  the  broad  framework  of
economic policy, I believe that the revision of the Bank of Japan Law is significant not only to
the Bank of Japan itself or to the  financial  sector,  but  also  to  the  overall  economy.  Now  that
Japan’s industries are making steady efforts to adapt  to  a  new  era,  it  is  also  required  that  the
economic policy management of Japan be reformed to suit the times.
The Bank of Japan Law is to be reviewed as the first concrete step in the reform
process of Japan’s economic policy management. The law, stipulated in 1942, has been one of
the  rules  and  regulations  constituting  the  basis  of  the  old  regime  which  has  affected  the
country’s economic policy management for the past 50 years. This is why much international
attention is now focused on the reform of the central bank system in Japan.
In  order  for  the  central  bank  to  achieve  its  missions,  improvement  of  the
institutional framework is necessary, but what is more important is that the Bank manages its
policy and operations with due  responsibility.  We  at  the  Bank  are  very  conscious  of  this  and
will exert ourselves to the utmost to  ensure  that  the  Bank  fulfills  its  responsibilities  amid  the
ongoing  globalization  and  shifts  to  market-oriented  economies.  I  would  like  to  conclude  by
expressing my hope for your continued support and understanding.
BIS Review   142/1996
