Mr.  Greenspan  presents  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  on  the
supervision  of  US  banks  if  they  are  authorized  to  widen  their  activities      Testimony  of
Chairman  of  th  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,
before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Securities and Government-Sponsored Enterprises
of  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services  of  the  US  House  of  Representatives  on
19/3/97.
Mr.  Chairman,  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to
present  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  on  the  supervision  of  our  nation’s  banking
organizations should they be authorized by the Congress to engage in a wider range of activities.
As you know, the Board has supported  financial  modernization  for  many  years  and  hopes  that
the  Congress  will  act  to  facilitate  reforms  that,  by  enhancing  competition  within  the  financial
services industry, would benefit the consumers of financial products in the United States.
Financial modernization may well mean that future banking organizations will be
sufficiently  different  from  today  as  to  require  perhaps  substantial  changes  in  the  supervisory
process for the entire organization. Just how much modification may be needed will depend on
the  kinds  of  reforms  the  Congress  adopts.  In  evaluating  those  modifications,  I  would  like  to
underline the significant supervisory role required by the Federal Reserve to carry out its central
bank responsibilities. I also would like briefly to discuss the continued importance of umbrella
supervision  and  the  implications  of  a  wider  role  for  bank  subsidiaries  in  the  modernization
process.
Supervision and Central Banking
There  are  compelling  reasons  why  the  central  bank  of  the  United  States  --  the
Federal Reserve -- should continue to be involved in the supervision of banks. The supervisory
activities  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  for  example,  have  benefited  from  its  economic  stabilization
responsibilities and its recognition that safety and soundness goals for banks must be evaluated
jointly with its responsibilities for the stability and growth of the economy. The Board believes
that  these  joint  responsibilities  make  for  better  supervisory  and  monetary  policies  than  would
result  from  either  a  supervisor  divorced  from  economic  responsibilities  or  a  macroeconomic
policymaker with no practical experience in the review of individual bank operations.
To carry out its responsibilities, the Federal Reserve has been required to develop
extensive,  detailed  knowledge  of  the  intricacies  of  the  U.S.,  and  indeed  the  world,  financial
system.  That  expertise  is  the  result  of  dealing  constantly  over  many  decades  with  changing
financial markets and institutions and their relationships with each other and with the economy,
and from exercising supervisory responsibilities. It comes as well from ongoing interactions with
central banks and financial institutions abroad. These international contacts are critical because
today  crises  can  spread  more  rapidly  than  in  earlier  times  --  in  large  part  reflecting  new
technologies -- and require a coordinated international response.
Crisis Management and Systemic Risk
to 
Second  only 
its  macrostability  responsibilities 
the  central  bank’s
responsibility  to  use  its  authority  and  expertise  to  forestall  financial  crises  (including  systemic
disturbances in the banking system) and to manage such crises once they occur. In a crisis, the
Federal Reserve, to be sure, could always flood the market with liquidity through open market
operations and discount window loans; at times it has stood ready to do so, and it does not need
supervisory  and  regulatory  responsibilities  to  exercise  that  power.  But  while  sometimes
is 
BIS Review   31/1997
necessary  in  times  of  crises,  such  an  approach  may  be  costly  and  distortive  to  economic
incentives and long-term growth, as well as an insufficient remedy. Supervisory and regulatory
responsibilities give the Federal Reserve both the insight and the authority to use techniques that
are  less  blunt  and  more  precisely  calibrated  to  the  problem  at  hand.  Such  tools  improve  our
ability  to  manage  crises  and,  more  importantly,  to  avoid  them.  The  use  of  such  techniques
requires both the authority that comes with supervision and regulation and the understanding of
the  linkages  among  supervision  and  regulation,  prudential  standards,  risk  taking,  relationships
among banks and other financial market participants, and macroeconomic stability.
Our financial system -- market oriented and characterized by innovation and rapid
change  --  imparts  significant  benefits  to  our  economy.  But  one  of  the  consequences  of  such  a
dynamic system is that it is subject to episodes of stress. In the 1980s and early 1990s we faced a
series of international debt crises, a major stock market crash, the collapse of the most important
player in the junk bond market, the virtual failure of the S&L industry, and extensive losses at
many  banking  institutions.  More  recently,  we  faced  another  Mexican  crisis  and,  while  in  the
event less disruptive, the failure of a large British merchant bank. In such situations the Federal
Reserve stands ready to provide liquidity, if necessary, and monitors continuously the condition
of depository institutions to contain the secondary consequences of any problem. The objectives
of the central bank in crisis management are to contain financial losses and prevent a contagious
loss of confidence so that difficulties at one institution do not spread more widely to others. The
focus of its concern is not to avoid the failure of entities that have made poor decisions or have
had bad luck, but rather to see that such failures -- or threats of failures -- do not have broad and
serious impacts on financial markets and the national, and indeed the global, economy.
The Federal Reserve’s ability to respond expeditiously to any particular  incident
does not necessitate comprehensive information on each banking institution. But it does require
that the Federal Reserve have in-depth knowledge of how institutions of various sizes and other
characteristics  are  likely  to  behave,  and  what  resources  are  available  to  them  in  the  event  of
severe financial stress. Even for those events that might, but do not, precipitate financial crises,
the authorities turn first to the Federal Reserve, not only because, as former Chairman Volcker
noted last month, we have the money, but also because we have the expertise and the experience.
We  currently  gain  the  necessary  insight  by  having  a  broad  sample  of  banks  subject  to  our
supervision and through our authority over bank holding companies.
Payment and Settlement Systems
Virtually  all  of  the  U.S.  dollar  transactions  made  worldwide  --  for  securities
transfers, foreign exchange and other international capital flows, and for payment for goods and
services -- are settled in the United States banking system. A small number of transactions that
comprise the vast proportion  of  the  total  value  of  transactions  are  transferred  over  large-dollar
payment systems. Banks use two of these systems -- Fedwire, operated by the Federal Reserve,
and CHIPS, operated by the New York Clearing House -- currently to transfer $1.6 trillion and
$1.3 trillion a day, respectively. CHIPS settles its members’ net positions on Fedwire.
These  interbank  transfers,  for  banks’  own  accounts  and  for  those  of  their
customers, occur and are settled  over  a  network  and  structure  that  is  the  backbone  of  the  U.S.
financial system. Indeed, it is arguably the linchpin of the international system of payments that
relies  on  the  dollar  as  the  major  international  currency  for  trade  and  finance.  Disruptions  and
disturbances  in  the  U.S.  payment  system  thus  can  easily  have  global  implications.  Fedwire,
CHIPS,  and  the  specialized  depositories  and  clearinghouses  for  securities  and  other  financial
instruments,  are  crucial  to  the  integrity  and  stability  not  only  of  our  financial  markets  and
BIS Review   31/1997
- 3 -
economy,  but  those  of  the  world.  Similarly,  adverse  developments  in  transfers  in  London,
Tokyo,  Singapore,  and  a  host  of  other  centers  could  rapidly  be  transferred  here,  given  the
financial interrelationships among the individual trading nations.
In  all  these  payment  and  settlement  systems,  commercial  banks  play  a  central
role, both as participants and providers of credit to nonbank participants. Day-in and day-out, the
settlement  of  payment  obligations  and  securities  trades  requires  significant  amounts  of  bank
credit. In periods of stress, such credit demands surge just at the time when some banks are least
willing or able to meet them. These demands, if unmet, could produce gridlock in payment and
settlement  systems,  halting  activity  in  financial  markets.  Indeed,  it  is  in  the  cauldron  of  the
payments and settlement systems, where decisions involving large sums must be made quickly,
that  all  of  the  risks  and  uncertainties  associated  with  problems  at  a  single  participant  become
focussed as participants seek to protect themselves from  uncertainty.  Better  solvent  than  sorry,
they  might  well  decide,  and  refuse  to  honor  a  payment  request.  Observing  that,  others  might
follow suit. And that is how crises often begin.
Limiting, if not avoiding,  such  disruptions  and  ensuring  the  continued  operation
of the payment system requires broad and indepth knowledge of banking and markets, as well as
detailed knowledge and authority with respect to the payment and settlement arrangements and
their  linkages  to  banking  operations.  This  type  of  understanding  and  authority  --  as  well  as
knowledge  about  the  behavior  of  key  participants  --  cannot  be  created  on  an  ad  hoc  basis.  It
requires broad and sustained involvement in both the payment infrastructure and the operation of
the  banking  system.  Supervisory  authority  over  the  major  bank  participants  is  a  necessary
element.
Monetary Policy
While  financial  crises  and  payment  systems  disruptions  arise  only  sporadically,
the Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy on an ongoing basis. In this area, too, the Federal
Reserve’s  role  in  supervision  and  regulation  provides  an  important  perspective  to  the  policy
process.  Monetary  policy  works  through  financial  institutions  and  markets  to  affect  the
economy,  and  depository  institutions  are  a  key  element  in  those  markets.  Indeed,  banks  and
thrifts  are  more  important  in  this  regard  than  might  be  suggested  by  a  simple  arithmetic
calculation of their share of total credit flows. While diverse securities markets handle the lion’s
share  of  credit  flows  these  days,  banks  are  the  backup  source  of  liquidity  to  many  of  the
securities firms and large borrowers participating in these markets. Moreover, banks at all times
are the most  important  source  of  credit  to  most  small  and  intermediate-sized  firms  that  do  not
have ready access to securities markets. These firms are the catalyst for U.S. economic growth
and  the  prime  source  of  new  employment  opportunities  for  our  citizens.  The  Federal  Reserve
must  make  its  monetary  policy  with  a  view  to  how  banks  are  responding  to  the  economic
environment. This was especially important during the “credit crunch” of 1990. Our supervisory
responsibilities give us important qualitative and quantitative information that not only helps us
in the design of monetary policy, but provides important feedback on how our policy stance is
affecting bank actions.
The macroeconomic stabilization responsibilities of the Federal Reserve make us
particularly  sensitive  to  how  regulatory  and  supervisory  postures  can  influence  bank  behavior
and hence how banks respond to monetary policy actions.  For  example,  capital,  liquidity,  loan
loss  reserve,  and  asset  quality  evaluation  policies  of  supervisors  will  directly  influence  the
manner and speed with which monetary policy actions work. In the development of interagency
rules and policies, the Federal Reserve brings to the table its unique concerns about the impact of
BIS Review   31/1997
these  rules  on  credit  availability,  potential  responses  to  changes  in  interest  rates,  and  the
consequences for the economy. We believe that, as a result, supervisory policy is improved.
Federal Reserve’s Supervisory Role
For all of these reasons, the Board believes the Federal Reserve needs to retain a
significant  supervisory  role  in  the  banking  system.  Just  exactly  how  that  is  achieved  depends
critically  on  the  types  of  reforms  the  Congress  enacts  and  the  direction  the  banking  industry
takes  in  structuring  and  conducting  its  activities.  In  the  Board’s  view,  its  current  authority  is
adequate  for  the  current  structure.  For  today’s  financial  system,  we  are  able  to  meet  our
obligations  by  the  intelligence  we  gain  from,  and  the  authorities  we  have  over  the  modest
number of large banks we directly supervise and the holding companies of these and other large
banks  over  which  we  have  a  direct  umbrella  supervisory  role.  Our  information  is  importantly
supplemented by our supervision of a number of other banks of all sizes, namely state member
banks. Currently, the latter group gives us a good representative sample of organizations of all
sizes outside the largest entities.
The  large  entities  are  essential  if  we  are  to  address  the  Federal  Reserve’s  crisis
management and systemic risk responsibilities, deal with international financial issues involving
foreign  central  banks,  manage  risk  exposures  in  payment  systems,  and  retain  our  practical
knowledge and skill base in rapidly changing financial markets. Large bank holding companies
are typically at the forefront in financial innovation and in developing sophisticated techniques
for  managing  risks.  It  is  crucial  that  the  Federal  Reserve  stay  informed  of  these  events  and
understand  directly  how  they  work  in  practice.  Directly  supervising  both  these  large
organizations and a sample of others is also critical to our ability to conduct monetary policy by
permitting us to gain first-hand on-the-spot intelligence on how changes in financial markets --
including those induced by monetary policy -- are affecting money and credit flows.
If  in  the  future  the  holding  company  becomes  a  less  clear  window  into  the
banking  system,  the  Board  believes  that  the  Congress  would  need  to  change  the  supervisory
structure if the central bank is to carry out the responsibilities I have discussed today.
Umbrella Supervision
The Congress, in its review of financial modernization, must consider legal entity
supervision  alone  versus  legal  entity  supervision  supplemented  by  umbrella  supervision.  The
Board  believes  that  umbrella  supervision  is  a  realistic  necessity  for  the  protection  of  our
financial  system  and  to  limit  any  misuse  of  the  sovereign  credit,  that  is,  the  government’s
guarantees that support the banking system through the safety net.
The  bank  holding  company  organization  increasingly  is  being  managed  so  as  to
take advantage of the synergies between its component parts in order to deliver better products
to the market and higher returns to stockholders. Such synergies cannot occur if the model of the
holding  company  is  one  in  which  the  parent  is  just,  in  effect,  a  portfolio  investor  in  its
subsidiary. Indeed, virtually all of the large holding companies now operate as integrated units
and are managed as such, especially in their management of risk.
One  could  argue  that  regulators  should  be  interested  only  in  the  entities  they
regulate and, hence, review the risk evaluation process only as it relates to their regulated entity.
Presumably each regulator of each entity -- the bank regulators, the SEC, the state insurance and
any state finance company authorities -- would look  only  at  how  the  risk  management  process
BIS Review   31/1997
- 5 -
affected  their  units.  It  is  our  belief  that  this  simply  will  not  be  adequate.  Risks  managed  on  a
consolidated  basis  cannot  be  reviewed  on  an  individual  legal  entity  basis  by  different
supervisors.
The latter logic motivated the congressional decision just five years ago to require
that foreign banks could enter the United States if, and only if, they were subject to consolidated
supervision. This decision, which is consistent with the international standards for consolidated
supervision  of  banking  organizations,  was  a  good  decision  then.  It  is  a  good  decision  today,
especially  for  those  banking  organizations  whose  disruption  could  cause  major  financial
disturbances  in  United  States  and  foreign  markets.  For  foreign  and  for  U.S.  banking
organizations, retreat from consolidated supervision would, the Board believes, be a significant
step backward.
We have to be careful, however, that consolidated umbrella supervision does not
inadvertently so hamper the decisionmaking process of banking organizations as to render them
ineffectual. The Federal Reserve Board is accordingly in the process of reviewing its supervisory
structure  and  other  procedures  in  order  to  reflect  a  market-directed  shift  from  conventional
balance sheet auditing to evaluation of the internal risk management process. Although focussed
on  the  key  risk  management  processes,  it  would  sharply  reduce  routine  supervisory  umbrella
presence in holding companies. As the Committee knows, the Board has recently published for
comment  proposals  to  expedite  the  applications  process,  and  the  legislation  Congress  enacted
last  year  eased  such  procedures  as  well.  Nonetheless,  the  Board  requests  even  greater
modification to its existing statutory mandate so that the required applications process could be
sharply cut back, particularly in the area of nonbank financial services.
In  the  Board’s  view,  those  entities  interested  in  banks  are  really  interested  in
access to the safety  net,  since  it  is  far  easier  to  engage  in  the  nonsafety  net  activities  of  banks
without acquiring a bank. If an organization chooses to deliver some of its services with the aid
of  the  sovereign  credit  by  acquiring  a  bank,  it  should  not  be  excused  from  efforts  of  the
government  to  look  out  for  the  stability  of  the  overall  financial  system.  For  bank  holding
companies,  this  implies  umbrella  supervision.  Although  that  process  will  increasingly  be
designed to reduce supervisory presence and be as nonintrusive as possible, umbrella supervision
should not be eliminated, but recognized for what it is: the cost of obtaining a subsidy.
Nonetheless,  we  would  hope  that  should  the  Congress  authorize  wider  activities
for financial services holding companies that it recognize that  a  bank  which  is  a  minor  part  of
such  an  organization  (and  its  associated  safety  net)  can  be  protected  through  adequate  bank
capital requirements and the  application  of  Sections  23A  and  23B  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act.
The case is weak, in our judgment, for umbrella supervision of a holding company in which the
bank is not the dominant unit and is not large enough to induce systemic problems should it fail.
Subsidiaries, Subsidies, and Safety Nets
The  members  of  this  Subcommittee  are,  I  think,  aware  of  the  Board’s  concerns
that  the  safety  net  constructed  for  banks  inherently  contains  a  subsidy,  that  conducting  new
activities  in  subsidiaries  of  banks  will  inadvertently  extend  that  subsidy,  and  that  extension  of
any  subsidy  is  undesirable.  The  Subcommittee  recently  heard  testimony  that  there  is  no  net
subsidy and, therefore, the authorization of nonbank activities in bank subsidiaries would neither
inadvertently extend this undesirable side effect of the safety  net  nor  reduce  the  importance  of
the  holding  company  as  a  consequence  of  the  increased  incentives  to  shift  activities  from  the
holding company to the bank.
BIS Review   31/1997
Mr. Chairman, I would like briefly to comment on these latter views.
Subsidy values -- net or gross -- vary from bank to bank; riskier banks clearly get
a larger subsidy from the safety net than safer banks. In addition, the value of the subsidy varies
over time; in good times, markets incorporate a low risk premium and when markets turn weak,
financial asset holders demand to be compensated by higher yields for holding claims on riskier
entities. It is at this time that subsidy values are the most noticeable. What was it  worth  in  the
late 1980s and early  1990s  for  a  bank  with  a  troubled  loan  portfolio  to  have  deposit  liabilities
guaranteed by the FDIC, to be assured that it could turn illiquid to liquid assets at once through
the Federal Reserve discount window, and to tell its customers that payment transfers would be
settled  on  a  riskless  Federal  Reserve  Bank?  For  many,  it  was  worth  not  basis  points  but
percentage points. For some, it meant the difference between survival and failure.
It  is  argued  by  some  that  the  cost  of  regulation  exceeds  the  subsidy.  I  have  no
doubt that the costs of regulation are large, too large in my judgment. But no bank has turned in
its charter in order to operate without the cost of banking regulation, which would require that it
operate also without deposit insurance or access to the discount window or payments system. To
do so would require both higher deposit costs and higher capital. Indeed, it is a measure of the
size of banks’ net subsidy that most nonbank financial institutions are required by the market to
operate with significantly higher capital-to-asset ratios than banks. Most finance companies, for
example,  with  credit  ratings  and  debenture  interest  costs  equal  to  banks  are  forced  by  today’s
market to hold six or seven percentage points higher capital-to-asset ratios than those of banks.
It  is  instructive  that  there  are  no  private  deposit  insurers  competing  with  the
FDIC.  For  the  same  product  offered  by  the  FDIC,  private  insurers  would  have  to  charge
premiums  far  higher  than  those  of  government  insurance,  and  still  not  be  able  to  match  the
certainty of payments in the  event  of  default,  the  hallmark  of  a  government  insurer  backed  by
the sovereign credit of the United States.
The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  similar  status  with  respect  to  the  availability  of  the
discount  window  and  riskless  final  settlement  during  a  period  of  national  economic  stress.
Providing  such  services  is  out  of  the  reach  of  all  private  institutions.  The  markets  place
substantial  values  on  these  safety  net  subsidies,  clearly  in  excess  of  the  cost  of  regulation.  To
repeat, were it otherwise, some banks would  be  dropping  their  charters  if  there  were  not  a  net
subsidy.
In fact it is apparently the lower funding costs at banks that benefit directly from
the subsidy of the safety net that has created the tendency for banking organizations to return to
the  bank  and  its  subsidiaries  many  activities  that  are  authorized  to  banks.  These  activities
previously  had  been  conducted  in  nonbank  affiliates  for  reasons  such  as  geographic  and  other
inflexibilities, which have gradually eased. Indeed, over the last decade the share of consolidated
assets  of  bank  holding  companies  associated  with  nonbank  affiliates  --  other  than  Section  20
securities affiliates -- has declined almost half to just 5.2 percent. This tendency reflects the fact
that  asset  growth  that  earlier  had  been  associated  with  nonbank  affiliates  of  bank  holding
companies  --  consumer  and  commercial  finance,  leasing,  and  mortgage  banking  --  has  most
recently  occurred  largely  in  the  bank  or  in  a  subsidiary  of  the  bank.  To  be  sure,  as  Chairman
Helfer indicated to the Subcommittee earlier this month, many banking organizations still retain
nonbank  subsidiaries.  Our  discussions  with  bank  holding  companies,  however,  suggest  that  in
some  cases,  these  affiliates  were  acquired  in  the  past  and  have  established  names  and  an
interstate  network  whose  value  would  be  reduced  if  subsumed  within  a  bank.  There  are  also
BIS Review   31/1997
- 7 -
often  adverse  tax  implications  for  the  shift.  And,  finally,  some  of  these  activities  may  not  be
asset intensive and hence may not benefit significantly from bank funding.
Clearly, the authorization of new activities in bank subsidiaries that are  not  now
permitted either to banks or their affiliates would tend to accelerate the trend to reduce holding
company activity, even if these activities were also permitted to holding company subsidiaries.
The subsidy inherent in the safety net would assure that result, extending the spread of the safety
net and requiring that the Federal Reserve’s authority and ability to meet its responsibilities be
shifted to a different paradigm.
Such a result is reason enough for our concern about the spreading of the safety
net subsidy. But  we  should  also  be  concerned  because  of  the  distortions  subsidies  bring  to  the
financial  system  more  generally.  After  all, 
the  broad  premise  underlying  financial
modernization --  with  its  removal  of  legislative  and  regulatory  restrictions  --  is  that  free  and
often intense competition will create the most efficient and customer-oriented business system.
This  principle  has  proved  itself,  generation  by  generation,  with  ever  higher
standards of living.
In  financial,  as  well  as  most  other,  markets  the  principle  is  rooted  in  another
premise -- that the interaction of private  competitive  forces  will,  with  rare  exceptions,  create  a
stable  error  self-correcting  system.  This  premise  is  very  seriously  called  into  question  if
government subsidies are supplied at key balancing points. By their nature, subsidies distort the
establishment of competitive market prices, and create incentives that misalign private risks with
private  gains.  Such  distortions  undermine  the  error  self-correcting  mechanisms  that  support
strong financial markets.
We  must  be  very  careful  that  in  the  name  of  free  market  efficiency  we  do  not
countenance greater powers and profits subsidized directly or indirectly by government.
Conclusion
Mr.  Chairman,  in  conclusion,  the  Board  believes  that  as  the  Congress  moves
toward  financial  modernization  the  newly  created  structure  of  financial  organizations  should
limit, in so far as possible, the real and perceived transfer of the subsidy inherent in  the  safety
net  to  nonbank  activities.  To  maintain  a  level  playing  field  for  all  competitors,  nonbank
activities must be financed at market, not subsidized, rates.
The  Board  also  believes  that  financial  modernization  should  not  undermine  the
ability and authority of the central bank of the United States to manage crises, assure an efficient
and safe payment system, and conduct monetary policy. We believe all of these require that the
Federal Reserve retain a significant and important role as a bank supervisor. In today’s structure,
we have adequate authority and coverage to meet our responsibilities. But should erosion occur,
as  would  likely  be  the  case  if  new  activities  are  authorized  in  bank  subsidiaries,  the  Congress
would have to consider what changes would be required in the Board’s supervisory authority to
assure that it continues to be able to meet its central bank responsibilities.
BIS Review   31/1997
