Mr. Lamfalussy looks at the progress achieved by the Hungarian economy in
recent  years      Address  by  the  President  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  Mr.  Alexandre
Lamfalussy, at a conference organised by the Hungarian Banking Association on the occasion of
the  10th  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  new  Hungarian  banking  system  and  held  in
Budapest on 7/2/97.
For  at  least  three  reasons,  I  have  accepted  with  pleasure  the  invitation  to  share
some thoughts with you on the occasion of these tenth anniversary celebrations.
First, for obvious personal reasons, I enjoy spending some time in Hungary - even
if it is only for less than a day.
Second,  I  am  absolutely  convinced  that  an  efficient  financial  system  in  general,
and  an  efficient  banking  system  in  particular,  together  comprise  an  indispensable  precondition
for  the  proper  functioning  of  a  market  economy  and,  indeed,  for  economic  growth.  Not  a
sufficient condition, but a necessary one.
Third, I note that Hungary has made substantial progress in this direction in four
key areas. The larger part of the Hungarian banking system is now in genuinely private hands;
the financial health of most banks (which, not so long ago, was - to put it mildly - precarious)
has improved; the legal, accounting and regulatory framework  has  been  consolidated,  and,  last
but  not  least,  there  is  now  an  interbank  payment  system  in  place  which  can  no  longer  be
qualified as prehistoric. Admittedly, in all these areas progress is still possible and desirable, but
what has been achieved so far now enables you to address a number of institutional issues for the
solution of which Western experience is fast becoming increasingly and directly relevant.
But  before  considering  some  of  these  issues,  allow  me  to  make  some  remarks
about  the  macroeconomic  situation  of  the  Hungarian  economy  and  about  the  new  framework
within  which  the  National  Bank  of  Hungary  will  be  operating.  Both  these  areas  are  of  key
importance  for  the  management  of  your  banks.  At  the  same  time,  both  have  a  bearing  on
Hungary’s  declared  intention  to  join  the  European  Union  (and  within  this,  probably  at  a  later
stage,  also  EMU).  Last  but  not  least,  both  are  important  areas  in  themselves,  irrespective  of
considerations relating to European integration.
THE MACROECONOMIC SITUATION
That  there  has  been  a  significant  improvement  since  mid-1995  in  Hungary’s
macroeconomic situation is beyond doubt.  Here  are  a  few  facts  and  comments  on  some  of  the
features of this improvement.
1. The current account deficit reached $3.5 billion in 1993 and almost $4 billion
in 1994, i.e. more than 10% of GDP - an obviously unsustainable situation by any standards, but
even  more  so  for  a  country  with  a  high  debt  ratio.  Some  of  this  deficit  was  covered  by  direct
foreign investment, but the greater part of it was financed by borrowing, as a result of which by
the end of 1994 the net external debt had reached 46% of GDP and the exceptionally high level
of more than 160% of exports of goods and services and unrequited transfers.
2. I have not yet seen the full 1996 figures, but estimates based on the first eleven
months  suggest  a  current  account  deficit  of  around  (or  even  less  than)  $1.5 billion.  This  looks
much more reasonable, not only because it was more than covered by foreign direct investment
but  also  because  of  what  lies  behind  this  improvement.  The  $2.5  billion  drop  in  the  current
BIS Review   16/1997
- 2 -
account  deficit  between  1994  and  1996  was  made  possible  (a)  by  a  35%  increase  in  exports,
accompanied  by  a  modest  increase  in  imports  of  about  14%,  and  (b)  by  the  steady  and  rapid
increase in services income, mainly (but not exclusively) derived from tourism.
3. Since there was also a sizable inflow of foreign direct investment in 1995 and
1996,  the  country’s  net  external  debt  dropped  from  $18.9  billion  at  end-1994  to  about  $13.3
billion at end-1996. Net external debt declined to 31.2 expressed as a percentage of GDP, and to
71.6 as a percentage of exports of goods, services and unrequited transfers. I have also noted that
by 1996 net interest payments on the external debt had dropped to 6.7 as a percentage of exports
of goods and services. The comparable figures were 12% in 1994 and as high as 17% in 1990. It
is useful to point out that the sizeable decline of the net external debt was made possible by the
substantial decline of the public sector  deficit from 8.2% of GDP in 1994 to 4% in 1996, while
at  the  same  time  the  share  of  public  sector  expenditure  in  GDP  declined  from  62%  to  a  more
bearable  51%.  “Growing  out”  of  the  debt  service  burden  is  no  longer  wishful  thinking.  It  is
beginning to become a reality.
4.  The  fact  I  find  most  noteworthy  is  that  the  $2.5  billion  switch  of  resources
towards external use, amounting to some 7% of GDP, took place without a recession, which is
unusual  for  such  a  large  switch.  It  was  even  accompanied  by  a  small  increase  in  GDP.  This
would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  fast  growth  of  exports.  The  remarkable  growth  of
labour productivity in industry - of close to 60% between 1992 and 1996 - played a major role in
this respect. This growth, together with the  changing  composition  of  exports,  suggests  that  the
structural  transformation  of  the  Hungarian  economy  has  gone  quite  far.  The  growth  of  net
services exports points in the same direction.
5. So much for the bright side of the picture, which is a good thing but should not
be overstated.
First,  these  are  improvements  in  comparison  with  the  unsustainable  imbalances
which characterised both the situation prevailing in 1988-89 and that of the years 1993-94.
Second,  the  price  paid  by  the  majority  of  Hungarians  was  very  heavy  indeed:  a
drop in net real earnings of 12% in 1995, followed by another of 4% last year. Even if this was
arguably  unavoidable,  given  the  size  of  the  imbalances  which  had  to  be  corrected  (and  which
themselves  had  been  caused,  to  some  extent  at  least,  by  the  premature  rise  in  real  earnings  in
1994), the size of the sacrifices remains a fact. Against this background, any further erosion of
average living standards would be just as unsustainable as were the macroeconomic imbalances
in 1993-94.
Third,  the  rate  of  inflation  is  still  far  too  high.  Admittedly,  since  the  post-
devaluation  peak  reached  in  the  late  spring  of  1995  -  of  more  than  30%  -  the  rate  has  been
declining  steadily,  to  stand  by  December  last  year  at  a  shade  below  20%.  But  I  am  seriously
worried by the fact that the Hungarian rate of inflation, while never moving towards three digits,
has remained stuck within the 18-35% range over the past seven years. The worst was avoided
by maintaining positive real interest rates during the greater part of this period, but the distorting
effects of such inflation rates on the economy  remain  substantial,  not  to  mention  their  socially
unacceptable impact on those people whose earnings cannot be adjusted to inflation.
6.  Looking  ahead,  I  hope  that  you  will  bear  with  me  if  I  become  a  little
philosophical.  All  knowledgeable  observers  of  Hungarian  history,  ancient  as  well  as
contemporary, agree that Hungarians possess the very rare ability to pull back at the last minute
BIS Review   16/1997
- 3 -
from the brink of disaster or at least to extricate themselves from a seemingly hopeless situation.
They unfortunately also note that once the Hungarians have done so, they miss the opportunity
offered  by  their  own  success  to  carry  out  policies  with  a  long-term  perspective  in  mind.  I  do
hope that history will not repeat itself.
Admittedly,  any  further  decline  in  the  average  living  standard  would  be
unacceptable. The standard of living should be allowed to begin to rise - but only to the extent
that this does not upset the basic balance of the economy again. At the same time, the reduction
in inflation must continue at a pace which puts the attainment of single-digit inflation in sight.
You must break out - downwards - of the 18 to 35% range. And, last but not least, the country
will have to begin to tackle earnestly the major structural problems related to the pension, health
care, education and social security systems. These are daunting challenges. Two reminders may
help  when  tackling  them.  The  first  is  that  Hungary  has  managed  major  breakthroughs  in  the
recent past which were just as difficult as these future challenges: over the past five years, real
privatisation accompanied by a fundamental shift in the structure of industry and services; and,
more recently, the handling of a macroeconomic crisis situation. The second is that most of these
challenges  are  akin  to  those  encountered  by  modern  Western  societies.  For  these  challenges
Hungary is in good company.
THE MONETARY POLICY ENVIRONMENT
Two  recent  changes  have  occurred  regarding  the  institutional  environment  in
which the National Bank of Hungary is operating. I welcome both of them.
1.  The  possibility  of  the  direct  financing  of  the  budget  deficit  by  the  NBH  has
been  eliminated.  This  is  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  and  is  a
measure which has already been implemented by all fifteen member countries of the European
Union and which the EMI closely monitors. To remind you, this provision of the Treaty applies
to the member countries at this stage, prior  to  effectively  entering  EMU.  It  would  seem  to  me
impossible for Hungary to join the European Union without this change in the law governing the
operations of the NBH, even if Hungary’s participation in the euro area were to come at a later
stage.
But  this  is  only  an  institutional  or  political  argument.  There  is  more  to  it.
Maastricht  or  no  Maastricht,  eliminating  the  direct  monetary  financing  of  budget  deficits  is
simply economic common sense. In the long run, inflation is a monetary phenomenon: it cannot
happen without an (at least) accommodating expansion of the money supply. And we know from
historical experience that more often than not the major source of any such inflationary increase
in the money supply has been the direct financing of government by the central bank. Hungary
has  not  been  an  exception  to  this  general  rule  -  rather  its  confirmation.  And  once  inflation  is
established, interest rates go up. Except for  very  short  periods,  it  is  impossible  to  keep  market
interest rates below the rate of inflation: who would be ready to undertake financial savings the
remuneration of which would imply a loss in real financial wealth? To try to keep interest rates
low by monetary financing of the government is a self-defeating device. It may work for a few
months,  but  would  end  up  producing  more  inflation  and  higher,  not  lower,  interest  rates -
certainly higher nominal interest rates, but very likely also higher real rates. The simple reason
for  this  is  that  people  are  not  fools  -  at  least  not  for  a  long  time.  Monetary  financing  of  the
government is therefore likely to combine two evils at the same time: inflation and high interest
rates.
BIS Review   16/1997
- 4 -
2.  The  accumulated  and  potential  future  losses  of  the  NBH  on  account  of  its
borrowings  in  foreign  currency  have  been  taken  over  by  the  government.  This  is  a  salutary
cleaning-up operation which ought to have been carried out long ago. It has no consequences for
the  “real”  economy.  These  borrowings  have  been  undertaken  in  the  past  on  government
instruction and with government approval, with the NBH acting solely as an intermediary. The
NBH’s only shareholder is the Hungarian State; the real burden of the State’s direct or indirect
external borrowing has to be borne by the present or future taxpayers. This real burden was to
some extent hidden by the “seigniorage” profits of the NBH, which had two consequences: they
hid  the  size  of  this  burden  from  public  view;  and  they  distorted  the  NBH’s  accounts.  As  all
experts know, the size of this double distortion was proportional to the rate of inflation, and was
aggravated by the NBH’s sterilisation policy of large capital  inflows,  without  which,  however,
inflation would not have been brought down from 30 to 20% within the past  eighteen  months.
Sterilisation was therefore a wise policy; the real culprit is the rate of inflation, which is much
higher  in  Hungary  than  in  the  countries  whose  currencies  were  used  for  borrowing.  In  a
sentence:  this  long  overdue  measure  serves  both  public  transparency  and  democratic
accountability (of both the government and the NBH) - even if the general public, or politicians,
may  be  excused  for  not  fully  understanding  the  intricate  interconnection  between  accounting
procedures in a country with high inflation and the processes of the real economy. This is a good
example of the generalised mess created by inflation.
CHALLENGES FOR THE HUNGARIAN BANKS
As  I  said  right  at  the  outset,  it  is  now  time  to  look  ahead  and  begin  to  address
some major issues for the Hungarian banks - issues which, thanks to the progress made over the
past  few  years,  are  no  longer  totally  dissimilar  from  those  facing  banks  in  western  Europe.  I
intend to make a few comments  on  these,  since  they  are  issues  on  which  I  can  possibly  throw
some light on the basis of my own professional experience.
1.  The  first  is  about  the  specificity  of  banking,  i.e.  about  the  possibility  or
desirability of  clearly  distinguishing  banks,  through  rules  and  regulations,  from  other  financial
intermediaries.  I  noted  that  the  recent  changes  in  Hungarian  banking  law  have  implied  a
movement towards the de-specialisation of banks, notably in the field of securities transactions. I
believe  that  a  development  towards  the  universal  banking  model  is  justified  -  on  certain
conditions. It is justified for two groups of reasons.
the 
First, because financial innovation in general, and securitisation in particular, are
traditionally  neat  distinction  between  banks  and  other  financial
breaking  down 
intermediaries, indeed even between financial intermediation and financial markets, all over the
world. Some time ago, banks were defined as financial intermediaries whose liabilities (mainly
sight and short-term deposits) were equivalent to the money supply, and the money supply was
defined  as  the  total  sum  of  bank  liabilities.  This  nice  circular  definition  kept  academics,  bank
regulators and central bankers equally happy until the moment when financial innovation started
blurring  the  distinction  between  money  and  other  financial  assets,  and  securitisation  began
blurring  the  distinction  between  financial  intermediation  and  financial  market  operations.  The
proliferation  of  derivatives,  financial  futures  and  the  like  added  to  the  confusion  between
balance sheet and off-balance sheet items. The result is that it is becoming increasingly difficult
to identify banking on the basis of the old equivalence of “banking liabilities = money supply”.
This  has  now  been  recognised  in  the  sweeping  deregulation  of  banking  activities  affecting  the
whole of western Europe and, though more cautiously, also the United States. In some cases this
has gone so far as to allow the emergence of consolidated banking and insurance activities.
BIS Review   16/1997
- 5 -
Second,  in  a  shorter  Hungarian  perspective,  banks  in  Hungary  have  a  head  start
on  other  financial  intermediaries  in  collecting  the  financial  savings  of  households  and  of  the
enterprise  sector.  Admittedly,  Hungary  badly  needs  the  large-scale  development  of  life
assurance  companies,  pension  funds,  mutual  funds  and  the  like,  i.e.  all  those  institutional
investors  which  can  channel  savings  towards  equity  investment.  But  this  takes  time,  since
experience  and  human  resources  are  rare  and  the  reform  of  the  pension  system  and  of  health
services takes time. Banks should be allowed to fill the gap for the time being, by putting at the
disposal of savers a wide variety of financial instruments.
2.  Now  let  me  come  to  the  risks  that  a  generalised  move  towards  universal
banking could entail, and the ways and means of containing them.
The  main  risk,  of  course,  is  the  emergence  of  conflicts  of  interest.  One  such
potential  conflict  of  interest  may  arise  within  any  bank,  between  the  bank’s  own  risk-taking
activity and risk-taking for its customers. The classic example of this is the potential conflict of
interest between  credit-granting  and  securities  underwriting,  but  this  is  only  one  example.  The
traditional  way  of  avoiding  the  misuse  of  such  conflict-creating  situations  is  (a)  to  devise  an
organisational structure with clearly distinguishable lines of responsibility, (b) to avoid flows of
“inside” information between the various activities, (c) to attribute to each activity costs, income
and profits, and (d) to entrust external auditors with the surveillance of the systems put in place.
The end-result will, of course, never be entirely safe. Moreover, the building of “Chinese walls”
inside  a  multi-polar  banking  organisation  may  weaken,  or  even  destroy,  the  synergy  between
those poles, i.e. it may undermine the rationale of a multi-polar organisation. I would not want,
however,  to  overstate  the  internal  conflict  of  interest  argument.  In  the  long  run,  the  kind  of
conflict to which I have referred is unlikely to be very strong. In a longer-term perspective, no
bank can afford to favour its own risk-taking activity at the expense of its customers - especially
if auditing makes it certain that any misuse of the bank’s powers would come to light.
3. Another much more dangerous conflict of interest could arise where the bank is
capable of exercising a decisive shareholding power in another non-banking firm, of which it is
at the same time a major creditor. This could have unacceptable consequences not only for the
firm’s  other  shareholders  but,  if  the  practice  became  widespread,  could  even  lead  to  structural
distortions for entire industries. To avoid this happening, I would favour rather strict regulations.
For  instance,  mutual  funds  managed  by  banks  should  either  have  limits  on  the  equity
participation in individual firms or not have access to the firm’s Board. The same should apply,
a fortiori, to any bank’s direct and permanent equity participation in a non-banking firm - unless,
perhaps, the bank remains just a shareholder (as if it were, say, a pension fund), without direct
banking operations with the firm in question.
4.  Under  the  last  point,  I  already  touched  on  one  particular  aspect  of  corporate
governance, namely when a bank can play a decisive role in a non-banking firm’s life. But you
will also have to face up to the reverse problem: when a non-banking firm becomes a bank’s key
shareholder  and  could  therefore  potentially  induce  risk-taking  by  the  bank  in  its  favour,  at  the
expense of the bank’s other shareholders or of its depositors or customers. This is a particularly
acute danger in countries where  there  are  not  many  non-bank  institutional  shareholders,  where
the  defence  of  minority  shareholders  has  no  tradition  and  where  depositors  are  not  properly
protected. Such problems have been encountered in Western market economies. It is clearly  in
Hungary’s interest to build up, or consolidate, the appropriate defences against the emergence of
such problems.
BIS Review   16/1997
- 6 -
5.  In  order  to  avoid  any  misunderstandings,  I  am  not  launching  any  appeal  in
favour of overregulation. In a market economy, the best regulator is the market itself. And when
spontaneous  market  regulation  fails  -  which  does  happen  -  the  second-best  solution  is  to  use
regulatory  techniques  which  favour  the  emergence  of  market-led  self-regulation.  I  am  simply
trying  to  make  two  points.  First,  that  banking  and  finance  have  broader  and  more  general
implications for the economy as a whole than any other kind of activity. A crisis in, say, the steel
industry creates hardship, but it does not create a general crisis. A banking crisis may well do so.
Second, banking and finance are evolving at a very  fast  pace  under  the  combined  influence  of
technological  progress,  innovation  and  globalisation.  This  needs  a  careful  adjustment  of  the
regulatory framework, not its general weakening.
6. In a very different area, may I call your attention to the need to develop both
retail banking in the narrow sense of the term and also banking services to the dynamic sector of
small  and  medium-sized  enterprises. 
is  vastly
underdeveloped,  both  in  the  number  of  consumer-friendly  local  offices  and,  even  more
importantly,  in  the  range  of  high-quality  banking  services  offered  to  these  two  groups  of
customers.  This  underdevelopment  is  particularly  striking  when  it  is  compared  with  the
sophistication of some of the wholesale banking activities being offered.
fields,  Hungarian  banking 
these 
In 
This  is  most  regrettable  and  goes  against  the  long-term  interests  of  the  banks
themselves,  not  to  mention  those  of  the  country.  Households  are,  and  will  remain,  the  major
source of the country’s financial savings. They deserve to be supplied with appropriate, safe and
diversified  vehicles  which  allow  them  to  find  an  outlet  for  their  financial  wealth.  Some  small
and  medium-sized  firms  are  net  savers;  others  desperately  need  financing  for  development
purposes, which financial markets will not be able to provide for a very long time indeed. I have
known of a number of western European and even North American banks which derived great
strength  from  their  solid  retail  banking  basis,  which  helped  them  considerably  in  situations  in
which some, if not many, of their cherished wholesale customers went bust.
You will also need the retail banking basis for another reason. Satisfied household
and  small  enterprise  customers  provide  you  with  the  greatest  public  support.  And  I  can  assure
you  that  you  will  need  this  support  in  a  democratic  society.  Banking  has  never  been,  and  is
unlikely  to  become,  a  popular  activity,  especially  when  it  relies  exclusively  on  customers
recruited from among large corporations and very wealthy individuals. Beware of the danger of
political backlash.
In  developing  your  retail  activities,  you  will  have  to  monitor  western  European
experiences carefully. Many western European countries are overbanked in this field, and a good
deal  of  discussion  is  focusing  on  the  merits  of  customer  proximity  versus  home-computer
banking.  My  feeling  is  that  you  will  be  able  to  avoid  some  of  the  earlier  western  European
excesses,  and  rely  directly  on  the  most  recent  communications  and  information  systems
technology.  But  for  a  long  time  to  come,  most  of  your  customers  will  need  close,  human
proximity. The comparative assessment of the costs and benefits of these two approaches will be
a very great challenge for the Hungarian banking system.
I hope that in ten years’ time, if I am still around, I shall be able to congratulate
you on having been able to successfully meet this challenge. Meanwhile, I wish you good luck -
and the ability to help the emergence of good luck by hard work, skilful management and good
strategic choices.
BIS Review   16/1997
