Dr.  Brash  looks  at  banking  soundness  and  the  role  of  the  market  with
respect to New Zealand's banking industry   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, Dr. Donald T. Brash, to the IMF conference on banking soundness and monetary
policy in a world of global capital markets held in Washington on 30/1/97.
My address this morning is on “Banking Soundness and the Role of the Market”.
As  most  of  you  will  already  know,  this  is  a  subject  of  particular  relevance  to  New  Zealand,
given that we have adopted a banking supervision approach which places considerable emphasis
on the role of the market in promoting a sound financial system. In my speech today I  will  be
outlining the key features of our new approach to banking supervision and the reasons why we
have  gone  in  this  direction.  Although  much  of  my  address  will  focus  on  the  New  Zealand
experience,  I  will  attempt  to  draw  some  general  conclusions  about  the  role  market  disciplines
can  play  in  promoting  a  sound  and  efficient  financial  system  -  conclusions  that  may  have
relevance for the design of banking supervision arrangements in other countries. Before I outline
the new approach to banking supervision in New Zealand, I think it would be useful to give you
a little background on the supervisory structure which operated at the time that the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand conducted its review of banking supervision.
Background to New Zealand’s Banking Supervision Arrangements
New Zealand first adopted a formalised approach to banking supervision in 1987.
For  most  of  the  period  from  then  until  the  end  of  1995  New  Zealand’s  approach  to  banking
supervision was relatively orthodox. It involved:
minimum capital requirements (based on the Basle Capital Accord);
limits on the amount which banks could lend to individual customers and related
parties;
a limit on banks’ open foreign exchange positions;
off-site monitoring of banks, using information provided privately to the Reserve
Bank;
annual consultations with the senior management of banks; and
a  range  of  powers  to  enable  the  Reserve  Bank  to  respond  to  bank  distress  or
failure.
However,  the  former  system  of  banking  supervision  differed  in  some  important
respects  from  the  approaches  adopted  in  many  other  countries.  In  particular,  New  Zealand’s
supervisory framework:
did  not  involve  the  licensing  or  supervision  of  deposit-taking  or  the  business  of
banking - only those entities wishing to use the word “bank” in their name were
subject to supervision;
did not feature deposit insurance;
did not seek to protect depositors per se - instead, it sought to protect the financial
system as a whole; and
BIS Review   /1997
- 2 -
did not involve any form of on-site examination of banks.
These  distinguishing  features  continue  to  apply  under  the  new  supervisory
framework.
In  late  1991  we  commenced  a  major  review  of  our  banking  supervision
arrangements. The review was motivated by a number of concerns.
Probably  the  main  reason  for  commencing  the  review  was  a  concern  that
conventional  approaches  to  banking  supervision  generally  make  insufficient  use  of  market
disciplines  as  a  means  of  promoting  a  sound  and  efficient  financial  system.  We  believed  that
there  was  considerable  scope  to  use  market  disciplines  to  promote  systemic  stability.  In
particular,  we  wished  to  provide  the  market  with  a  greater  capacity  to  hold  the  directors  and
management to account for the sound management of their bank. And we wanted to improve the
market’s  ability  to  make  well  informed  decisions  as  to  which  banks  they  would  do  business
with. As  I  note  later  in  this  address,  we  concluded  that  the  introduction  of  a  well  focused  and
comprehensive disclosure regime would go a long way towards achieving these objectives.
Another factor which led us to review our banking supervision arrangements was
a  concern  at  the  compliance  costs  and  regulatory  distortions  which  can  be  associated  with
conventional  approaches  to  banking  supervision.  This  concern  reflects  our  view  that  banking
supervisors tend to have strong incentives to promote a stable financial system, without always
having  appropriate  regard  to  the  compliance  costs  and  regulatory  distortions  to  which
supervision and prudential regulation can give rise.
We were also concerned at the taxpayer risk involved in the traditional approach
to banking supervision. Although this risk is present regardless of the form banking supervision
takes, it is likely to be greater  where  the  banking  supervisor,  and  only  the  banking  supervisor,
has  regular  access  to  financial  information  on  a  bank.  It  is  also  likely  to  be  greater  the  more
intensive  the  supervision  process  is.  We  wanted  to  explore  ways  of  reducing  the  risk  of  the
government being called upon to rescue a bank in distress.
 Finally, we recognised that conventional banking supervision can only go so far
in  promoting  a  sound  banking  system.  There  are  inherent  limitations  in  the  extent  to  which
prudential regulation and supervision, even supervision which includes on-site examinations, can
minimise the incidence of bank distress and failure. This is evidenced by the fact that countries
with  intensive  supervisory  regimes  have  not  been  immune  from  serious  episodes  of  financial
distress. Indeed, we were concerned that banking supervision could even be increasing the risk
of  bank  failure  or  distress,  by  potentially  reducing  the  incentives  for  bank  directors  and
managers to make their own considered judgements about what constitutes prudent behaviour.
The New Approach to Banking Supervision in New Zealand
In  the  light  of  these  concerns,  and  following  a  lengthy  period  of  review,  we
concluded  that  the  concerns  we  had  identified  could  be  substantially  addressed  by  placing
greater  reliance  on  market  disciplines  through  public  disclosure  by  banks,  increasing  the
accountability  of  bank  directors  and  management,  and  reducing  the  extent  of  prudential
regulation.  The  new  banking  supervision  arrangements,  which  came  into  force  on  1  January
1996, reflect these conclusions.
BIS Review   /1997
- 3 -
The new approach differs from the former regime in two main areas. First, a new
disclosure  regime  applicable  to  all  banks  operating  in  New  Zealand  has  been  introduced.  The
disclosure  regime  is  designed  to  substantially  strengthen  the  market  disciplines  on  banks  and
sharpen the incentives for the directors and management of banks to manage their banks’ affairs
in  a  sound  and  responsible  manner.  I  will  outline  the  main  features  of  the  disclosure
arrangements shortly.
The  second  major  change  involved  a  reduction  in  the  extent  of  prudential
regulation of banks. The main changes included:
the  removal  of  the  former  limit  on  the  amount  which  banks  may  lend  to  their
customers;
the removal of the limit on banks’ open foreign exchange exposures;
the  removal  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  guidelines  on  internal  controls  and  the
associated audit requirements; and
the removal of the need for banks to privately report their financial position and
risk exposures to the Reserve Bank.
We were satisfied that the introduction of the new disclosure regime obviated the
need for many of the former prudential controls on banks.
Undoubtedly the feature of the new approach that has attracted most attention  is
the disclosure regime. Let me briefly outline its main features.
Under the new arrangements, all banks operating in New Zealand must publish a
disclosure  statement  each  quarter.  The  disclosure  statements  are  in  two  forms:  a  brief  Key
Information  Summary,  which  is  aimed  at  the  ordinary  depositor;  and  a  more  comprehensive
General Disclosure Statement, which is aimed principally at the professional analyst.
The Key Information Summary contains a short summary of key information on a
bank, including:
the  bank’s  credit  rating  (or  a  statement  that  the  bank  has  no  credit  rating);  the
bank’s  capital  ratios,  measured  using  the  Basle  framework;  and  information  on
peak  exposure  concentration,  peak  exposures  to  related  parties,  asset  quality,
shareholder guarantees (if any) and profitability.
The  Key  Information  Summary  must  be  displayed  prominently  in,  and  be
available on demand from, every bank branch.
The  General  Disclosure  Statement  contains  wider-ranging  and  much  more
detailed information on a bank and its banking group, including:
corporate information and some information on parent banks (where applicable);
comprehensive  financial  statements  (including  a  five  year  summary  of  key
financial  data);  credit  rating  information  (including  any  changes  to  the  rating  in
the two years preceding a bank’s most recent disclosure statement balance date);
detailed information on capital adequacy, asset quality and various risk exposures
BIS Review   /1997
- 4 -
(including  exposure  concentration  and  related  party  exposures);  information  on
funds  management  and  securitisation  activities,  risk  management  systems,  and  a
summary  of  the  prudential  regulations  imposed  on  the  bank  in  question  by  the
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand;  information  on  the  bank’s  exposure  to  market
risk, both peak and end of period (and in respect of the full banking book).
The disclosure statements issued by banks are subject to full external audit at the
end of year and a limited scope audit review at the half year. Disclosure statements issued at the
other quarters in the year are not required to be audited.
One  of  the  most  important  features  of  the  disclosure  framework  is  the  role  it
accords  bank  directors.  Each  director  is  required  to  sign  their  bank’s  disclosure  statements  (or
authorise someone to sign on his or her behalf) and to make certain attestations in the disclosure
statements, including:
whether the bank is complying with the prudential requirements imposed on it by
the Reserve Bank; whether  the  bank  has  systems  in  place  to  adequately  monitor
and  control  its  banking  risks  and  whether  those  systems  are  being  properly
applied; whether the bank’s exposure to related parties is contrary to the interests
of  the  bank;  and  whether  the  disclosure  statement  contains  all  the  required
disclosures and is not false or misleading.
Directors face severe criminal and civil penalties (including up to three years’ jail
and  personal  liability  for  creditors’  losses)  if  a  disclosure  statement  is  held  to  be  false  or
misleading.
The disclosure arrangements are expected to bring a number of important benefits
to the New Zealand financial system:
We are confident that the disclosure arrangements are playing an important role in
strengthening  market  disciplines  on  banks.  Under  the  new  arrangements  the  market  has
considerably greater information on a bank’s financial performance and risk positions than was
previously  the  case.  And  the  information  is  available  more  frequently  and  in  a  more  timely
manner.  The  market  therefore  has  greater  scope  to  react  to  developments  affecting  a  bank’s
financial condition - rewarding those banks which are well managed and penalising those which
appear to be less well managed. The strongest banks are likely to benefit from that strength by
operating  at  lower  costs;  weaker  banks  are  likely  to  be  under  pressure  to  strengthen  their
position.  Over  the  longer  term  we  believe  that  stronger  market  disciplines  will  make  a  major
contribution to the soundness of New Zealand’s financial system.
Another benefit which we expect to see from the disclosure regime is a growing
emphasis on the important role which bank directors play in overseeing the prudent management
of their banks. The disclosure framework reinforces and provides a sharper focus on the duties
of bank directors. In particular, it sharpens the focus on directors’ duties to ensure that their bank
has  the  necessary  systems  in  place  to  identify,  monitor  and  manage  adequately  the  bank’s
various business risks, and to ensure that those systems are being properly applied at all times.
The disclosure requirements are also likely to increase the accountability of bank
directors  and,  indirectly,  the  accountability  of  various  levels  of  management  within  the  banks.
As a result of the disclosure arrangements, we would expect to see directors taking greater care
than  might  otherwise  have  been  the  case  to  ensure  that  they  are  adequately  discharging  their
BIS Review   /1997
- 5 -
obligations.  In  so  doing,  it  is  likely  that  directors  will  take  steps  to  ensure  that  there  are
appropriate accountability mechanisms within the management hierarchy.
Over time, we expect that the increased accountability of bank directors will lead
to an improvement in the quality of bank boards. Shareholders now face stronger incentives to
ensure  that  the  directors  of  their  banks  have  the  appropriate  skills,  experience,  integrity  and
judgement to fulfil the duties expected of them.
Another important benefit which we hope will flow from the disclosure regime is
a reduction in the risk that the taxpayer will be called upon to rescue a bank. As a result of the
disclosure  arrangements  we  hope  that  there  will  be  a  stronger  public  perception  that  the
management  and  directors  of  a  bank  have  the  sole  responsibility  for  the  management  of  their
bank’s affairs. Moreover, the public now has access to much the same information on banks as
does  the  Reserve  Bank,  thereby  eliminating  the  monopoly  of  information  which  supervisors
generally  tend  to  have  in  respect  of  a  bank’s  financial  condition.  Both  of  these  factors  should
assist  in  enabling  future  governments  to  resist  the  inevitable  pressures  to  rescue  a  bank  in
distress or to insulate creditors from losses - at least to some extent.
Although the new supervisory framework  places  great  emphasis  on  the  role  that
market  disciplines  can  play  in  promoting  systemic  stability,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  has  not  abandoned  its  responsibilities  for  the  financial  system.
We recognise that, for the time being at least, systemic stability is best served by a combination
of market disciplines and banking supervision. In particular, we see value in:
retaining  some  control  over  which  entities  may  call  themselves  banks  in  New
Zealand;
the Reserve Bank maintaining a sound understanding of the state of the financial
system; and
the  Reserve  Bank  retaining  a  capacity  to  respond  to  financial  distress  or  bank
failure, where this threatens financial system stability.
In  this  context,  a  number  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  core  functions  have  been
retained.
The Reserve Bank continues to have responsibility for registering new banks.
Banks  continue  to  be  subject  to  minimum  capital  requirements  (in  line  with  the
Basle  Capital  Accord)  and  a  limit  on  lending  to  related  parties.  Although  we  believe  that
disclosure  alone  would  ensure  that  banks  would  maintain  capital  at  least  equivalent  to  the  8%
minimum,  we  consider  that  retention  of  the  minimum  capital  requirements  reinforces  the
credibility of the new supervisory framework, at no additional cost to banks.
The  Reserve  Bank  continues  to  monitor  banks  on  a  quarterly  basis.  However,
monitoring is now conducted principally using banks’ public disclosure statements, in contrast to
the former system of monitoring on the basis of information provided  privately  to  the  Reserve
Bank.  In  most  respects,  banks’  disclosure  statements  contain  information  which  is  more
comprehensive  and  more  reliable  than  the  information  previously  provided  privately  to  the
Reserve Bank.
BIS Review   /1997
- 6 -
The Reserve Bank also continues to consult with the senior management of banks.
Formal prudential consultations are held annually, and generally focus on the strategic direction
of  the  banks,  major  changes  in  their  operations  and  other  high  level  issues.  In  addition,  as
Governor of the Reserve Bank  of  New  Zealand,  I  meet  with  the  chief  executives  of  the  larger
banks  on  a  regular  basis  to  discuss  a  broad  range  of  issues,  including  issues  relating  to  the
banking industry and to the wider economy.
And, importantly, the Reserve Bank retains a wide-ranging capacity to respond to
financial distress or bank failure where a bank’s financial condition poses a serious threat to the
stability of the banking system.
As with the former supervision arrangements, the objective underlying the above
responsibilities is the promotion of a sound and efficient financial system. Depositor protection
does not feature in the Reserve Bank’s objectives.
Reactions to the New Approach to Banking Supervision
All in all, I believe that the new approach has been relatively well accepted. But it
has taken time for that acceptance to be achieved. It is fair to say that, during the review process,
reservations about  the  new  approach  were  expressed  from  a  number  of  quarters,  both  at  home
and abroad. I think it would be useful to mention some of these.
One of the observations made has been that New Zealand is “free riding” on the
efforts  of  the  home  supervisors.  We  firmly  reject  this  notion.  We  believe  that  the  new
supervisory framework is at least as effective at promoting prudent banking practices as are the
more  traditional  approaches  to  banking  supervision.  And  we  are  satisfied  that  the  new
framework  enables  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  to  fulfil  its  duties  as  a  host  supervisor
within  the  terms  of  the  Basle  Concordat.  In  that  regard,  under  the  new  approach  to  banking
supervision, the Reserve Bank of  New  Zealand  remains  well  informed  about  the  activities  and
financial  condition  of  all  banks  operating  in  New  Zealand,  and  well  placed  to  respond  to
incipient  financial  distress  where  appropriate.  Indeed,  as  I  have  already  noted,  the  disclosure
regime  provides  the  Reserve  Bank  (and  the  public)  with  information  which  is  generally  more
comprehensive than the information previously received by the Reserve Bank.
But  it  is  certainly  true  that  any  host  supervisor  will  -  inevitably  -  rely  to  some
extent on the global supervision of the home supervisor. After all, this is an intrinsic part of the
Basle  Concordat.  The  most  a  host  supervisor  can  realistically  achieve  is  to  promote  prudent
banking practices in the local operations of the banks within its jurisdiction.
In  the  context  of  the  above  point,  some  commentators  have  suggested  that  the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand is not well placed to anticipate emerging financial distress in the
absence of conducting on-site examinations of banks or otherwise obtaining private information
from  banks.  Although  I  acknowledge  that  on-site  examinations  do  increase  the  information
available  to  banking  supervisors,  I  am  not  at  all  convinced  that  the  information  obtained  from
such  examinations  enables  the  supervisors  to  reliably  anticipate  incipient  financial  distress.  In
modern banking, risk positions can and do change rapidly. A week in  politics  might  be  a  long
time, but in banking it is a very long time indeed! This is becoming increasingly the case. The
information obtained from on-site examinations, or from any other sources for that matter, can
only  provide  a  snapshot  of  a  bank’s  risk  positions  at  a  particular  point  in  time,  and  even  then
generally only in respect of a subset of the bank’s business. For these reasons I believe any such
BIS Review   /1997
- 7 -
information  is  of  limited  usefulness  in  assessing  the  dynamics  of  a  bank’s  risk  positions  or  in
anticipating financial distress.
I  acknowledge,  of  course,  that  publicly  disclosed  information  also  has  these
limitations. But at least public disclosure brings with it the incentives for the sound management
of  banking  risks.  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  the  private  disclosure  of  information  to  a  banking
supervisor - whether on-site or off-site - creates these types of incentives.
A further concern we have with on-site examinations or the off-site collection of
detailed private information on banks, at least in the New Zealand context, is the risk that these
approaches  can  blur  the  lines  of  responsibility  for  the  management  of  banks.  If  the  banking
supervisor  has  responsibility  for  regular  on-site  examinations,  it  presumably  follows  that  the
supervisor also has responsibility for encouraging or requiring a bank to modify its risk positions
or make other adjustments to its balance sheet where the supervisor has concerns in relation to
the  bank’s  risk  profile.  This  has  the  potential  to  erode  the  incentives  for  the  directors  and
management  of  banks  to  take  ultimate  responsibility  for  the  management  of  banking  risks,
effectively passing some of this responsibility to the banking supervisor. It also has the potential
to  create  public  perceptions  that  the  responsibility  for  managing  banking  risks  is  effectively
shared  between  a  bank’s  directors  and  the  banking  supervisors.  In  turn,  this  makes  it  very
difficult indeed for a government to eschew responsibility for rescuing a bank in difficulty.
I  acknowledge  that  any  system  of  banking  supervision  -  even  one  that  relies
principally on public disclosure - will inevitably create public expectations that the supervisory
authority  takes  some  responsibility  for  the  management  of  banking  risks.  And  I  acknowledge
that any system of banking supervision  creates  a  risk  for  the  taxpayer  in  the  event  that  a  bank
gets  into  difficulty.  However,  in  order  to  minimise  these  risks,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New
Zealand prefers to keep the spotlight clearly focused on the directors and management of a bank,
rather  than  risk  a  further  blurring  of  their  accountability.  We  believe  that  the  avoidance  of
having  an  on-site  examination  role  or  otherwise  regularly  obtaining  private  information  from
banks assists in this regard and reinforces market disciplines on banks.
Another  observation  frequently  made  is  that  New  Zealand  would  not  have
adopted  the  new  framework  had  a  substantial  part  of  its  banking  system  been  domestically
owned. It is my firmly-held conviction that we would have adopted this approach even if all or
most  of  our  banks  had  been  locally-owned.  I  say  this  because  we  believe  that  the  regime  is
actually  more  likely  to  promote  prudent  banking  behaviour  than  do  the  more  traditional
approaches,  but  with  a  lower  likelihood  of  moral  hazard  and  regulatory  distortion.  In  this
context, I should note that, at the time we commenced our review of banking supervision, in late
1991,  a  significant  part  of  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  was  still  domestically  owned.
Indeed, as I see it, many of the changes we have implemented in New Zealand would be of equal
relevance to those jurisdictions in which the core of the banking system is domestically owned.
Another criticism made of the New Zealand approach is that comprehensive and
frequent disclosure can, in some circumstances, exacerbate financial system distress, rather than
promote  systemic  stability.  I  acknowledge  that,  in  some  circumstances,  disclosure  could
exacerbate  a  bank’s  difficulties.  For  example,  where  a  bank  is  required  to  disclose  a  loss  or  a
severe deterioration in asset  quality,  this  could  lead  to  a  sharp  adverse  reaction  by  the  market,
possibly  causing  the  bank  in  question  to  come  under  liquidity  pressure.  Of  course,  this
possibility  exists  with  even  the  barest  disclosure  requirements  -  such  as  with  the  release  of  an
annual report or a six monthly interim disclosure. And the risks of adverse market reaction are
present  even  in  the  absence  of  disclosure  requirements  -  for  example,  as  a  result  of  market
BIS Review   /1997
- 8 -
speculation as to a bank’s financial  condition.  Indeed,  in  some  circumstances  the  disclosure  of
comprehensive  information  might  actually  reduce  the  risk  of  the  market  reacting  adversely  to
misinformation  or  to  an  absence  of  information.  In  any  case,  where  a  bank  knows  in  advance
that it will be making adverse disclosures, it would generally have the opportunity to take steps
to reduce the risk of an adverse market reaction. These steps would include the disclosure of the
remedial measures being taken to address the bank’s difficulties.
Of course, the risk of a severe market reaction to an adverse disclosure creates the
very incentives for banks to ensure that they manage their affairs in such a way that there will be
no  adverse  developments  to  disclose.  In  the  longer  term,  therefore,  the  risk  of  adverse  market
reaction could be expected to promote a sounder financial system.
One  of  the  criticisms  often  made  of  public  disclosure  by  banks  is  that  the  vast
majority  of  depositors  will  not  read  banks’  disclosure  statements.  On  this  assumption,  some
observers suggest that disclosure is of very limited effectiveness. We do not agree. It is certainly
true that most depositors are unlikely to read the disclosure statements. But the disclosure regime
in  New  Zealand  is  not  predicated  on  the  assumption  of  wide  readership  by  the  ordinary
depositor.  The  source  of  market  disciplines  does  not  lie  in  wide  public  readership.  Rather,  the
efficacy of the disclosure regime rests on the assumption that the disclosure  statements  will  be
read  by  the  agents  of  depositors,  such  as  the  financial  news  media,  financial  analysts  and
investment  advisers,  and  by  wholesale  creditors  and  fellow  bankers.  It  is  the  risk  of  adverse
reactions  by  these  types  of  disclosure  users  that  creates  the  incentives  for  bank  directors  and
management to manage their banks’ affairs in such a way as to avoid the need to make adverse
disclosures.
Although the disclosure regime does not rely on the mass readership of disclosure
statements by depositors, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is encouraging depositors to take a
greater  interest  in  their  banks’  disclosures.  Over  much  of  last  year  we  actively  promoted
publicity  about  the  new  disclosure  arrangements.  And  we  prepared  a  “user’s  guide”  to  assist
depositors  (and  their  agents)  to  understand  the  disclosures  being  made  by  banks.  The  user’s
guide  is  now  available  in  every  bank  branch  in  the  country.  While  it  is  unlikely  to  be  a  “best
seller”, it is encouraging to note that there has, in fact, been a surprising degree of interest in it
from  the  public.  We  hope  that,  over  time,  an  increasing  proportion  of  depositors  will  take  a
keener interest in their banks’ financial condition.
Another observation made about the new framework is  that  our  approach  places
an excessive emphasis on the role of bank directors - that we are asking too much of them. To
illustrate  this  point,  during  the  review  process,  I  had  a  visit  from  the  chief  executive  of  one
major international bank with an operation in New Zealand. He had come to protest strongly at
the requirement that bank  directors  would  have  to  sign  the  disclosure  statements  every  quarter
and attest to the appropriateness of their risk management systems. When I asked why, he said
“... bank directors understand absolutely nothing about banking...”. This comment is quite unfair
about  many  bank  directors,  of  course,  but  there  is  an  uncomfortable  element  of  truth  in  it  in
some cases. The blame for this situation almost certainly  lies,  in  part,  on  a  supervision  regime
which had assumed too much of the responsibility for the viability of banks. We very much hope
that a regime which will continue to have some key regulations, but which is based primarily on
market disclosure and director attestations, will improve that situation.
BIS Review   /1997
Early Indications of the Effects of the Disclosure Regime
- 9 -
Although  it  is  far  too  early  to  make  conclusive  assessments  of  the  success  or
otherwise  of  the  new  supervisory  approach,  there  have  been  some  encouraging  signs  that  the
disclosure requirements are meeting a number of their objectives. I will briefly highlight a few
of these.
We  have  been  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  the  financial  news  media  in  New
Zealand have taken a close interest in the new bank disclosure regime. The quarterly disclosure
statements  have  received  quite  detailed  scrutiny  from  the  news  media,  resulting  in  greater  and
more  focused  public  exposure  of  banks’  financial  results  and  risk  positions.  We  hope  that  this
type  of  media  attention  will  sharpen  the  incentives  for  banks’  directors  and  management  to
manage their banks’ affairs prudently.
A good example of the news media’s interest in banks’ disclosure statements was
the  media’s  interest  in  one  bank’s  disclosure  of  its  non-compliance  with  a  Reserve  Bank
prudential  requirement.  We  were  surprised  at  the  intensity  of  the  media’s  interest  in  this
disclosure - as, I suspect, were the management and directors of the bank in question. Hopefully,
this type of media attention, and the attendant adverse publicity to which it inevitably gives rise,
will encourage banks to ensure that they comply with Reserve Bank requirements in the future. I
am inclined to think that the threat of adverse publicity is likely to be a more effective discipline
on  banks  than  are  many  of  the  standard  supervisory  sanctions  for  breaches  of  regulatory
requirements.
Interestingly, the disclosure regime seems to be strengthening the extent to which
banks scrutinise each other’s financial performance and risk positions. We are aware that banks
are making considerable use of the disclosure statements to monitor each other. The additional
and  more  frequent  information  now  available  could  be  expected  to  assist  banks  in  managing
their  inter-bank  exposure  positions  and  in  assessing  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  business  they
conduct  with  each  other.  We  believe  that  the  banking  industry  itself  is  one  of  the  most  potent
sources of market disciplines on individual banks.
Anecdotal feedback suggests that the obligations now placed on bank directors are
causing the directors of some banks to exercise greater scrutiny of their banks’ risk positions. In
turn, this seems to be focusing greater attention on the systems they have in place for identifying
and  managing  risks.  Moreover,  it  seems  that  some  banks  are  taking  steps  to  increase  the
accountability of various levels of management within their banks. We are also aware that some
banks have engaged external consultants to review aspects of their risk management systems. It
seems that part of the motivation for conducting these reviews lies in the disclosure requirements
- particularly the director attestation as to the adequacy of a bank’s risk management systems.
These are all pleasing developments. We hope that they auger well for the success
of  the  new  arrangements.  I  am  confident  they  will.  But  we  are  under  no  illusion  that  the  new
arrangements provide guarantees of financial system stability. Of course they do not. No system
of  banking  supervision  can  do  that.  The  most  we  are  entitled  to  believe  is  that  the  disclosure
regime  will  significantly  reduce  the  likelihood  of  financial  system  instability  in  the  future  -  at
lower  regulatory,  compliance  and  taxpayer  costs  than  other  supervisory  options  might  be
expected to achieve.
BIS Review   /1997
- 10 -
General Observations on Incorporating Market Disciplines into Banking Supervision
Before I conclude this address, I should probably make some comments about the
extent to which market disciplines could be better incorporated into the supervisory frameworks
in other countries.
I  should  first  of  all  make  it  clear  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  is  not
promoting the New Zealand supervisory model as the ideal model for other countries to adopt.
We make no such claims. The model we have adopted meets our particular needs, but it might
not  necessarily  be  suitable  for  other  countries.  Clearly,  each  country  needs  to  make  its  own
judgement as  to  what  type  of  supervisory  framework  is  best  suited  to  its  unique  requirements.
That judgement will inevitably depend on many considerations, including:
the objectives which banking supervision is expected to meet, and whether those
objectives include depositor protection;
the existence or otherwise of deposit insurance arrangements;
the structure of the banking system; and
the  infrastructure  within  which  banking  operates,  such  as  banking  law  and
accounting standards.
Having said this, I do believe that market disciplines can play a substantial role in
most  financial  systems.  In  particular,  I  think  policy  makers  in  many  countries  could  usefully
give  careful  thought  to  the  merits  of  introducing  comprehensive  and  well  focused  disclosure
requirements for banks. Similarly, I believe there would be much to gain from the adoption of
policies  designed  to  strengthen  the  responsibilities  of  bank  directors,  so  that  the  ultimate
responsibility for the management of  banking  risks  lies  squarely  in  the  boardroom,  rather  than
being awkwardly balanced between the banking supervisor and the bank director.
But it is fair to say that the effectiveness of market disciplines will much depend
on  the  structure  of  the  regulatory  arrangements  in  place  and  the  nature  of  the  infrastructure
within  which  the  banking  system  operates.  In  particular,  the  following  factors  would  seem  to
play an important role in determining the effectiveness of using disclosure as a mechanism  for
promoting systemic stability.
Market  disciplines  are  more  likely  to  be  effective  where  governments  do  not
insulate depositors from losses - whether explicitly in the form of deposit insurance or through
implicit  depositor  protection.  Understandably,  depositors  and  other  creditors  are  less  likely  to
take an interest in a bank’s financial condition where they know, or have good cause to surmise,
that they will be insulated from losses should a bank get into difficulty. In such circumstances,
banks  which  are  performing  poorly  are  less  likely  to  face  adverse  market  reaction  than  in  an
environment where creditors operate under the expectation that they are likely to lose money in
the  event  of  a  bank  failure.  In  part,  this  is  why,  in  New  Zealand,  we  have  eschewed  deposit
insurance or depositor protection, and have sought to make it clear to depositors, among others,
that they should not expect the government to insulate them from losses in the event of a bank
failure.
It is also fair to say that market disciplines are more likely to be effective where
the supervisory requirements applied to banks are kept to a minimum. I say this for two reasons.
BIS Review   /1997
- 11 -
First, the greater the supervisory requirements, the more likely it is that the market will perceive
that  the  government  is  underwriting  individual  banks.  And  second,  the  greater  the  supervisory
requirements,  the  less  likely  it  is  that  bank  directors  and  management  will  view  themselves  as
having ultimate responsibility for the management of their banks.
The  effectiveness  of  market  disciplines  will  also  depend  on  the  structure  of  the
financial  system.  In  particular,  it  seems  likely  that  market  disciplines  would  be  more  effective
where  a  bank  is  domestically  owned  -  that  is,  where  no  other  bank  stands  behind  it.  Where  a
bank  is  owned  by  another  bank,  the  market  would  naturally  have  regard  to  the  financial
condition of the parent bank when assessing how it should react to disclosures made by the local
bank.  Market  disciplines  might  therefore  be  somewhat  more  subdued  in  a  financial  system
characterised by foreign ownership than in one dominated by locally owned banks. Having said
this, I am fully satisfied that even in a financial system which is largely foreign owned, such as
in the New Zealand financial system, there is very considerable scope to use market disciplines
to  promote  improved  risk  management  by  the  subsidiaries  and  branches  of  foreign  banks.
Indeed,  it  is  possible  that  New  Zealand’s  disclosure  regime  might  well  be  adding  to  the
incentives on overseas parent banks to more vigilantly supervise their  New  Zealand  operations
and to give greater attention to their own financial condition.
The  extent  of  government  ownership  of  the  banking  system  is  also  likely  to
influence the effectiveness of market disciplines.  I  think  we  would  all  agree  that  the  market  is
less likely to impose meaningful disciplines on a bank which is state owned than would be the
case with a privately owned bank - assuming, of course, that the market has faith in the financial
soundness and political stability of the government in question. However, even where a bank is
state owned, a robust disclosure regime might well strengthen the accountability of the directors
and management of the bank, leading to improved risk management within the bank.
It will come as no surprise to you that I believe that market disciplines are more
likely to be effective where banks are required to make comprehensive disclosures on a frequent
and  timely  basis.  The  disclosure  requirements  should  focus  on  the  key  aspects  of  a  bank’s
financial  performance  and  risk  profile,  and  should  be  made  with  sufficient  frequency  and
timeliness  as  to  provide  the  market  with  a  meaningful  basis  for  assessing  a  bank’s  financial
condition and comparing one bank with another. Disclosure is likely to be more meaningful and
effective if it is supported by robust accounting standards which have the force of law. Certainly,
in the case of New Zealand, we have found that our disclosure regime has been assisted greatly
by  the  introduction  of  legally  binding  and  more  rigorously  drafted  accounting  standards.
Moreover,  disclosure  requirements  should  ideally  be  coupled  with  an  appropriate  legal
framework  governing  bank  directors  -  a  framework  designed  to  focus  directors’  attention  on
their duties to manage the affairs of their bank in a sound manner, and to hold them to account
for any breaches of those duties.
However, as they say, there is a time and a place for everything. And so it is with
disclosure. I think we would all agree that it would not  be  helpful  to  introduce  new  disclosure
requirements  at  a  time  when  the  banking  system  is  in  a  fragile  state.  Doing  so  could  well
exacerbate the situation. That is why, in New Zealand, we introduced the disclosure regime at a
time  when  the  financial  system  was  in  a  strong  position  and  therefore  when  disclosure  would
assist in maintaining confidence in the banking system, rather than detracting from it.
Finally,  the  effectiveness  of  market  disciplines  through  public  disclosure  will
obviously  be 
infrastructure  within  which  banking  operates.  By
“infrastructure”,  I  refer  to  such  matters  as:  the  nature  and  adequacy  of  corporate  law;  the
influenced  by 
the 
BIS Review   /1997
- 12 -
adequacy of accounting standards and auditing requirements; the sophistication and integrity of
the  accounting  profession;  and  the  adequacy  of  the  financial  news  media  and  financial
professionals.
All else being equal, the more well developed the infrastructure, the more likely it
is  that  market  disciplines  will  be  effective.  This  suggests  that,  in  the  case  of  some  developing
countries, where perhaps the infrastructure is not well developed, the scope for using disclosure
to promote market disciplines is somewhat more limited than would otherwise be the case. But
even  in  such  cases,  I  would  not  dismiss  the  potential  merits  of  developing  relatively  simple
disclosure  requirements,  drawing  on  international  accounting  and  auditing  standards  as
appropriate, as a means of promoting some rudimentary market disciplines.
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  my  view  that  market  disciplines  can  play  a
powerful  role  in  promoting  systemic  stability,  in  conjunction  with  some  degree  of  banking
supervision. I think there is considerable scope for policy makers to give further thought to how
market  disciplines  could  be  better  used  to  reinforce  the  efforts  of  banking  supervisors  in  the
quest for systemic stability. However, in giving thought to this matter, it may well be necessary
for  policy  makers  to  re-assess  some  fundamental  aspects  of  the  conventional  approaches  to
banking supervision and their relationship to the promotion of market disciplines. These include
such  issues  as  depositor  protection,  deposit  insurance,  the  extent  of  prudential  regulation  of
banks, and the intensity with which banking supervision is conducted. These are all substantial
issues of course, and I have little doubt that there  will  be  continuing  international  debate  as  to
where the appropriate balance should lie. I very much hope that the approach which we in New
Zealand have adopted will assist in promoting international debate on supervisory options.
BIS Review   /1997
