Mr.  George  looks  at  the  prospects  for  the  UK  economy  and  developments
towards  European  Monetary  Union      Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,
Mr. E.A.J.  George,  at  the  Liverpool  and  District  Bankers’  Institute  Bi-Annual  Dinner  in
Liverpool on 12/3/97.
It is a very enjoyable - and vital - part of our job at the Bank of England to keep
in touch with what is going on around the country. And we work quite hard at it - through visits
like this one; through our non-executive directors who have business interests in the regions and
through our network of regional agents.
Now the purpose of these contacts is to help us understand the reality behind our
precious monetary and economic statistics, and to help us understand what is pre-occupying you.
The economic reality I would say is not at all bad. Looking back over the longer
term,  I  detect  an  important  change  in  attitudes  in  this  country:  where  before  people  -  both
employers and employees - tended to look inwards and backwards, seeking to protect what they
had  had,  now,  it  seems  to  me,  they  are  increasingly  looking  outwards  and  forwards  to  new
opportunities.  It  is  a  fundamental  change.  And  over  the  past  four  years  or  so  it  has  been
complemented by a more stable macro-economic environment than most of us can remember in
our  professional  life  time.  Putting  these  together  has  brought  us  consistently  low  inflation;
steady and sustained growth; and gradually falling unemployment. And interest rates have been
lower and less volatile over this period than they have been for more than thirty years.
Some  people,  it’s  true,  still  say  to  me  that  all  this  has  not  had  much  effect  on
them -  it’s  not  like  it  was  in  the  boom  times!  And  I  recognise,  of  course,  that  economic
conditions do vary across regions and sectors and between individual companies. More than ever
before it’s a tough competitive world.
But what most people say to me these days is that steady growth and low inflation
is  exactly  what  they  want  so  that  they  can  make  rational,  long-term,  decisions  in  their  own
businesses,  which  is  what  enables  them  to  face  the  global  competition.  The  major
preoccupations that I hear are about whether our recent, more stable, economic environment will
continue, and about the implications - good or bad - for that environment of a move to a single
European currency.
Let me say a word first about our domestic economic prospects before turning to
Europe.
In fact, Mr. Chairman, we set out the Bank’s views on the domestic economy at
some length in our quarterly Inflation Report only last month. But in summary we have seen a
gradual pick-up in the pace of activity over the past year, driven by domestic demand - notably
consumer spending - so that the money supply and both demand and output are now growing at
above-trend rates. Other things equal we would expect that to continue.
The picture is, however, complicated by the exaggerated strengthening of sterling
since  last  summer  -  particularly  against  the  European  currencies  -  which  probably  reflects
uncertainties  affecting  the  Continental  countries  at  least  as  much  as  developments  in  our  own
economy.  This  strength  of  sterling  poses,  for  the  time  being,  a  genuine  monetary  policy
dilemma. It will lead to a fall in inflation in the short run - over the rest of this year - as import
prices  fall.  And  it  makes  life  very  difficult  for  UK  manufacturers  exposed  to  international
competition,  so  that  our  external  trade  position  is  likely  to  deteriorate  -  and  that  may  have  a
BIS Review   29/1997
- 2 -
longer-lasting  effect  on  inflation.  But  these  effects  may  not  be  enough  to  offset  the  gradual
emergence  of  inflationary  pressure  looking  forward  to  next  year,  stemming  from  continuing
above-trend growth of domestic demand.
On that basis we advocated a moderate tightening of policy in order  to  slow  the
domestic expansion to a pace that can be sustained in the medium and longer term.
Let me be quite clear, for those who insist  on  over-dramatising  these  things,  we
were not calling in the Inflation Report for “an immediate interest rate hike to bring an incipient
boom to a juddering halt!” I should like to think that in the present more stable environment that
kind  of  language  is  anachronistic.  What  we  in  fact  expected  over  the  next  couple  of  years  is
continuing growth somewhat above trend with inflation picking up towards 3%, though rising -
which by our own past standards is a relatively benign outlook. What we are seeking to do is to
moderate  the  pace  of  expansion  before  inflationary  pressures  begin  to  build  in  order  to  ensure
that the outlook remains benign next year, and a year after, and well into the future.  And  that,
Mr.  Chairman,  is  precisely  what  most  business  people  -  whether  in  industry  or  commerce  or
financial  businesses  -  tell  us  they  would  want  us  to  do.  It  is  also  the  purpose  of  the
Government’s Inflation Target.
Let me then turn to Europe and the question of monetary union.
I do not think anyone questions that economic prosperity in Europe is  crucial  to
economic  prosperity  in  this  country.  Our  fundamental  interests  are  the  same.  And  not  many
people question that the effective functioning of the European single market can make a major
contribution to our collective prosperity - it is a positive sum game in our mutual interest. It is
clear I think too that the single market in Europe will function more effectively if each member
country  pursues  disciplined  macro-economic  policies  in  a  context  of  structural,  supply-side,
flexibility - again as a matter of national as well as collective interest. So much it seems to me is
common  ground  in  all  15  EU  member  countries  -  and  indeed  beyond.  Whatever  happens  in
relation  to  monetary  union  it  is  vital,  it  seems  to  me,  that  we  hold  on  to  this  fundamentally
important consensus.
Moving on from there to the narrower question of monetary union, the potential
economic benefits and risks  have  now  become  much  clearer,  and  are  rather  well  illustrated  by
our  own  present  monetary  policy  dilemma.  On  the  one  hand,  any  manufacturer  will  tell  you  -
after his experience since last summer -  about  the  great  advantage  of  intra-European  exchange
rate certainty. On  the  other  hand,  with  the  single  currency  comes  the  single  monetary  policy  -
the single, one-size-fits-all interest rate throughout the euro-area. The risk very simply is that the
single  interest  rate  may  not  in  the  event  suit  the  domestic  monetary  policy  needs  of  all  the
euromember  countries  -  just  as  the  present  level  of  German  interest  rates  of  around  3%,
reflecting the disappointing weakness of the German economy, would not at this point  suit  the
UK - where, as I have said, we need to moderate the pace of our economic expansion.
The  potential  economic  risks,  as  well  as  the  potential  benefits,  were  recognised
when  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  signed  -  and  the  famous  “convergence  criteria”  were  put  into
the Treaty precisely in order to limit the risks. Looked at from an economic perspective it would
be  a  considerable  mistake  for  monetary  union  to  go  ahead  without  reasonable  confidence  of
genuine,  sustainable,  convergence  between  its  members;  and  it  would  be  a  mistake  for  any
individual country to apply to join - or to  be  allowed  to  join  -  unless  it  had  achieved  genuine,
sustainable, convergence. But at the end of the day it is a political process - and no-one should
underestimate  the  political  determination  on  the  Continent  to  proceed  according  to  the  Treaty
BIS Review   29/1997
- 3 -
timetable.  I  only  hope  that  those  who  will  make  the  decision  really  appreciate  that  if  the
economics  of  monetary  union  were  to  turn  out  badly  -  resulting  in  policy  tension  between  the
euro-member  states  -  then  it  is  unlikely  to  have  its  intended  effect  of  advancing  political
harmony either.
I would not at this stage care to put much money on the outcome - central bankers
are  a  naturally  cautious  breed.  But  the  prudent  planning  assumption  is  that  monetary  union
probably will go ahead on time - at least among a limited group of countries. The question then
is what would that mean for you.
Let me start with the timetable. A final decision on whether to go ahead, and who
should participate, will need to be taken next spring. That would open the way to the immediate
setting  up  of  the  European  Central  Bank  so  that  it  could  complete  its  preparations  for  the
irrevocable fixing of exchange rates with effect from 1st January 1999.
It is important to be clear what the irrevocable fixing of exchange rates means. It
does not mean that the participating national currencies would instantly disappear. They would
continue to exist initially as separate denominations, or sub-units, of the euro, which would have
become a currency in its own right. The DM or French franc or whatever would in effect relate
to the euro just as pence relate to the pound - except that the fixed conversion rate would be a
great deal more complicated, extending to six significant figures!
There  would  be  no  euro  banknotes  or  coins  at  that  stage,  only  book  entries  in
euro-denominated bank accounts for those who wished to use them. No-one would be compelled
to  use  the  euro;  but  equally  no-one  would  be  prohibited  from  using  it  or  offering
euro-denominated  facilities.  The  European  Central  Bank  and  the  National  Central  Bank
members  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  would  denominate  their  transactions  in
financial  markets  in  euro,  although  euro-denominated  amounts  would  be  convertible  into
national currency  denominated  amounts  and  vice  versa  through  the  payments  system  for  those
that wished. To provide added impetus, national governments will denominate new debt issues
in euros, and some at least may also convert their outstanding debt to the euro-denomination.
Our working assumption is that banks and others active in the wholesale financial
markets will in fact choose to transact most of their wholesale business in the euro-denomination
more  or  less  from  the  start.  And  we  assume  that  they  will  wish  to  offer  euro-denominated
facilities  to  major  business  customers  that  wished  to  use  them.  So,  for  example,  non-financial
companies,  including  large  retailing  companies,  with  an  active  business  in  other  euro-area
countries may wish to be able to quote prices or undertake  transactions  in  euros  from  an  early
stage, although they would certainly still need to transact most of their local business in national
currencies for some considerable period.
On  the  other  hand,  we  would  not  expect  there  to  be  much  demand  for  banking
facilities  denominated  in  euros  either  for  individuals  or  for  the  vast  majority  of  smaller  local
businesses much before euro banknotes and coins become available in late 2001 or early 2002.
At that point, the conversion of retail facilities into euros might proceed quite rapidly during the
subsequent six-month period when national currency  notes  and  coin  are  to  be  withdrawn  -  but
again  the  principle  of  no  compulsion  and  no  prohibition  would  apply.  Retail  conversion  is  of
course a massive undertaking. But the timetable does at least provide some 4-5 years from now
for people to prepare.
BIS Review   29/1997
- 4 -
The bottom line in all this is that if EMU goes ahead on time and whether the UK
is in or out, the impact on your business will depend very much upon the nature of the business
you are in.
Up to now, we at the Bank have concentrated mainly on ensuring that the banking
system  and  the  wholesale  financial  markets  will  be  ready  to  operate  in  euros  from  Day  1,
because they will be affected first, and they will be affected whether or not the UK is a part of
the “first wave”. But we are conscious of the developing thirst for information from the rest of
the business community. With this in mind, we have co-operated  with  the  CBI  and  the  British
Chambers  of  Commerce  in  organising  regional  workshops  -  including  one  to  be  held  here  in
Liverpool on 23 April. We are participating too in seminars organised by the Forum of Private
Business  -  and  I  am  sure  that  if  you  are  interested  you  will  be  able  to  prevail  upon  Stan
Mendham, who I am delighted to see here this evening, to organise such a seminar here too! If
you  are  really  lucky,  007  might  even  provide  you  with  a  short  Bank  of  England  guide:
“Introduction of the Euro - what does it mean for business?” which, for reasons that I can’t quite
understand, in this case comes absolutely free.
The picture  is  rather  different  if  the  UK  were  to  opt  out  of  monetary  union  -  at
least  for  the  time  being.  In  that  case  the  euro  will  be  a  foreign  currency  in  the  UK,  and
businesses,  where  appropriate,  will  need  to  cope  with  it  from  the  1  January  1999  just  as  they
cope  now  with  transactions  and  contracts  denominated  in  deutschemarks,  dollars,  yen  and  the
like. But the huge difference between the ‘in’ and the ‘out’ scenario will be that notes and coins
would not be introduced in this country if we are an ‘out’, so that for most of us life would go on
very much as normal.
Mr. Chairman, I have dwelt on the practical side of monetary union very briefly
this evening, because I fear that the practicalities may be overlooked in the passion of the debate
about  the  principle.  But  in  my  youth  -  which  seems  a  very  long  time  ago  now  -  I  was  a  boy
scout,  brought  up  with  the  motto  “Be  Prepared”.  It  is  vital  in  this  context  that  we  are  indeed
prepared, whatever the outcome, and the Bank is determined to do all that we can to ensure that
we are.
And provided we have properly prepared ourselves I do not believe that monetary
union need  hold  great  terrors  for  this  country  whichever  way  the  decision  goes  when  the  time
comes. If it is decided that EMU is a safe club for the UK to join then I think this country is as
well placed as any to live with its disciplines. If on the other hand, we remain on the outside but
continue to behave responsibly - in our national interest, but also as a member of the EU - then I
think the fears for inward investment, or for the future of the financial services industry in this
country,  will  prove  to  be  exaggerated.  The  economic  reality  is  that  businesses  -  whether
financial or non-financial - will expand their activities in this country so long as it is profitable
for them to do so. They would be answerable to their shareholders if they behaved in any other
way.
The key to economic prosperity in this country, Mr. Chairman, lies in continued
macro-economic  discipline  in  a  context  of  structural,  supply-side,  flexibility,  and  that  is  true
regardless of monetary union. Provided - in or out - we persist in that, then we can continue to
deliver  a  business  climate  of  steady  growth  with  low  inflation  for  as  far  ahead  as  we  can  see.
That  is  the  best  possible  prospect  for  the  bankers  here  this  evening  -  and  the  best  possible
prospect for their customers.
BIS Review   29/1997
- 5 -
BIS Review   29/1997
- 6 -
BIS Review   29/1997
