Mr. Stals comments on financial sector reforms in Africa   Contribution by the
Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  C.  Stals,  at  the  Sixth  Session  of  the
Conference  of  African  Ministers  of  Finance  and  Governors  of  Central  Banks  arranged  by  the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and held in Addis Ababa on 31/3/97.
I INTRODUCTION
1. Background to the South African financial sector reform process
Unlike  many  other  countries  on  the  African  continent,  South  Africa  has  a
well-established  financial  structure  which  includes  a  relatively  independent  central  bank,
sophisticated  modern  banking  institutions  and  competitive  financial  markets.  There  developed,
nevertheless, a need for far-reaching financial reforms in recent years. The experience of South
Africa in this regard provides an interesting case study from which some lessons can be learned.
The  South  African  financial  sector  and,  for  that  matter,  its  total  economy,  was
isolated  to  a  high  degree  from  the  rest  of  the  world  for  more  than  a  decade  because  of
unacceptable  internal  political  and  social  policies,  and  international  punitive  actions  taken
against  the  country.  In  the  circumstances,  developments  in  the  financial  sector  did  not  keep
abreast  with  the  evolutionary  international  changes  of  the  past  twenty  years.  With  a  lack  of
external competition and economic concentration in a few powerful corporate conglomerates, a
stagnating  economy,  and  a  comprehensive  protective  exchange  control  system,  a  “hot-house”
climate was created that contributed to a retarded adjustment process of the financial sector.
Major political and social  reforms  in  South  Africa  culminated  in  the  democratic
election of the Government of National Unity in April 1994. The scene was then set for major
changes,  also  in  the  economy  of  the  country.  Indeed,  not  only  was  the  scene  set,  but  the
expectations of the people of the country demanded  major  reforms  that  would,  as  a  minimum,
provide a better economic performance and an increase in the standard of living of millions of
previously disadvantaged members of the community.
Over the past five years, South Africa was therefore not only challenged with the
need for reintegrating the South African economy, and more in particular, the financial sector in
a  rapidly  changing  global  financial  environment,  but  also  with  the  challenge  of  adapting  to  a
new domestic socio-political structure. These adjustments in the financial sector, which are still
in  progress,  were  facilitated  by  the  existence  of  a  sophisticated,  albeit  marginally  retarded,
financial system with a long history of more than a century.
The  Government’s  policy  approach  to  the  needed  reforms  is  based  on  a  gradual
but  resolved  transformation  of  the  financial  sector,  mainly  by  exposing  domestic  institutions
more to international  competition,  by  integrating  policy  measures,  the  institutional  framework,
and the financial markets gradually into the global village, and by adapting at the same time to
the changing needs of the local community. In the next part of this paper, the attention is focused
on the reform process of the financial system to meet these policy objectives.
The new South Africa was also confronted with a daunting further challenge, and
that  is  to  become,  and  to  be  part  of,  Africa.  With  the  admission  of  South  Africa  during  the
second  half  of  1994  to  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC),  comprising
twelve countries in the Southern African region, new challenges were offered for the expansion
of financial co-operation  on  a  regional  basis.  The  third  part  of  this  presentation  will  provide  a
BIS Review   37/1997
- 2 -
brief summary of the progress so far made with co-operation amongst  the  central  banks  of  the
members of SADC in the implementation of financial reforms in the region.
II FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORMS IN SOUTH AFRICA
2.1 Macroeconomic policy implications
The  integration  of  the  South  African  financial  system  in  the  global  economy
obviously holds major implications for macroeconomic policies. A country that exposes itself to
the  whims  and  the  fickleness  of  fund  managers  and  financial  traders  operating  in  a
technologically  integrated  global  market  system  can  no  longer  ignore  the  international  norms
and standards set for financial disciplines, prudent management, sound government and internal
stability and security. Integration into the world financial system brings the advantage of access
to a massive pool of excess saving in the mature economies of the world, but also demands from
the  individual  participating  country  adherence  to  the  disciplines  of  a  global  market  economy.
This presentation will, however not cover the consequences for macroeconomic  policies  of  the
financial  reforms,  but  will  rather  concentrate  on  major  institutional  adjustments.  Aspects  of
economic policy, such as exchange rate policies have been, or will be, covered in other sessions
of this Conference.
2.2 The role and functions of the central bank
The South African Reserve Bank was founded in 1921 as one of the first central
banks  to  be  established  in  the  new  world  outside  of  Europe.  The  Bank  therefore  has  a  long
history and experience, and has always operated with some autonomy from Government. Even
today,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  privately  owned,  with  important  restrictions  on  the
rights of shareholders, for example that no individual shareholder may hold more than one-half
per cent of the capital of the Bank, and that the Bank may not pay a dividend of more than 10
per cent per annum on the paid-up share capital of the Bank.
Without  going  into  the  details  of  the  functions  and  responsibilities  of  the  South
African Reserve Bank, the new South African Government recognised a few basic principles for
the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  the  development  of  the  economy.  These  can  be  summarised  as
follows:
 Monetary policy is part of overall macroeconomic policy for which Government
takes final responsibility.  There  must  therefore  be  good  co-operation  between  the  central  bank
and Government, and regular consultation must take place between the Governor of the Reserve
Bank and the Minister of Finance. The task of the central bank must be clearly defined and must
be restricted to the objective of creating a stable financial environment that will be conducive for
optimum real economic development. The central bank must protect the value of the currency.
For the implementation of monetary policy, the central bank must be given sufficient autonomy
to enable it to make objective decisions on sensitive monetary policy issues, such as the level of
interest  rates,  money  supply  guidelines,  financial  liquidity  management  and  bank  credit
extension policies. The central bank must be accountable to Parliament.
To  give  effect  to  this  policy  approach,  the  South  African  Government  included
the  following  mandate  for  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in  the  new  Constitution  of  the
Republic of South Africa:
BIS Review   37/1997
- 3 -
 “The primary object of the South African Reserve Bank is to protect the value of
the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth in the Republic.
“The South African Reserve Bank, in pursuit of its primary object, must perform
its  functions  independently  and  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice,  but  there  must  be  regular
consultation  between  the  Bank  and  the  Cabinet  member  responsible  for  national  financial
matters”.
2.3 The development of the banking system
South  Africa  has  always  had  a  private  sector  banking  system,  based  on  private
sector ownership and on effective competition in a free market environment. The major reforms
introduced  in  recent  years  to  adapt  the  banking  system  to  the  needs  of  the  country’s  changed
philosophies,  macroeconomic  policy  objectives  and  international  relationships,  were  therefore
concentrated on improving the existing structure.
Firstly, recognition was given in the banking legislation to the existence and role
of  “informal”  banking  business  that  developed  mostly  in  the  less  developed  communities  over
many years. The Banks Act was therefore amended to provide for the continuation of numerous
informal  savings  clubs  (“stokvels”)  outside  the  normal  constraints  of  bank  regulation  and
supervision,  but  also  then,  of  course,  without  access  to  central  bank  accommodation  at  the
discount window.
New legislation to provide for communal ownership of a banking institution was
introduced in the form of the Mutual Banks Act.
Secondly, banking  institutions  adapted  their  own  internal  policies  to  provide  for
greater participation in the social upliftment programmes of the country, for example by entering
into  an  agreement  with  Government  to  provide  a  minimum  amount  per  year  for  low-cost
housing. On the other end of the spectrum, banks also introduced new electronic data processing
systems,  for  example  automated  teller  machines,  and  “smart  card”  facilities  for  a  gradual
introduction of electronic money.
Thirdly, bank regulation and supervision underwent major changes over the past
ten  years  to  apply  the  world-wide  supported  directives  of  the  Basle  Committee.  At  this  stage,
bank regulation and supervision is based primarily on risk identification and management, with
clearly defined roles for shareholders, boards of directors, senior management and internal and
external auditors.
Fourthly, the South African banking scene was opened up for foreign banks, and
South  African  banks,  in  turn,  were  allowed  to  establish  branch  offices,  subsidiaries  and
representative  offices  in  many  countries  around  the  world.  Today,  in  addition  to  about  35
domestic banks, there are  more  than  10  established  branches  and  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks
operative  in  South  Africa,  and  about  60  international  banks  with  representative  offices  in  the
country.  South  African  banks  have  opened  up  29  branches/subsidiaries  in  13  other  African
countries.
It  is  still  too  early  to  judge  the  effect  of  this  wider  competition  on  the  South
African banking system. There are signs, however, that it is beginning to squeeze the margins of
banking  business.  In  particular,  the  share  of  foreign  banks  in  wholesale  banking,  foreign
exchange business and financial market activity increased significantly. This was accompanied,
BIS Review   37/1997
- 4 -
however,  by  an  almost  explosive  increase  in  the  total  volumes  of  business  in  these  markets,
which provided for continued growth in existing and newly-established institutions.
2.4 The development of financial markets
Once  again, 
the  advantage  of 
the  new  South  Africa  had 
inheriting
well-established and relatively sophisticated financial markets. This did not mean, however, that
no reforms were required in these markets. The most striking adjustments occurred in the capital
market. A “big-bang” revolution took place in the Johannesburg Stock Exchange last year when:
the  market  for  trading  in  equities  was  separated  from  the  bond  market;  an  electronic  screen
trading  system  replaced  the  traditional  open-floor  outcry  system;  corporates  and  non-residents
were  allowed  for  the  first  time  to  become  broker-members  of  the  Exchanges;  provision  was
made  for  negotiated  commissions  and  principal  versus  broking  trade  by  members  of  the
Exchange.
Over the past few years, a market in derivatives also developed, originally as an
over-the-counter  market,  but  since  the  establishment  of  the  South  African  Futures  Exchange
(SAFEX) in 1990, on a more formal basis.
These  reforms,  together  with  the  other  socio-politico-economic  changes  in  the
country, boosted turnovers in the financial markets. In 1996, the total turnover in equities on the
Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  exceeded  US  $27  billion;  total  turnover  in  the  Bond  Market
amounted to US $703 billion, and 4.1 million contracts were traded through SAFEX.
Major changes also took place in the South African market for foreign exchange,
particularly in the light of the gradual removal of exchange controls. South Africa has a floating
exchange  rate  system  in  which  about  30  authorised  dealers  in  foreign  exchange  (banking
institutions) make prices on a competitive basis, for foreign currencies (mostly US dollar). The
exchange rate is therefore determined by underlying forces of demand and supply, influenced to
a diminishing extent by Reserve Bank intervention (through exchange controls and direct active
participation). The Reserve Bank is gradually reducing its participation in the market, and is now
in  the  process  of  encouraging  the  development  of  a  more  active  market  in  forward  foreign
exchange outside of the central bank. The average daily turnover in the South African market for
foreign exchange over the past six months amounted to US $6.1 billion.
The policy  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  continue  to  encourage  the  development  of
the financial markets, and to monitor these markets on a  regular  basis.  The  central  bank  itself,
however, is reducing its own direct participation in the market-making processes. This applies to
the market for foreign exchange and also the capital market. Negotiations for the transfer to the
private sector of responsibility for the primary funding of government and for market-making in
government bonds have reached an  advanced  stage.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  eventually  confine
its participation in these markets to transactions (such as  open-market  operations)  aimed  at  the
achievement of defined monetary policy objectives.
2.5 The national payment, clearing and settlement system
Up to now, the national payment, clearing and settlement system was vested in a
joint  venture  between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  major  commercial  banks  in  the  country.
Clearing takes place on a daily basis through an electronic data process in a communal banking
service  facility  known  as  the  Automated  Clearing  Bureau  (ACB).  The  ACB  is,  however,  no
longer  able  to  stand  up  to  the  emerging  pressures  of  the  expanded  activity  in  the  financial
BIS Review   37/1997
- 5 -
markets. The Reserve Bank has therefore taken the initiative to introduce a major reform to the
national payments, clearing and settlement system. In April 1998, a new integrated system will
be introduced to provide for real-time on-line settlement on a gross basis of large  transactions,
and for a daily netting-process and final settlement of smaller transactions.
The  intention  with  this  major  reform  project  is  to  reduce  the  risk  exposure  of
possible default by any individual institution that could lead to the collapse of the whole system.
At the same time, the new system must be compatible with global network systems for payments
and clearing operations, and must provide a framework for an integrated cross-border settlement
system for the SADC region.
2.6 The gradual removal of exchange controls
At the centre of the South African programme for financial reform is the gradual
phasing-out of  exchange  controls.  Comprehensive  exchange  controls  were  introduced  in  South
Africa  over  an  extended  period  of  time,  ranging  from  1961  to  1993.  These  direct  control
measures were intended to provide some protection to the domestic economy against the adverse
effects of non-economic factors that afflicted South Africa over a long period of time.
When the Government of National Unity came into power in April  1994,  it  was
accepted  as  a  policy  objective  to  remove  the  exchange  controls.  At  that  time,  however,  South
Africa had virtually no  official  foreign  reserves  at  its  disposal  for  this  purpose.  The  pragmatic
solution was therefore adopted to embark on a process of a gradual phasing-out of the exchange
controls.
Good progress has been made over the past three years with this programme. So
far  all  effective  exchange  controls  on  current  account  transactions  have  been  lifted;  exchange
controls applicable to non-residents have been fully removed; the two-tier exchange rate system
for certain capital account transactions was formally terminated in 1995; South African resident
corporates  were  given  permission  to  make  certain  direct  investments  in  branches  and
subsidiaries in foreign countries; South African resident institutional investors (insurers, pension
funds  and  mutual  funds)  may  now  diversify  up  to  10  per  cent  of  the  total  assets  managed  by
them in foreign currency denominated assets; and South African resident private individuals will
shortly  be  allowed  to  transfer  limited  amounts  of  capital  from  South  Africa  for  foreign
investment.
The removal of the exchange controls is a process that has far-reaching effects for
the financial sector and the development of the financial markets in South Africa. It is a process
that  must  be  applied  with  caution,  and  must  be  supported  by  other  macroeconomic  policy
measures aimed at improving the international competitiveness  of  the  South  African  economy.
In  the  area  of  the  financial  sector,  the  authorities  must  make  sure  that  level  playing  fields  are
created for all domestic and non-resident participants in the market.
III REGIONAL FINANCIAL CO-OPERATION WITHIN SADC
When  it  formally  joined  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  in  the
second half of 1994, South Africa was given the task of managing the Financial and Investment
Protocol  for  the  region.  A  Sectoral  Committee  of  Ministers  of  Finance  was  established  within
the institutional framework of SADC, and two sub-committees were  created,  one  for  Heads  of
Finance Departments, and a second for Governors of Central Banks.
BIS Review   37/1997
- 6 -
The  Committee  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Banks  of  SADC  met  four  times
during the past eighteen months, finalised a Terms of Reference for its activities, established  a
Secretariat and Research Unit within the South African Reserve Bank, and agreed on a number
of  projects  and  programmes  to  be  implemented.  The  basic  approach  of  the  Committee  of
Governors has been described as a “bottom-up” approach, where the attention is focused at this
stage  on  financial  co-operation  amongst,  and  not  integration  of,  the  financial  systems  of  the
twelve  independent  members  of  SADC.  Furthermore,  the  attention  is  focused  on  the
development  of  the  internal  financial  systems  of  members  within  a  consistent  and  compatible
framework that will pave the way for the co-ordination of macroeconomic monetary policies at
some later stage, and perhaps some integration of systems further downstream.
The programme of the Governors’ Committee therefore provides for an exchange
of information on, and regular discussion of, macroeconomic  structures  and  economic  changes
in  member  countries.  To  facilitate  this  programme,  the  Secretariat  of  the  Committee  has
established within the South African Reserve Bank a computerised data bank for basic financial
and economic statistics of each one of the members of SADC. All members will at some stage
have direct real-time access to this data base;  an  exchange  of  information  on  the  structure,  the
functions,  the  responsibilities  and  the  relationships  with  the  government  of  each  one  of  the
twelve  participating  central  banks.  For  this  purpose,  the  Secretariat  of  the  Committee  is  busy
with  the  compilation  of  an  information  data  bank  on  the  participating  central  banks;  a
co-ordinated  training  programme  for  central  bank  officials.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank
Training Institute will this year offer three three-week specialised courses on central banking for
officials  from  SADC  central  banks;  co-ordination  of  the  exchange  control  policies  applied  by
members of SADC. At least two countries in the region have removed all exchange controls, and
many  others  are  in  the  process  of  gradually  removing  remaining  controls;  a  work  study  on
Information Technology (IT) develop-ments within each central bank. The exercise involved in
by  South  Africa  to  revise  is  national  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  system  provides  an
opportunity  to  plan  ahead  and  consider  ways  and  means  of  introducing  compatible  and
inter-changeable  systems  in  the  region;  a  concerted  approach  on  efforts  to  reduce  or  avoid
money laundering and illegal banking activities in the region; and a major initiative to improve
the quality of bank supervision and regulation in the region, and to co-ordinate  policies  on  the
licensing  of  banking  institutions.  This  work  is  undertaken  jointly  with  the  East  and  Southern
Africa Banking Supervisors Group (ESAF), which includes a  few  more  countries  than  just  the
SADC configuration.
Whilst  the  work  of 
the  Governors’  Committee  up 
to  now  was  more
institutionally-centred, more attention will be given in the next phase to the development of the
financial  markets  in  the  region.  There  are  obviously  opportunities  for  a  better  utilisation  of
existing markets in a number of the participating countries in the interest of the whole region. In
the  third  phase,  the  Committee  of  Governors  will  address  the  macroeconomic  needs  for  the
harmonisation of monetary policies such as inflation and interest and exchange rate  policies  of
the member countries.
The broad strategy of the SADC Committee of Governors is based on the premise
that a sound financial basis must first be laid within the participating countries before it can be
extended  to  the  region  as  a  whole.  At  this  stage,  the  main  objective  is  therefore  to  learn  from
each other and to help each other to create appropriate structures for the central bank, the private
banking  sector  and  the  financial  markets  in  each  one  of  the  twelve  members  of  SADC.  The
domestic financial sector reforms introduced in each country must, however, even  at  this  early
stage, take cognisance of the development needs of the region, and the longer-term objective of
a more co-ordinated and integrated regional financial sector. This will be the contribution of the
BIS Review   37/1997
- 7 -
central banks to the expansion of trade and investment, and to improved living conditions for the
approximately 130 million people of the region.
Finally,  the  Committee  of  Governors  of  SADC  as  a  regional  body  has  a  great
interest in establishing extended relationships with similar regional central banking forums in the
rest of Africa, and other similar initiatives in the Southern African region.
IV CONCLUSION
The  nature  of  current  South  African  financial  sector  reforms  is  dictated  by  the
special  circumstances  of  the  country.  They  may  therefore  differ  substantially  from  those
introduced in other countries. The South African reforms are needed to adapt the financial sector
to  major  internal  socio-political  reforms,  and  to  accommodate  the  challenges  presented  by  an
enhanced participation in the global financial markets.
As  far  as  regional  developments  are  concerned,  South  Africa  welcomes  the
opportunity  of  participating  more  actively  through  the  Southern  African  Development
Community in the development of the financial sector of the African continent.
There  is  a  growing  need  for  some  closer  contact  between  the  various  regional
financial  sector  arrangements  on  the  African  continent.  From  the  level  of  financial  reforms
applied  within  each  one  of  the  more  than  fifty  African  countries,  through  the  second  tier  of
regional  financial  cooperation,  the  ultimate  objective  must  be  to  establish  a  sound,  stable  and
well-functioning financial system in  support  of  economic  development  in  the  whole  of  Africa.
Co-ordination  on  a  continental  basis  of  the  financial  reforms  applied  within  the  regions  can,
perhaps, become an important function of the Economic Commission for Africa, working under
the auspices of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations.
BIS Review   37/1997
