Mr. Heikensten looks at the prospects for the Swedish economy against the
background of the central bank’s monetary policy    Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the
Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr.  Lars  Heikensten,  given  at  the  Centre  Party’s  Economic  Seminar  in
Haparanda on 15/6/97.
I should like to begin with a word of thanks for the invitation to talk to you here.
In  these  introductory  remarks  I  shall  be  discussing  the  economic  situation.
Sweden’s economy presents many positive aspects: the outlook for growth is good, the general
government  deficit  is  estimated  to  be  eliminated  next  year  and  the  low  inflation  policy  is
becoming more and more established. But there are also persistent economic problems to solve,
not least in the labour market.
Before  considering  the  economic  situation,  however,  I  thought  I  would  say
something about monetary policy, the role of the Riksbank and the changes in the status of the
Riksbank that recently gained the support of five of the political parties in Sweden’s parliament,
including the Centre Party.
1. Monetary policy and the role of the Riksbank
Why low inflation?
In  the  past  decade  there  has  been  a  growing  awareness  of  low  inflation’s
importance as a central condition for the proper workings of an economy. This has been the case
not just in Sweden but virtually throughout the western world. The significance of price stability
is clearly demonstrated by Sweden’s experience in earlier decades. The economic climate in the
1950s  and  1960s,  with  low  inflation,  high  and  stable  growth  and  low  unemployment  makes  a
sharp contrast with the 1970s and 1980s, when attempts to keep the price rise on a par with the
rest  of  the  world  failed  and  a  series  of  devaluations  had  negative  effects  on  wage  formation,
productivity and economic growth.
There is reason to believe that the high and fluctuating inflation in the 1970s and
1980s  contributed  to  the  weak  state  of  investment  and  productivity.  The  recurrent  crises  over
wage  costs  generated  uncertainty  about  business  profits  and  thereby  about  the  conditions  for
investment. And although the devaluations did lead to a temporary improvement of profitability
in  the  sector  exposed  to  foreign  competition,  they  also  eased  the  pressure  for  structural
adjustments.
By concealing important economic signals, high and fluctuating inflation impairs
the workings of the economy. Households and firms are less able to make rational consumption
and investment decisions and planning for the longer term is more difficult. The risks are greater
and the required return, including compensation  for  the  risks,  rises.  Decision-making  therefore
becomes more short term and speculative.
A good example is Sweden’s real estate boom in the 1980s. The combination of
high inflation and the tax system at that time meant that speculative capital was attracted to the
property market. Financing more productive  investment  became  comparatively  difficult.  When
inflation fell back in the early 1990s it became apparent that the investments in real estate  had
been founded on unrealistic expectations that prices would continue to rise. The property market
collapsed  and  credit  institutions  were  hit  by  massive  loan  losses.  The  bank  crisis  accordingly
accentuated the economic downturn in Sweden.
BIS Review   68/1997
- 2 -
Inflation is also associated with an arbitrary redistribution of income and wealth,
often  contrary  to  the  ambitions  of  distribution  policy.  Referring  again  to  the  1980s,  the  chief
losers from the inflationary economy at that time, with the resultant price fall, were probably not
the property speculators but households whose bank savings were eroded by two-digit inflation
and whose wages were only subsequently adjusted for inflation.
Price stability is the Riksbank’s objective
The reason why monetary policy is assigned the task of safeguarding the value of
money  is  basically  simple:  by  adopting  an  appropriate  monetary  stance  the  central  bank  can
choose, or at least strongly influence, the rate of inflation. In the short run price increases are of
course  affected  by  many  other  factors  such  as  the  state  of  economic  activity,  the  direction  of
fiscal policy, wage formation, etc. But in the long run inflation is a monetary phenomenon. By
controlling the supply of money in a wide sense, in the long term the Riksbank can also govern
movements in the value of money and in inflation.
Interest  rate  management  by  the  Riksbank  cannot,  on  the  other  hand,  generate
economic  growth  and  employment  in  the  longer  run.  The  crucial  factors  for  this  are  quite
different, such as capital formation, demographic trends, advances in technology and education,
how the economy functions, etc. Some scope for stimulating the economy may exist in the short
run  but  this  presupposes  an  established  confidence  in  economic  policy’s  commitment  to  price
stability. If economic agents have doubts about economic policy, attempts to stimulate demand
will  be  liable  to  elicit  an  upward  shift  in  the  rate  of  inflation  that  is  expected  by  firms,
households, trade unions and others. Wages and prices may then start to chase each other as they
did  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  The  longer  market  rates  of  interest,  which  the  Riksbank  can
influence only marginally, will begin to move up and the ultimate effect on demand may be the
opposite  of  what  was  intended.  The  outcome  may  be  a  combination  of  low  growth  and  high
inflation.
Much accordingly depends on the confidence that the price stability policy enjoys.
In an economy where a low inflation policy is firmly established, it is easier to lower the interest
rate without eliciting uncertainty about monetary policy’s long-term commitment. There is, quite
simply, more room to manoeuvre. But this does of course presuppose that the outlook for future
inflation condones such a policy.
Independence and accountability
The  institutional  framework  for  monetary  policy  is  important  for  underpinning
confidence  in  long-term  economic  policy.  The  agreement  announced  recently  between  five
political parties concerning measures to strengthen the formal status of the Riksbank is therefore
a good thing, even though it amounts in many respects to a codification of current practice. It is
a clear demonstration that the political system supports a monetary policy that focuses on price
stability  consistently  and  over  the  long  term.  Increased  confidence  in  the  low  inflation  policy
among economic agents implies greater opportunities of supporting economic activity in practice
when the conditions for inflation so permit.
Some  voices  in  the  public  debate  have  chosen  to  see  this  as  a  move  towards  a
monetary  policy  that  is  less  democratic.  Such  an  interpretation  is  comprehensible  but  no  less
misleading  for  that.  It  is  the  Riksdag,  Sweden’s  parliament,  that  lays  down  monetary  policy’s
objective and elects the governing board, which then appoints the members of the directorate for
a  term  of  six  years.  The  proposed  changes  mean  that  the  practical  execution  of  the  monetary
BIS Review  68/1997
- 3 -
policy objective as established by the Riksdag is entrusted to the Riksbank. We can concentrate
on this task and build up the competence that is needed to do the job properly.
At the same time there is less risk of monetary policy being influenced by various
short-term considerations. One way of describing the consequences of the reform is to say that
the  delegation  improves  the  conditions  for  attaining  the  objective  of  low  inflation  that  the
Riksdag has ordained. At the same time, an independent status for the Riksbank calls for more in
the  way  of  accountability.  It  will  be  even  more  important  that  monetary  policy  decisions  are
anchored - at the political level as well as among a broader public - by means of clear motivation
and  an  open  dialogue.  Decisions  to  adjust  the  interest  rate  tend  to  affect  both  households  and
firms  very  directly  and  specifically.  It  is  therefore  vital  to  gain  an  understanding  for  our
execution of monetary policy.
In  recent  years  the  Riksbank  has  done  a  great  deal  to  promote  an  increased
understanding of what we do. This work must continue. One instance of transparency is the clear
focus  on  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target.  In  that  this  target  and  our  tolerance  interval  of  1
percentage point are clearly specified, the Riksbank’s operations are open to assessment.
Our policy involves adjusting the instrumental interest rate  -  the  repo  rate  -  to  a
level that we judge to be in accordance with the inflation target. Experience tells us that a change
in  the  short  interest  rate  has  its  full  impact  on  inflation  after  a  time  lag  of  one  to  two  years.
Consequently, the Riksbank has to operate in a relatively long time perspective - the interest rate
has to be set in the light of forecasts of what the rate of inflation will be one to two years ahead.
Our  assessments  of  future  inflation  are  presented  continuously  in  speeches  and  various
publications,  above  all  the  quarterly  inflation  reports.  What  I  now  have  to  say  about  the
economic  situation  in  Sweden  is  largely  taken  from  the  latest  inflation  report,  which  was
published about a fortnight ago.
2. The economic situation
Activity is strengthening
In the period since 1993, when economic activity in Sweden turned upwards after
the profound crisis, growth in annual terms has averaged 2.7 per cent, which is higher than we
were accustomed to in the inflationary period in the 1970s and 1980s. The growth has also had a
favourable composition, coming primarily from exports and investment. This has contributed to
a period of expansion without any appreciable capacity shortages. The good export performance
has also led to sizable current account surpluses, making it possible to repay foreign debt.
Private  consumption  has  been  restrained  by  the  measures  taken  to  consolidate
government  finance.  This  consolidation  will  continue  on  a  substantial  scale  in  the  years  ahead
but its effects have probably peaked. Together with a pent-up consumer demand, this leads us to
count  on  rising  private  consumption,  though  the  labour  market  situation  is  a  factor  that  we
believe will tend to make the increase relatively cautious.
GDP growth in 1996 was held back by destocking and a continued fall in public
consumption and investment. We envisage that the stock adjustments are now coming to an end.
Together  with  some  increase  in  consumption  and  a  continuation  of  strong  exports,  this  means
that  the  outlook  for  growth  in  the  coming  years  is  relatively  bright.  Our  assessment  is  that
growth in 1997 will amount to approximately 2 per cent, followed by 3 per cent in 1998.
BIS Review   68/1997
- 4 -
Inflation in line with the target
The  path  of  inflation  largely  depends  on  growth  in  relation  to  the  economy’s
long-term potential output - in other words on how the gap between actual and potential output
changes - as well as on the inflation expectations of different economic agents.
The Riksbank considers that 5 per cent growth in the coming years is compatible
with low inflation, mainly because in general the economy has plenty of unutilised capacity. In
other words the output gap, which is affected by, for example, the labour market situation, is not
expected to close in the coming years.
Structural  changes  and  increased  competition  in  several  fields  suggest  that  the
Swedish  economy’s  inflation  propensity  has  fallen.  Deregulation  has  been  carried  out  in
transport  and  communications,  for  instance,  and  to  some  extent  in  the  food  sector.  EU
membership has had positive effects for competition in Sweden, partly via increased competition
from imports. The new competition laws have also helped to strengthen competition.
Changes of this type, as everyone knows, are  positive  in  that  they  pave  the  way
for  lower  consumer  prices.  Another  consequence  that  is  less  evident  and  therefore  worth
underscoring is  that,  in  so  far  as  the  changes  affect  the  outlook  for  inflation,  they  can  provide
room for a somewhat less tight monetary stance.
The  continued  fall  in  inflation  expectations,  to  a  level  that  for  Sweden  is
historically  low,  likewise  suggests  that  inflationary  pressure  is  subdued.  Agents  in  markets  for
labour,  goods  and  money  now  count  on  inflation  being  in  line  with  the  Riksbank’s  inflation
target in both the short and the medium term. Increased confidence in the inflation target can of
itself lower the inflation propensity. The  rate  of  wage  increases  to  date  this  year  indicates  that
the parties in the labour market are beginning to act in line with the lower expectations; the new
wage settlements that have been concluded in 1997 show a downward shift in the rate of wage
increases  compared  with  1996,  towards  levels  that  are  more  in  line  than  before  with  the
Riksbank’s inflation target.
The Riksbank’s overall assessment is that in the coming two years the underlying
rate of inflation will be between 1.5 and 2 per cent. Registered inflation, however, will rise by
degrees  with  the  disappearance  of  transitory  effects  that  have  pushed  the  CPI  down  in  recent
months. The registered rate will probably remain below the inflation target during 1997 and then
move  up  towards  two  per  cent  in  1998.  Against  this  background,  in  the  inflation  report  the
Riksbank considered that the monetary stance is well balanced.
Forecasting inflation a  couple  of  years  ahead  is,  as  everyone  appreciates,  a  very
difficult matter. So there is good cause to be humble. In the inflation report we have highlighted
a number of factors that may cause inflation to follow a different path. A weaker exchange rate
than  we  assume  or  a  stronger  increase  in  consumption  could  result  in  higher  inflation.  The
opposite effect could come from, for example, better productivity growth or a different picture
of  resource  utilisation.  For  the  Riksbank  it  is  therefore  important  continuously  to  assess  new
information that may provide guidance about the path of inflation.
3. Two questions
The picture of Sweden’s economy I have painted thus far is relatively bright. This
is warranted. The economy has gone through a deep recession after the policy realignment in the
BIS Review  68/1997
- 5 -
early 1990s. Difficult adjustments have been made and we are now beginning to see the results.
There are many resemblances with Denmark and other  countries  that  have  experienced  similar
processes of adjustment earlier. In every case it has taken time for the situation to become more
stable and for households and firms to recover confidence.
However, the bright picture must not blind us to the continued presence of serious
challenges  for  economic  policy.  For  one  thing  there  is  the  importance  of  securing  sound
government  finance  in  the  long  run.  For  another  there  is  the  situation  in  the  labour  market.  I
choose  to  raise  these  two  questions  because  what  happens  with  fiscal  policy  and  in  the  labour
market  is  of  great  consequence  for  the  Riksbank’s  ability  to  safeguard  the  value  of  money.  It
would  therefore  be  almost  a  dereliction  of  duty  not  to  place  these  matters  on  the  agenda  as
clearly and distinctly as we are able.
Fiscal policy and monetary policy’s manoeuvrability
Let  me  begin  with fiscal  policy.  Since  the  dramatic  deterioration  of  government
finance  in  the  early  1990s  there  has  been  a  remarkable  recovery.  From  a  deficit  equivalent  to
over 12 per cent of GDP in 1993 the Government now counts on a deficit of 2 per cent for 1997.
This  consolidation,  besides  attracting  praise  from  the  European  Union  and  international
organisations, has earned the confidence of our creditors; since 1995 the interest rate differential
between  Swedish  and  German  treasury  bonds  has  narrowed  from  3.5  to  little  more  than  1
percentage point.
Even with the SEK  16  billion  for  expansionary  measures  in  fiscal  1998  that  the
Government proposed in the Spring Economic Bill, the Swedish budget trend looks favourable
in a European context.
Notwithstanding these successes, there is reason to comment briefly on how fiscal
policy  influences  the  conditions  for  monetary  policy  and  thereby  the  future  development  of
interest rates. This influence acts in two ways.
Firstly,  fiscal  policy  is  an  important  consideration  for  monetary  policy  in  that  it
affects the demand situation in the economy. An illustration of this is provided, for example, by
the  recent  years’  changes  in  household  disposable  income.  Although  household  wage  income
rose  strongly  from  1994  to  1997,  the  sector’s  disposable  income  hardly  changed.  Household
income  has  been  held  back  by  increased  taxes  and  decreased  transfers;  but  for  the  negative
effects of changes in public systems, the annual level of household income would have been 3 to
4 per cent higher. The burden on household income was probably greatest in 1996 but even in
the  coming  two  years  the  fiscal  stance  measured  in  this  way  will  be  tight.  It  is  accordingly
helping to lower inflationary pressure.
If,  in  the  current  situation  with  good  prospects  for  growth,  unexpected  budget
improvements were to be used to give fiscal policy a more expansionary turn, the result might be
an earlier need to tighten monetary policy in order to secure the objective of price stability. It is
then by no means certain that the overall effect on demand would be what was intended.
Secondly, the fiscal trend in a longer context of “sustainability” is also important
for monetary policy. If the government deficit appears to be growing uncontrollably, as was the
case for some years in the early 1990s, uncertainty may arise as to whether the problems can be
tackled at all. This can have negative consequences for monetary policy; the exchange rate may
weaken sharply, for instance, with an increased  risk  of  inflation.  The  budget  consolidation  has
BIS Review   68/1997
- 6 -
naturally  been  important  in  this  respect,  too.  It  is  the  main  single  explanation  for  the  krona’s
appreciation  since  the  crisis  years,  as  well  as  for  the  Riksbank  being  in  a  position  to  lower
interest rates so markedly.
As a result of the years with massive general government deficits, however, from
1990 to 1996 public sector debt has grown from 44 per cent of GDP to 78 per cent. This restricts
the future freedom of action in economic policy and means that there is a risk of fiscal policy in
practice having a destabilising effect. This is particularly the case in that, with high revenue and
spending  ratios,  the  Swedish  budget  is  sensitive  to  cyclical  factors.  Seen  from  this  angle  the
Government’s target of a 2 per cent budget surplus over the economic cycle appears reasonable,
though there is no academic foundation for a quantified level of ambition. There may be grounds
for  strategic  tax  cuts  to  improve  the  long-term  growth  potential.  But  in  the  light  of  the
experience  with  government  finance  in  recent  decades  a  warning  should  be  issued  against  tax
cuts without parallel cuts in spending.
Weak employment
The  labour  market  trends  in  recent  years  have  been  bleak.  Although  annual
economic growth since 1993 has averaged 2.7 per cent, employment has not risen. This indicates
that a considerable proportion of unemployment is structural in the sense that the level is liable
to remain high even if activity continues to improve.
The difficulty in generating new jobs is not confined to Sweden; it is a  problem
we have in common with much of Europe. But there are countries in Europe that have succeeded
in turning the employment curve upwards since the mid 1980s. I am thinking in particular of the
Netherlands, where employment, after a long period of stagnation, has been increased by 20 to
25  per  cent  since  the  mid  1980s.  In  the  course  of  a  decade  unemployment  has  been  virtually
halved, from 12 to just over 6 per cent.
Of course one cannot be certain that other countries’ solutions apply to  Swedish
conditions in every respect. But it is important to note that GDP growth in the Netherlands has
been fairly close to the EU average even though employment has developed very differently.
So it is not higher demand  in  the  past  decade  that  lies  behind  the  creation  of  so
many  new  jobs  in  the  Netherlands.  Most  of  the  evidence  suggests  that  traditional  demand
management is not capable of lowering unemployment appreciably. Instead it is the workings of
the labour market and wage formation that are key factors for the possibility of turning the path
of unemployment. That is where the efforts must be made.
Such  efforts  might  make  it  possible  to  combine  low  inflation  with  a  better
development  of  employment.  They  could  then  contribute  to  increased  confidence  in  economic
policy as a whole. At times there seems to be a tendency for the problem of unemployment  to
generate  some  uncertainty  about  economic  policy’s  long-term  commitment.  Reforms  in  the
fields  of  wage  formation  and  the  labour  market  can  mitigate  the  potential  conflicts  between
economic policy’s goals. That would improve the conditions for a continued fall in the level of
interest rates relative to the rest of the world, even in a situation where Sweden stays outside the
euro area for the time being.
BIS Review  68/1997
4. Summary
- 7 -
Today,  future  prospects  for  the  Swedish  economy  are  bright  in  many  respects.
The  consolidation  of  the  government  budget,  accompanied  by  growing  confidence  in  and
support for the low inflation policy, has paved the way for a marked reduction of interest rates.
This  favours  domestic  demand.  Together  with  a  continuation  of  strong  exports  and  favourable
productivity, this points to good conditions for growth in the coming years, with persistently low
inflation.
At the same time it is a major problem that growth does not seem to be generating
new  jobs  to  a  sufficient  extent.  This  suggests  that  to  a  high  degree  the  unemployment  is
structural.  Measures  must  therefore  be  taken  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market.
For  further  favourable  economic  development  it  is  also  essential  that  the  efforts  to  reduce
government debt are continued. The conditions for monetary policy in the years ahead will then
be  improved  and  greater  freedom  of  action  will  be  created  for  economic  policy  in  the  longer
term.
BIS Review   68/1997
