Mr. Kelley looks at the extent to which banks are still special      Remarks  by
Mr.  Edward  W.  Kelley,  Jr.,  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System,  at  the  Seminar  on  Banking  Soundness  and  Monetary  Policy  in  a  World  of  Global
Capital  Markets  sponsored  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  held  in  Washington  on
29/1/97.
I would like to say first that it is a pleasure for me to be here today to participate
in  this  conference  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  exchange  views  on  the  important  issues
addressed by this session in particular. I also want to thank Governor George for his fine survey
on the question of whether banks remain special; his paper makes many good points and I agree
with  virtually  all  of  what  he  has  to  say.  As  a  consequence,  my  comments  will  be  more  in  the
nature of expanding upon his remarks, rather than in taking issue with any of his main points.
As  Governor  George  noted,  the  degree  to  which  each  of  us  regards  banks  as
“special”  is  bound  to  be  colored  by  the  history  and  development  of  banking  in  our  respective
countries. Of course, the U.S. banking is quite unique in many respects. Relative to the U.K., for
example, we have many more depositories (on the order of 25,000 or so) and they operate with
more regulatory restrictions on their activities than in the U.K. and many other countries. Also,
our system of deposit insurance is more generous than in the U.K. Bearing these differences in
mind, I will attempt to address aspects of our subject today that apply more or less generically in
all countries, but I will draw on U.S. experiences for illustrations.
To begin, let me say that I found the seemingly simple question “Are banks still
special?”  to  be  deceptively  difficult.  In  reading  Mr.  George’s  paper  and  organizing  my  own
thoughts  on  the  subject,  I  was  compelled  to  answer  for  myself  a  series  of  even  more  basic
questions  such  as:  “How  do  we  define  a  ‘bank’?”,  “What  do  we  mean  by  ‘special’?”,  and  “If
banks are indeed special, what does this imply about the proper stance of government vis-à-vis
the banking industry and other types of financial services providers?”
For  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  I  will  define  a  bank  rather  broadly  as  any
financial intermediary that accepts deposits and extends loans to households or businesses. In the
United  States,  this  definition  encompasses  domestic  commercial  banks,  branches  of  foreign
banks operating in the United States, savings and loan associations, and credit unions.
Defining  what  constitutes  “specialness”  is  more  difficult.  In  general  terms,
analogous to Governor George’s definition, I will define a “special” aspect of banking as one in
which  there  is  a  clear  and  pronounced  public  interest  exceeding  that  present  in  other  types  of
business and commerce. As I will note more fully  in  the  following,  my  definition  of  “special”
does not  necessarily  imply  that  the  special  aspect  of  banking  in  question  should  be  isolated  or
insulated from competition with other financial service providers. There are at least three general
aspects of banks and banking that have been deemed special by many observers -- the liquidity
transformation  function  of  banks,  the  provision  of  basic  financial  services  such  as  credit
extension,  deposits-taking,  and  payments  processing,  and  the  linkage  between  the  banking
system  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  the  following,  I  will  take  up  each  of  these
“special” aspects of banking in turn.
So,  is  the  liquidity  transformation  function  of  banks  still  special?  By  the  term
“liquidity  transformation  function”  of  banks,  I  refer  to  the  typical  balance  sheet  structure  of
banks  that  often  features  a  sizable  volume  of  highly  liquid  liabilities  --  those  that  can  be
withdrawn  at  par  on  demand  such  as  balances  in  checking  accounts  --  in  combination  with  a
BIS Review   13/1997
- 2 -
portfolio of generally longer-term assets that often are difficult to sell or borrow against on short
notice.
It  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  there  is  considerable  agreement  among  central
bankers  and  other  economic  policymakers  that  this  unique  balance  sheet  structure  creates  an
inherent  potential  instability  in  the  banking  system.  Rumors  concerning  an  individual  bank’s
financial condition -- even if ill-founded -- can spark a run by depositors and other creditors that
may  force  the  bank  to  unload  assets  at  firesale  prices  and,  in  extreme  situations,  suspend
payment on withdrawal requests. Especially if the distressed institution is large or prominent, the
panic can spread to other banks, with potentially debilitating consequences for the economy as a
whole. Most countries with private banking systems have experienced episodes of bank panics to
some  degree,  and  in  the  United  States,  such  panics  occurred  with  some  frequency  in  the  late
nineteenth  century  and  were  a  major  factor  exacerbating  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.
While  institutional  regimes  differ,  most  countries  have  established  safeguards  against  banking
panics that rest on three basic pillars -- some form of deposit insurance (explicit or implicit), a
program of banking supervision and regulation, and an institution that can act as lender of  last
resort.
To  come  back  to  our  basic  question  of  whether  the  liquidity  transformation
function  of  banks  and  the  associated  instability  remains  “special,”  I  would  say  that  there  is
simply  no  doubt  about  it.  Wherever  banking  panics  have  occurred,  their  effects  on  economic
performance have been crippling. Thus, developing institutions and mechanisms that can prevent
or short-circuit bank panics remains an important and “special” goal for economic policymakers.
Having  said  this,  however,  recent  experiences  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere  have
underscored  the  importance  of  going  about  this  task  in  a  way  that  does  not  overextend  the
banking “safety net.” In the United States, this lesson was painfully conveyed during the 1980s
and early 1990s by the hundreds and hundreds of bank and thrift failures that occurred in these
years. While this phenomenon was extraordinarily complex, many have argued that underpriced
deposit  insurance  and  relatively  lax  supervision  contributed  to  the  problem  by  distorting  the
incentives banks and thrifts faced in assessing the risks of their business decisions.
In  response,  U.S.  federal  banking  agencies  have  implemented  changes  that  trim
the  banking  safety  net  somewhat  --  for  example,  by  requiring  prompt  closure  of  troubled
institutions, by applying stricter rules governing the payoffs of depositors and other creditors in
bank failures, and by curtailing the practice of allowing regulatory “goodwill.” In addition, new
bank  capital  regulations  such  as  the  Basle  risk-based  capital  standards,  which  have  been
implemented  in  the  G-10  and  have  served  as  a  blueprint  for  capital  regulation  in  many  other
countries, have helped to provide better incentives for banks in their business decisions.
To  summarize,  I  would  argue  that  banks  remain  quite  special  in  their
susceptibility  to  runs  and  in  the  severe  consequences  that  a  large-scale  banking  panic  would
involve today. Balancing the need for a banking “safety net” to defuse potential bank runs with
the need to create the right incentives for banks in assessing and assuming risk is one of the most
difficult challenges we face as central bankers.
A  second  way  in  which  banks  have  been  deemed  to  be  “special”  is  in  the
provision  of  basic  banking  services  such  as  credit  extension,  deposit-taking,  and  payments
processing.  There  is  little  question  that  these  functions  are  critically  important  throughout
society.  Consumers  turn  to  banks  for  safe  investments  such  as  time  and  savings  deposits,  for
transactions  deposits,  for  processing  payments,  and  for  short-  and  long-term  credit.  Large  and
small  businesses  rely  on  banks  for  payment  processing,  short-term  credit,  and  backup  credit
BIS Review   13/1997
- 3 -
lines.  And  governments  rely  on  the  banking  system  to  conduct  payments,  distribute  currency,
safeguard tax receipts, and to serve as a conduit for monetary policy. In short, the basic business
functions  of  banks  are  at  the  heart  of  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  overall.  By  the
definition  I  put  forward  earlier,  I  would  have  to  say  that  these  basic  functions  performed  by
banks are and will remain special. However, it is far from clear that these functions can only be
performed  by  banks  or  that  there  is  always  a  “special”  public  purpose  in  ensuring  that  banks’
role in performing such functions is protected.
Indeed,  as  Governor  George  noted,  nonbanks  have  made  impressive  inroads  in
markets  that  previously  had  been  largely  banks’  domain.  For  example,  money  market  mutual
funds  and  stock  and  bond  mutual  funds  have  lured  billions  of  dollars  that  formerly  had  been
placed  in  staid  bank  investments  such  as  certificates  of  deposits.  Most  mutual  funds  now  also
offer some “banking” services such as checkwriting privileges. The advent of asset securitization
has  allowed  nonbank  mortgage  companies  to  compete  successfully  with  banks  in  the  home
mortgage  market,  and  nonbanks  have  also  been  important  players  in  the  explosion  of  new
financial instruments such as derivatives and structured notes.
For  the  most  part,  this  blurring  of  the  traditional  lines  between  banks  and
nonbanks  seems  to  be  a  positive  development.  New  competitive  forces  have  been  unleashed,
financial  innovation  has  accelerated,  and  businesses  and  households  now  enjoy  a  far  greater
range of choices on their menu of financial services than they did only a decade ago. Banks have
responded  vigorously  --  and  I  would  say  successfully,  given  recent  trends  in  profitability  --  to
the challenges posed by nonbank competitors.  To  be  sure,  such  rapid  changes  have  also  posed
new  risks.  It  is  critical  in  this  environment  that  policymakers  stay  abreast  of  market
developments to ensure that banks and nonbanks face the right incentives in assessing the risks
of  their  business  decisions,  and  likewise  to  ensure  that  consumers  and  investors  have  the  best
possible  information  available  to  them  when  choosing  among  financial  services  and  products.
Thus,  while  I  agree  that  the  basic  functions  of  banks  in  making  credit  available,  in  providing
safe investment choices (deposits) for households, and in processing payments are special, I see
little to be gained by insisting that banks always be the only type of entity that can provide such
services.
The case of electronic money helps to illustrate the point I am trying to make. It
remains to be seen how popular this form of payment will become in the United States, but the
question of whether nonbank institutions should be allowed to issue electronic money is actively
being debated in many countries. Some argue that issuing money is a special bank function and
that  electronic  money  should  properly  remain  exclusively  a  bank  product.  For  the  time  being,
however,  I  along  with  other  policymakers  at  the  Federal  Reserve  have  concluded  that  any
decision to reserve the nascent market for smart cards and other forms of electronic money as a
province for banks alone might well stifle both competition and technological innovation in this
area.  Thus,  while  most  would  agree  that  providing  efficient  payment  media  for  small  dollar
transactions  is  a  “special”  function  that  banks  currently  perform,  it  does  not  follow  that  only
banks should be allowed to perform the function.
As  a  corollary,  I  would  also  say  that  there  is  not  a  “special”  public  purpose  in
constraining banks from competing in many other markets traditionally dominated by nonbank
financial institutions.  This  is  a  subject  which  is  especially  topical  in  the  United  States  because
our domestic banks are more restricted in the business activities in which they can engage than
are  banks  in  many  other  countries.  As  you  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  pushed  to  expand
banks’ ability to  compete  with  investment  houses  in  underwriting  securities,  and  the  scope  for
U.S. banks to sell insurance-related products has also expanded recently.
BIS Review   13/1997
- 4 -
The  third  general  aspect  of  banking  that  is  often  deemed  special  is  the  linkage
between the banking system and monetary policy. Of course, this is a topic that has spawned a
truly vast economic literature. Without venturing into this thicket, I would simply like to note as
fact that through much of the 1990-1994 period, growth of the broad U.S. monetary aggregates
such as M2 was quite at  odds  with  historical  relationships  to  nominal  income  growth.  Perhaps
the  most  important  factor  underlying  this  development  has  been  a  fundamental  realignment  of
household financial assets away from bank deposits in favor of bond and stock mutual funds and
other  capital  market  investments.  This  “decoupling”  of  banking  system  deposit  liabilities  and
nominal  GDP  became  so  pronounced  during  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  that  the  Federal  Open
Market Committee downgraded the status of M2 as a  policy  variable.  Today  M2  remains  only
one of the many variables reviewed by the FOMC in the course of its policy deliberations.
I raise this example because financial innovations and shifts in financial structure
affecting  the  monetary  aggregates  in  other  countries  have  similarly  created  complications  in
their  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  the  difficulties  in  guiding  monetary  policy
during  periods  of  rapid  financial  innovation  have  been  a  factor  contributing  to  greater
experimentation among central banks with alternative targets such as inflation or nominal GDP
growth. Thus, I believe one could argue that the growth of aggregate bank deposits or money is
probably less “special” today as a policy variable in many countries than in the past.
Ironically,  while  the  growth  of  bank  deposits  may  be  less  special  as  a  policy
guide,  the  special  role  of  the  banking  sector  as  the  primary  vehicle  in  implementing  monetary
policy  in  most  countries  remains  unchallenged.  Most  central  banks  seek  to  achieve  their
objectives through some form of interest rate management. Control over short-term interest rates
is  achieved  in  every  case  I  am  aware  of  by  manipulating  the  supply  of  central  bank  reserves
available  to  satisfy  banks’  demand  for  reserves.  Banks’  demand  for  reserves  is  similarly
influenced  by  central  banks  either  directly  by  setting  reserve  requirements  or  indirectly  by
allowing  only  banks  to  access  the  payment  system  and  then  setting  the  rules  regarding  the
management of their central bank accounts.
To conclude, I would like to return to one of the questions posed at the outset of
these remarks: If banks are special, what does this imply about the proper stance of government
vis-à-vis  the  banking  industry?  As  I  hope  my  previous  comments  make  clear,  regulatory  and
supervisory  policies  must  recognize  the  dynamic  forces  at  play  in  the  financial  sector.  Such
policies must promote and exploit the competitive process in order to foster efficient delivery of
services while encouraging financial and economic stability. These objectives are not likely to be
achieved by regulations that arbitrarily identify and rigidly segment bank and nonbank financial
markets. Rather, our goal as policymakers should be to establish rules of the game that provide
proper incentives for financial institutions to accurately assess and manage the risks inherent in
their business  decisions.  Likewise,  we  should  foster  reporting  standards  and  information  flows
so that the consumers of financial services and products are as well informed as possible about
the  risks  and  returns  of  the  financial  services  and  products  they  buy.  To  the  maximum  extent
possible,  market  forces  should  determine  which  bundles  of  financial  services  and  products  are
provided by banks and other types of financial service providers.
As a final comment, I would note that sound macroeconomic policies are one of
the most important ways to encourage the efficient delivery of financial services and the safety
and  soundness  of  financial  institutions.  Conversely,  policies  that  result  in  significant
macroeconomic 
implications  for  financial
institutions and banks in particular. In reviewing the past two decades in the United States, for
example,  one  cannot  help  but  notice  that  the  most  severe  problems  in  our  banking  and  thrift
imbalances  frequently  have  serious  adverse 
BIS Review   13/1997
- 5 -
industries during  the  1980s  stemmed  from  serious  macroeconomic  imbalances  --  including  the
accelerating inflation of the late 1970s and the costly but necessary steps to reverse that trend in
the  1980s.  By  contrast,  macroeconomic  policies  that  encourage  sustainable  economic  growth
with low inflation -- like those in recent years -- have a strong positive influence on the overall
health of the banking sector and other financial institutions as well.
BIS Review   13/1997
