Bank  of  Japan  presents  the  summary  of  an  article  published  in  the  May
edition of its Quarterly Bulletin   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 30/5/97.
Checklist for Risk Management (Revised Edition)
The English version of the Checklist published in the May 1997 issue of the Bank
of Japan Quarterly Bulletin includes specific sample questions  in  addition  to  check  points  that
were  provisionally  published  in  the  November  1996  issue.  The  original  Checklist  written  in
Japanese has precedence over this English version.
I. Objectives
The  Bank  Supervision  Department  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  initially  compiled  the
Checklist for Risk Management (hereafter referred to as the former Checklist) in December 1987
to assist examiners in assessing the adequacy of risk management at individual banks during on-
site  examinations.  The  former  Checklist  was  distributed  to  financial  institutions  under  the
Bank’s  supervision  as  a  reference  for  checking  and  strengthening  their  risk  management
systems.  
Amid the progress in financial liberalization and innovation  that  has  taken  place
during  the  past  several  years,  financial  institutions  have  expanded  the  scope  of  their  business
activities,  and  this  has  enabled  them  to  pursue  higher  returns  by  taking  on  risks  freely  while
giving consideration to market rules. At the same time, this has led to a better understanding by
financial institutions of the importance of maintaining the balance between risk and return by
adequately assessing and controlling risk exposure. As a result, financial institutions are taking
the initiative  in  strengthening  and  upgrading  their  risk  management  systems  in  order  to  secure
financial safety and soundness.  
With  these  changes  in  the  environment  surrounding  financial  institutions,  the
Bank  of  Japan  has  recognized  the  increased  importance  of  adequately  assessing  any  future
threats  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions.  This  implies  nothing  more  than
further  strengthening  and  promotion  of  the  same  kind  of  examination  focused  on  risk
management  as 
the  Bank  Supervision  Department  has
comprehensively revised the former Checklist (hereafter referred to as the new Checklist).
the  past.  With 
this  aim, 
in 
Like its predecessor, the new Checklist has been distributed to all banks subject to
the Bank of Japan’s supervision, as it is intended to assist banks in reviewing and strengthening
their risk management systems based  on  the  principle  of  self-responsibility,  while  serving  as  a
guideline  for  bank  examiners.  As  this  revised  document  includes  some  points  that  will  be
equally useful to those financial institutions not subject to the Bank’s supervision (such as some
shinkin  banks,  credit  cooperatives,  agricultural  cooperatives,  and  labor  credit  associations)  and
business enterprises, the new Checklist is presented in the Quarterly Bulletin.
II. Major Features
The most prominent feature of the new Checklist is the change in categorization.
In  view  of  the  transformation  of  risk  management  emphasis  from  heightening  recognition  of
risks  in  the  former  Checklist  to  the  recent  actual  control  of  risks,  the  overall  structure  of  the
Checklist  has  been  altered  from  the  eight  categories  by  type  of  risk  in  the  former  Checklist
(credit  risk,  interest  rate  risk,  foreign  exchange  risk,  liquidity  risk,  operations  risk,  electronic
data processing  [EDP]  risk,  systemic  risk,  and  management  risk)  to  four  categories  by  type  of
operation  (management  and  internal  controls,  lending  operations,  market  operations  and  asset
and liability management [ALM], and business operations and EDP).
BIS Review   60/1997
- 2 -
The  Checklist  has  also  been  revised  to  reflect  the  important  points  in  risk
management  acquired  during  the  Bank’s  past  on-site  examinations,  while  giving  due
consideration  to  the  various  reports  and  guidelines  of  international  organizations  and  foreign
financial authorities, and to trading practices in Japan. 
Concretely,  the  section  on  management  and  internal  controls  emphasizes  basic
management policy and strategy concerning risk management, while  including  items  regarding
legal compliance and countermeasures against disasters. This section is given the highest priority
in the new Checklist. 
Second,  against  the  background  of  the  increase  in  nonperforming  assets
accompanying the bursting of the “bubble” economy, the section on lending operations has been
strengthened to reflect points  important  in  the  evaluation  of  creditworthiness  and  avoidance  of
credit  concentration.  At  the  same  time,  this  section  promotes  comprehensive  management  of
domestic,  overseas,  on-balance-sheet,  and  off-balance-sheet  transactions,  and  includes  general
remarks foreseeing the introduction of a loan grading and review system, further contributing to
the continued enhancement of risk management as a whole.  
Third, the section on market operations and ALM has been expanded in content,
as  this  section  is  the  most  strongly  influenced  by  the  progress  in  financial  liberalization  and
innovation, namely, the rapid growth in derivatives transactions and the greater impact of ALM
skills on profit/loss of financial institutions. This  section  incorporates  numerous  concepts  from
the Checklist for Risk Management on Derivatives Transactions, which was compiled and issued
in April 1995, and reflects new risk management techniques and lessons learned from some of
the recent financial incidents.  
Fourth,  with  the  development  of  EDP  at  financial  institutions,  more  weight  has
been put on EDP in the section on business operations and EDP. Furthermore, to reinforce the
importance of the accuracy of individual offices’ work, this section has given as comprehensive
a  treatment  as  possible  to  such  issues  as  new  types  of  transactions  accompanying  progress  in
information technology (i.e., fund transactions using customers’ computer terminals).
BIS Review   60/1997
