Mr.  Thiessen  discusses  some  important  issues  and  challenges  facing  monetary
policy in Canada in the period ahead   Notes for remarks by the Governor of the Bank of Canada,
Mr. Gordon Thiessen, to the Vancouver Board of Trade in Vancouver, British Columbia, on 7/10/97.
The challenges ahead for monetary policy
Today, I would like to talk about some of the important issues and challenges facing
monetary policy in the period ahead and how the Bank of Canada proposes to deal with them.
This is not an unusual topic for me since the business  of  central  banking  is  seldom
without challenges. But what a difference the past two years have made to the challenges we face!
Let me remind you that it was in late 1995, when investors’ concerns about Canada’s
fiscal and political problems finally began to recede, that the Bank of Canada was able to take action
to provide substantial monetary support to the economy. This action, which continued over the next
year or so, was designed to offset both the direct impact on the economy of fiscal restraint and the
effects  on  consumer  confidence  of  the  difficulties  and  uncertainties  arising  from  the  major
restructurings that were necessary in both the private and public sectors.
In  response  to  the  monetary  stimulus,  the  economy  has  gathered  momentum  and
finally  seems  to  have  pulled  free  from  the  difficulties  associated  with  the  restructuring.  Indeed,
economic activity has accelerated this year and has expanded by about 4 per cent over the course of
the past 12 months.
With  the  economic  momentum  expected  to  continue  at  a  solid  pace  in  the  period
ahead, monetary policy now faces new challenges. Over the next year or two, as the remaining slack
is  absorbed  and  we  move  towards  full  use  of  the  economy’s  capacity  to  produce,  the  issue  for
monetary  policy  will  be  to  try  to  ensure  that  this  process  goes  smoothly  and  that  inflationary
pressures do not re-emerge.
Further down the  road,  we  will  also  have  to  concern  ourselves  with  the  conduct  of
monetary  policy  as  the  economy  operates  under  conditions  of  full  capacity.  With  all  the  structural
changes that have taken place in Canada and around the world in recent years, one important issue
will  be  to  gauge  just  how  rapidly  our  economy  can  grow  on  a  sustainable  basis -- that  is,  without
generating  inflation  pressures -- and  what  this  implies  for  the  employment  picture  in  Canada.  The
challenge for monetary policy at that stage will be how best to deal with the uncertainty surrounding
estimates of the economy’s potential to produce.
The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  through  the  economic  upswing  and  then  under
conditions of full capacity are the two topics I would like to discuss with you today.
Returning to full capacity
Let me start with the immediate challenge for monetary policy -- to promote monetary
conditions  that  will  preserve  Canada’s  good  inflation  performance  through  the  current  economic
upswing, thereby helping to make this economic expansion a long-lasting one.
As I mentioned, monetary conditions in Canada have been very stimulative for over a
year.  With  growing  evidence  that  economic  activity  was  expanding  smartly,  the  Bank  of  Canada
began reminding Canadians that, as slack in the economy is taken up, there would be a need to move
to less-stimulative monetary conditions. We took a step in that direction last week when we raised
our Bank Rate by ¼ of a percentage point to 3¾ per cent.
BIS Review   94/1997
- 2 -
This kind of action can set off  alarm  bells  in  the  minds  of  some  people.  They  may
wonder why the Bank of Canada is “slamming on the brakes” when the economy has only just begun
to pick up and the unemployment rate is still high. I would like to respond to any such concerns by
explaining what Canadians can expect from their central bank in the period ahead and why.
But before I do so, I would like to remind you that, when we at the Bank talk about
how stimulative monetary conditions have been, we are not just looking at short-term interest rates
(which are still near their lowest levels in decades and well below comparable U.S. rates). Monetary
conditions also take into account the effects on the economy of changes in the exchange rate for the
Canadian  dollar.  For  example,  the  relatively  low  value  of  our  dollar  has  been  a  major  source  of
stimulus for Canada’s export sector. So a proper assessment of the degree of monetary ease in the
economy has to consider both our low interest rates and the relatively low Canadian dollar.
Now,  what  about  the  perception  that  any  move  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  to
less-stimulative monetary conditions means “slamming on the brakes” for our economy? Let me stay
with the automobile analogy for a moment. To get the economy moving, the Bank has been pressing
hard on the monetary accelerator. But once the economy picks up speed, just as with a car, you need
to ease off gradually on the accelerator and steady your cruising speed at a safe level. If you press
hard on the accelerator for too long, you will reach speeds that are unsafe. You risk losing control and
getting into serious trouble. The same holds true for the economy. Too much monetary stimulus can
lead to an exhilarating temporary burst of economic activity. But it will almost certainly also lead to
inflation-related distortions that undermine both the expansion and the economy’s efficiency over the
longer term. The end result, as we know only too well from past experience, is high interest rates,
punishing debt loads, recession, and higher unemployment.
A  further  complication  is  that  it  takes  between  a  year  to  a  year  and  a  half  for  the
economy to fully respond to changes in the degree of monetary stimulus. In this sense, the economy
is like a car that doesn’t respond immediately when you ease off on the accelerator but only a mile or
so further down the road. With such a car, you want to be able to look a long way ahead to see what
is coming, and you want to take action early to ensure that your speed is appropriate.  This  is  why
monetary policy must focus on the future, rather than the present, and why the Bank must act in a
forward-looking, pre-emptive manner.
In  other  words,  if  we  want  our  economy  to  reach  full  capacity  relatively  smoothly,
without the risk of repeating the painful, inflation-related boom and bust cycles of the past, we must
be ready to take timely action. If we wait to act until the economy is going flat out and pressing hard
on the limits of its capacity to produce, we will have waited too long.
Thus, some combination of a further rise in short-term interest rates and an increase in
the value of the Canadian dollar will likely be necessary in coming months. I hasten to add that such a
rise in short-term rates is the best way to preserve medium- and long-term rates at low levels. And it
is  these  longer-term  rates  that  are  so  important  for  the  investments  in  new  technology  and  other
initiatives to increase productivity that Canadian businesses need to stay competitive. Let me reassure
you that we are not talking about anything like the short-term interest rate increases that we saw in
the 1970s and 1980s, or even in 1995. In an environment of low inflation and improved fiscal health,
interest rates should not have to get that high again.
You will not be surprised that I cannot give you in advance precise information about
any further action the Bank  may  take  to  reduce  the  amount  of  monetary  stimulus  in  the  economy.
What I can tell you is that it is the strength of the momentum of demand, and thus how quickly the
economy approaches the limits of its capacity to meet that demand, that will determine the timing and
extent  of  our  response.  Close  monitoring  of  the  strength  of  demand  in  the  economy,  and  timely,
BIS Review   94/1997
- 3 -
measured steps in the right direction, will help us avoid the more substantial, and potentially  more
disruptive, tightening that would be required later on if monetary policy actions were unduly delayed.
Moreover, the magnitude of the increase in short-term interest rates will be influenced by the extent
of the exchange rate response.
I hope this makes it clear that what the Bank of Canada has in mind, and is aiming for,
is a “gradual easing off on the accelerator” in the months ahead, so that there will be no need to “slam
on the brakes” later on.
Making the most of the economy’s production potential
Next, let me say a few words about the challenges that await us further down the road.
One  of  the  more  remarkable  international  economic  developments  of  the  past  few
years  has  been  the  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy.  That  economy  has  had  six  years  of  solid
economic expansion, with high rates of job creation and low inflation.
In the late 1980s, when the U.S. unemployment rate dipped below 6 per cent, there
were  strong  inflationary  pressures.  Compare  this  with  the  present  situation:  the  U.S.  economy  has
been expanding at an average rate of about 3½ per cent for 8 quarters, current levels of demand are
above most estimates of its capacity to produce, and the unemployment rate has been at or below 5
per cent for several months. Yet inflation has remained well behaved. What is happening?  Are  we
operating in a different environment?
There are, of course, some temporary factors -- such as the appreciation  of  the  U.S.
dollar, the decline in energy prices, and the slack in overseas economies -- that are currently helping
to  suppress  inflationary  pressures  in  the  United  States.  However,  a  number  of  observers  are
suggesting that other, more permanent factors may also be contributing. One possibility, which has
been rather widely discussed recently, is that all the structural changes that have taken place in the
United States have raised the production capacity of the economy and reduced the risk of inflation. I
believe that another important factor in this success story has been the strong credibility of monetary
policy in the United States. By persuading Americans that it is determined to maintain low inflation,
the U.S. Federal Reserve has given itself room to test the potential of the economy without triggering
the quick response in wages and prices from worried workers and businesses that we saw during the
years of high inflation.
How  does  this  U.S.  experience  relate  to  Canada?  Can  we  also  look  forward  to  an
improvement  in  the  longer-term  performance  of  our  economy?  Unfortunately,  it  is  not  possible  to
make  that  judgement  in  advance,  given  the  complexity  of  the  factors  affecting  economic
performance. How rapid growth can be and still be sustainable, and how low our unemployment rate
will go, will ultimately depend on the flexibility, efficiency, and productivity of Canadian enterprises.
I am referring here to the effective use of new technology; the skills, training, and adaptability of our
labour force; our ability to control costs; and the initiative and ability of Canadian businesses to find
and develop new and expanded foreign markets for their products.
The contribution that monetary policy can make towards realizing this potential is to
ensure that the pace of economic expansion remains sustainable. This essentially means encouraging
monetary  conditions  that  will  allow  the  economy  to  test  the  limits  of  its  capacity  to  expand,  but
without setting off inflation and the costly boom and bust cycles of the past two decades.
As  in  the  United  States,  the  problem  in  Canada  is  that  there  is  considerable
uncertainty  regarding  the  level  of  economic  activity  that  can  be  accommodated  by  our  capacity  to
produce and how rapidly this capacity will expand over time. This is where  the  Bank  of  Canada’s
BIS Review   94/1997
- 4 -
inflation-control target should prove useful as we try to steer the economy along a sustainable growth
path. That target is to hold inflation inside a range of 1 to 3 per cent.
One of the advantages of such an explicit target is that it provides a ready measure of
the state of the economy by comparing the  actual  trend  of  inflation  against  the  target  range.  If  the
trend of inflation looks as though it will be pushing through the top of the target range, this implies
that  demand  in  the  economy  has  been  unsustainably  strong,  and  monetary  conditions  must  be
tightened. But if inflation  is  persistently  lower  than  past  history  and  the  existing  levels  of  demand
would suggest, and it is tending to press the bottom of the range, chances are that there is more room
for the economy to expand than previously thought, and monetary conditions can be easier.
However, if the Bank of Canada is going to respond to such signals, we must ensure
that our inflation-control strategy is a credible one. It is by conducting monetary policy in a prudent
manner  during  the  economic  upswing  that  the  Bank  can  provide  Canadians  with  assurance  that
inflation will remain under control when the economy begins to operate at levels that push against the
limits of capacity. If businesses, individuals, and investors are persuaded that inflation will stay low,
they will not respond immediately to signs of strong demand pressures by seeking to raise prices and
wages and by pushing up interest rates. Such an environment provides the flexibility necessary for
the economy to test the limits of growth and employment without immediately putting the economic
expansion at risk.
Concluding remarks
In conclusion, let me just say that the period ahead will be an exciting one. At no time
since the 1960s have we had in place the conditions that would permit the Canadian economy to fully
realize its potential. With inflation under control and increasingly favourable fiscal positions, we now
have an opportunity to see what our economy is capable of delivering, in terms of sustained growth in
output and employment  and  improving  standards  of  living.  The  Bank  of  Canada’s  role  is  to  make
sure that monetary policy provides the right background -- a stable, low-inflation environment.
BIS Review   94/1997
