Mr. Reddy considers the future of India's debt market 1997   Inaugural address given
by the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Y.V. Reddy, at the Invest India Conferences
in Mumbai, on 9/10/97.
The Future of India’s Debt Market 1997
I am happy to be amongst you this morning. This conference gives me an opportunity to
sharpen my thoughts, and gain insights from the deliberations. The subject has gained importance over
the years, and in particular, more recently after the  Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  of  April  1997.  In  fact,
there is a sudden spurt in conferences on this subject, as for example, the SBICAP Debt Market Seminar
held last month. Also, there was pretty elaborate coverage of this subject during the last two days in the
discussions of Bank Economists’ Conference on the Second Phase of Reforms in the Financial Sector.
The objective of this national conference, as I understand, is to assess recent changes and
examine issues which merit urgent consideration in order to achieve an efficient and vibrant debt market.
In the seminar organised by the SBICAP, Governor, Dr. C. Rangarajan had flagged some specific issues
which  would  help  in  formulating  an  agenda  for  further  reforms  in  the  debt  markets.  I  would  urge  this
audience to give serious consideration to these issues.
2.
India and the Government of India in the debt market in the recent period. These include:
Let  me,  therefore,  begin  by  highlighting  the  reforms  initiated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of
  setting up of a comprehensive system of primary dealers,
adoption of DVP system for settlement of government securities transactions,
abolition of tax deduction at source on government securities,
hedge their foreign currency risk in the forward market,
introduction of Treasury bills of varying maturities, and
placing investments of banks in preference shares/debentures/bonds of corporates outside 
the five per cent limit.
In a bid to increase transparency in operations, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been
disseminating information on its transactions in gilts and publishing the calendar of auctions in respect of
Treasury bills and repos.
Soon, the RBI proposes to publish data on banks’ investments in corporate and PSU debt
in the Weekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin.
To  foster 
inter-institutional  coordination,  a  Technical  Advisory  Committee  for
government  securities  and  a  Standing  Committee  on  Money  Market  have  been  set  up.  Major  issues
confronting the debt and money markets are discussed in these committees. These committees have been
found to be useful to all participants.
3.
As I observe, the discussions in this conference are structured around five sessions, viz.,
primary market, secondary market, legal issues, risk management and future directions. For the sake of
convenience, I will follow broadly the same structure and pose issues for further deliberations.
Primary Market
  Lack  of  market  clearing  yields  at  primary  auctions  of  government  debt  is  often  being
4.
cited  as  a  significant  factor  slowing  the  development  of  the  secondary  market.  The  arguments  run  as
follows:
First, it hampers efforts to broaden the investor base.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 2 -
Second,  at  times  when  cut-off  yields  in  the  primary  market  are  lower  than  prevailing
secondary market yields, it curbs secondary trading.
Third,  to  the  extent  the  cut-off  yields  are  lower  than  secondary  market  yields,  it
constrains inventory build-up  by  primary  dealers.  Finally,  to  the  extent  volumes  of  pick-up  in  primary
auctions are reduced due to interest rate considerations, it reduces the availability of floating stock in the
secondary market.
5. 
What are the factors that inhibit market clearing mechanisms? There are four important
issues,  viz.,  notifying  auction  size,  type  of  auction,  element  of  non-competitive  bids  and  frequency  of
auctions of Treasury bills. Another issue of concern relates to large private placements of corporate debt.
6. 
At present, there is no pre-announced notified amount in 364-day and  14-day  auctions.
This procedure enables the RBI to determine either the cut-off price or the amounts to be accepted in a
flexible manner. Notifying amounts in auctions will bring more transparency in the auction procedure by
removing the uncertainty about volumes in auctions. In this context, it needs to be emphasised that the
capacity  of  primary  dealers  to  absorb  auction  supply  as  an  underwriter  is  limited.  Currently,  primary
dealers underwrite to the extent of 50 per cent of the amounts in auctions with notified amounts. In this
scenario, there is a danger of devolvement on the RBI, if there is a pre-announced notified amount. The
extent  of  the  devolvement  on  the  RBI  can  be  minimised  by  increasing  the  underwriting  amounts  to
primary dealers. The RBI  could  also  change  the  notified  amounts  between  each  auction,  depending  on
prevailing market conditions, in order to minimise the devolvement risk on itself.
7. 
Presently,  there  are  six  primary  dealers.  The  institution  of  primary  dealers  has  partly
contributed  to  a  significant  increase  in  secondary  market  transactions  in  government  securities.
Authorising primary dealers is an on-going process. All eligible applicants will be considered by the RBI
for  primary  dealership.  While  on  this  subject,  an  issue  that  needs  to  be  considered  relates  to  the
when-issued market. At present, the Securities Contracts  (Regulation)  Act,  1956  prohibits  short-selling
of  securities.  Two  options  could  be  considered.  First,  whether  to  give  exclusive  access  of  primary
auctions  to  primary  dealers  and  simultaneously  permit  them  to  engage  in  short  sales  of  government
securities. Second, whether to continue with the existing system of access to primary auctions and allow
all  participants  to  engage  in  short  sales  of  government  securities.  The  timing  and  sequencing  of  this
reform  --  whether  to  introduce  it  now  or  wait  until  the  number  of  primary  dealers  has  enlarged -- are
aspects that need to be carefully considered. I would urge upon the participants to discuss the pros and
cons of these options and the international practices in this regard.
8. 
There is some debate over the type of auction that is most suitable for selling Treasury
bills  and  dated  government  securities  in  India.  There  are  advocates  for  both  the  discriminatory  and
uniform price auctions. But, international practices seem to be in favour of discriminatory price auctions.
In a switch-over from one auction system to another, a number of considerations arise such as easy entry,
cost  to  issuer,  return  to  investor,  role  of  primary  dealers,  incentive  to  gather  information,  etc.  This  is
another area fit for a careful assessment.
9. 
As  you  are  aware,  non-competitive  bids  are  allowed  in  91-  and  14-day  Treasury  bills
auctions.  A  major  issue  relates  to  the  treatment  of  non-competitive  bids.  Country  practices  show  that
non-competitive bidders are made allocations within the notified amount. However, the non-competitive
bidders  in  other  countries  consist  essentially  of  small,  retail  and  inexperienced  investors.  Since  the
maximum bid is restricted to  a  small  value,  the  competitive  bid  prices  do  not  get  distorted.  There  is  a
view in the Indian market that non-competitive bidders  should  also  be  allowed  as  competitive  bidders.
However,  in  our  country,  since  State  Governments  are  major  non-competitive  bidders,  their  volatile
surplus  funds  position  could  make  their  participation  in  Treasury  bills  auctions  very  uncertain.  Thus,
there  could  be  large  swings  in  terms  of  volumes  in  auctions.  Another  view  is  to  make  allocation  for
non-competitive bidders outside the notified amount.
BIS Review   99/1997
- 3 -
There is a view in the market that the high frequency of auctions recently brought about
10. 
by  introducing  14-day  Treasury  bills  auctions  (along  with  frequent  repos)  tends  to  hinder  secondary
market activities by reducing investor participation in the secondary market in favour of waiting for a few
days for primary issues. Also, the staggered settlement dates for Treasury bills falling on different days in
the  week  make  secondary  market  trading  across  different  maturities  of  Treasury  bills  less  efficient.
Perhaps, it would be useful for this conference to discuss the need, if any, to reduce auction  frequency
and adjust settlement dates of different maturity Treasury bills to fall on the same day in the week so as
to improve fungibility and thereby price discovery and market efficiency.
11. 
Finally,  an  increasingly  important  concern  relates  to  the  issuance  of  PSU  bonds  and
corporate debentures through private placements. Although, the private placement market plays a crucial
role in enabling corporates to raise resources, certain vital issues need to be considered for a well-directed
and efficient functioning of the market. At present, there is no transparency in this market and virtually
little information. In developed markets, the regulatory authorities indicate the framework within which
the  private  placement  has  to  function,  like  number  of  persons  per  placement,  arrangements  with  only
qualified  investors  and  strict  regulations  to  access  certain  qualified  investors.  We  have  to  assess  the
adequacy  of  the  regulatory  framework  to  protect  the  interest  of  investors  from  risks  associated  with
subscriptions  in  the  private  placement  market.  With  a  proper  regulatory  framework  and  more
transparency, the private placement market can develop further as an integral and important constituent
of  the  primary  market  for  the  raising  of  resources  by  corporates;  hence,  the  need  to  deliberate  on  the
status of regulatory framework.
Secondary Market
12.
 As part of the reform process, a number of technical impediments that prevented more
active  secondary  market  trading  in  government  securities  and  Treasury  bills  have  been  progressively
removed. Let me briefly recall these:
 abolition of the system of TDS,
issuance of benchmark securities, and
operationalising the DVP system at all centres.
The  RBI  is  encouraging  banks  to  open  SGL  II  accounts  for  constituents,  thereby
enlarging  the  coverage  of  book-entry  holding  of  government  securities.  Recently,  the  National  Stock
Exchange has been authorised to open a SGL II account and a current account with the RBI. A decision
has been taken to extend a similar facility to the Stock Holding Corporation of India. These steps would
further streamline transfer and settlement procedures in the government securities market.
13.
 In respect of PSU bonds and corporate debentures, which are held mostly in scrip form,
a proper settlement system is yet to be put in place. The National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL)
was expected to dematerialise a sizeable stock of non-government debt. But, at present, NSDL has been
able to dematerialise only those securities which are exempt from stamp duty. Suitable  amendments  to
the stamp duty regime appear, therefore, necessary to avoid transaction costs and enable active use of the
facility. An appropriate solution is needed, since an efficient transfer and settlement system in the PSU
bonds and corporate debt segments could usher in the resumption of repos in these instruments. Once it
is  assured  that  risk-free  and  transparent  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  put  in  place  through  a
depository like NSDL in dematerialised form, it should be possible to permit such repos.
14. 
Another  issue  that  has  been  raised  frequently  relates  to  giving  permission  to  financial
institutions  to  borrow  through  repos  in  eligible  securities.  While  there  is  a  risk  of  generating
asset-liability  mismatches  among  non-bank  participants,  the  conference  could  discuss  the  operational
feasibility of allowing such participants into the repo market under suitable safeguards.
15. 
The Reserve Bank of India is considering a range  of  options  to  increase  the  interest  of
individual investors in government securities. There is an inherent potential for households to diversify
BIS Review   99/1997
- 4 -
their  investment  portfolio  encompassing  government  securities.  It  would  be  useful  to  quickly  review
marketing  and  distribution  strategies  adopted  in  other  countries  for  reaching  government  securities  to
households. Australia, Ireland, the Netherlands and Sweden adopt direct sales of government securities to
the retail sector through special registration facilities. Hungary, Switzerland, the UK and the USA retail
through  non-competitive  bidding  arrangements.  France  and  Norway  use  the  primary  dealers  network.
Germany,  Spain  and  Turkey  have  retailing  arrangements  through  the  banking  system,  while  Denmark,
Ireland, and Poland retail government securities through the stock exchanges. Italy uses both the banking
and  stock  exchange  network.  The  conference  could  do  well  to  consider  strategic  options  for  this
important phase of market development.
Legal Issues
16. 
The most important segment of the debt market being government securities, let me start
with  the  relevant  law  on  this.  The  law  relating  to  government  securities  and  their  management  by  the
Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  the  Public  Debt  Act,  1944.  The  present  act  dates  to  pre-independence  days,
when  marketable  debt  comprised  almost  the  entire  borrowing  by  the  Government.  This  is  no  longer
valid, with almost over Rs.300,000 crore worth of other liabilities of the Government comprising, inter
alia,  instruments  like  NSS,  Indira  Vikas  Patra,  etc.,  falling  outside  the  purview  of  this  Act.  Further,
provisions of the Public Debt Act relate to issue, servicing and repayment of government securities and
do not provide regulation of trading/marketing of government securities. For instance, under the present
Act, the Reserve Bank has no substantive powers to design and introduce an instrument of transfer suited
to  the  computer  environment.  There  are  other  constraints,  such  as  those  which  preclude  the  RBI  from
issuing government securities in the form of promissory notes in the name of trusts, non-availability of
nomination  facility  in  respect  of  government  securities,  barring  a  minor  from  holding  government
securities,  etc.  A  new  Act  on  government  securities  is  proposed  to  take  care  of  these  issues.  Any
suggestions on this reform are welcome.
 It seems appropriate to consider extending the use of depositories established under the
17.
Depositories Act to government securities. The Depositories Act came into force in 1996 providing for a
legal  framework  for  holding  of  equities,  bonds,  debentures,  units  and  other  market  instruments  in
dematerialised form in a depository. Such deposits come under the regulatory framework of SEBI. Since
the RBI manages the  public  debt  of  central  and  state  governments,  Public  Debt  Offices  (PDOs)  of  the
RBI are in effect depositories under the Public Debt Act. Thus, giving permission to depositories to hold
government  securities  in  dematerialised  form  would  make  the  provisions  of  the  Depositories  Act
applicable  to  the  Reserve  Bank  as  an  issuer,  bringing  into  focus  the  respective  regulatory  roles  of  the
Reserve Bank and  SEBI  in  government  securities.  One  of  the  suggestions  to  resolve  this  is  by  way  of
incorporating  a  provision  in  the  proposed  Government  Securities  Act,  excluding  the  provisions  of
Depositories Act being applicable to government securities.
18. 
It  would  certainly  be  useful  to  survey  the  international  experience  in  this  regard.  In
Canada,  Germany  and  Switzerland,  there  is  central  government  prudential  regulation  of  depository
institutions and provincial or state supervision of securities trading. The Bank of England used to provide
regulation  of  depository  institutions,  although  after  the  passage  of  the  Bank  of  England  Bill,
responsibility  for  banking  supervision  will  be  transferred  to  the  new  and  strengthened  Securities  and
Investments Board (SIB). The SIB will also take direct responsibility for the regulatory regime covered
by  the  Financial  Services  Act.  In  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  the  central  banks  provide  prudential
regulation  of  depository  institutions,  but  there  is  no  specific  regulation  of  the  government  securities
market.  The  Japanese  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Danish  Supervisory  Authority  for  Financial  Affairs
provide  centralised  regulation  of  government  securities.  As  you  will  have  observed,  international
experience is varied.
19. 
Another  legal  issue  which  is  often  alluded  to  relates  to  forward  contracts.  This  forum
would do well to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the repeal of the government notification
issued in l969 prohibiting forward contracts in securities.
BIS Review   99/1997
Risk Management
- 5 -
20. 
Investors  in  debt  instruments  face  three  major  components  of  risk,  viz.,  credit  risk,
interest rate risk and foreign currency risk. In case of government bonds, credit risk is zero. The foreign
currency risk is relevant only to non-resident investors like FIIs who are investing in debt  instruments.
Recently, the 100 per cent debt funds dedicated to the debt market were allowed to take forward cover to
enable them to hedge their exchange rate risk. Investments in all debt instruments are exposed to interest
rate risk. This risk can be better hedged  if  a  futures  market  in  interest  rate  exists,  or  if  short-selling  in
securities is allowed. However, the futures market will be meaningful only in an environment of totally
deregulated  interest  rates  and  the  existence  of  a  term  money  market  which  itself  is  dependent  on  a
credible  yield  curve.  Thus,  while  the  eventual  introduction  of  interest  rate  futures  and  permission  for
short-selling is inevitable, the real issue is one of the timing of these reforms, so that it does not entail
any systemic risks.
Future Direction
21. 
Consistent  with  the  spirit  of  financial  sector  reforms,  the  RBI  is  in  the  process  of  the
divestment of part of its shareholding of DFHI and STCI, so that the RBI does not have the majority of
shareholding. As you are aware, the RBI has taken the initiative to promote STCI and DFHI. The RBI is
now a  minority  shareholder  in  DFHI  and,  after  the  second  round  of  disinvestment  in  l995,  its  share  is
only  l0.5  per  cent.  It  has  also  been  decided  to  disinvest  shares  of  STCI  so  that  after  the  first  phase  of
disinvestment, the RBI’s shareholding will be less than fifty per cent.
 Second, non-banking financial companies are now required to maintain a higher level of
22.
liquid assets in the form of government securities and government-guaranteed bonds. This will increase
the demand for government paper in the market. This will be in addition to the demand generated due to
the opening up of provident funds to debt market instruments, emergence of MMMFs and  investments
by l00 per cent FII debt funds.
23. 
Third,  I  would  like  to  flag  the  vital  issue  of  the  role  of  market  participants.  Standard
practices have to be evolved by the market with regard to the manner of quotes, the conclusion of deals,
the manner of pricing and accounting standards. A code of best practices also has to be evolved for repo
transactions  in  eligible  securities.  In  the  context  of  moving  towards  a  liberalised  and  market-oriented
environment  in  the  financial  sector,  it  would  be  desirable  if  such  standard  practices  were  evolved  and
accepted in a common forum of a self-regulatory body. At present, I understand that there are moves to
create  such  self-regulatory  body/bodies  among  the  PDs  and  among  banks  and  financial  institutions
covering  transactions  in  money  and  fixed-income  securities  markets.  This  is  a  welcome  trend  and  the
RBI would be willing to nurture such developments in the market.
24.
 Finally, the time has  come  to  accord  priority  for  establishing  electronic  links  between
the  Deposit  Accounts  Department  and  Public  Accounts  Department/Public  Debt  Office  of  the  RBI  for
achieving  synchronisation  of  funds  and  securities  transfers.  We  should  also  begin  planning  electronic
links between banks, primary dealers and others who have access to the system, so as to pave the way for
a  more  information-efficient  and  transparent  securities  market.  These  plans  can  succeed  only  with  the
concerted efforts of all -- the Government, the Reserve Bank of India and the market participants. I would
appreciate your detailed suggestions.
BIS Review   99/1997
