Bank  of  Japan  presents  summaries  of  articles  published  in  the  November
edition of its Quarterly Bulletin   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 28/11/97.
Flow of Funds in Japan, 1996
Summary
In  1996,  the  gross  amounts  of  fund-raising  and  financial  investment  by  the
domestic  nonfinancial  sector  (comprising  the  corporate  business,  personal,  and  public  sectors)
during the year both decreased from the previous year, remaining at low levels compared  with
the  past.  The  sector’s  fund-raising  through  borrowing  declined,  while  funds  raised  through
government bond issues reached a record  high.  As  for  financial  investment,  there  was  a  larger
net redemption of securities (excluding investment trusts) than in 1995, and the net investment
in insurance products narrowed significantly.
In the corporate business sector, the financial surplus marked a record high. This
was because (1) cash flow improved in excess of the continued growth in fixed investment, due
mainly to a recovery in sales; and (2) interest payments decreased, reflecting low interest rates.
The sector’s fund-raising was at its lowest level since 1956 -- the third year of compilation of the
flow  of  funds  accounts -- primarily  on  account  of  a  net  decline  in  loans,  which  was  more
significant than the previous year, particularly in those from private financial institutions. At the
same time, financial investment also declined from the previous year. Such overall sluggishness
of  fund-raising  and  financial  investment  activities  can  be  attributed  to  the  persisting
balance-sheet adjustment pressure.
In  the  personal  sector,  the  financial  surplus  narrowed,  the  ratio  of  financial
surplus to nominal GDP marking a record low. This was because (1) consumption expenditures
increased  by  a  larger  margin  than  the  improvement  in  employees’  income;  and  (2)  housing
investment increased due to the effects of low interest rates and a surge in demand ahead of the
rise in the consumption tax rate  in  fiscal  1997.  Both  fund-raising  and  financial  investment  fell
below the  previous  year’s  levels,  with  conspicuous  declines  in  investments  in  long-term  assets
such  as  insurance,  securities,  and  trusts.  The  outstanding  amount  of  financial  assets  in  the
personal sector reached ¥1,200 trillion for the first time at the end of 1996.
In  the  public  sector,  a  large  financial  deficit  remained,  due  to  expanded
public-sector investment during the first half of the year. Fund-raising through government bond
issues, almost all of which were purchased by the financial sector, marked a record high.
Profits and Balance-Sheet Developments of Japanese Banks in Fiscal 1996
Overview
Operating  profits1  of  Japanese  banks2  in  fiscal  1996  amounted  to  ¥6.4  trillion,
5 percent lower than in the previous year. This decline reflects a decrease in the net bond-related
                                                  
1  “Operating profits” signifies earnings from core banking operations, arrived at by subtracting “general loan-loss provisions,” “ general and
administrative expenses” and “expenses for debenture issuance” from the total of “net interest income” (e.g., interest received/paid) for loans and
BIS Review   113/1997
- 2 -
profits  and  in  the  net  interest  income  of  city  banks.  Excluding  a  temporary  factor3  which
contributed to an increase in profits on trust accounts, the decline in operating profits from the
previous year was about 10 percent.
Loan  write-offs  and  loan-loss  provisions4  marked  approximately  ¥7.6  trillion
(including  trust  accounts),  which  is  the  second  highest  level  following  fiscal  1995  when  the
jusen (housing loan companies) were liquidated. This suggests that most banks continued to give
high priority to solving the problem of nonperforming loans.
Net  stock-related  profits5  were  no  more  than  about  ¥1.0  trillion,  approximately
¥2.9 trillion lower than the fiscal 1995 level, due to substantial stock write-downs resulting from
the  fall  in  stock  prices.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  banks’  balance  sheets  have  become  more
exposed to volatility in stock prices because of a rise in the book values of stocks which resulted
from  recent  cross  transactions -- sets  of  purchases  and  sales  transactions  on  the  same  stocks  in
order to acquire unrealized capital gain. As the loan write-offs and loan-loss provisions virtually
matched the total of operating profits and stock-related profits, recurring profits and net income
reached close to zero levels, although this represented an improvement from the previous year.
On the Relationship between Monetary Aggregates and Economic Activities in Japan: A Study
Focusing on Long-Term Equilibrium Relationships
Introduction
This paper empirically analyzes the relationship between monetary aggregates and
economic  activities  in  Japan  using  actual  data  and  focusing  on  long-term  equilibrium
relationships.  Long-term  time-series  data  from  the  1960s  to  1996  are  used  in  the  analysis  in
order to observe long-term relationships between the most commonly used monetary aggregate,
M2+CDs,  and  macroeconomic  indicators,  such  as  GDP,  rather  than  limiting  the  analysis  to
short-term relationships during the past year or two.1  In addition to long-term relationships, the
                                                                                                                                                                   
discounts,  deposits  and  securities),  “net  fee  and  commission  income”  (e.g.,  fees  and  commissions  received/paid)  and  “net  other  operating
income” (e.g., net profits related to bonds and foreign exchange).
2  “Japanese banks” or “banks” in this article refers to “All Banks,” comprising the member banks of the Federation of Bankers Associations of
Japan, which consists of city banks, long-term credit banks, seven trust banks (excluding foreign-owned trust banks and trust banks that started
business after October 1993), the 64 member banks of the Regional Banks Association of Japan (hereafter referred to as regional banks), and the
65 member banks of the Second Association of Regional Banks (hereafter referred to as regional banks II). However, calculated figures exclude
data for Hyogo Bank (the present Midori Bank), Taiheiyo Bank (the present Wakashio Bank), and Hanwa Bank.
3    Specifically,  the  temporary  factor  here  refers  to  profits  resulting  from  withdrawals  from  special  reserve  funds  held  by  trust  banks.  The
withdrawal profit resulted from a revision of a government ordinance that reduced the ratio of funds to set aside for the special reserve  funds
(from 3 percent of principal to 0.5 percent of principal). These are accumulated to provide for situations in which the value of a loan trust falls
below the value of the principal. The trust banks applied part of the profit to write off nonperforming loans in trusts, and the remainder to  be
accounted as trust fees and be registered in the banking accounts as net fee and commission income.
4  This includes not only loan write-offs, but also transfers to special loan-loss accounts (provisions), losses from the sales  of  nonperforming
loans to the Cooperative Credit Purchasing Company (CCPC), and renunciations of claims.
5    Stock-related  profits/losses  are  calculated  by  subtracting  from  “gains  on  stock-selling  operations”  the  sum  of  “losses  from  stock-selling
operations” and “stock write-downs”.
1  Note that the sample period includes the period when M2+CDs underwent large fluctuations, i.e. from the latter half of the 1980s to the early
1990s.
BIS Review   113/1997
- 3 -
stability  of  the  money  demand  function  and  also  the  lead/lag  relationships  between  monetary
aggregates and other macroeconomic indicators are tested.
The conclusions of the paper can be summarized as follows.
(1)  When  developments  in  M2+CDs  and  other  macroeconomic  indicators  are
viewed in the long term, fluctuations  in  nominal  M2+CDs  have  a  relatively  stable  relationship
with  movements  in  nominal  GDP.  This  can  also  be  confirmed  by  applying  an  econometric
technique  called  “cointegration  analysis”,  which  suggests  that  there  is  a  long-term  equilibrium
relationship  between  the  two.  On  the  other  hand,  the  relationship  between  M2+CDs  and
prices -- which along with real GDP make up nominal GDP -- has changed since the latter half
of the 1980s, in the sense that fluctuations in prices have clearly diminished relative to those of
M2+CDs.
(2)  A  relatively  stable  money  demand  function  can  be  estimated,  based  on  the
above  long-term  equilibrium  relationship  and  incorporating  factors  for  short-term  fluctuations.
At least in the sample period, the mechanism of short-term fluctuations has been relatively stable
in  M2+CDs,  GDP,  interest  rates,  and  asset  factors,  as  represented  by  the  money  demand
function.
(3) An analysis in terms of lagged cross correlation on the lead/lag  relationships
between  M2+CDs  and  other  macroeconomic  variables  reveals  that  M2+CDs  basically  leads
nominal and real GDP, domestic private demand, and prices. However, there are differences in
results across sample periods that cannot be ignored.
(4)  Similar  analyses  are  conducted,  from  the  standpoints  of  conclusions  (1)-(3)
above,  on  selected  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  other  than  M2+CDs,  and  on  monetary
aggregates  obtained  by  partially  changing  the  components  of  M1  and  M2+CDs.  The  results
show  that  these  aggregates  did  not  have  more  stable  relationships  with  macroeconomic
indicators than did M2+CDs.
(5) The above results suggest that, in analyzing monetary aggregates, it would be
effective to use the long-term equilibrium relationship between M2+CDs and GDP as well as the
money demand function incorporating the relationship. In interpreting the empirical results using
the statistical techniques, however, it is necessary to bear in mind the following limitations:
(a) Long-term equilibrium relationships indicate only the average  relationship  in
the long run, and hence considerable deviations from equilibrium values may arise in the short
term; and
(b) There still remains a possibility that the long-term equilibrium relationships or
money demand functions derived from the previously observed data may change, as a result of a
large shift of funds caused by deregulation and other structural changes in the financial markets
in the future.
Checklist for the Year 2000 Problem
Introduction
BIS Review   113/1997
- 4 -
The Bank Supervision Department of the Bank of Japan  compiled  the  following
checklist  (the  original  is  in  Japanese)  to  assist  bank  examiners  in  assessing  the  adequacy  of
financial  institutions’  risk  management  framework  for  addressing  the  Year  2000  problem
(hereinafter simply “the  Problem”).1 On  August  19,  1997,  the  checklist  was  also  distributed  to
financial institutions to help them in their own evaluation of their action plans.
The  checklist  emphasizes  the  significance  of  each  financial  institution’s
understanding and awareness of the Problem, and calls for the commitment of each institution,
including  the  top  management,  to  its  action  plans.  In  proceeding  with  the  action  plans,  each
institution is advised to fully assess the effects of the Problem, carefully arrange the scheduling
of the plans, and complete renovation and testing prior to the implementation of the action plans.
The checklist also stresses  the  importance  of  other  matters  including  (1)  the  monitoring  of  the
progress as to the implementation of the action plans, (2) the scrutiny of legal responsibilities of
outside vendors, and (3) the establishment of contingency plans.
                                                  
1  Many computer operating systems and applications use six-digit codes for dates -- date fields -- comprising two digits for the year, two digits
for the month, and two digits for the day (for example, December 31, 1999 reads 991231). With such a coding system, the code for the year 2000
will be “00,” which may be interpreted as the year 1900, not 2000. This will cause errors in date-sensitive calculations and other issues. Such
problems are referred to as the Year 2000 problem. If measures are not taken to address the problem, normal operations of financial institutions
will be disrupted, which would lead to disturbances in  payment  and  settlement  systems  nationwide,  the  effects  of  which  may  spread  to  other
industries.
NB   This Review is available on the BIS Worldwide Web site (http://www.bis.org)
  BIS Review   113/1997
