Mr. Brash asks how fast the New Zealand economy can grow   Address by the
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Mr.  Donald  T.  Brash,  to  the  Rotary  Club  in
Auckland, on 6/10/97.
Introduction: economic growth is important
Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to be addressing the Auckland Rotary Club
today.  Just  15  years  ago  I  was  a  member  of  this  Club,  and  I  look  back  to  that  time  with  very
warm memories.
When I was invited to speak to you,  I  was  given  a  clean  slate:  I  was  essentially
allowed  to  choose  my  own  subject.  And  I  want  to  use  that  freedom  to  go  beyond  my  usual
territory, of monetary policy, interest rates, exchanges rates, MCIs and all the rest, to talk about
a  broader  issue,  namely  New  Zealand’s  future  economic  growth  --  what  it  may  be,  what  is
constraining it, and how it can be enhanced.
And  I  want  to  do  that  for  two  reasons.  First,  because  economic  growth  is  the
ultimate objective of much public policy, and that in turn because it is economic growth which
gives  us  choices  --  the  ability  to  enjoy  better  quality  housing,  the  ability  to  have  better  health
care,  the  option  of  choosing  more  leisure,  the  ability  to  invest  in  environmentally-friendly
production techniques, the freedom to choose between an array of options denied to those where
economic growth is low or non-existent.
And secondly I want to talk about economic growth because there is still a great
deal  of  public  misunderstanding  about  the  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  monetary  policy  in
encouraging  or  discouraging  economic  growth.  There  is  still  quite  a  widespread  view  that  the
Reserve  Bank’s  exclusive  focus  on  delivering  predictably  low  inflation  involves  a  cost  in
economic growth, and that if only the Bank were not so  obsessive  about  its  inflation  objective
the New Zealand economy could grow much more quickly. People look back to the 5, 6 and 7
percent  growth  rates  achieved  just  a  few  years  ago,  and  wonder  why  we  can’t  return  to  those
growth rates. They look at our Asian neighbours expanding with breathtaking speed, and wonder
why  we  can’t  emulate  them.  They  reflect  on  the  painful  restructuring  that  the  New  Zealand
economy  underwent  from  1984,  and  ask  if  it  was  all  worthwhile.  Some  people  suspect  that
perhaps the Reserve Bank has denied us the benefits which should have been available.
So  today  I  want  to  discuss  the  issue  of  economic  growth  in  the  broadest  terms.
My aim is to provide a framework for thinking about what is a reasonable expectation for New
Zealand’s  growth,  to  identify  some  of  the  factors  that  will  determine  whether  we  are  able  to
achieve  that  potential,  and  to  discuss  the  linkage  between  growth  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s
interest, namely inflation.
Running the economy is like running a marathon
Let  me  start  by  reminding  you  of  the  challenge  facing  a  marathon  runner.  The
objective is to go as fast as possible over the full distance. It makes no sense to sprint, ‘hit the
wall’, and simply not finish the race, or spend much of the time on hands and knees recovering
from that initial bout of excessive enthusiasm. Nor does it make any sense to walk most of the
way,  finishing  the  race  with  unused  reserves  of  energy.  Neither  approach  is  likely  to  lead  to
running the race in a personal best time. And that is why experienced athletes constantly check
their pace, making sure it is neither too fast nor too slow.
BIS Review   92/1997
- 2 -
In  terms  of  an  economy,  going  too  fast  also  leads  to  ‘hitting  the  wall’,  with
symptoms  typically  being  a  burst  of  inflation,  a  deterioration  in  the  balance  of  payments
position, perhaps an asset price boom, signs of difficulty in finding skilled employees, and very
often a sense of euphoria (‘look how fast I’m going and I still feel good!’). The results of hitting
the wall are typically a sharp recession -- sharper still if overcooked asset prices are collapsing.
To complete the analogy, in any long distance race you will find several runners
who have paced themselves correctly, but who complete the race in very  different  times.  Each
may have done a personal best time, but those personal bests will be very different.
So  it  is  with  economies.  Some  economies  will  be  able  to  sustain  a  much  faster
pace  than  others  without  running  into  the  too-fast  danger  territory;  some  will  naturally  grow
more slowly than others, without leaving large amounts of unused energy or potential. And it is
not necessarily a question of one economy being better than another; it’s just a question of being
different.  If  that  thought  surprises,  I’d  simply  note  that  the  ‘best’,  most  highly  productive,
economy in the world -- the United States -- is also one of the slower growing economies, and
has been now for some decades.
What  is  it  that  determines  why  some  economies  can  achieve  sustainably  faster
growth  than  others?  Potential  growth  ultimately  depends  on  two  things:  quantity  and  quality.
The  quantity  of  people  and  capital,  in  the  form  of  factories,  forests,  trucks,  roads,  and  all  the
rest. And the quality of those same things. Countries that have faster potential growth rates have
faster trend growth in the quantity of people and capital at work in the economy,  and/or  faster
trend growth in the quality or productivity of those things.
New Zealand’s sustainable growth now about 3 percent annually
So  how  fast  can  New  Zealand  grow  in  a  sustainable,  or  ‘long-term  average’,
sense?  Looking  forward,  we  estimate  New  Zealand’s  potential  growth  rate  currently  to  be
around  3  percent  annually  --  a  result  of  trend  growth  in  the  working  age  population  of  1.5
percent  and  trend  growth  in  output  per  person  also  of  about  1.5  percent.  That  growth  in  real
output per person comes from a combination of growth in the quantity of capital, and growth in
the quality of that capital and the way we use it. In other words, we should expect our  growth
rate  to  average  about  3  percent  annually  over  the  course  of  our  usual  economic  cycles,  with
outcomes  for  any  given  year  ranging  from  about  1  percent  at  the  trough  to,  perhaps,  4  or  5
percent at the peak.
If a 3 percent average growth rate does not sound very exciting, let’s put that into
a broader context. Sustained growth of 3 percent is clearly well ahead of our experience in the
seventies  and  eighties.  Indeed,  between  1975  and  1990,  growth  averaged  less  than  1  percent
annually.  Of  course  occasionally  we  grew  more  quickly  than  that,  but  those  periods  of  faster
growth were typically short-lived, and associated with unsustainably large fiscal and balance of
payments deficits and rapidly increasing inflationary pressures.
And  the  difference  between  a  1  percent  average  growth  rate  and  a  3  percent
average  growth  rate  adds  up  to  an  enormous  difference  in  the  volume  of  goods  and  services
available  to  New  Zealanders  if  the  difference  is  sustained  for,  say,  10  years.  Today,  our
economy  is  producing  goods  and  services  totalling  about  $100  billion  each  year.  If  that  total
grows by only 1 percent a year for a decade, in 10 years’ time we will be producing goods and
services of $110 billion. If the total grows at an average of 3 percent a year, in 10 years’ time we
will be producing goods and services of $134 billion. The difference of $24 billion annually is a
BIS Review   92/1997
- 3 -
lot  of  additional  hospital  operations,  or  tertiary  education,  or  restaurant  meals,  or  overseas
holidays.
But what about the much more rapid growth of the 1993 to 1995 period,  during
which at one point growth exceeded 7 percent? Surely that shows that we are capable of much
faster  growth  than  3  percent?  Clearly  we  can  grow  faster  than  3  percent  at  times,  and  we  are
likely  to  do  so,  just  as  the  marathon  runner  can  occasionally  sprint.  Equally  clearly,  however,
growing at 5, 6, or 7 percent for a brief period tells us nothing about how fast we can grow on
average over a longer period of time.
The  rapid  growth  which  we  experienced  for  a  brief  period  in  the  1993  to  1995
period  was  the  result  in  part  of  adding  more  capital  and  of  improving  productivity,  but  was
fundamentally the result of being able to bring back into employment the large number of people
who  had  become  unemployed  during  the  recession  of  the  late  eighties  and  early  nineties.  You
will recall that unemployment reached 11 percent of the labour force in the  early  nineties,  and
fell to 6 percent by the mid-nineties.
Everybody  hopes  that  unemployment  falls  below  its  present  level,  of  almost  7
percent  of  the  labour  force.  Growth  rates  aside,  lower  unemployment  implies  a  huge
improvement in well-being, both for the individuals concerned and for society as a whole. It is
conceivable,  although  unlikely  during  the  next  two  or  three  years,  that  we  could  reduce
unemployment by 5 percent of the labour force again. But it is clearly inconceivable that we can
do  that  repeatedly,  since  that  would  quickly  imply  negative  unemployment.  To  the  extent  that
the very rapid growth of the mid-nineties was a result of being able to ‘mine’ the unemployment
rolls for additional workers, it is not something which can be repeated indefinitely.
3 percent growth looks good by the standards of other developed countries
If  we  look  at  other  countries,  we  find  that,  by  the  standards  of  the  developed
world,  our  3  percent  looks  reasonably  attractive.  For  example,  the  United  States  is  generally
estimated  to  have  a  growth  potential  of  a  little  over  2  percent,  being  1  percent  labour  force
growth, and 1 percent annual productivity gain.
Over  recent  months,  some  US  commentators  have  wondered  whether  the  US
productivity  trend  has  lifted  --  largely  as  a  consequence  of  the  impact  of  new  computer
technology -- but the jury is still out on this question. Certainly the fact that US unemployment
has  recently  been  falling  markedly,  and  now  stands  at  4.9  percent,  its  lowest  level  in  nearly  a
quarter  of  a  century,  strongly  suggests  that  recent  US  growth  has  also  been  dependent  on
‘mining’  the  unemployment  rolls  for  additional  workers,  and  is  likely  to  slow  as  finding
additional workers becomes increasingly difficult.
It is also interesting to recall that, while some people have questioned why New
Zealand can not achieve US growth rates, over the six years to March 1997 New Zealand grew
at  an  average  rate  of  3.1  percent  annually,  slightly  faster  than  the  US  economy  grew  over  the
same period (2.7 percent).
Mr Ian Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, noted in a recent
speech  that,  between  June  1991  and  December  1996,  both  New  Zealand  and  Australia  had
enjoyed economic growth of 3.6 percent, and that that growth had been faster than growth in any
of  the  other  16  developed  countries  against  which  he  compared  us,  with  the  exception  of
BIS Review   92/1997
- 4 -
Norway and Ireland. (Speech to the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce in Melbourne on 15
May 1997.)
In other words, although  it  is  too  early  to  be  dogmatic  --  given  the  influence  of
cyclical  factors  on  growth  rates  measured  over  relatively  short  periods  --  New  Zealand  does
appear to have made a significant gain in its growth potential in recent years, and to have lifted
its performance from near the bottom of the class to somewhere rather closer to  the  top  of  the
class of developed countries.
Why do the Asian Tigers seem so much more successful?
So where do the Asian Tigers fit in -- countries that have been routinely achieving
growth rates of 8 to 10 percent per annum --  and  why  can’t  New  Zealand  be  more  like  them?
That’s a question that has challenged economists around the  world  for  some  time.  It  would  be
misleading to claim that any sort of consensus has been arrived at --  indeed,  the  debate  on  the
sources of these extraordinary growth rates still rages.
But  it  seems  likely  that  the  very  rapid  growth  achieved  by  the  Asian  Tiger
economies,  and  by  China,  can  be  explained  very  readily  in  conventional  terms,  by  looking  at
growth in the inputs of labour and capital, and at productivity improvements.
Thus demographics and migration trends are obviously important in determining
how fast a labour force will grow. And Asian economies have experienced very rapid increases
in  their  effective  labour  forces  in  recent  years.  Singapore,  for  example,  almost  doubled  the
proportion  of  its  population  engaged  in  the  formal  labour  force  between  1960  and  1990.  That
increase  accounts  for  close  to  one-third  of  Singapore’s  remarkable  average  growth  rate  of  8.5
percent over that period.
Similarly,  a  few  decades  ago  many  Asian  economies  operated  with  little  in  the
way of  modern  tools  and  machinery.  In  recent  years,  the  growth  in  the  quantity  of  capital  has
been huge. Annual investment in Singapore has consistently exceeded 30 percent of  GDP,  and
rose to almost 50 percent at times during the seventies.
Those  very  high  rates  of  investment,  and  the  ability  of  traditionally  poor,  often
agricultural, economies to pick up, off the shelf, very much more productive technologies from
other countries have in turn made it possible to achieve extremely rapid improvements in labour
productivity.  Thus  for  example,  taking  a  peasant  farmer  employing  a  water  buffalo  and  a
wooden plough and giving him either a modern tractor and a plough, or a modern computerised
lathe, is likely to see an extremely large increase in output per person.
It  seems  clear  that  if  a  country  has  available  some  under-utilised  labour,  large
amounts of capital and an ability to adopt the latest technology, perhaps through being open to
foreign direct investment, it is possible to grow very quickly indeed during a ‘catch-up’ phase.
But once a country reaches the developed country norms in terms of labour force participation
rates,  standards  of  education,  and  available  technology,  growth  rates  will  also  tend  to  slow  to
match the developed country norms.
Japan seems to have undergone that transformation in recent years. After growing
at  a  very  rapid  pace  that  enabled  it  to  transform  itself  over  the  post-war  period  from  a  rather
poor  and  war-devastated  country  to  one  having  per  capita  incomes  amongst  the  highest  in  the
BIS Review   92/1997
- 5 -
world,  Japan’s  growth  rate  over  the  past  few  years  has  been  much  closer  to  that  of  the  ‘more
established’ developed economies.
Lessons  for  New  Zealand:  immigration  policy,  benefit  policies,  and  education  policy  are  all
important
What can we learn from this survey of growth in other countries that is relevant to
New Zealand today? The most important lesson is that if we wish to lift our long term growth
rate -- our sustainable average growth rate -- we have to look to those factors that are important
determinants  of  long  term  growth,  namely  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  labour  force,  the
quantity and quality of investment, and the other factors which determine the productivity with
which labour and capital are combined.
The  supply  of  labour  is  largely  determined  by  population  growth  and  the
proportion of the population which is engaged in employment.
We  can  influence  population  growth  to  some  extent,  by  our  policy  on
immigration.  The  experience  of  Australia,  Canada  and  the  United  States  --  indeed  of  New
Zealand -- suggests that a well-considered immigration policy can have a significantly beneficial
effect  on  an  economy’s  long-term  growth  rate  not  only  by  increasing  the  labour  force  but  by
bringing skills, market knowledge and capital.
The  proportion  of 
the  population  engaged 
in  formal  employment  (the
participation  rate)  can  be  influenced  by  policy  even  more  substantively.  For  example,  pension
and  entitlement  rules  which  impose  very  high  effective  tax  rates  on  low  income  people
contemplating staying in, or re-entering, the work force tend to reduce participation rates. This
makes the current discussion about reforming the benefit system of direct relevance to potential
growth.
With  an  ageing  population  and  sensible  policies  on  retirement  income,  we  can
expect  a  greater  proportion  of  the  population  to  remain  in  work  beyond  the  current  retirement
age and, with some evidence that people remain healthier,  both  physically  and  mentally,  when
they  are  employed,  that  is  almost  certainly  something  to  be  welcomed  for  reasons  going  well
beyond  potential  growth  rates.  Moreover,  we  can  probably  expect  the  trend  towards  higher
participation rates for women to continue, and this too will mean that the labour force is likely to
grow rather more quickly in the years ahead than does the population generally.
The  quality  of  our  labour  force  can  also  be  influenced  through  public  policy
choices,  but  only  slowly.  It  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  process  of  economic  development  and
growth  goes  hand  in  hand  with  enhanced  educational  standards.  We  in  New  Zealand  once
routinely listed ‘a well-educated labour force’ as one of the clearly identifiable strengths of our
economy. We can no longer be so confident on that front. The capacity of today’s high school
graduates  to  write  grammatical  English  seems  to  be  disappointing  to  a  great  many  employers,
while  international  studies  comparing  the  ability  of  New  Zealand  students  in  mathematics  and
science with that of students in other countries suggest that we no longer have anything of which
to be terribly  proud.  In  the  Third  International  Maths  and  Science  study,  New  Zealand  ranked
22nd  out  of  41  countries  in  science  and  24th  in  maths.  By  contrast,  the  top  four  countries  in
maths were Singapore, South Korea, Japan, and Hong Kong, with Singapore, South Korea and
Japan also occupying three of the top four positions in science.
BIS Review   92/1997
- 6 -
As a general proposition, those economies which have been out-performing us in
terms  of  per  capita  growth  have  typically  also  been  out-performing  us  in  educational  effort.
Whether  that  is  because  those  countries  have  better  educational  structures,  or  just  have  people
who are more convinced of the crucial importance of a good education, I do not know. But the
result  is  that  the  quality  of  their  labour  force  is  rapidly  improving,  whereas  ours  is  improving
rather  more  slowly.  For  the  longer  term,  it  may  well  be  that  the  most  important  policy  area
relevant to improving our sustainable growth rate is education policy.
The quality of management also matters, and in this regard I have no doubt that
the opening up of the New Zealand economy during the last decade or so has been a catalyst for
improved  business  management  in  New  Zealand.  Certainly  poor  management  is  no  longer
sheltered by regulations and tariffs which keep competitors at bay.
Similarly, economies that grow strongly typically have good  industrial  relations.
Here too we have made progress in recent years. The less centralised structures we now have for
negotiating  pay  and  conditions  have  been  beneficial  from  the  standpoint  of  encouraging  both
employers and employees to focus on their mutual stake in staying up with, if not ahead of, the
competition. At the very least, nobody seems to want to go back to the very highly centralised
industrial relations structures we had in the seventies and eighties. And the number of ‘days lost’
as the result of strikes is well down on what used to be regarded as normal. These things are all
helping our growth performance.
Lessons  for  New  Zealand:  policies  which  distort  investment  decisions  damage  our  growth
prospects
Additional  investment,  so  that  each  person  employed  is  teamed  with  a  greater
amount  of  physical  capital,  is  also  crucial  to  our  growth  performance.  But  in  some  ways  the
quality of additional investment is even more important than its quantity. When we look at New
Zealand’s slow growth period --  through  the  seventies  and  eighties  --  we  find  that  the  ratio  of
investment to GDP was quite respectable by comparison with other developed countries.  What
was  impeding  growth  was  not  so  much  an  inadequate  level  of  investment  as  a  persistent
tendency to direct capital into low-yielding activities.
Perhaps  the  best-known  examples  of  low-yielding  investment  were  the  ‘Think
Big’ projects of the late seventies and early eighties, but a great many could also be found in the
private  sector.  Partly  because  of  the  distortions  caused  by  inflation,  much  investment  was
channelled  into  real  estate  investment,  sometimes  well  ahead  of  demand.  Partly  because  of
subsidies, capital was invested in  the  production  of  sheepmeat  for  which  there  was  no  market.
Largely because of  quantitative  import  restrictions  and  high  tariffs,  a  great  deal  of  capital  was
invested  in  activities  which,  while  profitable  to  the  investors,  added  little  or  nothing  to  output
valued  at  international  prices.  Worse,  in  some  highly  protected  industries,  when  measured  at
international prices the value of output was actually negative. In other words, the cost of inputs,
at world prices, exceeded the value of outputs at world prices.
It is with those considerations in mind that countries seeking to boost their growth
performance look to micro-economic reforms -- to reduced protection, to deregulation, to flatter
and broader tax structures, and to increased market flexibility -- to encourage available resources
of  labour  and  capital  to  move  into  those  activities  where  private  financial  returns  and  national
economic returns are similarly high.
BIS Review   92/1997
- 7 -
With that, of course, goes the requirement that those same resources are permitted
to move away from activities in which the returns are low. Allowing industries which depend for
their continued existence on protection from imports to continue operating indefinitely  may  be
doing a favour to the subsidised few, but it certainly does not help our growth potential.
(It  surprises  me  that  we  still  hear,  occasionally,  a  manufacturer  argue  that  we
should  not  reduce  tariffs  in  New  Zealand  because  other  countries  use  tariffs  to  protect  the
internationally  uncompetitive  parts  of  their  economies.  Since  tariffs  are  essentially  a  tax  on
exports, and our export industries are almost by definition those which are the most efficient in
international  terms,  why  we  should  tax  such  industries  just  because  other  countries  tax  their
export industries is frankly beyond me.)
Lessons for New Zealand: growth affected by high taxation?
Attention  is  also  increasingly  focusing  on  the  role  which  the  total  size  of
government plays in influencing an economy’s growth rate. In recent months, a series of studies
commissioned  by  the  Inland  Revenue  Department  has  reached  the  conclusion  that  when  a
government’s  total  tax  revenue  exceeds  about  20  percent  of  GDP  the  impact  on  growth  is
negative. Another study commissioned by the Treasury has cast some doubt on the methodology
used in the studies commissioned by the IRD, but suggests that the  optimum  level  of  taxation,
relative  to  GDP  and  from  a  growth  point  of  view,  is  probably  below  20  percent.  Why?
Presumably because with low tax rates fewer resources are squandered in trying to minimise tax
obligations, and the disincentive effects of taxation on effort and risk-taking are reduced.
I  myself  do  not  know  why  countries  with  relatively  low  tax  burdens  appear  to
grow more quickly than those with relatively high tax burdens,  or  indeed  whether  there  is  any
causal relationship between low tax levels and high growth. But it does seem clear that the East
Asian countries where economic growth has recently been most rapid are  also  countries  where
the ratio of tax revenue to GDP is very much lower than it is in New Zealand or other developed
economies.
Lessons for New Zealand: growth remains heavily dependent on foreign savings
One other issue deserves mention. Before a country can invest it must have access
to  savings  --  either  its  own  domestically-generated  savings,  or  the  savings  of  other  countries.
New Zealand has a long record of relying on the savings of others. That was hardly surprising
when, as a colonial outpost, we drew on the capital of Britain to fund our development. We also
relied  on  a  flow  of  migrants  to  boost  the  available  labour  force.  Together,  those  imported
resources  were  combined  to  generate  growth  and  wealth  at  a  rate  that  was  probably  similar  to
that achieved by the Asian Tigers in the last decade or so.
While  the  flow  of  migrants  is  generally  rather  smaller  in  modern  New  Zealand
than was the case during the late nineteenth century, we’ve never fully weaned ourselves from a
relatively  heavy  dependence  on  the  savings  of  others.  We  appear  to  see  nothing  unusual,  let
alone undesirable, in continuing to do so indefinitely.
It  is  not  at  all  obvious  that  we  would  invest  more,  or  would  invest  more
efficiently,  if  we  generated  more  savings  domestically.  But  it  seems  to  me,  as  someone  who
believes  that  our  being  open  to  international  capital  markets  has  been  hugely  beneficial  to  our
economy and to our society, that we would probably face a more stable and perhaps more secure
future  if  our  dependence  on  the  savings  of  others  were  reduced.  At  the  very  least,  we  need  to
BIS Review   92/1997
- 8 -
recognise that there is little point in decrying the degree of foreign ownership of New Zealand
businesses and assets if we are not also ready to decry the paucity of New Zealand savings.
Growth and monetary policy
So where does monetary policy fit into this growth story? It may surprise you to
hear  me  contend  that,  as  a  determinant  of  long  term  growth  potential,  monetary  policy  has  a
relatively modest and indirect influence.
I say that because, as I  have  explained,  long  term  growth  is  a  product  of  labour
and  capital,  and  how  productively  those  two  factors  work  together.  The  things  which  I  have
described as being crucial here are essentially ‘supply-side’ matters -- the rate of growth of the
labour force, the quality of the education system, the extent to which government policies distort
the  allocation  of  investment,  and  all  the  rest.  These  are  the  crucial  determinants  of  our
sustainable growth rate.
But  monetary  policy  can  help  in  two  ways.  First,  by  keeping  inflation  stable  it
can,  as  a  by-product,  assist  in  moderating  economic  cycles  --  restraining  demand  when  it
threatens to exceed the economy’s capacity to supply and encouraging demand to increase when
it threatens to fall short of capacity. In other words, successful monetary policy aimed at keeping
inflation  stable  also  keeps  the  economy’s  pace  as  close  to  the  optimum  as  possible.  In  the
marathon  analogy,  successful  monetary  policy  avoids  the  economy  ‘hitting  the  wall’,  but  also
avoids it ‘running too slowly’, with unused reserves of labour and capital.
Secondly,  there  is  now  strong  evidence  that  high  inflation  positively  damages
sustainable growth, and growing evidence that there is some damage caused even by quite low
rates of inflation.
Nobody  argues  that  price  stability  will  create  a  major  improvement  in  an
economy’s sustainable growth rate -- that growth rate depends primarily, as indicated, on all the
real factors I have already discussed. But it now seems beyond reasonable doubt that keeping the
general price level stable is the best contribution which monetary policy can make to the way in
which  the  economy  operates,  and  therefore  the  best  contribution  to  the  economy’s  sustainable
growth  rate.  In  an  inflation-free  environment,  investors  and  the  public  generally  get  their  best
shot  at  reading  accurately  the  signals  that  markets  are  delivering  --  which  goods  and  services
represent best value, where the best returns on investment may be found, how much to consume
and how much to save.
Price  stability  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  strong  growth.  It  is  not  even  a
necessary condition for strong growth. It is just the best contribution which monetary policy can
make.
BIS Review   92/1997
