Mr.  Hannoun  discusses  the  operational  framework  for  EMU  and  the
challenge  of  managing  price  stability      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Banque  de
France, Mr. Hervé Hannoun,  at  the  Financial  Times  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
Conference in London on 20/11/97.
I  am  delighted  to  take  part  in  this  discussion  on  the  framework  for  the  single
monetary policy in Stage Three. I will address what I consider to be the two main categories of
issues  in  this  context:  those  related  to  monetary  policy  strategy  on  the  one  hand,  and  those
related  to  the  execution  of  monetary  policy  operations  on  the  other  hand;  in  other  words,
strategic and operational issues.
1. STRATEGIC ISSUES
What  are  the  main  strategic  issues  relating  to  the  formulation  of  the  single
monetary policy? I will consider in turn:
    the final objective,
the intermediate target,
the role of the exchange rate as an indicator, and
the starting level of interest rates in the euro area at the end of next year.
1.1. Final objective: a quantified definition of price stability
The  final  objective  of  the  single  monetary  policy  is  clearly  stated  in  the
Maastricht  Treaty:  according  to  article 105,  “the  primary  objective  of  the  ESCB  shall  be  to
maintain price stability”. Only a monetary policy geared towards the objective of price stability
can  create  the  conditions  for  durable  and  sustainable  growth.  To  reach  this  objective,  three
conditions need, in my view, to be fulfilled:
 firstly, the monetary strategy should be set in a medium-term framework. More generally,
the European policy mix should consist both of a  medium-term  stability-oriented  monetary
policy and of a medium-term fiscal policy aiming at a balanced budget (or “close to balance”
as stated  in  the  Stability  Pact).1  This  medium-term  stability-oriented  policy  mix  is  the  best
we can do to create the conditions for durable growth in the euro area. And it is now widely
agreed in the European Union that the policy mix should not give the illusion that it can fine
tune the economy;
                                                  
1  By  urging  governments  to  aim  for  a  fiscal  position  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  in  the  medium  term,  the
Stability Pact enables them to let automatic fiscal stabilizers come into play during recessions without exceeding
the 3% reference value. In short, it allows them to create a fiscal buffer during normal economic periods that can
be drawn on if an asymmetric shock occurs.
BIS Review   112/1997
- 2 -
  secondly,  the  strategy  pursued  should  provide  a  clear  anchor  to  inflation  expectations.
This  implies  the  public  announcement  of  a  quantified  definition  of  the  final  objective  of
price stability; for instance, the Banque de France aims at an inflation rate not exceeding 2%;
thirdly,  the  strategy  should  be  based  on  a forward-looking approach.  This  is  because  the
transmission  of  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the  economy  takes  place  with  relatively  long
lags. Estimates of these lags between interest rate changes and their effects on inflation vary
between one and two years. As a consequence, central banks have to look ahead before they
take  monetary  policy  decisions.  A  case  in  point  was  the  recent  decision  by  several
continental  central  banks,  including  the  Banque  de  France,  to  raise  their  main  refinancing
rates on 9th October. This move was justified by the need to pre-empt inflationary pressures
early enough, although current inflation remained  low.  In  my  view  it  is  very  important  to
make  the  public  aware  of  the  concept  of  the  “pre-emptive  strike”,  which  is  at  the  heart  of
central banking.
1.2. Intermediate target: more arguments in favour of monetary targeting, with a caveat
In order to provide an anchor to inflation expectations and to look ahead, central
banks  make  public  an  intermediate  target  which  they  commit  themselves  to  respecting.
Announcing an intermediate target also enhances the accountability of the central bank. This is
why Article 12 of the Statute of the ECB  explicitly  refers  to  decisions  relating  to  intermediate
monetary objectives  as  one  of  the  main  responsibilities  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.
Two  possible  strategies  have  been  selected  by  the  EMI  Council  as  potential  candidates  to  be
recommended to the ECB, namely monetary targeting and direct inflation targeting.2 In the case
of direct inflation targeting, the inflation forecast  made  by  the  central  bank  can  be  viewed  as
fulfilling the role of the intermediate target.3
Let me dwell a moment on the choice the ECB will have to make between direct
inflation  targeting  and  monetary  targeting,  unless  it  chooses  to  combine  elements  of  both
strategies.  Inflation  targeting  stresses  the  responsibility  of  the  ESCB  for  achieving  and
maintaining  price  stability.  However,  there  are  some  difficulties  in  the  process  of  forecasting
inflation  over  the  medium  and  longer  term.  As  Mervyn King  recently  stated,  “such  a  forecast
cannot  be  a  single  number.  It  must  be  presented  for  what  it  is,  namely  a  probability
distribution”.4  Furthermore,  inflation  targeting  could  imply  more  formal  cooperation  with  the
Government  since  the  latter  is  in  a  position  to  influence  price  developments.  Finally,  inflation
targeting has admittedly proven useful in progressing towards price stability,  as  the  experience
of the United Kingdom has shown. Nevertheless, the track record of inflation targeting is fairly
short and has mostly taken place in a context of world-wide disinflation.
Monetary targeting (in concrete terms, targeting a broad money aggregate such
as  M3)  clearly  indicates  the  responsibility  of  the  central  bank  for  developments  that  are  more
directly under its control and would therefore correspond better to the independence of the ECB.
Moreover,  it  is  based  on  observed  information,  which  makes  it  more  transparent.  Finally,
                                                  
2  See  the  EMI  report:  “The  single  monetary  policy  in  Stage Three  -  Elements  of  the  monetary  policy  of  the
ESCB”, February 1997.
3  See,  for  instance,  Lars  E.O.  Svensson,  “Inflation  forecast  targeting  :  Implementing  and  monitoring  inflation
targets”, European Economic Review 41 (1997), 1111-1146.
4  Lecture given by Mervyn King at the London School of Economics on Wednesday 29 October 1997 to mark the
tenth anniversary of the LSE Financial Markets Group.
BIS Review   112/1997
- 3 -
monetary targeting  by  the  ESCB  would  be  in  continuity  with  the  strategy  implemented  by  the
Bundesbank since 1975 and by the Banque de France since 1976. However, this strategy hinges
on  the  stability  of  money  demand.  Preliminary  research  has  shown  that  EU-wide  money
equations  often  perform  better  than  comparable  national  equations.5  Nonetheless,  this  may
provide no safe guidance for  the  starting  period  of  EMU  in  so  far  as  the  move  to  Stage Three
constitutes a change of regime which might lead to breakdowns in empirical relationships.
1.3. Indicators: an important role for the exchange rate and long term interest rate of the euro
It  is  likely  that,  while  avoiding  a  “looking-at-everything”  approach,  the  ESCB
will closely monitor, in addition to the intermediate objective, a broad set of other economic and
financial  indicators  to  help  assess  the  risks  to  future  price  stability.  In  this  set  of  indicators,
emphasis will probably have to be laid on the exchange rate and the long-term interest rate of
the euro, for at least three reasons.
Firstly, the euro exchange rate and long-term interest rate will play an important
role in shaping monetary conditions within the euro area, together  with  the  level  of  short-term
interest rates that will be steered by the ESCB. Secondly, although the degree of openness of the
euro area will be much lower than is currently the case for any EU Member State, with “foreign”
trade representing roughly 9% of GDP for the EU as a whole, the area will remain totally open
to foreign capital flows. In that regard, I would like to stress that current holdings of French and
German  securities  by  non-residents,  including  cross-holdings,  amount  to  1,200 billion  dollars.
This  highlights  the  importance  of  keeping  a  high  level  of  confidence  in  the  euro.  Thirdly,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  the  ESCB  will  inherit  credibility  from  the  participating  national  central
banks, the ECB will have no track record of its own in targeting money or inflation. It will thus
have to build up its reputation and pay due attention to those indicators that reflect most directly
the level of confidence placed by investors in the euro.
Of course,  as  underlined  above,  the  external  value  of  the  euro  will  not  have  the
status  of  an  intermediate  objective  and  the  ECB’s  strategy  will  not  be  based  on  exchange  rate
targeting.6 However, any depreciating trend of the euro would feed domestic inflation through a
rise in import prices and, by undermining investors’ confidence, would contribute to the building
of risk premia into the euro yield curve. This would have negative consequences for investment,
competitiveness,  growth  and  employment  in  the  euro  area.  So  there  cannot  be  any  “benign
neglect” with respect to the exchange rate. A stable and strong currency contributes to lowering
long-term  interest  rates,  which  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  financing  of  the  economies  in
continental Europe.
All  these  reasons  point  to  the  need  for  a  strong  and  stable  euro,  a  currency  that
will be as credible as the franc, the guilder or the Deutsche Mark. The euro must be, and will be,
rock  solid.  Therefore  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro,  even  if  not  targeted  as  such,  will
undoubtedly play an important role as an indicator in the conduct of the single monetary policy.
                                                  
5 See, for instance, “Money Demand in EU Countries: A Survey”, by F.X. Browne, G. Fagan and J. Henry, EMI
Staff Paper n° 7, March 1997.
6 This is different from the current stance in France, where the stability of the exchange rate vis-à-vis the most
credible currencies within the ERM is one of the two intermediate targets of monetary policy.
BIS Review   112/1997
- 4 -
1.4. The starting level of key interest rates in the euro area
Let  me  say  a  few  words  on  another  strategic  question:  what  will  be  the  starting
level of key interest rates in the euro area thirteen months from now?
Futures contracts on short-term interest rates reflect the market’s expectations on
this  issue.  But  of  course  don’t  expect  a  central  banker  to  answer  this  question,  one  year  in
advance. I will just mention the Banque de France view on the rationale that should be behind
the determination of the starting level of the euro area short-term rates.
As you know, we currently observe interest rate differentials between the “core”
and more “peripheral” currencies participating in the exchange rate mechanism. Although these
spreads  have  been  dramatically  reduced  in  the  past  two  years,  due  to  the  remarkable
convergence  of  inflation  rates  throughout  the  European  Union,  some  interest  rate  differentials
still exist. They can be attributed partly to differing positions in the business cycle, and partly to
differences in credibility.
Cyclical differences within the potential euro  area  should  not  be  overestimated.
There is, all in all, a relatively high degree of synchronisation in the business cycle in continental
Europe.  The  convergence  criteria  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  certainly  played  an
important role in fostering this synchronisation. Moreover, in the future, differences in cyclical
developments will gradually be reduced as policies, structures and behaviour will become more
and  more  similar.  Lastly,  some  persisting  differences  may  well  be  tolerated  as  is  currently  the
case  between  the  various  regions  of  the  same  country  or,  for  instance,  between  the  various
member states of the USA.
Credibility  differences  between  “core”  and  “peripheral”  currencies  result  from
the different lengths of the track records in terms of stability-oriented policies. It is not the same
to  have  reached  an  inflation  goal  of  less  than  2%  for  one  year  as  for  ten  years.  One  of  the
benefits  that  the  “peripheral  countries”  could  reap  from  participating  in  the  first  wave  of
monetary  union  is  to  achieve  the  level  of  interest  rate  of  the  most  credible  currencies  without
having yet built up a very long track record.
I would like to underline that in Europe, we are not converging towards a kind of
average  of  the  market  interest  rates  of  the  potential  euro  area.  One  has  to  understand  that  the
philosophy of EMU is to organize the convergence of the European countries towards the  best
possible level of monetary credibility and therefore towards the benchmarks in terms of interest
rates.  As  Mr.  Trichet  recently  stated,  “convergence  is  a  benchmarking  concept”,  not  an
averaging process. Convergence does not mean that the “core” currencies’ interest rates should
go  up  towards  irrelevant  “average  levels”,  but  that  the  interest  rates  of  more  “peripheral”
countries should progressively converge towards the benchmark level.
This  benchmark  level  is  currently  given  by  the  intervention  rates  of  the
Bundesbank and of the Banque de France, both at 3.3%. But of course the benchmark level one
year from now could be different from 3.3%.
2. OPERATIONAL ISSUES
How will the ESCB operate? As you know, central banks implement their policies
through  the  creation  and  destruction  of  central  bank  reserves,  of  which  they  are  monopoly
BIS Review   112/1997
- 5 -
suppliers.  This  is  done  in  the  framework  of  domestic  credit  operations  as  well  as  foreign
exchange  interventions.  Credit  operations  are  conducted  at  maturities  that  extend  overnight  or
beyond, to implement monetary policy, or on an intraday basis, to provide liquidity to payment
systems. Therefore, I will consider in turn monetary policy operations, intraday credit operations
and foreign exchange operations. I will focus on the following issues:
As regards monetary  policy  operations,  how  will  a  single  money  market  rate  be
attained and what will be the degree of interest rate volatility that the ESCB will be willing  to
accept?  As  regards  intraday  operations,  how  to  cope  with  the  risk  of  spillover  from  intraday
credit into overnight credit? As regards domestic credit operations as well as  foreign  exchange
operations, how will the principle of operational decentralisation be applied within the ESCB?
2.1. Monetary policy operations: a short-term money market rate as operational target
To  implement  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  ESCB  will  pursue  an  operational
target that will normally  be  a  short-term  money-market  interest  rate.  Two  issues  deserve  close
attention in that regard: the singleness of the money market on the one hand, and the volatility of
the interest rate that will be targeted on the other hand.
2.1.1. Single money market rate
The single monetary policy will be characterised by the singleness of interest rate
levels in the interbank market: from the 1st January 1999 on, a single money-market interest rate
will apply throughout  the  euro  area  for  a  given  maturity.  The  issue  is,  thus,  how  to  attain  this
single  interest  rate  level.  Two  requirements  will  have  to  be  met  for  that  purpose.  The  first
requirement  is  that,  in  the  context  of  a  single  monetary  policy  that  will  be  implemented  in  a
decentralised  manner,  there  should  be  a  very  high  degree  of  harmonisation  of  instruments  and
procedures.  The  EMI  and  central  banks  are  working  relentlessly  to  this  aim.  The  second
requirement lies in the integration of interbank markets and payment systems.
As far as interbank markets are concerned, two factors should play a key role:
  the  first  factor  relates  to  the  various  rules  market  operators  have  to  abide  by.  These  rules
apply to counterparts, market makers, brokers, rating agencies and market enterprises such as
clearing houses. They take the form of codes of conduct, regulations, master agreements and
market  standards.  An  appropriate  degree  of  harmonisation  of  these  market  rules  should  be
reached under the aegis of central banks and prudential authorities;
the  second  factor,  the  use  of  a  single  range  of  reference  interest  rates  would  guarantee  the
transparency of the euro money market. In this respect, short-term maturities are of special
interest  to  central  banks.  This  justifies  that  they  intervene  to  some  extent  in  the  process  of
elaborating these indicators. As a matter of fact, the EMI has recently agreed that the ESCB
should sponsor the computation of an overnight reference rate for the euro area.
As  regards  payment  systems,  the  TARGET  system  will  also  contribute  to  the
rapid emergence of a unified money market throughout the euro area. TARGET will connect the
domestic  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  systems  operated  by  the  national  central  banks.  It
will enable participants to make totally safe cross-border settlements in euro, in real time and at
a  low  cost,  thereby  facilitating  interest  rate  arbitrage.  All  large-value  payments  related  to
BIS Review   112/1997
- 6 -
monetary policy operations will have to process through TARGET. A common closing time for
domestic  RTGS  and  the  harmonisation  of  conditions  under  which  intraday  liquidity  will  be
provided  by  national  central  banks  within  the  euro  area  should  also  help  prevent  any  risk  of
segmentation of the single money market.
2.1.2. Interest rate volatility
The  EMI  has  described  in  various  publications  the  set  of  monetary  policy
instruments  that  will  be  made  available  to  the  ESCB.7  This  set  will  comprise  open  market
operations,  standing  facilities  and  minimum  reserves.  It  should  fulfil  two  basic  functions:
firstly,  to  enable  the  ESCB  to  control  efficiently  its  operational  target;  secondly,  to  signal  the
ESCB monetary policy stance. It should also be consistent with the requirement laid down in the
Maastricht Treaty that the ESCB should act in accordance with the principle of an open market
economy with free competition, favouring the efficient allocation of resources.
In  practice,  the  concrete  design  and  use  of  monetary  policy  instruments  will
depend crucially on the degree of volatility of the short-term rate chosen as the operational
target that the ESCB will be willing to accept. This volatility will in turn depend on several
factors:
   the  width  of  the  corridor  defined  by  the  two  standing  facilities  available  to  absorb  or
provide liquidity (the deposit facility for the  floor  and  the  marginal  lending  facility  for  the
ceiling).  Under  normal  circumstances,  the  two  facilities  will  bound  the  overnight  interest
rate. They will operate at the  overnight  maturity  and  will  be  accessible  at  the  discretion  of
counterparties  and  for  unlimited  amounts,  provided,  in  the  case  of  the  marginal  lending
facility, counterparties can supply adequate collateral. A very narrow corridor, allowing very
little room for the functioning of the money market, would not be strictly in line with market
principles. On the other hand, a very broad corridor would not help contain excessive market
volatility.  As  a  consequence,  the  width  of  the  corridor  is  likely  to  be  set  pragmatically
(currently, it is around 2% for most central banks that operate an interest rate corridor similar
to the one planned for the ESCB);
the frequency of fine tuning operations could be a more discriminating factor for interest
rate  volatility.  Very  frequent  intervention  of  the  ESCB  in  the  money  market  would  not,  in
my view, be fully consistent with market principles. Moreover, excessive intervention might
complicate the extraction of information from movements in market interest rates, especially
at  the  maturity  at  which  the  ESCB  would  intervene.  Intensive  recourse  to  fine-tuning
operations might also deprive regular  refinancing  operations  and  standing  facilities  of  their
signalling effect and be conducive to a centralisation of monetary policy operations;
provided  they  are  set  at  a  sufficient  level,  and  include  an  averaging  provision,  reserve
requirements  constitute  an  efficient  buffer  against  liquidity  shocks ;  this  would  help
stabilize short-term interest rates over the maintenance period. In  turn,  setting  a  fairly  high
level  of  minimum  reserves  might  require  remunerating  them  in  order  not  to  induce
significant delocation or disintermediation;
                                                  
7  See  the  two  EMI  reports  “The  single  monetary  policy  in  Stage Three – Specification  of  the  operational
framework”, January 1997, and “The single monetary policy in Stage Three – General documentation on  ESCB
monetary policy instruments and procedures”, September 1997.
BIS Review   112/1997
- 7 -
  enhancing the signalling effect of the main refinancing operations should also contribute
to lowering interest rate volatility. This may best be achieved through the normal conduct of
fixed-rate tenders, which send clear signals to the market, rather than variable-rate tenders.
The  latter  may  nevertheless  be  useful  in  certain  circumstances  where  the  ESCB  wishes  to
gauge market sentiment;
finally, the communication policy of the ESCB could also play a role in smoothing interest
rate volatility. The  ESCB  will  have  to  publish  weekly  a  consolidated  balance  sheet.  It  will
also  publish  the  results  of  its  tender  operations.  It  could  equally  wish  to  release  daily
aggregate data on the reserve holdings, if averaged reserve requirements are in place, and on
the  use  of  the  two  standing  facilities,  as  measured  in  both  cases  at  the  end  of  the  previous
day.
2.2. Intraday operations: the spillover from intraday credit into overnight credit as a borderline
case
To  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  TARGET  system,  the  national  central
banks  will  provide  intraday  liquidity  to  participants  in  the  real-time  gross  settlement  systems.
This will be done in the form of fully collateralised intraday credit operations, in the sense that a
credit extended during the day falls due before the end of the day. From a monetary policy point
of view, such operations create the risk of a spillover of intraday credit into overnight credit that
would  undermine  the  control  of  the  ESCB  over  the  euro  monetary  base.  In  other  words,  the
spillover of intraday credit into overnight credit in the books of the central bank can be viewed
as a borderline case between payment systems and monetary policy issues.
Within the euro area, this risk will be limited as end-of-day debit positions will be
automatically  considered  to  be  a  request  for  recourse  to  the  marginal  lending  facility,  i.e.  an
ESCB monetary policy instrument that bears a penalty interest rate.
Outside the euro area, a problem arises as the RTGS systems of non-participating
countries will be connected to TARGET, whereas no central bank currently gives non-residents
access  to  its  monetary  policy  instruments.  As  a  consequence,  different  mechanisms  are  being
prepared  in  order  to  prevent  intraday  credit,  if  granted  to  non-euro  area  NCBs,  from  spilling
over  into  overnight  credit.  These  mechanisms  include  the  limitation,  possibly  to  zero,  of  the
amount  of  intraday  liquidity  non-euro  area  NCBs  could  receive,  a  system  of  penalties  and
sanctions  applied  in  case  of  overnight  overdrafts  and  an  early  closing  time  for  participants  in
RTGS systems in non-euro area countries. The decision on which mechanisms to implement will
be taken by the ECB.
2.3. Foreign exchange operations
Foreign  exchange  operations  include  foreign  reserve  assets  management  on  the
one hand, foreign exchange intervention on the other hand.
The ESCB will hold and manage two different types of foreign reserve assets:
 those  that  will  be  transferred  from  the  national  central  banks  to  the  ECB;  according  to  the
Statute,  the  ECB  shall  be  provided  with  such  foreign  reserve  assets  up  to  an  amount
equivalent to euro 50 billion;
BIS Review   112/1997
- 8 -
 and those that  will  be  kept  by  the  national  central  banks;  the  management  of  these  foreign
assets  will  be  subject  to  guidelines  issued  by  the  ECB  to  ensure  that  the  operations  of
national central banks do not interfere with the  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  of  the
euro  area.  These  guidelines  will  include  prior  approval  by  the  ECB  for  transactions
exceeding thresholds to be specified and will also apply to member states’ transactions with
their foreign exchange working balances.
The  ESCB  will  have  the  technical  capacity  to  conduct,  if  need  be,  foreign
exchange  intervention  in  order  to  counteract  excessive  or  erratic  exchange  rate  fluctuations  of
the euro against the major non-EU currencies (e.g., the US dollar).
The  need  for  intervention  could  also  arise  either  in  the  context  of  G7  concerted
operations or within the framework of the ERM II. To this end, the ESCB will use the pool of
foreign assets transferred from the NCBs to the ECB.
The framework that has been designed for domestic as well as foreign exchange
operations  allows  the  ESCB  to  build  on  the  expertise  that  NCBs  have  acquired  over  the  years
and  to  make  an  extensive  use  of  existing  operational  capacities  in  NCBs  (dealing  room,  front
office,  back  office).  Common  sense  dictates  making  use  of  equipment,  human  resources  and
expertise currently available at NCBs.
2.4. A decentralised execution of operations
A key feature of the single monetary policy is indeed that it will be decided in a
centralised  manner,  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  and  executed  in  a  decentralised
manner, by the national central banks. In my description of operational issues within the context
of the single monetary policy, I have made numerous and concrete allusions to this reliance of
the  ECB  on  the  national  central  banks,  in  the  areas  of  monetary  policy,  payment  systems  and
foreign exchange operations. This organisation scheme of the ESCB is in line with the principle
of subsidiarity laid down in the Maastricht Treaty. According to this principle, the ESCB shall
have  recourse  to  the  national  central  banks  to  carry  out  its  operations,  to  the  extent  deemed
possible and appropriate. Consistently with this principle of decentralisation in the execution of
the ESCB’s operations, the counterparties (credit institutions) will keep their accounts with the
NCBs.
Operational  decentralisation  within  the  ESCB  will  be  in  the  very  interest  of  the
System. In this regard, let me quote the President of the EMI, Mr. Duisenberg: “Reliance on the
infrastructure  and  operational  experience  built  up  by  the  national  central  banks  will  prove  a
valuable  asset.  Given  that  the  ESCB  needs  to  be  cognisant  of  differences  between  financial
market participants  and  structures  in  the  EU,  operating  through  the  national  central  banks  will
ensure that it has the best possible knowledge of market conditions throughout the euro area”.8
The  credibility  of  the  ECB  as  the  decision-making  centre  will  by  no  means  be
undermined  by  this  decentralised  scheme.  It  will  not  depend  on  the  technicalities  in  the
execution  of  operations.  The  credibility  of  the  ECB  will  crucially  depend  on  its  ability  to
                                                  
8  Speech  by  the  President  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  Dr.  W.F.  Duisenberg,  at  the  conference  on
“European Monetary Union : Prospects for European Financial Markets”, held in Paris, 22 October 1997.
BIS Review   112/1997
- 9 -
adamantly  pursue  its  strategy  aiming  at  price  stability  and  on  its  fortitude  in  resisting  any
pressure to deviate from this strategy.
BIS Review   112/1997
