 Masaru Hayami: Towards a sustainable growth path 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Keizai  Club,  Tokyo, 
25 February 2003. 
 This is my last speech as Governor of the Bank of Japan. I still remember how I braced myself for the 
immediate and formidable tasks when I took office five years ago. For Japan's economy, there were 
two: "how to return to a sustainable growth path" and "how to rebuild the financial system." And for the 
Bank of Japan, there was also the important challenge of navigating our way on a new voyage in line 
with the principles of the new Bank of Japan Law which came into effect at almost the same time as I 
became Governor.  
Today, of the various tasks I have tackled during my term, I will focus on policy measures, monetary 
policy  in  particular,  to  bring  Japan's  economy  back  onto  a  sustainable  growth  path,  our  efforts  in 
promoting  the  development  of  financial  markets,  which  is  closely  related  to  monetary  policy 
management, and efforts in improving transparency under the new Bank of Japan Law.  
I.  
The current status of Japan’s economy 
The real economy 
Let me start with the current status of Japan's economy.  
Economic activity remains stagnant amid substantial uncertainty about the economic outlook.  
Exports and production, which were the engine of recovery, have slowed down since the second half 
of last year and do not show any sign of improvement.  
Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  an  export-led  profit  recovery  which  also 
reflects  corporate  restructuring  efforts.  But  a  pick-up  is  unlikely  for  the  time  being,  mainly  due  to 
substantial uncertainty regarding overseas economies. Private consumption is likely to remain weak 
for some time, due to the severe employment and income situation.  
A widely shared view of overseas economies in 2003 is that they will follow a gradual recovery path. In 
this situation, I believe it tenable not to change our current forecast that exports will further increase 
and  the  uptrend  in  production  will  resume  sooner  or  later,  which  will  in  turn  gather  momentum  for 
recovery.  
Of course, we should be vigilant against increasing uncertainties for the future.  
Geopolitical risk 
Geopolitical risks centering on Iraq is a major risk to Japan's economy. Such risk also threatens the 
world economy.  
If  an  attack  on  Iraq  takes  place,  there  seem  to  be  three  channels  through  which  its  effects  spread 
based on the experience of the Gulf War: a surge in oil prices, deterioration in sentiment on the part of 
economic  agents,  and  destabilization  of  financial  markets  such  as  the  stock  and  foreign  exchange 
markets.  
Given such channels, the impact of a war on the global economy is likely to be relatively small if the 
conflict ends quickly.  
At the time of the Gulf War, there was a surge in crude oil prices and a plunge in stock prices when 
Iraq invaded Kuwait, but, with the outbreak of the war, expectations spread for an early ending and the 
markets turned around. This time, oil prices have already been rising since the end of last year, and it 
is said that the market has already factored in, to a large extent, an early ending scenario of any war.  
Of course, we should not be too optimistic. To be sure, we are not certain to what extent stock prices 
have  indeed  factored  in  a  war  scenario.  Another  concern  is  that  the  sentiment  of  economic  agents 
BIS Review 9/2003 
 1
 might  deteriorate  depending  on  war  developments.  What  worries  us  is  that  consumer  sentiment 
indicators in the United States have been declining since the middle of last year.  
More caution would be necessary for global economic prospects if a war with Iraq becomes prolonged 
or spreads. Oil prices might either stay high or rise further to affect the world economy.  
In addition, the U.S. economy, which is expected to be the driving force behind the world economy, 
has been underpinned by a moderate recovery in the expenditure of highly indebted households while 
business spending has been slow to pick up. If consumer sentiment further deteriorated under such 
circumstances,  it  would  be  a  big  threat  to  the  scenario  which  assumes  a  moderate  recovery  of 
overseas economies led by the U.S. economy.  
Disposal of nonperforming loans and corporate finance 
Turning  to  domestic  risk  factors,  we  are  monitoring  how  financial  institutions  will  make  progress  in 
disposing  of nonperforming loans, and how  it  will influence stock prices, corporate finance, and the 
real economy. Such attention is all the more necessary as Japan's fiscal year-end approaches.  
We  have  recently  seen  some  moves  to  tackle  the  nonperforming  loan  problem.  Major  banks  have 
announced  measures  to  raise  capital,  and  narrowing  of  the  spread  between  bank  debentures  and 
government bonds suggests that the markets have to some extent welcomed such measures. At the 
same time, however, it would appear that many market participants want more time to assess whether 
such measures would support the increase of banks' earning powers.  
As was stated in "Japan's nonperforming Loan Problem" released last October by the Bank of Japan, 
while the problem was previously characterized primarily as the disposal of the fallout of the bursting 
of  asset  price  bubbles,  recently  it  has  increasingly  become  more  a  question  of  the  disposal  of 
nonperforming loans newly generated during the transformation of industry and individual businesses.  
Given such circumstances, earning powers at both firms and banks need to be increased to overcome 
the nonperforming loan problem, and persistent efforts should continue to be made. And, we should 
always be alert to the risk that, during such a process, a certain shock might prompt banks to tighten 
their lending stance and impair the fixed investment of enterprises with relatively high credit risk.  
The road to sustainable growth 
II. 
The past two economic recovery phases in Japan, between the end of 1993 and the midst of 1997 
and  between  early  1999  and  the  end  of  2000,  were  both  triggered  by  an  increase  in  exports.  But, 
unfortunately, in neither case did recovery lead to sustainable growth led by private demand. In fact, a 
slowdown in overseas economies and public concern over the domestic financial system dragged the 
economy  back  into  recession.  And  now,  economic  indicators  show  that  Japan's  economy  is  in  a 
cyclical recovery for the third time in ten years.  
What is important this time around is how to ensure that Japan's economy returns to a sustainable and 
stable recovery path.  
In order to answer this question, the following three points are important: room for monetary and fiscal 
policy, soundness of the financial system, and flexibility in the economic system.  
Last  weekend,  I  attended  the  G7  Finance  Ministers'  and  Central  Bank  Governors'  Meeting  held  in 
Paris. The statement issued specifically mentioned necessary measures for Europe, Japan, and the 
United States in order to realize higher growth. For Japan, the statement referred to the commitment 
to structural reforms including in the financial and corporate sectors. Such a recognition has much in 
common with what I am about to address in my speech.  
Room for exercising monetary policy 
To  begin  with,  let  us  consider  further  room  for  exercising  macroeconomic  policy.  On  the  monetary 
policy front, the Bank of Japan faces the zero bound on interest rates. The uncollateralized overnight 
call rate was already below 0.5 percent when I took office in March 1998. Against such a backdrop, I 
endeavored to make utmost use of marginal room for further interest rate reduction, and the call rate 
now stands at virtually zero.  
  The Bank of Japan also made efforts in seeking transmission channels other than short-term interest 
rates for conducting monetary easing. In March 2001 the Bank entered uncharted waters by adopting 
a quantitative easing framework. Commercial banks' current account deposits held at the Bank were 
adopted as a main target of money market operations, and ample liquidity has been provided.  
As  a  result  of  such  ample  liquidity  provision,  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  rapidly 
expanded to an unprecedented level (Charts 1 and 2). Recently, the total assets of the Bank reached 
128 trillion yen, a 40 percent increase from 91 trillion yen at the end of March 1998, and the ratio of 
monetary  base  to  nominal  GDP  is  now  at  an  all-time  high  except  for  during  World  War  II.  As 
represented by such figures, the Bank has indeed been pursuing quite unusual policy measures.  
The  balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  exceeded  that  of  the  ECB,  on  a  foreign  exchange  rate-
adjusted basis, and became the largest of those of the central banks in the world. Recently, the size of 
the balance sheet to nominal GDP increased from 18 percent at the end of March 1998 to 26 percent. 
Compared  with  11  percent  for  the  ECB  and  7  percent  for  the  FRB  as  of  the  similar  date,  you  can 
imagine the extraordinary size of the Bank of Japan's balance sheet.  
Such  drastic  monetary  easing  has  had  a  tremendous  impact  on  the  financial  markets.  The 
uncollateralized overnight call rate has declined to 0.001 percent and, even interest rates for longer 
terms have fallen, for example 5-year government bonds now yield below 0.3 percent.  
The  decline  in  longer  term  interest  rates  is  due  mainly  to  the  powerful  effect  on  the  market 
expectations  of  the  Bank's  commitment  to  continue  its  drastic  monetary  easing  until  the  Consumer 
Price Index registers stably zero percent or more.  
Ample liquidity provision by the Bank under the quantitative easing framework has played an important 
role  in  securing  financial  market  stability  by  promptly  responding  to  any  sudden  hike  in  liquidity 
demand and nurturing a sense of security with respect to market liquidity.  
With  the  strong  commitment  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  providing  an  extremely  easy  and  stable 
environment, markets have been able to overcome various adverse shocks, not only incidents such as 
the  September 11th terrorist attacks in the United States and  increasing bankruptcies  at  home, but 
also such times as the year-end, fiscal year-end, and semiannual business year-end.  
The  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  have  greatly  contributed  not  only  to  financial  market 
stability but also to the macroeconomic stability in that they have warded off the risk of the economy 
tumbling into a downward spiral.  
Yet,  if  you  ask  whether  such  ample  liquidity  provision  has  played  a  role  beyond  underpinning  the 
economy  through  market  stability,  and  lifting  the  economy  by  stimulating  demand,  the  answer  is, 
unfortunately, only to a limited extent so far.  
This  is  because,  there  has  been  a  lack  of  forward-looking  activity  in  the  private  sector  to  take 
advantage of extremely easy monetary conditions when the economy is facing the nonperforming loan 
problem and a high level of corporate debt, in addition to the limited room for interest rate reduction 
due to the zero interest rate bound.  
Fiscal policy 
With respect to fiscal policy, or another pillar of macroeconomic policy, there have been times when 
significant  stimulus  measures  have  been  taken  since  the  early  1990s  and  they  have  had  a  certain 
effect in underpinning the economy.  
Yet, it is also true that fiscal policy had not sufficiently realized the effects one would expect from the 
sizes  of  these  stimulus  measures.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  it  has  not  been  necessarily 
exercised effectively either in terms of quality or content. For example, while the share of investment 
expenditure within the total fiscal expenditure has been quite high among OECD countries, inefficient 
investment  has  continued.  Because  of  this,  the  spillover  effects  on  private  demand  through  the 
multiplier  effect  declined,  and  overall  productivity  growth  in  the  economy  slowed  down.  In  addition, 
when  there  was  serious  concern  over  the  prospects  of  fiscal  balance,  tax  reduction  would  not  be 
effective.  
As  a  result  of  repeated  fiscal  stimulus  measures,  gross  government  debt  increased  markedly  to 
become  the  highest  among  G7  countries. While  the  debt  situation  should  be  somewhat  discounted 
considering the level of net debt, there is a constraint on increasing the amount of fiscal expenditure 
and  the  effects  would  be  limited.  Given  that,  I  believe  it  is  now  all  the  more  necessary  to  conduct 
  appropriate fiscal policy management including tax reform and a review of government expenditure so 
as to activate private demand.  
Financial system problem and financial intermediary function 
Let me turn to the second aspect, the role of the financial system in getting Japan's economy back on 
track.  
The  nonperforming  loan  problem  of  the  financial  system  and,  on  the  other  side  of  the  coin,  the 
massive debt problem of the corporate sector, constitute a heavy burden for Japan's economy. In such 
a  situation,  the  prolonged  stagnation  of  the  economy  has  substantially  reduced  the  expected  profit 
growth  rate  of  firms,  which  have  thus  been  inclined  to  allot  improved  cash  flows,  if  any,  to  debt 
repayment rather than to capital investment.  
Such  moves  are  reflected  in  the  declining  growth  rate  of  money  supply  (M2+CDs).  Money  supply 
posted 3-4 percent growth last year, but it has now slowed down to around 2 percent. A reason for this 
slowdown is probably a reaction to the rapid fund shift that was seen two years ago, but it is a fact that 
the current situation does not warrant high growth for the time being.  
Money  supply  is  the  sum  of  deposits  and  cash  held  by  firms  and  individuals,  and  deposits,  which 
occupy  a  large  part  of  it,  drive  its  movement.  Since  deposits  are  liabilities  of  a  bank,  they  are 
determined as a result of financial intermediary activity on the part of banks and demand for funds on 
the part of firms.  
A substantial increase in  money supply growth means a large expansion  of banks' balance sheets. 
But, banks' balance sheets do not expand when it is rather difficult to expect an immediate increase in 
bank  lending  in  the  current  situation  where  firms  are  repaying  excess  debt,  which  in  itself  is  a 
necessary adjustment in the immediate future.  
In  this  context,  the  challenges  facing  the  policymakers,  including  the  bank  regulators,  are  how  to 
activate  the  financial  intermediary  function  of  banks  and,  simultaneously,  how  to  enhance  financial 
intermediation other than through banks.  
Significance of capital market development 
When there are constraints on the credit creation activity of the banking sector, which shoulders the 
nonperforming loan problem, the use of capital markets, which are alternative channels for financial 
intermediation,  might  give  an  important  clue  for  seeing  Japan's  economy  return  to  a  sustainable 
growth path.  
Banks and capital markets ought to complement each other to support a nation's financial system. I 
believe that the advantage of capital markets lies in their price discovery function in order to realize 
efficient  fund  allocation.  As  the  economic  environment  is  constantly  changing,  such  a  function  is 
particularly  important  at  the  present  juncture  where  the  swift  reallocation  of  productive  resources  is 
needed and there are increasing public expectations for nurturing and organizing capital markets in 
which various market participants become engaged in price formation.  
Japan's capital markets are quite small compared with those of the United States (Chart 3). In terms of 
corporate sector funding, while the outstanding loan amount extended by commercial banks is some 
300 trillion yen, the outstanding balance of corporate bonds and CP issued remains at some 80 trillion 
yen (Chart 4).  
Furthermore, Japan's capital markets are not matured and not functioning as efficiently as they should. 
Generally speaking, risks and returns are evaluated accurately in capital markets, and both investment 
and  fund  procurement  are  carried  out  based  on  the  calculations  derived  from  such  evaluation. 
However,  in  Japan,  only  a  limited  number  of  firms  issue  corporate  bonds  and,  consequently,  a 
sufficient variety of risk-and-return combinations are not available to investors. Investors, for their part, 
are not keen to pursue optimal risk-and-return combinations.  
Additionally,  the  role  of  public  financial  institutions  needs  to  be  clarified  to  improve  capital  markets. 
The  share  of  public  financial  institutions  in  Japan's  financial  markets  is  remarkably  high,  compared 
with  other  countries.  If  the  size  of  public  financial  institution  becomes  too  big,  the  risk-and-return 
combination in the economy may be distorted, and the market economy pricing mechanism may not 
function sufficiently.  
  I  do  not  deny  the  role  of  public  financial  institutions.  In  my  opinion,  there  is  a  definite  role  public 
financial  institutions  should  continue  to  play  in  the  future.  Yet,  over  time,  the  main  role  of  these 
institutions might come to be restricted to providing credit enhancement measures in the limited areas 
where there is a need for policy. For example, public financial institutions could play a supporting role 
in nurturing securitization markets, such as markets for CP backed by receivables of small to medium-
sized firms, by providing credit enhancement measures.  
Flexibility in the economic system 
The third aspect is flexibility in the economic system.  
Policymakers must take appropriate measures on the macroeconomic policy front. They also need to 
take  measures  which  promote  the  efficient  functioning  of  financial  intermediation.  Moreover,  the 
economy  itself  must  respond  flexibly  to  environmental  changes  and  various  shocks  to  return  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path.  In  this  regard,  it  becomes  increasingly  important  for  policymakers  to  take 
measures, which support the economy to enhance its flexibility.  
The structural problems in Japan were induced not only by the asset price bubbles but also because 
the  economic  system  could  not  respond  flexibly  to  substantial  environmental  changes  such  as 
globalization  and  computerization  that  progressed  rapidly  from  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s  to  the 
1990s, in addition to a declining birth rate and an aging society.  
Responses to environmental changes were repeatedly deferred due to effects of the generation and 
bursting of asset price bubbles, slow progress of deregulation, and a high degree of intervention of the 
public sector  in  the economy. Such deferral constitutes one of the major factors behind  the current 
severe situation Japan's economy finds itself in.  
In order to bring Japan's economy back onto a sustainable growth path, it is vital to promote structural 
reform including responses to the nonperforming loan problem. Structural reform is a measure working 
on the supply side to improve productivity, and to reallocate the factors of production - labor, land, and 
capital - most efficiently in response to the changing economic environment. At present, the efficient 
and  appropriate  reallocation  of  such  resources  is  required  on  various  levels,  such  as  among  firms, 
among industries, and among regions.  
While  the  government  does  play  an  important  role  in  promoting  structural  reform,  the  main  driving 
force must come from firms and other private economic agents. Efficient resource allocation  will be 
realized only when individual firms pursue their economic activities such as production and investment 
through market mechanisms.  
From such a viewpoint, I have been carefully watching the moves of individual firms. I am encouraged 
to observe that such moves as business reorganization have recently occurred in order to cope with 
environmental  changes  like  globalization  and  computerization.  I  hope  such  a  development  will  gain 
momentum in the months ahead.  
Inflation targeting 
III. 
There  does  not  seem  to  exist  any  magic  remedy  for  bringing  Japan's  economy  back  onto  a 
sustainable  growth  path.  After  all,  the  only  way  is  for  economic  agents  to  persistently  promote 
structural reform in their respective fields as well as for policymakers to continue making the utmost 
efforts on the macroeconomic policy front.  
We cannot deny that a feeling of no way out has been in the air, and inflation targeting arguments in 
the  context  of  monetary  policy  could  be  seen  as  a  reflection  of  such  feeling.  Having  said  that,  the 
argument which advocates inflation targeting as a remedy for Japan's problems is not appropriate for 
the following reasons.  
First,  while  Japan's  economy  is  experiencing  moderate  deflation,  it  is  erroneously  argued  that  the 
biggest problem is the price decline and the situation will improve if price declines are stopped. Such 
an argument misses the relation between the cause and effect. Looking at empirical analysis, inflation 
rates have responded to higher growth rates with a 1-2 year time-lag and the reverse relationship has 
not been observed.  
  Second, inflation targeting is essentially a framework for enhancing the transparency of the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  But  arguments  in  Japan  are  problematic  since  they  regard  inflation  targeting  as  a 
measure to overcome deflation.  
Many  seem  to  consider  that,  under  inflation  targeting,  a  central  bank  puts  too  much  priority  on 
attaining  the  target  inflation  rate  and  thus  pursues  monetary  policy  in  quite  a  mechanical  fashion. 
However,  in  countries  where  inflation  targeting  is  adopted,  great  value  is  attached  to  attaining  the 
target inflation rate over the medium-to-long term, and policy management is pursued with plenty of 
room for discretion inclusive of allowing the inflation rate to diverge from the target rate in the short 
run.  What  matters  is  a  thorough  explanation  with  respect  to  such  short-term  divergence  from  the 
target, and, in this sense, inflation targeting plays a role as an important communications tool for the 
central bank to explain the conduct of monetary policy.  
In contrast, as I previously said, current arguments in Japan regard inflation targeting as a measure to 
overcome deflation.  
In  my  opinion,  as  interest  rates  have  reached  virtually  zero  percent  amid  Japan's  economy 
shouldering various structural problems and monetary policy has been hampered to a great extent, it 
is not appropriate to adopt inflation targeting.  
To  be  sure,  changing  expectations  with  respect  to  inflation  is  one  way  to  lower  real  interest  rates. 
However, it is unreasonable to expect that public expectations can be so easily changed just by what 
the authorities say in the absence of effective policy measures and mechanisms.  
In  addition,  not  only  would  inflation  targeting  be  ineffective  but  if  its  adoption  also  provoked 
expectations among the public that the Bank of Japan might adopt extreme measures which impair the 
creditworthiness of Japan's economic policy as a whole, it would greatly destabilize the markets and 
the economy.  
The third reason  is that inflation  targeting arguments are based on the argument that  deflation is a 
monetary phenomenon. While many tend to justify this assertion by saying it is in every textbook of 
economics, I believe that, in mapping out policies in Japan, it is necessary to apply theories taking into 
account  the  fact  that  the  economy  faces  the  zero  interest  rate  bound  and  the  nonperforming  loan 
problem. Several important chapters about deflation and policy responses could be added to current 
economic textbooks when the experience of Japan and other countries are thoroughly analyzed.  
As  previously  mentioned,  the  problem  is  that  the  mechanism  to  increase  money  itself  is  greatly 
constrained. As a consequence, any argument that everything will be solved as long as money can be 
increased avoids the essential policy problem.  
For these reasons, it is not appropriate to adopt inflation targeting at this point. But this by no means 
signifies that the Bank of Japan tolerates a decline in prices.  
The Bank of Japan has been making utmost efforts to promptly bring Japan's economy back onto a 
sustainable growth path and to realize a situation which enables prices to escape from the declining 
trend. The Bank's current commitment to continue monetary easing until the Consumer Price Index 
registers stably zero percent or more indeed represents its strong resolve to overcome deflation.  
Improving financial market functioning and infrastructure 
IV. 
The central bank's contribution to the macroeconomy is not limited to monetary policy.  
The improvement of financial markets and strengthening of their functions are also important tasks for 
a  central  bank.  Indeed,  financial  markets  are  where  a  central  bank  conducts  its  monetary  policy 
operations  and  whether  they  function  properly  is  extremely  important  in  terms  of  the  smooth 
transmission of policy effects. In addition, as previously mentioned, financial markets themselves play 
an important role in effecting efficient resource allocation, which is necessary for sustainable economic 
growth. I will only briefly touch on the Bank's actions, which have a close relationship with monetary 
policy.  
Introduction of RTGS 
One is the introduction of real-time gross settlement - or RTGS - to Bank of Japan current account 
deposits in January 2001. This now means that when commercial banks request a fund transfer via 
  immediately  settle 
the  Bank  of  Japan,  we  will 
their  current  accounts  at 
transaction-by-transaction basis.  
Compared with the previous settlement method where unsettled transactions were accumulated and 
settled  in  a  lump  at  a  designated  time,  the  introduction  of  RTGS  has  contributed  substantially  to 
reducing  risk  in  that  it  reduces  the  amount  of  unsettled  funds  as  well  as  limits  any  chain  reaction 
should a specific bank become illiquid.  
Through  ample  liquidity  provision,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  making  efforts  to  ensure  market 
stability, thereby underpinning the economy. In the process, the reduction of settlement risks through 
the introduction of RTGS has without doubt also played an important role.  
it  on  a 
Public auction system for FB issuance 
For the issuance of financing bills (FBs), a public auction system was introduced. Strange as it may 
sound now, in the financial market of the second largest economy in the world, FBs had long been 
underwritten by the Bank of Japan until just a few years ago.  
From  such  viewpoints  as  creditworthiness,  liquidity,  and  the  homogeneity  of  products,  there  was 
strong demand both domestically and overseas for FBs. Thus they are worthy to be a core product in 
the short-term money market. If there were insufficient market depth, smooth interest rate and price 
formation in the short-term money market would become difficult, leading to a serious problem from 
the  viewpoint  of  securing  measures  for  the  Bank's  money  market  operations  and  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy.  
Taking account of such a situation and after thorough discussion with the parties concerned, the Bank 
of  Japan  reached  an  agreement  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in  December  1998  to  change  FB 
issuance to, in principle, a public auction system. It was implemented in April 1999.  
Subsequent  development  of  the  FB  market  has  been  greatly  contributing  to  daily  money  market 
operations and the conduct of monetary policy as expected. At present, FBs also play an important 
role in meeting  investor needs for safe and liquid assets. If the underwriting  of FBs by the  Bank of 
Japan  had  continued  and  there  was  a  shortage  of  such  products  in  the  market,  securing  financial 
market stability would have been much more difficult than now.  
Making ABS and ABCP eligible collateral 
In relation to financial market improvement, the Bank of Japan made asset-backed securities (ABS) 
and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) eligible collateral for its money market operations.  
As  collateral  for  bill  operations  and  the  Lombard-type  lending  facility,  the  Bank  selects  eligible 
collateral based mainly  on creditworthiness and marketability. Bearing  in mind  not  only  the need to 
diversify measures through which the  Bank provides liquidity  but also that such  selection of eligible 
collateral  contributes  indirectly  to  ensuring  smooth  corporate  financing,  the  Bank  has  been  making 
efforts to adopt new financial products including ABS and ABCP as eligible collateral.  
While the amount of securitized products used as collateral has not been that large so far, we believe 
there  has  been  some  positive  impact  on  the  development  of  their markets  through  the  provision  of 
liquidity by our making such products eligible as collateral.  
Improving transparency 
V. 
Before closing, let me discuss the Bank's efforts to improve monetary policy transparency.  
As I mentioned, my term as Governor started at about the same time as the new Bank of Japan Law 
came  into  effect.  The  Law  has  "independence"  and  "transparency"  as  its  keywords. While  the  new 
Bank of Japan Law stands comparison with other central bank laws, it is an important and continuous 
challenge for the Bank of Japan how to implement the rules and principles it incorporates.  
As Governor of the Bank of Japan, I have made not a few difficult decisions in navigating monetary 
policy. At the same time, I have taken pains to improve the ways of how best to discuss, determine, 
and externally communicate various policies under the framework of the new Bank of Japan Law.  
  For example, since October 2000, the Bank has been publishing the so-called "Outlook Report" semi-
annually  which  summarizes  the  standard  scenario  and  risks  pertaining  to  the  economic  outlook,  as 
well  as  giving  forecasts  of  prices  and  growth  rate  by  Policy  Board  Members  as  a  reference.  The 
scenario and a list of possible risks given in the report have been useful in terms of both enriching 
discussion  and  improving  external  accountability  by  providing  a  common  platform  for  subsequent 
discussions at Monetary Policy Meetings.  
With respect to the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank has endeavored to communicate in clear and 
simple  language  by  employing  not  only  those  channels  stipulated  by  law  such  as  the  minutes  of 
Monetary Policy Meetings, which are issued about one month after each meeting, and semi-annual 
reports submitted to the Diet, but also by answering questions in the Diet and at press conferences. 
For example, the number of times I appeared in the Diet to answer questions during my term of office 
up to January was 382.  
In improving transparency, the Bank makes efforts with respect to measures not only directly related to 
monetary policy but also those related to money market operations. The announcement of criteria for 
selecting  counterparties  in  money  market  operations  and  guidelines  on  eligible  collateral  is  one 
example, and we have been publishing the Bank's holding of government bonds by issue since June 
2001, and the content of collateral the Bank has received since June 2002.  
I am convinced that we have established a framework of monetary policy transparency at a level which 
compares favorably with that of any other central bank in the world. Our self-assessment published 
last summer, which was based on the IMF's "Code and Good Practice on Transparency in Monetary 
and Financial Policies," reaffirmed such recognition.  
Even though a transparency framework has been established, it does not automatically mean that our 
monetary policy has gained public understanding. In fact, we have also received criticism. This is not 
because there is a problem with the transparency framework, but, as I explained today, because there 
have been some factors such as monetary policy being constrained in various ways and not able to 
produce tangible results, and the Bank being obliged to conduct its policy in the uncharted territory of 
quantitative easing after facing the zero interest rate bound.  
In any event, transparency, which is one of the keywords of the new Bank of Japan Law, is not only an 
important  responsibility  for  a  central  bank  which  was  given  independence  under  the  framework  of 
democracy,  but  also has significance  in increasing the effectiveness of monetary  policy. I  believe it 
important to strive to improve transparency as we go forward.  
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
Today I have reviewed my efforts at the Bank of Japan during my term centering on monetary policy.  
During the past five years, we have been exploring what a central bank can and cannot do in order to 
get Japan's economy back on track.  
In exploring the boundary between what a central bank can and cannot do, we have tried to find the 
right  boundary  by  not  being  shackled  by  precedents,  thinking  hard,  and  acting  with  courage.  Even 
after  short-term  interest  rates  reached  virtually  zero  percent,  we  adopted  a  new  framework  of 
quantitative  easing  and  have  been providing  ample liquidity. This  was  unprecedented in the central 
bank history. In addition, we also came up with an extremely unusual measure for a central bank last 
fall,  namely  the  direct  purchase  of  the  shareholdings  of  banks  in  the  interests  of  financial  system 
stability.  
I am nevertheless aware that voices have been heard calling for further efforts on the part of the Bank 
of  Japan  for  revitalizing  Japan's  economy.  And,  let  me  assure  you  here  that  we  are  committed  to 
making the most of our wisdom and courage to further explore what we are able to do and to carry it 
out. Thank you for your attention. 
                    