 John Hurley: A central banker’s perspective of the Irish and international 
economic situation 
Speech  by  Mr  John  Hurley,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Finance  Dublin 
Conference, Dublin, 25 March 2003. 
 The international and euro area economy 
This is a time of exceptional uncertainty in the world economy. This uncertainty has been driven by a 
number  of  factors,  notably  the  deterioration  of  equity  and  financial  markets  during  2002  and  more 
recently, rising geopolitical tensions  and the ensuing  war  in Iraq. As  a result, the outlook for global 
economic growth has weakened compared with earlier expectations.  
The impact of the war in Iraq on the global economy  will depend on the extent and duration of the 
conflict.  The  range  of  scenarios  is  wide  but  one  can  characterise  two  contrasting  situations.  In  one 
case, a prolonged conflict could trigger a marked increase in oil prices and undermine consumer and 
business confidence, slowing consumption and investment spending and leading economic growth to 
weaken. Alternatively, a short and decisive conflict would eliminate the uncertainty that now exists. It is 
not possible at this point to assess conclusively the implications for the euro area. But the Governing 
Council has made it clear that developments will be monitored closely, that it stands ready to act if 
necessary and will provide liquidity should that be required.  
The  geopolitical  situation  masks  the  fact  that,  by  historical  standards,  this  has  been  an  unusual 
economic recovery. Evidence from the past half-century suggests that typically a recovery in economic 
growth is driven by rising equity prices and falling savings rates, in addition to low interest rates. Over 
the past year, however, equity markets have weakened further, while savings rates have risen. These 
developments reflect to a large degree an attempt to correct the problems of the past, in particular the 
significant economic and financial imbalances generated during the preceding boom in the US. The 
current account deficit has, moreover, continued to grow and is now being driven by the emergence of 
a sizeable fiscal deficit. Ultimately, this situation has to be corrected, and this will undoubtedly have 
implications for the rest of the world.  
With the external impetus to growth likely to be modest, euro area growth will have to be driven largely 
by  domestic  demand.  However,  the  recent  track  record  of  larger  euro  area  economies  is  not 
encouraging. Their underperformance has acted as a headwind to sustainable economic recovery and 
this  situation  may  change  only  gradually.  In  summary,  I  would  remain  concerned  that,  even  in  the 
event of an unwinding of geopolitical tensions, euro area growth is set to remain modest for some time 
yet.  
The Irish economy 
Turning now to the Irish economy, I should say that the Central Bank’s Spring Bulletin is due to be 
published  to-morrow.  It  will  be  giving  a  fairly  detailed  analysis  of  how  we  see  the  outlook  for  the 
economy. I will confine my remarks today, therefore, to a few general observations.  
Over the past year or so, the pace of economic growth has slowed greatly in the wake of a much more 
subdued  international  performance.  With  such  a  high  dependence  on  international  trade  and  a 
disproportionately  large  ICT  sector,  it  was  inevitable  that  Ireland  would  feel  the  draughts  from  the 
developments in the international economy. It was also clear that the high growth rates experienced 
since  1994  would  decline  as  the  economy  increasingly  encountered  infrastructural  pressures  and 
labour market tightness, and this inevitably happened. However, the speed of the deceleration in GNP 
growth  was  much  faster  and  its  extent  was  significantly  greater  than  expected.  Such  a  sharp 
deceleration was clearly going to be felt in people’s pockets and on the jobs front.  
Given the deterioration in the general international economy, the immediate cause of the slowdown 
here is the weakness of demand. Export growth here last  year is now estimated to have been only 
about 4 ¼ per cent, compared with average annual increases of 19 per cent, for example, in the three 
years to 2000. With such a large traded sector, this slowdown was bound to be felt right through the 
BIS Review 16/2003 
 1
 economy. This has spilled over into domestic demand with both consumption and investment demand 
showing only modest growth last year.  
With business and consumer confidence indicators quite weak, it is unlikely that there will be much of 
a recovery in domestic spending in the short-term. On top of this, we have the outbreak of hostilities in 
Iraq and the major uncertainties that this adds to the equation.  At present,  we  are factoring  in only 
modest growth this year in domestic spending. With only a small pick-up in export growth, GNP growth 
is likely to be a little less than 2 per cent. There is also some downside risk to this forecast.  
In this more difficult environment, the pursuit of prudent policies will leave us well-placed to participate 
in the upturn in the  world  economy  when  it comes. An important element in this is that, the rate of 
increase  in  public  expenditure  needs  to  continue  its  downward  path  to  a  more  sustainable  level;  it 
should  be  contained  to  the  7%  planned  for  this  year.  This  will  help  to  limit  domestic  inflationary 
pressures. It would also limit the damage to our competitiveness in the event of a sharp appreciation 
of the euro.  
As our Spring Bulletin points out tomorrow, we still have an inflation problem. The excess inflation over 
that  of  our  euro  area  partners  is  largely  a  services  sector  phenomenon.  Nominal  pay  increases  in 
recent  years  have  been  much  higher  than  the  euro  area.  While  higher  productivity  increases  here 
have partly offset these differences, these have been confined to a relatively small number of industrial 
sectors.  The  strengthening  of  the  euro  since  the  middle  of  last  year  has  exacerbated  the  effect  of 
these unfavourable trends on competitiveness. It behoves us, therefore, to focus on all policy areas in 
order to quickly reduce our inflation rate to that of the average of our euro area partners. In this regard, 
I  am  happy  to  see,  as  part  of  the  anti-inflation  initiative  in  the  proposed  national  partnership 
agreement, that representatives of employer and union organisations will work with the Government in 
an effort to target domestic sources of inflation.  
The financial sector 
I would now like to make a few comments on the financial sector. As a major player in the economy, 
the  broad  financial  sector  benefited  from  the  strong  economic  performance  before  the  recent 
slowdown. This was reflected in strong growth in balance sheet sizes and in employment. The IFSC 
continues to be a success story. The main area of growth in the IFSC has been in the funds sector; 
these now account for about half of total employment of about 11,000 with aggregate authorised funds 
amounting to over euro 300 billion.  
Irish banks have faced a marked deterioration in their business environment in the past year or so. In 
response to this, they have become more conscious of managing both their primary and secondary 
exposures  to  particular  industries  and  sectors.  In  terms  of  performance,  it  is  too  early  to  make  an 
assessment  of  the  overall  profitability  of  the  banking  sector  in  2002.  However,  some  key  results 
published to date, suggest that Irish credit institutions continue to increase profits, but at a slower rate 
than  in previous  years. Irish banks remain  well capitalised  with strong solvency  ratios and, to  date, 
there  has  been  only  a  marginal  increase  in  impaired  loans.  Provisioning  levels  have  also  been 
maintained suggesting that the banking system is well covered against loan losses. Notwithstanding 
the  currently  stable  picture,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  bad  debts  lag  the  economic  cycle. 
Therefore, loan quality will be a topical issue for some time.  
Regarding  the  broad  property  sector,  the  weaker  state  of  the  economy,  together  with  a  continuous 
expansion of housing output, would seem to point to more subdued prices ahead. In the commercial 
property  sector,  prices  have  ceased  rising.  The  growth  in  residential  mortgage  and  commercial 
property lending, nevertheless, remains strong despite the underlying weakness in the economy and 
the uncertain outlook. Our continuing concerns in this area will be dealt with in our Bulletin tomorrow.  
The new Regulatory Authority 
Before concluding, may  I refer briefly  to the  establishment of the new Regulatory  Authority.  As  you 
know, the Interim Board of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority has been in place since 
last April. I have been working very closely with Brian Patterson to ensure a smooth transition to the 
new structures. We are very confident that we will be ready for the implementation date, expected to 
be in early May.  
2 
 BIS Review 16/2003
 As provided for in the draft legislation the Financial Services Regulator will be a new authority with its 
own  independent  responsibilities  for  prudential  supervision  and  consumer  protection  across  the  full 
spectrum of the financial services industry.  
In  his  address  this  morning,  Liam  O’Reilly  described  how  the  Authority  will  discharge  its  functions. 
Liam and his staff have made excellent progress over the past several months in mapping out the way 
forward for supervision. I wish him every success in the important work ahead.  
Conclusion 
In summary, the world economy is currently labouring in the aftermath of past excesses, particularly in 
regard to asset markets, as well as present geopolitical uncertainties. These have seriously affected 
consumer  and  business  confidence  resulting  in  weak  demand  across  the  world  economy.  The 
international  climate  is  evidently  an  important  determinant  of  our  economic  performance,  and  there 
remain significant doubts over how and when the world economy will emerge from its current subdued 
state. Our own policies should be directed to limiting domestic inflationary pressures and protecting 
competitiveness. While, our inflation looks set to moderate somewhat, as the year progresses, it will 
require a concerted effort to narrow the inflation differential against the average for the euro area.  
BIS Review 16/2003 
 3
