 I J Macfarlane: What is the biggest risk to financial and economic stability? 
Introduction by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Panel Discussion 
on Financial Stability - Consilium, Coolum, 9 August 2003. 
 From  the  perspective  of  a  developed  OECD  (Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development) economy, what is the biggest risk to financial and economic stability? I suspect that at 
various stages over the past few decades, we would have come up with different answers. For much 
of the period, we would point to our apparent inability to control inflation, or to oil price shocks, or to 
governments(cid:146)  inability  to  control  their  finances.  At  other  times,  people  would  point  to  more  purely 
financial  vulnerabilities,  such  as  fragile  under-capitalised  banking  systems,  excessive  short-term 
international  capital  movements,  poor  prudential  regulation  or  inadequate  systems  of  governance. 
Others would point to the tendency of governments, central banks or the IMF (International Monetary 
Fund) to bail out failed systems and so create a moral hazard, as the main risk to future stability. You 
can make a good case for most of the candidates I have put forward. 
However, I think there is one other risk that we have become aware of that now seems to be larger 
than those I have listed above. I refer to asset price booms and busts. While the existence of these 
was  recognised,  they  were  usually  regarded  as  historical  curiosities,  or  at  least  very  low  frequency 
events (e.g. once or twice a century). The US experience in 1929 and its aftermath was the classic 
case  until  recently.  But  now  that  we  have  seen  the  world(cid:146)s  second  largest  economy  -  Japan  - 
experience one in the 1980s, and the world(cid:146)s largest one - the United States - experience one in the 
1990s,  they  seem  to  be  not  quite  so  (cid:145)low  frequency(cid:146).  We  should  also  not  forget  that  many  other 
economies, including our own, experienced an asset price boom and bust in the late 1980s and early 
1990s. Although they were not of the size of the Japanese one, or of the international significance of 
the US one, they were very costly to their respective economies. 
What  can  be  done  about  this  tendency  of  otherwise  well-managed  economies  to  exhibit  periodical 
asset price booms and busts? One response would be to give the task to monetary policy, so you will 
probably  expect  me  to  expound  on  this  subject.  Unfortunately,  I  must  disappoint  you  because  the 
subject  is  too  complex  to  cover  in  the  short  time  I  have  available,  and  besides,  we  at  the  Reserve 
Bank are hosting a conference on the subject in about a week(cid:146)s time. 
Instead, I want to follow a different path and ask are there factors that contribute to asset price booms, 
that  can  be  identified  and  eliminated  or,  at  least,  reduced?  I  have  in  mind  various  incentives, 
informational deficiencies and dubious practices which occur during the boom, but which we always 
seem  to  discover  well  after  the  bust  has  occurred.  We  realise  then  that  these  practices  allowed 
distorted views of the profitability of businesses and investment strategies to remain in place long after 
they should have been corrected. 
Each boom is different and the lessons  we learn after the bust has occurred are also different. For 
example, after the asset price booms of the late 1980s collapsed, we learned that a lot of the problem 
was  due  to  very  poor  banking  practices  -  connected  lending,  concentrated  risks,  weak  credit 
committees, forbearance whereby new loans were made to service existing debt, etc. In response to 
this, there have been enormous improvements in banks(cid:146) risk management, accounting practices and 
bank supervision. Partly as a result, or partly due to good luck, banks do not figure prominently in the 
wash-up of the latest boom - the US equity boom. Instead,  we discovered a new set of dubious or 
unsavoury practices. 
  First, were features of the system that gave a very strong incentive for the major players to 
push  up  asset  prices.  The  use  of  equity-based  remuneration,  particularly  options,  gave 
management  a  huge  incentive  to  concentrate  on  short-term  increases  in  share  prices, 
particularly as they knew that the investment community demanded it. 
Second, there were many means available to make profits look larger than they really were. 
The non-expensing of options being the most obvious, but others would include the use of 
special  purpose  vehicles  and  other  off-balance  sheet  entities,  the  non-recognition  of 
deficiencies in company-sponsored defined-benefit pension funds and the bringing forward 
of revenue recognition. In this country, we saw some very creative things being done with 
financial re-insurance, which basically had the aim of inflating recorded profits. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
  Thirdly,  there  was  a  failure  of  the  counterweights  in  the  system  to  limit  the  excesses.  In 
particular, the conflicts of interest in the auditing profession and the lack of independence or 
forcefulness  of  boards  of  directors  meant  that  excesses  were  not  detected.  Another 
counterweight is supposed to be the independence and scepticism of security analysts, but 
this was clearly compromised by the fact that the most prominent of them were working for 
investment  banks  which  were  sellers  of  securities  and  so  had  a  strong  incentive  to  look 
favourably on rising share prices. 
One could construct a long list of abuses, and a correspondingly long list of needed reforms. In various 
countries this is being done by governments and their agencies - particularly the conduct-of-business 
regulators such as ASIC (Australian Securities and Investments Commission) in Australia or the SEC 
(Securities  and  Exchange  Commission)  in  the  United  States.  Internationally,  a  lot  of  this  is  being 
co-ordinated by the Financial Stability Forum. Usually it is being pursued in the interests of investor 
protection and of ensuring the integrity of markets. But from my perspective, I see these reforms as 
serving  the  equally  important  macro-economic  purpose  of  reducing  the  tendency  for  asset  price 
booms to occur, or shortening somewhat their duration. I would not be so confident as to suggest that 
the reforms, no matter how well designed, would be able to prevent such booms, but any reduction in 
their extent will reduce the severity of the subsequent bust. 
I will conclude by making a comment about what we mean by a systemic financial crisis. Usually, it 
means a series of bank failures, bank runs, and the government or central bank having to recapitalise 
the banking system. Because of the improvement in banks(cid:146) risk management and bank supervision, 
we have not even been close to systemic financial failure in any major country on this occasion. For 
this  we  should  be  thankful.  But  what  we  are  getting  instead  are  failures  in  the  non-finance  sector, 
Enron, WorldCom, etc., and more particularly a severe tightening of belts in the corporate sector with 
consequent contractionary  effects on investment and  employment.  So the thing  that is different this 
time is that the boom has not been followed by a financial crisis, but by an economic contraction as the 
most severely stretched parts of the economy seek to restore their balance sheets. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2003
