 Kristina Persson: Monetary policy and labour supply 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting arranged by the 
municipality of Örebro, Örebro castle, 2 April 2003. 
 Thank you for the invitation to participate in this conference and for the opportunity to inform you about 
current monetary policy and the Riksbank’s objectives. I shall also take up one of the major challenges 
facing the Swedish economy over the coming years, namely labour supply and what consequences 
this may have for future growth and welfare in Sweden. 
Monetary policy focuses on inflation 
The  monetary  policy  objectives  are  clearly  stated  in  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  -  to  maintain  price 
stability and to promote a safe and efficient payment system. The Riksbank has specified the first of 
these objectives in an inflation target. The annual rate of change in consumer prices shall be 2 per 
cent, with a tolerated deviation interval of ± 1 percentage point. Monetary policy is normally directed at 
fulfilling this target one to two years ahead. To achieve our objective, we therefore make forecasts of 
price trends. If the forecasts indicate that inflation will be higher than the target level one to two years 
ahead, monetary policy must normally be tightened and the interest rate raised. The reverse applies if 
the forecast shows a lower inflation rate than the target level. 
Although monetary policy is aimed at an inflation target, developments in the real economy and the 
labour market have considerable significance for the shaping of monetary policy. For one thing, total 
demand  is  one  of  the  most  important  determining  factors  behind  the  inflation  rate,  and  for  another 
thing, taking the real economy into account can in certain cases mean that exceptions are made to the 
fundamental  monetary  policy  rule.  This  applies  in  particular  in  the  case  of  supply  shocks:1  Firstly, 
inflation can be allowed to be higher or lower one to two years ahead, when due to factors that are not 
considered to have a lasting effect on inflation, and secondly, the real economic costs of a rapid return 
to the target level are considered to be excessively  high. For example, we had particular reason to 
observe certain temporary changes at the time of our most recent repo rate decision. The Riksbank 
believes that energy prices will fall back from their present high levels without the rise spreading to 
other  prices.  Another  circumstance  that  affected  our  forecast  was  the  crisis  in  Iraq,  which  has  now 
become  a  war.  The  geopolitical  situation  overshadows  the  more  normal  inflationary  risks  that  we 
usually  observe.  I  shall  return  in  a  moment  to  the  economic  situation  and  give  you  my  views  of 
developments. 
Potential growth affects the Riksbank’s assessment 
When the Riksbank makes its assessment of inflation in the coming one to two years, we look first and 
foremost  at  resource  utilisation  in  the  economy.  The  stronger  the  increase  in  demand  in  relation  to 
potential production, the greater the risk of prices and wage rising too fast, and vice versa. We must 
therefore  analyse  the  entire  economic  outlook,  despite  the  fact  that  inflation  is  our  target  variable. 
However,  the  Riksbank  cannot  affect  potential  production,  i.e.  how  quickly  the  economy  can  grow 
without causing inflation. This is  what structural policy can  do.  Structural reforms can promote both 
investments and labour supply and thereby have a favourable effect on the long-term growth capacity 
of the economy. 
A  good  structural  policy  can,  for  instance,  contribute  to  a  larger  number  of  persons  in  various  age 
groups choosing to work instead of remaining outside of the labour force. By improving the conditions 
for  wage  formation  and  price-setting,  structural  reforms  can  also  contribute  to  increasing  the 
economy’s  capacity  to  adapt  to  different  types  of  shock.  Structural  policy  can  thus  be  seen  as  a 
complement to monetary policy. The better the long-term growth capacity of the economy, the more 
                                                      
1  See the monetary policy memorandum “The Riksbank’s inflation target - clarification and assessment”, 4 February 1999, 
Reference no. 1999-00351 DIR. 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 1
 quickly the actual growth rate can be without inflationary pressure arising, which would mean that the 
Riksbank had to react by raising the repo rate. 
Structural reforms are thus important from a welfare perspective. A high growth rate in the long term 
increases  the  possibility  to  pay  high  wages,  extend  welfare  or  invest  more  in  infrastructure  and 
education. 
The economic situation, inflation and the risk spectrum 
Our  most  recent  Inflation  Report  contains  a  sketch  of  the  Swedish  economy  that  anticipates  a 
relatively slow rate of growth for this year, but then a growth rate that is sustainable in the long term. 
GDP growth is assessed to be 1.7 per cent in 2003 and 2.4 per cent in 2004 and 2005. This means 
that the resource situation in the Swedish economy will not be strained over the coming years. Thus, 
economic activity is not expected to put any great pressure on prices and wages in future. Our picture 
of  resource  utilisation  has  been  affected  by  the  revisions  Statistics  Sweden  made  to  the  National 
Accounts recently, which indicate that productivity growth in the economy has been higher during the 
greater  part of the 1990s than  we had previously  assumed. This means in  turn that the economy’s 
long-term potential growth rate must have been slightly higher than we believed. 
Nevertheless, inflation rose tangibly during the spring and in February was 3.4 per cent according to 
the annual CPI rate. This is primarily due to higher electricity prices resulting from extremely low water 
levels in hydroelectric power station reservoirs and to higher oil prices. As I mentioned at the start, the 
energy price rise is expected to cause only temporary price rises and inflation is thus expected to fall 
back during the spring as electricity and oil prices decline. The forecasts in the March Inflation Report 
indicate an average rate of increase in CPI inflation of approximately 1.0 per cent one year ahead and 
2.0 per cent two years ahead. 
What inflationary risks can we see ahead? There is, of course, a risk that the higher energy prices will 
push up costs in other parts of the economy and thus have contagion effects. They can also affect 
inflation expectations and thereby wage trends. We have ahead of us wage bargaining rounds in the 
autumn,  which  will  affect  two  million  employees  and  will  play  an  important  role  in  future  economic 
developments.  The  main  risks  for  inflation  below  target  level  are  connected  with  the  uncertainty 
regarding international economic developments. In the euro area in particular there are problems that 
could  lead  to  weaker  economic  developments  than  we  are  currently  expecting  to  see.  The  risk 
spectrum for inflation is thus considered to be balanced on the whole. 
However, it is above all the geopolitical situation that is currently creating unease and uncertainty and 
poses  a  threat  to  the  global  economy  which  is  very  difficult  to  estimate.  The  uncertainty  currently 
prevailing  in  the  global  economy  makes  it  more  difficult  than  usual  to  interpret  various  economic 
indicators  and  to  predict  future  developments.  Personally,  I  believe  it  quite  possible  that  the 
consequences of the war will be both more prolonged and more costly for the global economy than is 
assumed in the main scenario of the Inflation Report. In addition, there was already uncertainty before 
the  war  with  regard  to  the  development  of  the  US  economy,  which  was  connected  with  the  large 
saving deficit, including a very large current account deficit. In my opinion, therefore, one cannot rule 
out  the  possibility  of  more  interest  rate  reductions  than  that  decided  at  the  last  Executive  Board 
meeting, because of the present uncertain situation for the global economy. 
Labour supply, productivity and growth in the long term 
As I mentioned  earlier, the economy’s long-term production capacity  is  very  important for monetary 
policy. It affects the rate at which the economy can grow and thereby how rapidly our prosperity can 
increase. Deciding factors for the speed at which the economy can grow are investment, labour supply 
and technology developments - e.g. machines becoming more modern or utilised more efficiently. 
Labour  supply,  in  particular,  will  affect  the  growth  of  the  economy  in  future.  If  we  use  Statistics 
Sweden’s population forecast as a starting point, we can see that the population will increase up to 
2009 by an average of 0.5 per cent a year, which is slightly lower than the increase during the 1990s. 
Thereafter the population will decline by an average of 0.3 per cent a year. This forecast is relatively 
certain, compared with forecasts of economic activity. This means that population growth in the long 
term will undermine welfare. Most other European countries share this problem - in most of the larger 
EU countries the population growth is expected to be even poorer than in Sweden. However, this is no 
consolation  -  on  the  contrary,  a  poor  development  among  our  trading  partners  could  cause  further 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2003
 difficulties for our own economy. Moreover, it is our own ambitions in welfare policy that should be put 
in relation to our growth capacity. 
The  future  age  structure  has  great  significance  for  labour  supply  and  production.  This  is  because 
labour  force  participation  varies  in  different  age  groups.  It  is  higher  in  the  age  group  25-54  years 
(87 per cent) than in younger and older age groups. The age group 16-24 years studies more today 
than at the beginning of the 1990s. Labour force participation for the oldest age group has also fallen 
over the past decade. One reason is that the retirement age from the labour market has been lowered 
and  now  the  actual  pension  age  amounts  to  62  years.  The  only  group  that  has  increased  its 
participation in the labour force in recent years is older women. This could be because those who are 
reaching a more advanced age today have a higher level of education than their predecessors. 
The  age  structure  accentuates  the  problems.  According  to  Statistics  Sweden’s  forecasts,  the  age 
group 20-64  years will need to support an increasing percentage of younger and older age groups. 
While the number of elderly people increases, the number of those between the ages of 20 and 64 will 
become an ever smaller percentage of the population. From having increased by almost one million 
during the years 1950 to 2000, they will now increase by only 70,000 over the coming fifty years. This 
will  increase the demands on the older population to participate  in the  labour force. According to a 
study by Statistics Sweden, half of old-age pensioners will need to work to support themselves in year 
2035. 
The  age  composition  will  also  make  tremendous  demands  on  welfare  services,  which  will  further 
increase pressure on the labour market and the need for an increased supply of labour. The average 
costs  for  care  and  welfare  increase  drastically  as  people  become  older  and  public  expenditure  on 
pensions, medical treatment and care of the elderly can be expected to increase from approximately 
18 per cent to approximately 23 per cent of GDP around the year 2030. 
When the long-term growth rate receives a weak contribution, or none at all, from the labour supply, 
the  dependence  on  labour  productivity  will  increase.  Compared  with  other  countries,  Sweden  has 
managed fairly well in this respect; it is productivity growth rather than labour supply that has created 
growth in recent years. Labour productivity increased particularly strongly during the 1990s, which was 
due to several factors. One important factor was that many companies with a low level of productivity 
were put out of business in connection with the recession at the beginning of the 1990s, while other 
companies chose to cut back on unqualified employees with simple work tasks. When the economy 
began to grow again, there was plenty of labour available, enabling the growth rate to be high without 
causing inflation to accelerate. Another reason was the IT boom towards the end of the 1990s, which 
also contributed to productivity growth. How high can future productivity growth be? It is difficult to say 
for certain, but we believe that it could be somewhere mid-way between the trends of the 1980s and 
1990s, i.e. around 2 per cent. 
Finally, a decisive factor for growth is the number of hours we work. As we know, the amount of sick 
leave taken has increased dramatically recently, which means that the number of working hours per 
employee has declined. There are also other reasons why fewer hours are worked on average today; 
the amount of overtime worked has declined, part-time work has increased and absence to care for 
children has also increased. Three years ago the number of hours worked increased by 2.7 per cent. 
Last year the figure decreased by 1.2 per cent. 
It is thus not sufficient that labour supply in terms of the number of persons increases. If we are to 
retain our level of growth, or even increase it, we need to take measures to ensure that the number of 
hours  we  work  on  average  increases.  Calculations  made  by  the  National  Institute  of  Economic 
Research indicate that  the growth rate could be  as  much as 0.4 percentage  points  higher per  year 
during  2003-2008  if  the  government’s  target  to  halve  sick  leave  is  achieved.  This  means  that  the 
number of hours worked will increase by 0.8 instead of 0.4 per cent a year. Public finances would then 
be improved by SEK 45 billion, which could be used for reforms - or for repayments on the central 
government debt and thus create increased scope for future borrowing. If immigrants participated in 
the working force to the same extent as Swedes, it would provide a further contribution to the number 
of hours worked of 0.1 percentage points a year. 
Monetary policy and wage formation 
The labour supply thus comprises a problem both in the long term and closer to hand. If this cannot be 
resolved  through  structural  measures  that  increase  the  labour  supply  -  e.g.  through  less  sick  leave 
being taken, increased working hours per employee or by labour force immigration - the Riksbank may 
BIS Review 17/2003 
 3
 be forced to subdue demand in the economy by raising the interest rate. The labour market’s ability to 
manage wage formation will be tested as early as next year, when actual growth is supposed to be in 
line  with  potential  growth.  Of  course,  we  do  not  believe  that  resource  utilisation  will  put  any  great 
pressure on prices and wages so soon, but as economic activity strengthens, greater demands will be 
made on social partners to show restraint. 
The  Municipal  Workers’  Union’s  demand  for  relative  wage  changes  could  also  entail  a  problem  in 
terms of potential contagion effects. Wage costs are expected to increase this year by just over 4.5 per 
cent,  which  is  higher  than  the  Swedish  economy  can manage  in  a  longer  perspective.  If  the  social 
partners do not succeed in accommodating the Municipal Workers’ Union’s wage demands, there is a 
risk of increased inflation. 
Another  challenge  for  wage  formation  is  the  government’s  employment  target,  which  entails  80  per 
cent  of  the  working  population  having  a  job.  Achieving  this  requires  reforms  to  increase  the  labour 
supply. Moderate wage demands could hasten the adaptation to the higher rate of employment. 
The explanation for this is that in a small, open economy like Sweden, the profit share of the value 
added is determined by international conditions and the prevailing production technology. In the short 
term,  the  labour  market  situation  and  negotiating  strength  can  affect  the  relative  profit  shares  and 
wage shares in the economy, but in the long term a high rate of wage increase will only lead to lower 
employment  and  production  without  affecting  real  wages  and  profit  shares.  More  moderate  wage 
demands, on the other hand, together with measures to stimulate the labour supply, will lead to higher 
employment without a long-term decline in real wages.2 
Conclusions 
Finally, as I mentioned at the beginning, monetary policy cannot directly affect production’s potential, 
long-term  growth  rate.  The  task  of  monetary  policy  is  to  stabilise  the  economy  by  changing  the 
instrumental rate if inflation deviates from the 2 per cent target one to two years ahead. In this sense, 
our task is very clearly defined. However, monetary policy can indirectly lay the foundation for a good 
development in growth in the slightly longer term, by providing an efficient payment and price-setting 
system. 
It  is  therefore  within  other  policy  areas  that  the  solutions  to  the  most  important  problems  and 
challenges I have highlighted today must be sought. These solutions will not only make it easier for the 
Riksbank  to  safeguard  price  stability,  they  are  also  a  necessary  condition  for  good  economic 
development in the future. This probably concerns many different types of input from many different 
forces  in  society.  The  government  and  the  Riksdag,  municipalities  and  county  councils,  public 
authorities,  the  social  partners,  trade  and  industry  and  individuals.  Social  ingenuity  and  a  close 
cooperation between different parties and interests will probably be necessary for success here. 
                                                      
2  See Wage Formation - Economic Conditions in Sweden 2002, National Institute of Economic Research. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2003
