 Ewart Williams: Globalization and the international financial institutions - 
issues and challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Ewart Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  to  the  John 
Clifford Sealy Memorial Lecture, 30 April 2003. 
 It is an honor to be invited to participate in the Clifford Sealy Memorial Lecture Series. I read a booklet 
of the Eight Memorial Lectures issued by the Foundation, and I got the impression that most of the 
lecturers  knew  Clifford  Sealy  well  and  they  dealt  with  themes  of  Caribbean  life  and  development, 
which were part of Clifford Sealy’s intellectual interests. 
Unfortunately, I did not know Clifford Sealy, although when I was briefly at the Central Bank in 1988/89 
as Advisor to William Demas, I  would often  hear him make mention of their friendship,  of Clifford’s 
intellect, his literary interests and his popular bookshop. 
I must also apologize for going further afield than Clifford Sealy may have liked and talking not about 
Caribbean issues but about changes taking place in the international economy. My excuse is that we 
really have become a global village. 
What I would like to do in my presentation tonight is to take a look at some of the reforms that have 
been taking place in the international financial system over the past few years. 
The  reforms  have  been  prompted  by  the  rapid  pace  of  globalization,  which  have  spawned  several 
financial crises. The cries of developing countries, citing a widening gap between rich and poor and 
increasing marginalisation, have added to pressures to reform. 
Not  unexpectedly,  the  dissatisfaction  has  been  focused  primarily  on  those  institutions:  the  IMF,  the 
World Bank and the WTO - which are considered to be at the core of the system. Forgive me if most of 
my references are to the IMF since it’s the one that I know most intimately and basically there is not 
too much of a cultural difference between it and its sister organizations. 
Let  me  first  address  the  issue  of  the  origins  of  the  reform  initiative.  I  think  one  can  say  that  the 
multilateral agencies first got serious about reform around 1994/1995, when the global economy was 
blind-sided by the Mexican crisis. 
Here was a country that was doing very well, had just signed on to NAFTA a trading bloc with the US 
and Canada: was the darling of the financial markets, receiving sizable short term capital inflows: had 
followed almost all the policy prescriptions of the multilateral agencies: and literally found itself in crisis 
because investors suddenly became uneasy about the politics, and all the capital left. The exchange 
rate went through the roof, interest rates went beyond one hundred percent, and the banking system 
collapsed leaving economic stagnation and unemployment in its wake. 
What’s worse, the Mexican crisis carried contagion effects and all Latin American economies began to 
experience capital flight and its repercussions. 
I think that this was the first clear evidence of the risks of globalization and the need to rethink the 
policies of the international financial agencies. 
Of course, after the Mexican crisis, came the Asian crisis in 1997/1998 raising new questions about 
globalization  and  IMF  policies  in  emerging  markets.  Here  was  another  case  of  widely  recognized 
success stories (the East Asian miracle, you remember) that suddenly went sour. 
In a way the Asian crisis undermined the mystique and the self-confidence of the IMF and World Bank 
as even they began to second-guess themselves. By this time, of course, developing countries, the 
NGO’s  and  all  the  critics  that  always  had  concerns  about  globalization  and  the  “Washington 
consensus” felt that they were vindicated: that globalization and the IMF policies were responsible for 
increasing poverty and the widening of the gap between rich and poor. 
The massive protest at the WTO meeting in Seattle brought it all to a head and began an intensive 
process of soul searching among all the institutions. 
Professor Joseph Stiglitz, the 2001 Nobel Prize Winner in Economics and former Chief Economist of 
the World Bank, and chief critic of the IMF is a strong supporter of “globalization”, which he sees as a 
positive  force  that  must  be  harnessed.  He,  however,  also  holds  the  view  that  the  failure  of  “the 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 1
 Washington consensus” contributed to increasing poverty in many developing countries and caused 
financial  crises  in  emerging  market  economies.  He  cites  the  IMF’s  biggest  sin  as  its  “market 
fundamentalism”. In his view, the IMF became too obsessed by a belief in the perfection of markets 
and  the  imperfection  of  governments.  He  also  believed  that  the Washington  Consensus  put  far  too 
much  emphasis  on  fighting  inflation  or  ensuring  that  Western  banks  got  repaid,  “without  showing 
feelings for the people whose lives were affected by policies”. 
Of course, the IMF has a different spin on what prompted reform. The Fund admits that it made some 
mistakes of judgement but insisted that it had nothing to do with the model, and that certainly, it was 
not  a  case  of  uncaring  bureaucrats  serving  the  narrow  interests  of  the  western  financial 
community. The Fund would concede on hindsight that: 
(i) 
it lacked sufficient appreciation of the workings of international capital markets and as such 
underestimated the speed with which funds would flow in and out of open capital markets; 
with its excessive focus on fiscal policy, it paid inadequate attention to the importance of the 
soundness of financial systems and the propensity that these had for spreading crises; 
it showed excessive zeal in encouraging countries to open up to short term foreign capital, 
without recognizing that the volatility of these flows could have devastating economic effects; 
it could have put more emphasis on poverty alleviation and the need for social safety nets in 
periods of adjustment; and 
it  needed  to  improve  its  understanding  of  institutions  and  political  dynamics  in  member 
countries. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
But so much for who was to blame and why. 
What has changed in the way in which the Bretton Woods institutions manage the global system? 
In principle, one could separate the range of reforms into two parts. You would recall my saying that 
from  the  Fund’s  view  the  main  justification  for  reform  was  the  fact  of  recurring  global  crises  -  first 
Mexico, then  East Asia, then Russia. In these circumstances, the Fund took the  view  that the first 
responsibility of reform was to put in place a system that offered hope for avoiding crises and 
of resolving them quickly when they occurred. 
The second set of reforms has had more to do with how the Fund operates - its internal procedures 
and its relationship with its members. 
Let’s first deal with the reforms to the international financial system - these come under a grandiose 
title of “The New Global Financial Infrastructure”. 
(i) 
In view of the evidence that a weak financial sector is an invitation for financial crisis, which 
invariably  has  an  extremely  high  social  cost,  the  IMF  undertook  to  make  the  focus  on 
financial sector soundness to be a main pillar of its operations both in developed and 
developing  countries.  Now  all  countries  -  and  we  here  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  are  no 
exception  -  are  investing  significant  resources  in  trying  to  identify  vulnerabilities  in  their 
financial  systems  and  taking  corrective  action.  The  plan,  here  at  home,  to  bring  the 
insurance companies and pension funds under the authority of the Central Bank must 
be seen in that light. 
A second innovation to the system is the establishment of internationally-accepted standards 
and codes as “rules of the game” for all economies. Thus, working with other international 
institutions,  we  now  have  codes  of  good  practice  for  monetary  policy,  fiscal  transparency, 
insurance  and  payments  systems,  securities,  corporate  governance,  accounting,  statistics, 
bank supervision etc. We are in the process of adopting some of these standards. 
A major innovation to the financial infrastructure which is now being put in place is a new 
mechanism for dealing with crisis countries that have acute external debt servicing problems. 
In the case of the Mexican and Asian crises, the Fund and the World Bank provided most of 
the  resources  and  in  so  doing  faced  the  criticism  that  they  bailed  out  western  banks.  To 
avoid this and to preclude prolonged negotiations with creditors the international community 
embarked on an intense search for a sovereign debt resolution model - essentially a kind of 
bankruptcy court for countries. The idea is that countries in acute financial crisis can have an 
orderly debt workout so that they quickly start a process of recovery, not over-encumbered 
by debt. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2003
 2. 
3. 
4. 
As to the other changes that have taken place. 
1. 
The Bretton Woods institutions have become a more open transparent institution and 
now  strongly  encourage  countries  to  implement  greater  transparency:  now  most  of  the 
their deliberations and internal reports about the workings of the institution are published. In 
turn, they now strongly encourage countries to publish the IMF reports about themselves. As 
for the IMF (as the criticism was less so for the World Bank). 
It has become a more humble institution because of its recent experience; less dogmatic in 
terms of its policy dialogue; less ideological in terms of its policy prescriptions and much 
more willing to listen to country suggestions. Thus, for instance, while there is a preference 
for flexible exchange rates, it is more willing to accommodate other exchange rate regimes: 
while it still sees merit in capital account liberalization, it now emphasizes to countries the 
potential  risks  of  such  a  move.  I  should  also  note  that  the  IMF  certainly  does  not  see 
exchange rate depreciation as the preferred instrument of demand adjustment as it was wont 
to do in the past. 
The IMF is now insisting on “national ownership of adjustment programmes”. This new 
focus  on  national  ownership  thus  provides  more  room for  the  discussion  of  policy  options 
and for programmes that take into consideration the social and political constraints. (A way 
of  dealing  with  the  “one  size  fits  all”  phenomena.  But  there  is  another  implication,  it  tells 
authorities that you could no longer justify unpopular measures by saying that they were IMF 
impositions. 
One major qualitative change is the recognition of the approach that “growth with macro-
economic balance may not be enough to reduce poverty” and that often what must be 
added  are  well  focused  social  interventions  aimed  at  income  re-distribution  with  this 
recognition. 
To underscore its commitment to poverty eradication, the Fund and the World Bank recently, launched 
a new initiative which involved forgiving the debt of the most heavily indebted poor countries, on 
condition that the resources released are allocated to poverty reduction programmes that have 
been  worked  out  and  agreed  between  the  Government  and  civil  society.  In  the  context  of  the 
programme, all creditors - bilateral and multilateral - are committed to provide the debt relief. It is the 
first  instance  in  which  the  Bretton Woods  have  voluntarily  provided  debt  relief  to  countries.  As  you 
know, the basic principle underlying these institutions is that even when bilateral creditors reschedule 
or forgive debt, they need to be paid, because of “the revolving character of these resources”. Some 
thirty-four countries are involved in this initiative. 
So  these  are  what  I  consider  to  be  the  major  initiatives  that  have  taken  place  in  the  international 
financial system and its centerpiece, the International Monetary Fund. 
Now you might say that these reforms don’t go far enough and perhaps they don’t. But I can tell you 
that even the Fund critics and long time Fund staff and ex-staff members, like myself, have recognized 
these as quantum leaps - in transparency, in public debate, in its openness to alternative policy 
options, in dealing with civil society. 
I must concede that implementing these reforms, in practice, is not always as simple as it appears, 
and in reality presents major challenges. 
Take the issue of dialogue with civil society. One  question that arises is  whether any multilateral 
institution should insist that a sovereign government conducts a full dialogue with its domestic 
stakeholders before it adopts a policy to be put forward as part of a programme for support. Is 
that respecting the sovereignty of the Government? 
The issue of “national ownership of an  adjustment programme”  also  presents a challenge in its 
practical  application.  The  fact  is  that,  over  the  years  both  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  have  become 
institutions  run  by  industrial  creditors  but  where  the  majority  of  the  members  are  developing 
country borrowers. In practice, the creditor countries, would like to lend as little as possible and with 
a  hardening  of  conditionality.  The  borrowing  developing  countries,  on  the  other  hand,  see  “national 
ownership”  to  mean,  being  able  to  choose  the  pace  of  adjustment;  sometimes  postponing  difficult 
policy decisions because of their political impact; and sometimes opting for less adjustment than the 
imbalance requires. The fact is that the success of the programme invariably depends on the strength 
of policies so national ownership cannot be an excuse for weak policies. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 3
 The issue of ownership is also related to the reform of “standard setting” or best practices. I think 
there are obvious benefits to individual countries and to the global economy to have a set of standards 
or  accepted  rules  of  the  game. The  industrial  countries,  through  the  various  international  agencies, 
have taken the lead in setting these rules. Developing countries have, however, expressed concerns 
that sometimes these standards and codes are too inflexible, that they do not allow for differences in 
institutional development, legislative frameworks and different levels of development. The developing 
countries  feel  that  setting  principles  rather  than  rules  may  be  more  effective  in  ensuring 
compliance. 
Finally, the issue of greater transparency in dealings between these institutions and governments is 
not  always  as  simple  as  it  sounds.  Many  discussions  with  country  officials  are  about  confidential, 
sensitive  issues.  Should  the  Fund  insist  that  in  the  interest  of  transparency  then,  even  these 
confidential issues (for example: about exchange rates, about privatization plans) are included 
in  Fund  reports  and  published?  If  it  did,  then  governments  may  not  be  prepared  to  have  open 
candid discussions on certain issues. 
In  the  continuing  search  to  establish  an  international  financial  framework  conducive  to  helping 
developing countries eliminate poverty, the international community, in early 2002 came up with a new 
paradigm which, in principle, could signal a new partnership in international co-operation between 
the multi-lateral agencies, the industrialized and developing countries. 
Essentially, the agreement - called the Monterrey Consensus - says that if developing countries meet 
their  responsibilities  by  adhering  to  principles  of  good  governance,  building  sound  institutions  and 
pursuing  sound  policies,  the  international  community  (defined  as  the  multilateral  agencies  and  the 
industrial countries) should be prepared to provide comprehensive support. 
The agenda of comprehensive support set for the industrialized countries included the following: 
(i) 
for 
imports  of  agricultural  products  and 
Addressing  the  trade  issues  of  particular  concern  to  developing  countries  such  as: 
opening  up  of  markets 
labour-intensive 
manufacturers,  the  need  to  give  special  and  differential  treatment  to  developing  countries 
and to reduce subsidies to agriculture. This is clearly within the WTO framework and would 
determine whether the Doha round is successful. 
The agreement called for increasing the availability of IMF resources, through an increase in 
Fund quotas. And this is important for debtor developing countries since there tends to be a 
trade-off between financing and adjustment. 
The industrialized countries undertook to increase Overseas Development Aid (ODA - grant 
assistance) from the current level 0.2 percent of GNP to 0.7 percent of GNP. 
The agreement challenged the Bretton Woods institutions to improve corporate governance 
by  increasing  the  participation  of  developing  countries  in  their  decision-making  processes. 
Essentially,  this  would  require  a  major  re-distribution  of  shares  and  Board  representation 
both in the IMF and in the World Bank. One proposal, for instance, is that since the countries 
of the developing world are the only borrowers, they should have at least one-half of the total 
shares which would give them some influence in the formation of the conditionality policies. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The evidence suggests that the industrialized countries have not started to keep their side of 
the bargain and this is of concern. For example, since the Monterrey Conference the US increased 
various agricultural subsidies and the EU postponed reducing theirs until 2006. Moreover, few of the 
industrialized countries have begun to make good on their commitment to increase aid to developing 
countries. You may be surprised to know that the level of agricultural subsidies in the EU is six times 
greater than the level of overseas development aid. 
Nevertheless, the developing countries remain optimistic about the Monterrey Consensus which they 
still  see  as  an  excellent  vehicle  for  achieving  their  development  objectives.  They  are  calling  on  the 
international financial institutions to set up systems to try to monitor compliance. So we will see. 
Let  me  end  with  a  brief  summary  examination  of  how  the  latest  globalisation  trends  and  the 
reform initiatives have impacted on the Caribbean region. 
Guyana is one of the 34  countries benefitting from the programme of special debt relief for heavily 
indebted  countries  (HIPC).  You  would  recall  that  the  essence  of  this  initiative  was  that  once  the 
country could work out a suitable economic programme with the IMF, it would be entitled to a certain 
measure  of  external  debt  relief.  Guyana  has,  therefore,  been  getting  external  debt  relief  from  the 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2003
 multilateral and regional agencies (IMF, World Bank, CDB and IDB) as well as from bilateral creditors. 
The  bulk  of  the  bilateral  relief  (about  US$  360  million)  is  coming  from  Trinidad  &  Tobago.  Why? 
Because  Trinidad  &  Tobago  happens  to  be  Guyana’s  largest  creditor,  through  oil-facility  loans 
extended in the late 1970s and early 1980s - during the first oil boom. 
Jamaica  is  perhaps  the  country  in  the  region  that  has  been  most  negatively  affected,  by  capital 
account  liberalization  and  by  the  judgements  of  the  private  capital  markets.  Capital  outflows,  along 
with weak institutions, are cited as two important factors leading to the financial sector crisis of 1996. 
The restructuring of the financial sector is estimated to have cost the government some 40 percent of 
GDP: the recurrent interest cost of 6 percent of GDP, has seriously compromised the Government’s 
efforts at fiscal consolidation. 
The  Eastern  Caribbean  States  (the  OECS)  have  been  facing  acute  economic  difficulties  over  the 
past  few  years  and  are  confronting  a  very  challenging  economic  outlook.  In  many  respects,  their 
situation  typifies  the  kind  of  special  challenge  that  small,  developing  states  face,  given  the  current 
rules of the international financial system. 
Firstly, they are very micro states with very small quotas in the IMF and World Bank so their borrowing 
capacity from these institutions is fairly limited. 
Secondly, because of their relatively high per capita income they are not eligible for the HIPC initiative 
or for concessional World Bank loans (from the International Development Association). Moreover, the 
little ODA (development grants) that they used to receive over the years have all but dried up. 
Thirdly, as producers of either sugar or bananas, they have suffered from the secular decline in the 
prices received for these commodities. As you know, the preferential arrangements that they enjoyed 
for many years in the EU are scheduled to be unwound soon - victim of the new trade liberalization 
arrangements under the WTO. 
These states have tried to diversify into tourism over the last several  years but tourist arrivals have 
been down, what with 9/11, global slowdown, the Iraq war and now SARS. In addition, Cuba and the 
Dominican  Republic  have  been  making  sizable  inroads  into  their  tourism  market  -  impact 
globalization. 
Most of them also tried to earn foreign exchange as offshore financial centers. They have now been 
caught  by  the  “standards  and  codes”  that  have  been  set  by  multilateral  agencies,  such  as  the 
Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF)  (concerned  about  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of 
terrorism); the OECD (concerned about Harmful Tax Competition); and the Financial Stability Forum 
(concerned about transparency and information transfer etc.). Under this onslaught, the attractiveness 
of these centers has declined and their continued existence now seems in jeopardy. 
All  these,  on  top  of  their  own  home-grown  problems,  which  have  ranged  from  overly  expansionary 
fiscal policies in some cases, to excessive external borrowing in others. 
I must note that the Caribbean has raised its voice in the reform exercise, in particular, in pressing for 
special  recognition  for  the  problems  of  small  states  and  for  participation  in  the  formulation  of  the 
standards and codes for the offshore centers. 
Notwithstanding the reforms I have outlined, the old image of the IMF in the Caribbean has prompted 
several governments to avoid entering into formal financial arrangements. However, by and large, the 
Bretton Woods agencies are now well accepted in the region as partners for policy dialogue and as 
sources for capacity building. Many countries in the region now formulate home-grown programmes 
which are submitted for the approval of and monitoring by the multilateral agencies. 
There is a current proposal in the region for a Regional Financing Mechanism (a kind of regional IMF) 
to fund programmes that are monitored by a regional agency, working in collaboration with the IMF or 
World Bank. 
But, that’s a discussion for another time. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 5
