 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Current trends and prospects of the Icelandic 
economy in a global setting 
Address by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, at the “Wirtschaftstag Island”, Berlin, 30 April 2003 
 Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It has been said that Iceland is an extreme case of a small open economy. It has a population of just 
under  300,000,  a  GDP  of  around  10  billion  USD  and  a  stock  market  capitalization  that  is  roughly 
one-tenth the market value of a moderate sized U.S. company. The small size, along with fluctuations 
in fish stocks and the terms of trade, make Iceland in many ways more vulnerable to external changes 
than larger countries. But by exploiting its abundant natural resources and a highly educated labour 
force, Iceland has been able to utilise its comparative advantage in the international division of labour, 
making its GDP per capita among the very highest in the world. 
Over the past two decades, significant structural reforms have taken place in the Icelandic economy 
and financial markets.  The objective of these reforms has been to achieve a market-based framework 
open  to external  influences. This process was accelerated  by the need  to better align the Icelandic 
economy with those of its European partners when Iceland became one of the founding members of 
the European Economic Area (EEA) in 1994 and thereby integrated into the internal market of the EU. 
As  a  member  of  the  European  Economic  Area  Iceland  is  obliged  to  transpose  into  national  law  all 
existing and future EU legislation in the field of financial services. This has implied important changes 
in  the  financial  system  in  Iceland.  The  EEA  negotiations  themselves  intensified  a  trend  towards 
liberalisation that started with the deregulation of interest rates in the mid 1980s and culminated in the 
liberalisation of the bulk of cross-border capital flows by 1995. 
Important rationalisation has also taken place in the Icelandic financial system. Until 1999, two of the 
main  commercial  banks  were  fully  government  owned  and  so  were  a  host  of  so-called  investment 
credit funds. The funds were unified in a single privatised institution which subsequently merged with 
Íslandsbanki in 2000 to become the then largest commercial bank. The withdrawal of the government 
from ownership of financial institutions was finalised in March 2003 when the government sold its last 
shares in the commercial banks. Already by mid April a decision had been taken to merge one of the 
two former government owned banks, Búnaðarbanki, with Kaupþing Bank ltd. The new bank will be 
the  largest  commercial  bank  in  Iceland  and  one  of  the  10  largest  in  the  Nordic  countries.  The 
privatisation of the credit institutions has thus already created ample opportunities for rationalisation 
and will continue to do so in the period ahead. The reform of the financial legislation and its framework 
in line with that in other European states has facilitated the export of financial services by Icelandic 
financial  institutions  and  the  establishment  of  operations  abroad.  You  will  hear  more  about  this 
process from the next speaker, Director Sigurdur Einarsson. 
Foreign  direct  investment  regulations  are  now  liberal  with  the  most  important  exception  that  such 
investment is not permitted in the fishing sector. Foreign direct investment is most noticeable in power 
intensive industries, such as the production of aluminium, which is based on Iceland’s abundance of 
renewable  energy  resources.  Recent  changes  in  corporate  taxation  in  Iceland,  lowering  them  to 
among the lowest to be found, serve to attract foreign business to Iceland and encourage Icelandic 
companies  with  international  operations  to  favour  Iceland  as  the  base  of  their  operations.  Director 
Garðar Ingvarsson will probably give you more detail on this later this afternoon. 
Direct investment by Icelandic companies abroad has risen rapidly in recent years and in a variety of 
areas,  such  as  fisheries  and  fish  processing,  pharmaceuticals,  retail  commerce  and  as  mentioned 
earlier, financial services. These developments also benefit the Icelandic economy in the long run as 
they  integrate  Iceland  further  into  the  global  economy,  allow  Iceland  to  draw  more  easily  on  the 
experience of others and bring in dividends. 
During  the  20th  century,  Iceland  tried  almost  every  type  of  exchange  rate  policy,  from  a  monetary 
union  with  Denmark  to  a  managed  float.  There  were  long  periods  when  the  Icelandic  króna  was 
pegged against or managed with respect to the currency of some trading partner countries or a basket 
of currencies, with varying degree of adjustability and commitment. During the 1980´s the exchange 
rate regime had been relatively flexible. But in the first half of the 1990´s it became much more stable, 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 1
 after the króna was fixed in December 1989. Exchange rate stability during this period was one of the 
cornerstones of the successful disinflation policy that took inflation in Iceland down from double digits 
in the late 1980s to below 2 per cent around the middle of the 1990s. 
Once the liberalisation of financial markets was more or less completed in the mid 1990´s, exchange 
rate flexibility was gradually increased. The margins around the exchange rate target were widened 
from 2¼ per cent in either direction to 6 per cent in September 1995 in order to allow for the possibility 
of greater fluctuations in the exchange rate with more volatile capital movements. In February 2000 
the target band was widened further to 9 per cent in either direction in order to create greater scope for 
monetary policy which was increasingly focusing on the maintenance of price stability. 
Recent experience around the world has demonstrated that it is difficult to maintain soft exchange rate 
pegs  with  free  capital  movements,  and  the  same  has  been  the  case  in  Iceland.  Furthermore, 
developments in the domestic economy at the end of last decade were such that the stable exchange 
rate policy was gradually undermined. During the second half of the 1990´s, the Icelandic economy 
entered a period of high economic growth. Growth was initially well balanced and led by exports and 
increased  investment  in  the  private  sector.  But  as  it  unfolded  it  became  increasingly  driven  by 
consumption  and  investment  in  the  non-traded  goods  sector,  fuelled  by  a  foreign  financed  credit 
expansion in the wake of intensified competition among lending institutions and a significant increase 
in credit availability. By 1998, signs of overheating were already increasingly visible in rising inflation 
and the ballooning current account deficit which climaxed in 2000 at 10 per cent of GDP. 
The  Central  Bank  responded  to  the  imbalances  in  the  economy  by  tightening  monetary  policy. 
Through  the  effects  of  the  tighter  monetary  policy,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  gradually 
appreciated as can be seen from Chart 1. In the spring of the year 2000 expectations in the market 
shifted for a variety of reasons; but concerns about the current account deficit and lower expectations 
of future economic growth were the most important. Subsequently the króna began to depreciate and 
continued to do so more or less uninterrupted, but on the whole in an orderly fashion, over a period of 
a year and a half until the end of November 2001. By that time, it had fallen from its peak by about a 
third against other currencies. 
As I mentioned before, experience has shown, that in the long run, it is very difficult to maintain soft 
exchange rate pegs with the free movement of capital across borders. Iceland shares this experience 
with  many  other  countries  during  the  post-liberalisation  face.  The  response  to  this  has  been  the 
observed tendency to adopt hard pegs in the form of monetary unions or currency boards or to go in 
the direction of floating. As so many other countries, Iceland adopted the second route. 
This  was  done  in  March  2001  by  a  joint  declaration  by  the  government  and  the  Central  Bank.  The 
principal objective as stated in the declaration, is to keep inflation as close as possible to 2½ per cent. 
Should  inflation  deviate  from  this  target  by  more  than  1½  percentage  points  in  either  direction,  the 
Bank is to provide the government with a written public account explaining what caused this deviation, 
how the Bank intends to respond and how long it expects that it will take for inflation to return to within 
the targeted inflation limits. In the  wake of this declaration, the Icelandic Parliament adopted a new 
legislation on the Central Bank, giving it one overriding goal, i.e. price stability, and full independence 
to use its instruments to achieve it. 
The new framework was immediately subjected to a baptism of fire. Overheating in the economy and 
the fall of the króna had rekindled inflation. As can be seen from Chart 2, inflation climbed rapidly from 
below 2 per cent in 1997 and 1998 to a peak of 9.4 per cent in January 2002. At the same time the 
short and medium term growth prospects of the economy deteriorated. Facing  conflicting demands, 
from the inflationary pressures stemming from a weakening currency on one hand and the outlook for 
a slowing economy on the other hand, the Central Bank opted to lower interest rates by ½ percentage 
point  when the  new monetary framework was  announced.  But that cut  was made from a very high 
level as the policy rate had peaked at 11.4 per cent. 
The Central Bank kept a tight monetary stance until the spring of 2002, when it was clear that inflation 
would decline. Within less than one year, inflation was reduced from nearly 10 per cent to the target of 
2½ per cent, and even below it for a while.  Furthermore, the current account deficit disappeared in a 
matter of two years, partly due to the depreciation of the króna. This turnaround was much more rapid 
than might have been expected and is almost unparalleled among the developed countries. 
The  economy  is  currently  in  a  relatively  good  balance.  But  once  you  are  in  calm  waters  new 
challenges  usually  emerge.  Ahead  are  new  investments  in  the  aluminium  sector  and  related  power 
plants, that will commence in 2003 and most likely continue until 2010. In economic terms these new 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2003
 investments  will  amount  to  over  30  per  cent  of  one  year’s  GDP  and  increase  Iceland’s  annual 
production capacity of aluminium from 270 to 740 thousand tons. 
The  economy  appears  to  have  already  begun  adapting  to  the  coming  projects  as  reflected  in 
exchange rate movements. As can be seen in chart 2. the króna was quite stable from the spring of 
2002  until  late  in  the  year.  It  then  began  to  appreciate  and  continued  to  do  so  steadily  until  early 
February 2003. It seems that the recent rice of the exchange rate is primarily due to the effect of the 
proposed  construction  projects  on  expectations.  The  current  assessment  indicates  that  economic 
growth could easily end up in the range 2-2½ per cent this year and well over 3 per cent next year. 
The outlook is for inflation to remain close to the inflation target during 2003 but it could rise in 2004. 
As  these  are  the  most  extensive  construction  projects  in  Icelandic  history,  sound  economic 
management will be required to prevent overheating in the economy, inflation and instability. Although 
their scope will be considerable, the Central Bank’s analysis of the prospective development indicates 
that, given appropriate economic policy and some strengthening of the króna, significant part of which 
might  already  have  taken  place,  economic  stability  could  be  maintained  and  inflation  kept  under 
control.  While  monetary  policy  will  probably  play  the  major  role,  fiscal  policy  will  have  to  assist. 
Otherwise there is the danger that the burden of the adjustment will be born disproportionally by the 
traded goods sector that might have detrimental medium term consequences. 
While the near term outlook in the global economy is rather gloomy, the situation in Iceland is quite 
different. A prolonged growth phase  was followed by  one  year, 2002, of a minor contraction, but at 
present we foresee a new period of growth when our task will be to maintain economic balance. The 
Central Bank is determined to keep inflation under control during the coming years of extensive activity 
in the economy, thus maximising the long term benefits of the extension of the export base. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The structure and diversity of the Icelandic economy has changed radically in recent decades and the 
legal framework has been modernized. Only a few decades ago the Icelandic economy had a narrow 
production base when fishing and fish processing were by far the most important activity. Today, the 
Icelandic economy has a broad base. Fishing continues to be important, but various industries have 
also  developed,  exploiting  among  other  things  the  vast  opportunities  offered  by  the  revolution  in 
information technology. Strong companies successfully compete in the international market in various 
fields,  including  among  other  things  communications  and  financial  services.  The  liberalization  and 
opening  up  of  the  economy  demand  close  cooperation  with  other  nations.  In  that  respect  it  will  be 
important to cooperate with businesses and public authorities in Europe, not the least in Germany. I 
hope that the meeting here today makes an important contribution to that effort. 
growth, the current 
Economic growth, the
current 
Economic
account and inflation 1990--2004
2004
account and inflation 1990
12
9
6
3
0
-3
-6
-9
-12
 Economic growth (left-hand axis)
%
Inflation (right-hand axis)
Current account, % of GDP (left-hand axis)
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01  02* 03*  04*
Forecast
1. Estimate for 2001-2002. Central Bank forecast for 2003-2004.
Sources: Statistics Iceland and Central Bank of Iceland.
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
BIS Review 21/2003 
  3
 nominal effective
TheThe nominal
rate of króna  January, 2000 
rate of króna  
exchange 
effective exchange 
January, 2000 –– April, 2003
April, 2003
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
Desember 31, 1991 = 100
Inflation target adopted 
in March 2001
Fluctuation limits 
(abolished in March 2001)
Exhange rate
2000
 2001
 2002
| 2003  
Source: Central Bank of Iceland.
 4 
 BIS Review 21/2003
