 Zdeněk Tůma: Challenges of free capital movement and the role of 
international standards (focusing on money laundering prevention) 
Introductory remarks by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the IFex Training 
Course: Fraud, Terrorist Financing And Money Laundering Prevention, Prague, 15 September 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues,  
It is my great pleasure and honour to give an opening address to this high-level training course. For 
my introductory remarks today I have chosen a topic related to the questions you are going to discuss 
during your seminar. I would like to focus on the issues stemming from free international mobility of 
capital and on the international standards that have been broadened and deepened in recent years to 
address underlying challenges. I will also come to the anti-money-laundering standards that form an 
important part of the new financial architecture.  
The  last  few  decades  have  seen  substantial  growth  in  global  capital  flows.  In  the  emerging  market 
economies alone, the net inflows of foreign capital have now reached about USD 150 billion a year, 
despite a contraction following the wave of emerging market crises in 1997-1998. The financial flows 
between  the  advanced  market  economies  are  of  an  even  higher  order,  of  course.  Moreover,  the 
turnover in the international markets is substantially higher than the net flows, exceeding global real 
economic activity many times over. Another striking feature is the fact that the international flows are 
currently  dominated  by  private  capital,  which  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  what  is  has  been  two  or  three 
decades ago when official capital flows used to play a key role.  
This  trend  has  been  greatly  supported  by  the  liberalisation  of  capital  flows,  both  in  the  advanced 
countries and in the emerging markets. The belief has prevailed that in a long run, free movement of 
capital  is  welfare  enhancing,  as  it  leads  to  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital,  faster  economic 
convergence  of  less  developed  countries,  better  consumption  smoothing,  and  diversification  of 
financial portfolios.  
Even though these benefits are undisputed, free capital mobility has also created many challenges. 
On the macroeconomic level, for example, we have observed many currency crises followed by painful 
stabilisation  periods.  These  crises  have  often  been  preceded  by  periods  of  fast  capital  inflows, 
aggravating vulnerabilities in the domestic financial sectors of the emerging market economies. These 
financial weaknesses have then functioned as an important transmission channel for macroeconomic 
shocks, leading to (cid:147)twin crises(cid:148), i.e. a vicious circle of currency depreciations and failures of financial 
institutions. The Asian crises in 1997-1998 and the recent experience of Argentina are examples of 
such modern twin crises.  
Another challenge related to the massive and liberalised capital flows lies in the area of international 
fraud and money laundering. The detection of such activities is a crucial preventive policy objective. 
Money laundering enables criminal activities to grow and cause further damage, the most serious case 
being terrorist financing. It also leads to potentially high moral and reputational costs for the financial 
system  and  for  society  at  large.  Finally,  it  generates  inefficiencies  and  volatility  in  the  allocation  of 
resources, as launderers move their funds not in response to economic rationale, but in an effort to 
disguise  the  origin  of  their  money.  In  the  end,  this  runs  counter  to  the  desired  benefits  of  financial 
liberalisation.  However,  in  an  environment  where  private  capital  moves  quickly  from  one  country  to 
another without any permission being required, seeking the best short-term returns, it is naturally more 
difficult  to  detect  fraudulent  or  money-laundering  transactions.  The  environment  is  also  made  more 
challenging  by  the  growing  sophistication  of  financial  products  in  the  liberalised  and  globalised 
markets and by frequent use of off-shore centres for tax-optimisation purposes.  
The ongoing financial innovations and recent negative experience have led to a widespread conviction 
that  the  international  policy  and  financial  architecture  needs  to  be  strengthened.  Moreover,  it  has 
become widely understood that regulation must be co-ordinated internationally, as tightening it in only 
some markets and/or countries might merely shift the negative phenomena to other places,  without 
reducing their overall severity. There have been numerous suggestions pointing in this direction, the 
most  ambitious  of  which  include  proposals  to  establish  a  global  lender  of  last  resort  and/or  a 
supervisor.  So  far,  however,  the  actual  solution  has  been  the  creation  of  a  comprehensive  set  of 
international standards and recommendations by international organisations. I consider this approach 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 to  be  appropriate,  as  it  fosters  the  desired  degree  of  international  standardisation  of  the  rules,  yet 
leaves enough room to take into account the specific features of each country and its legal system.  
In the macroeconomic policy sphere, the key set of international standards for monetary, financial and 
fiscal  policies  are  embodied  in  the  Code  of  Good  Practices  on  Transparency  in  Monetary  and 
Financial Policies and the Code of Good Practices in Fiscal Transparency, approved in 1999 and 2001 
respectively. Among other things, these principles deal with the independence of central banks and 
financial  regulators,  restrictions  on  monetary  financing  of  state  budgets,  greater  transparency  of 
policy-making, and data provision. These ideas have indeed had a marked effect in practice, and the 
first  tentative  conclusion  is  that  they  have  helped  to  mitigate  the  international  contagion  of  adverse 
shocks. In the financial regulatory and supervisory area the work to strengthen international standards 
has  also  been  very  intense.  The  key  pillar  here  is  the  Basel  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision, released in 1997. The ongoing work on the Basel Capital Accord, known as Basel II, is a 
well-known initiative for the future. Transposing all these standards into national legal and regulatory 
systems has become a key part of the newly founded FSAP, a joint programme of the IMF and the 
World Bank.  
In the  anti-money-laundering (AML)  area, too, the response to the recent challenges  has taken the 
form of more rigorous international standards. The key standards here are the 40 recommendations of 
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), first issued in 1990 and revised twice in 1996 and also this 
year.  After  the  events  in  September  2001,  eight  further  recommendations  were  added,  focusing  on 
combating  terrorism  financing.  These  recommendations  have  been  accepted  by  the  international 
financial organisations as a basis for anti-money-laundering criteria in the financial sector. The Basel 
Committee  published  a  document  entitled  (cid:147)Customer  Due  Diligence  for  Banks(cid:148)  in  October  2001 
specifying  details  of  the  (cid:147)know-your-customer(cid:148)  principle  for  banks.  The  IMF  has  added  the 
recommendations  to  its  surveillance  work  within  the  FSAP  missions  and  Offshore  Financial  Centre 
assessments, having developed a methodology for assessing the general principles in practice. These 
AML standards are thus on a par with all the other international codes and best practices and form an 
integral  part  of  the  strengthened  global  financial  architecture.  I  should  also  note  that  an  increased 
awareness of the crucial role played by the AML regulations in today(cid:146)s world is also apparent among 
private financial institutions themselves. This has been demonstrated, for example, by their adoption of 
the (cid:147)Wolfsberg principles(cid:148) and the involvement of the banking associations in many countries in AML 
issues.  
The  AML  regulations  require  financial  institutions  to  identify  their  customers  in  certain  transactions, 
either in suspicious ones, or in standard ones such as opening bank accounts, safety boxes, etc. The 
growing use of modern communications channels, e.g. telephone banking and e-finance, has made it 
necessary  to  ensure  that  the  identification  requirement  is  observed  equally  strictly  for  these 
transactions, too. Financial institutions are also obliged to store data that can be used for detecting 
money  laundering  and  as  evidence  during  subsequent  legal  action.  Special  units  have  been 
established  either  at  existing  regulatory  authorities  or  as  new  public  institutions,  to  which  financial 
intermediaries  are  obliged  to  report  either  suspicious  transactions  or  transactions  exceeding  some 
pre-specified volume. Private financial institutions must create their own internal procedures, including 
a clear division of responsibilities and staff training, in order to implement all the aforementioned duties 
in practice. As in the other fields of financial regulation, supervisors are paying increasing attention to 
examining whether such comprehensive procedures and their control mechanisms have been put in 
place, are functioning appropriately and are responding to new money-laundering practices and other 
innovations.  
The AML system in the Czech Republic started to be built in 1996 with the adoption of the Act (No 
61/1996 Coll.) Concerning Certain Measures against the Legalisation of Proceeds of Criminal Activity 
(the (cid:147)AML Act(cid:148)), which was subsequently amended in 2000. A draft amendment to the AML Act, which 
implements the EU(cid:146)s 2nd AML Directive and also the relevant Special Recommendations of the FATF 
on combating financing of terrorism, has recently been prepared. The Government has approved this 
amendment and it is currently being debated in the Czech Parliament.  
A special Financial Analytical Unit (FAU) has been established as an autonomous part of the Czech 
Finance  Ministry,  to  which  all  suspicious  transactions  must  be  reported.  The  regulators  of  the 
individual  financial  market  segments,  most  importantly  the  Czech  National  Bank  and  the  Czech 
Securities Commission, examine the regulated financial institutions(cid:146) compliance with the AML Act by 
means of both off-site and on-site supervision. The home regulators co-operate with the FAU, and also 
among themselves based on a mutual co-operation agreement. Co-operation with foreign supervisors 
is being established by signing Memoranda of Understanding. In this respect, the AML activities are 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
 thus  following  the  same  trend  as  the  financial  supervision  in  general.  A  crucial  role  is,  of  course, 
played in the AML system by the law-enforcement authorities, i.e. the police, prosecutors and judges.  
In previous years, one of the most sensitive measures in the AML system was the cancellation of the 
remaining anonymous saving-book accounts, which had a tradition of more than one hundred years in 
the Czech Republic. This issue, however, has now been resolved, contributing to stricter compliance 
with international standards in the Czech Republic. I am also pleased to tell you that the most recent 
progress in this area is the approval of a regulation issued by the Czech National Bank in August 2003 
that specifies requirements for banks(cid:146) internal AML systems. It is based on the BIS(cid:146)s (cid:147)Customer Due 
Diligence for Banks(cid:148). During its lengthy preparation we held numerous consultations with the Czech 
Banking Association, individual Czech banks, the FAU, further financial regulators and other parties 
concerned, so as to transpose the international standards into the Czech practice in an optimal way.  
The CNB regulation covers all the standard elements of the AML measures I have already mentioned. 
One of its last paragraphs - but definitely not least - concerns the training of bank staff in AML issues. 
Given the emphasis on training, let me express the delight that  your training course is taking place 
here  in  Prague.  Given  what  I  have  said  about  the  necessity  to  co-ordinate  AML  activities 
internationally, I am also glad to see that those attending the course come from numerous different 
countries.  I  hope  that  you  will  learn  as  much  as  possible  here  and  that  you  will  then  have  an 
opportunity  to  use  your  new  knowledge  actively  in  anti-fraud  and  AML  activities  in  your  home 
countries. Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
