 Bank of Japan’s April report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 9 April 2003 
 The Bank’s View2 
Economic  activity  remains  flat  as  a  whole,  despite  some  signs  of  improvement,  with  greater 
uncertainty about the economic outlook partly due to Iraq-related developments. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  although  business  fixed  investment  is  starting  to  recover,  private 
consumption  continues  to  be  weak.  Moreover,  housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public 
investment is declining. While domestic demand has not shown clear signs of recovery, both exports 
and imports are increasing at a very modest pace with net exports remaining virtually level.  
Industrial  production  continues  to  be  basically  level  in  response  to  these  developments  in  final 
demand. Corporate profits continue to recover, but the improvement in business sentiment as a whole 
has come to a halt due mainly to substantial uncertainty regarding the economic outlook. As for the 
employment  situation,  new  job  offers  are  on  a  gradual  rising  trend.  In  addition,  the  number  of 
employees,  which  covers  various  types  of  employees  including  non-regular  employees  such  as 
temporary workers, appears to be declining at a slower pace. However, firms are still maintaining their 
stance  on  reducing  personnel  expenses,  and  household  income  continues  to  decrease  with  an 
ongoing  decline  in  wages.  The  employment  and  income  situation  of  households  overall  remains 
severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared view of the prospect for overseas economies in 2003 
is that, partly due to the continued firmness in Asian economies, they will follow a gradual recovery 
path.  However,  their  recovery  is  likely  to  be  anemic,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  given  the  recent 
weakness  shown  in  economic  indicators  of  the  U.S.  and  European  economies  amid  greater 
uncertainty regarding Iraq-related developments. In this situation, the increase in Japan’s exports is 
expected to remain very modest, and industrial production is likely to be more or less unchanged for 
the immediate future.  
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income 
situation.  Business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  follow  a  clear  uptrend  if  exports  and  production 
increase  clearly  again,  but  for  the  time  being,  the  increase  in  business  investment  is  expected  to 
remain very modest.  
Overall, assuming that overseas economies will recover in 2003, albeit only at a moderate pace, the 
increase in exports will accelerate and the uptrend in production will resume sooner or later, which in 
turn  will  initiate  the  momentum  for  a  recovery.  However,  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic 
demand  is  unlikely  to  gain  momentum  for  some  time,  since  production  is  expected  to  be  virtually 
unchanged  for  the  time  being  while  downward  pressures  such  as  excessive  labor  input  and  debt 
persist.  Furthermore,  the  outlook  for  overseas  economies  warrants  careful  monitoring  with  more 
uncertain factors arising such as Iraq-related developments and economic implications of the severe 
acute  respiratory  syndrome  (SARS).  On  the  domestic  side,  careful  monitoring  is  required  of 
developments  in  stock  prices  and  how  they  affect  the  financial  system,  corporate  finance,  and  the 
economy.  
On the price front, import prices are rising, reflecting developments in prices of overseas commodities 
such as crude oil. Domestic corporate goods prices have stopped declining on the whole with the rise 
in  import  prices  and  the  improved  supply-demand  balance  in  materials  industries,  despite  the 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
April 7 and 8, 2003. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on April 7 and 8, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 18/2003 
 1
 continued fall in machinery prices. Meanwhile, consumer prices and corporate  services prices have 
been declining gradually.  
Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, the outlook for import prices is unclear at 
present  because it largely  depends on developments in crude  oil prices. On the domestic side, the 
supply-demand balance in the macroeconomy, ongoing technological innovations in machinery, and 
the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  In 
contrast, upward pressure is also at work, such as the effects of high crude oil prices to date and the 
improvement in the supply-demand balance in materials industries. Of these two opposite pressures, 
the  latter  will  be  slightly  stronger  at  the  corporate  transaction  stage  for  the  immediate  future,  and 
therefore,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  are  projected  to  inch  up.  As  for  the  outlook,  consumer 
prices  are  expected  to  continue  decreasing  but  the  pace  of  year-on-year  decline  is  expected  to 
become somewhat slower, as medical costs are projected to rise from April due to public insurance 
reforms.  
As for the financial environment, the Bank of Japan provided further ample liquidity to secure financial 
market stability, following the commencement of military action against Iraq by the United States and 
other  nations  (March  20,  Japan  Standard  Time).  As  a  result,  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts at the Bank rose to 30.9 trillion  yen at the  end of March. Under these circumstances, the 
overnight call rate continues to hover  at  very close  to  zero  percent, although  it rose temporarily  on 
March 31. Longer-term interest rates such as TB and FB rates also rose temporarily toward the fiscal 
year-end, but they are becoming steady again at low levels. 
Yields on long-term government bonds declined and were temporarily moving below the 0.7 percent 
level in early April, reflecting uncertainty over the domestic economic outlook. Yield spreads between 
private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are contracting. 
In  the  stock market, market  participants  continue  to  be  nervous  largely  due  to  uncertainty  over  the 
developments in military action against Iraq. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at the 
8,000-8,500 yen level. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen appreciated in early March as the U.S. dollar weakened on 
the whole. Since mid-March, however, the yen has been volatile reflecting the developments in military 
action against Iraq. The yen is currently traded in the range of 119-121 yen to the U.S. dollar.  
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip  companies.  The 
lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms, particularly small ones, are severe. In 
the  corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing  environment  for  firms  with  high  credit  ratings  is 
accommodative, but the overall environment for firms with low credit ratings remains severe although 
there seem to be slight improvements. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because business fixed 
investment is at low levels and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid  these  developments,  private  banks’  lending  continues  to  decline  by  about  2-3  percent  on  a 
year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued is moving at around 
the previous year’s level.  
Meanwhile, according to business surveys, financial positions of firms, particularly those of small firms, 
remain severe. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base is about 10 percent. The year-on-year growth rate 
of the money stock is around 2.0 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions as a whole continue to be extremely easy. Long-term interest rates are declining slightly. 
The  money  stock  and  the  monetary  base  maintain  high  growth  rates  relative  to  that  of  economic 
activity as a whole. However, stock prices continue to be weak. In corporate finance, the fund-raising 
environment of firms with low credit risks is accommodative on the whole, but with regard to firms with 
high credit risks, the stance of investors is severe and the lending attitudes of private banks continue 
to be cautious. Developments in the financial and capital markets, the behavior of financial institutions, 
and the situation of corporate finance continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2003
