 Sakuya Fujiwara: Inside a monetary policy meeting  
Speech  by  Mr  Sakuya  Fujiwara,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  Toyo  University, 
13 March 2003.  
 Introduction 
I would like to express my gratitude for the opportunity to give this speech.  
As you may be aware, my five-year tenure as Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan is drawing to an 
end. It is also almost five years since the revised Bank of Japan Law came into effect. The Law was 
revised comprehensively in 1997, for the first time in its roughly 50 years of existence, in line with a 
growing trend among central banks around the world to strengthen their autonomy and ensure greater 
transparency in the implementation of their policies. Previously a journalist, I was appointed as Deputy 
Governor at a time when the Bank of Japan was to start afresh with the new Bank of Japan Law. It 
was a truly dramatic change for me. The journalist who had been watching the Bank's policy from the 
outside,  suddenly  found  himself  working  inside!  Through  this,  so  to  speak,  switching  sides,  I 
discovered many things that were new to me about the Bank. Also, explaining monetary policy, there 
were many occasions when I was able to gain new insights into the function of the media.  
The Bank, as the central bank of Japan, conducts various kinds of business - the best known of which 
I believe is the issuance of banknotes. Today, based on my five years' experience at the Bank, I would 
like  to  talk  about  the  process  by  which  monetary  policy  is  decided  in  accordance  with  the  Bank  of 
Japan  Law  of  1997.  More  specifically,  I  will  talk  about  what  happens  in  Monetary  Policy  Meetings 
(MPMs).  
What is monetary policy? 
I. 
First, I would like to briefly explain the basics of monetary policy.  
The Bank of Japan Law of 1997 mandates that the Bank's monetary policy shall be aimed, through the 
pursuit of price stability, at contributing to the sound development of the national economy, making it 
clear that the objective of monetary policy is to achieve price stability. For the satisfactory development 
of  an  economy,  it  is  necessary  that  resources  be  allocated  efficiently.  The  competitive  market 
mechanism is a great device to achieve this end. To enable the market mechanism to perform this 
function properly, one must have a grasp of the trend of prices of goods and services - relative prices, 
to  be  more  precise  -  or,  from  the  standpoint  of  firms,  the  trend  in  popular  demand  for  products.  A 
correct  assessment  of  such  trends  is  difficult  if  the  yardstick,  prices  of  goods  and  services,  is  not 
stable.  What  is  more,  unexpected  fluctuations  in  prices  could  cause  serious  losses  to  savers  or 
borrowers.  This  would  not  be  fair,  and  could  also  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  general  level  of 
economic activity. This is why price stability is important.  
Textbooks  on  macroeconomics  or  financial  theory  explain  how  central  banks  try  to  achieve  price 
stability. Normally, a central bank targets and controls rates in the money market, where transactions 
take  place  between  financial  institutions.  In  Japan,  the  Bank  guides  money  market  rates  through 
market  operations,  providing  or  absorbing  funds  in  the  market  by  buying  or  selling  Japanese 
government  securities  and  bills.  The  resulting  changes  in  short-term  interest  rates  gradually  affect 
interest  rates  on  long-  and  medium-term  government  bonds,  business  loans,  and  deposits.  These 
changes  eventually  affect  the  spending  of  individuals  and  firms,  leading  to  changes  in  the  supply-
demand balance in goods and services. It is through this roundabout process called the transmission 
mechanism that the Bank tries to achieve stability in prices.  
The above textbook theory does not seem to work in Japan's current situation. Due to the prolonged 
economic  slump,  money  market  rates  have  already  fallen  to  virtually  zero  percent  and  thus  the 
traditional practice of easing monetary policy by lowering money market rates is no longer effective. 
Against this background, the Bank two years ago launched a policy of quantitative easing, shifting the 
target of money market operations from the overnight call rate to the outstanding balance of current 
accounts held by financial institutions with the Bank. Financial institutions hold current accounts with 
the Bank as an instrument of payment as well as to maintain their reserve balances under the reserve 
requirement  system,  and  the  Bank  decided  to  set  an  operational  target  for  the  total  outstanding 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
 balance  of  these  accounts.  The  target  amount  of  the  current  account  balance  began  at  "around 
5 trillion yen" and has since been raised a number of times. At present, it is "around 15 to 20 trillion 
yen." The Bank is thus providing ample funds under this framework of quantitative easing. The aim of 
this policy is to maintain stability in the financial markets, foster economic recovery, and prevent price 
falls. The consumer price index (CPI) has been declining at a moderate pace of less than 1 percent 
year  on  year.  The  Bank  has  announced  its  intention  to  prevent  further  deflation  by  making  a 
commitment  to  continue  with  the  policy  framework  of  quantitative  monetary  easing  "until  the  CPI 
registers stably a zero percent or an increase year on year."  
Recently,  there  have  been  lively  discussions  on  the  question  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary  policy  I  mentioned  earlier.  I  will  leave  detailed  explanation  of  the  mechanism  for  another 
time,  focusing  today  on  explaining  the  process  of  monetary  policy  decision-making.  I  will  try  to 
describe the scene, and the atmosphere in which monetary policy decisions are formulated. I hope it 
will help to increase your interest in and understanding of monetary policy.  
Who decides monetary policy? 
II. 
Japan's monetary policy is determined by the Bank's highest decision-making body, the Policy Board. 
In  this  regard,  there  are  two  important  points  to  note.  First,  the  Bank  is  independent  from  the 
Government and solely responsible for monetary policy. And second, monetary policy is decided by 
vote by a policy board made up of nine members.  
I will expand on the first point - the Bank's autonomy in its conduct of monetary policy. Why should 
monetary  policy  be  conducted  by  an  independent  central  bank?  Because  policy  action  that  central 
banks are often pressured to take from a short-term perspective to stimulate the economy could in the 
medium to long term trigger sharp fluctuations in the economy and prices, putting at risk the sound 
development  of  the  economy.  In  the  past,  there  have  been  numerous  instances  where  increased 
currency issuance caused hyperinflation. The experience of Japan just before and after World War II is 
a  case  in  point.  These  lessons  from  history  gave  rise  to  the  belief  that  monetary  policy  should  be 
conducted by a central bank that is independent from the government, a system that had won respect 
over a period of many years in the United States and Germany. Thus, in the 1990s, many countries, 
both emerging and developed, started to revise their central banking laws to ensure and strengthen 
their central banks' autonomy. As I explained earlier, the Bank's autonomy was institutionalized in the 
Bank of Japan Law of 1997, which states that "The Bank of Japan's autonomy regarding currency and 
monetary control shall be respected." To ensure the independence of the Bank, members of the Policy 
Board cannot be dismissed for holding opinions at variance with the Government, and the Government 
cannot order the Bank to undertake any particular policy action.  
Needless  to  say,  a  central  bank  should  not  take  advantage  of  its  independent  status  and  act  in  a 
self-righteous manner. Moreover, it must strive to clarify to the public the details of and the background 
to its  decisions. This condition is called the accountability or transparency of the central bank in its 
conduct  of monetary  policy.  The  Bank  of  Japan  Law  of  1997  contains  various  provisions  to  ensure 
such transparency along with the principal policy objective, which, as mentioned, is to contribute to the 
sound development of the national economy by maintaining price stability. Furthermore, to ensure that 
monetary policy is consistent with the Government's basic economic policy framework, the Law states 
that the Bank should always maintain close contact and exchange views with the Government. As I 
will discuss later, the Law also allows representatives of the Government to attend MPMs to give their 
views.  
Now for the second point, namely the decision of monetary policy by a committee, or a policy board. At 
the opposite extreme to this system is the framework in which the final decision is entrusted to the 
central bank governor, and some central banks maintain this system. However, the majority of central 
banks currently make use of the system where a committee or members of a board decide monetary 
policy.  The  Bank's  policy  decisions  are  made  through  a  majority  vote  of  the  nine  members  of  the 
Policy  Board,  which  I  believe  is  an  excellent  method.  This  makes  it  possible  for  Policy  Board 
members, who share the common objective of contributing to the sound development of the national 
economy  through  price  stability,  to  reach  the  right  decisions  based  on  the  pool  of  knowledge  and 
learning  of  the  constituent  members.  It  makes  for  better  decisions  and  contributes  to  satisfactory 
conduct of monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 III. 
What are MPMs? 
The framework of MPMs 
A. 
The  Policy  Board,  which  is  the  Bank's  highest  decision-making  body,  discusses  a  wide  range  of 
matters related to the Bank's policy and business operations. Matters related to monetary policy - such 
as  the  official  discount  rate,  guidelines  and  tools  for  money  market  operations,  and  the  Bank's 
assessment  of  economic  and  financial  developments  -  are  discussed  in  MPMs.  By  statute,  the 
procedures for MPMs differ from those of regular Policy Board meetings.  
The most important item on the agenda at MPMs is deciding on a policy guideline for money market 
operations  for  the  intermeeting  period  ahead.  For  example,  the  current  guideline  for  money  market 
operations  under  the  quantitative  easing  policy  framework  is  as  follows:  "The  Bank  of  Japan  will 
conduct money market operations, aiming at the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the 
Bank at around 15 to 20 trillion yen." The Policy Board also determines at MPMs the financial assets 
the  Bank  should  purchase  or  accept  as  eligible  collateral.  For  example,  it  decided  to  accept  as 
collateral asset-backed securities (ABS) and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), for which there 
is recently an expanding market.  
The  Policy  Board  is  composed  of  nine  members  -  the  Governor,  two  Deputy  Governors  including 
myself,  and  six  other  members.  At  MPMs,  the  Governor  and  the  Deputy  Governors  independently 
express their assessment of the economic and financial situation and the conduct of monetary policy. 
Article 23 of the Bank of Japan Law stipulates that the six members other than the Governor and two 
Deputy Governors be appointed from "among those with academic expertise or experience including 
experts  on  the  economy  or  finance."  These  members  are  often  mistakenly  thought  of  as  working 
part-time for the Bank, like the members of Government councils who only attend meetings. In fact, 
they  work  full-time  at  the  Bank,  and  perform  a  wide  variety  of  duties  besides  attending  MPMs,  for 
example,  devising  measures  to  maintain  an  orderly  financial  system,  administering  the  business 
operations of the Bank, and strengthening internal management.  
Decisions  made  by  the  Policy  Board  are  executed  by  the  Bank's  staff,  comprising  the  Governor, 
Deputy Governors, Executive Directors, and other staff.  
The schedule for MPMs 
B. 
MPMs are held once or twice a month, the first meeting of the month being held over two days. At this 
meeting, Policy Board members decide a guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting 
period  ahead,  and  formulate  the  Bank's  view  of  recent  economic  and  financial  developments.  The 
second meeting of the month takes one business day, and Policy Board members review the Bank's 
decision made at the first meeting.  
The schedule for MPMs is released at the end of each quarter for the six months following the month 
of the announcement.  
The Bank of Japan holds meetings on monetary policy more frequently than other major central banks. 
For  example,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  of  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  System  has  eight 
regularly  scheduled  meetings  a  year.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  meets 
once a month in principle to decide on monetary policy. The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of 
England holds its meeting once a month.  
Preparations before MPMs 
IV. 
Let me describe how the members of the Policy Board prepare for MPMs. Policy Board members are 
constantly  thinking  about  how  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  the  most  effective  way,  as  they  are 
responsible  for  deciding  matters  related  to  the  Bank's  policy  and  business  operations.  Economic 
indicators  are  updated  every  day  and  conditions  in  domestic  and  overseas  financial  markets  also 
change constantly, and such information provides the basis for monetary policy decisions. Members of 
the  Policy  Board  assess  these  data,  the  results  of  the  staff's  research  and  analysis,  and  anecdotal 
information related to firms and financial institutions collected at the Head Office and branches, as well 
as read a variety of technical and research papers, both domestic and foreign. In addition, members 
independently  gather  anecdotal  information,  and  interview  and  exchange  views  with  market 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 3
 participants and firms' top management. In this way, Policy Board members gather information related 
to the overall economy daily.  
At MPMs, Policy Board members deliberate on this information gathered through daily research and 
analysis, and reach  a consensus on the appropriate direction for policy. At the meeting, the  Bank's 
staff first present oral reports on the current economic and financial situation. These reports are based 
on the staff's written reports distributed to Policy Board members at least two business days before the 
meeting concerned. The written reports include a comprehensive analysis of the economy based on 
both macro- and microeconomic information obtained during the intermeeting period. The volume of 
written reports is usually large, and the pages including charts and tables number several hundred. 
During the two  business days  prior  to  MPMs, members read through the staff's written reports and 
formulate  their  views  on  the  economic  and  financial  situation  and  the  appropriate  direction  for 
monetary policy.  
V. 
On the day of the MPM 
Members and the staff attending the MPM 
A. 
Let me describe what happens in the first MPM of the month, which is held over two business days. 
The first day of the meeting starts at 2:00 p.m. The nine members of the Policy Board gather in the 
policy board room at the Bank's Head Office, ready to present their views on the state of the economy 
and the course of monetary policy. Pursuant to the new Bank of Japan Law, the Minister of Finance 
and the Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy may, when necessary, attend and express 
views  at  MPMs,  or  they  can  designate  a  staff member  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  or  the  Cabinet 
Office to attend the meeting.  
Three Executive Directors of the Bank in charge of departments and offices directly concerned with 
monetary  policy,  and  Directors-General  and  other  senior  officials  of  departments  and  offices 
concerned, attend MPMs to present oral reports. Others present at the MPM include the senior official 
in  charge  of  the  Bank's  external  relations  and  the  staff  of  the  MPM  secretariat,  which  arranges 
proceedings for MPMs.  
Presentation of the staff’s oral reports on economic and financial developments 
B. 
On the first day of the MPM, the staff present reports on recent economic and financial developments. 
The staff representing the departments and offices concerned report the results of the Bank's money 
market  operations  and  developments  in  the  economy  and  financial  markets  at  home  and  abroad 
during the intermeeting period. Policy Board members are also updated on new economic indicators 
as well as the most recent developments in financial markets that have become available since the 
distribution  of  the  written  reports  by  the  staff  prior  to  the  meeting.  Occasionally,  the  staff  refer  to 
economic  indicators  released  on  the  actual  day  of  the  MPM.  In  this  way,  members  absorb  all 
information available at the time of the meeting. The staff also answer questions, if any, from Policy 
Board members after each report.  
C. 
Discussions by Policy Board Members concerning economic and financial 
developments 
The second day of the MPM starts at 9:00 a.m. The meeting starts with a discussion on economic and 
financial developments. First, each Policy Board member in turn expresses his or her views on recent 
economic  and  financial  developments  and  the  prospects  for  the  future,  taking  into  account  the  oral 
reports presented by the Bank's staff on the previous day and other members' views.  
After  all  the  members  have  had  their  turn,  they  freely  exchange  views  on  recent  economic  and 
financial developments. During this time, they have further discussions and ask and answer questions 
and  make  comments.  Let  me  briefly  describe  how  members'  discussions  proceed  by  taking  the 
example  of  private  consumption.  First,  members  discuss  typical  economic  indicators  of  private 
consumption, such as sales at department stores, sales of household electrical appliances, and new 
passenger-car registrations. They also assess, for example, the outcome of winter holiday sales and 
the  effects  of  unseasonable  weather  on  the  economy,  taking  account  of  anecdotal  information 
obtained  from  corporate  interviews.  They  also  comment  on  the  outlook  for  private  consumption  in 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 relation  to  the  employment  and  income  situation,  since  the  household  income  situation  basically 
determines  the  trend  of  private  consumption.  In  addition,  they  assess  the  effects  on  private 
consumption of households' debt burden and developments in asset prices, such as land and stock 
prices. As you can see from this discussion process, the nine members of the Policy Board assess 
each type of economic data comprehensively and in depth from various perspectives, and thus a well-
thought-out assessment of the economy is formulated.  
Deliberations on the conduct of monetary policy 
D. 
Policy Board members then discuss the conduct of monetary policy for the intermeeting period ahead, 
which is the main item on the agenda at MPMs. Each Policy Board member in turn expresses his or 
her  views,  mainly  on  whether  the  Bank  should  maintain  or  change  the  guideline  for  money  market 
operations for the intermeeting period ahead, and the reasons. Members also deliberate on the Bank's 
conduct of monetary policy in the longer term, beyond the next MPM. Occasionally in the discussions, 
members express their views on financial system problems and the conduct of overall economic policy 
including fiscal policy.  
Members  then  exchange  views  freely  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  each  other's  views  and 
differences in their views. On this basis, members proceed further with the discussion. Through such 
active  discussions,  they  formulate  policy  proposals  relating  to  the  guideline  for  money  market 
operations for the intermeeting period ahead.  
Remarks by Government representatives 
E. 
Next, the Governor, who is the chairman of the Policy Board, provides an opportunity for government 
representatives to make remarks. As I mentioned earlier, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 
State  for  Economic  and  Fiscal  Policy  or  their  designated  delegates  can  attend  MPMs.  These 
representatives can express the views of the Ministry of Finance and the Cabinet Office on the state of 
the  economy,  the  Government's  conduct  of  economic  policy,  and  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law  permits  government  representatives  to  request  a 
postponement of the Policy Board members' vote on policy proposals to the next MPM. Government 
representatives may also submit specific proposals for monetary policy measures to be decided by the 
Policy Board. In any case, it is up to the Policy Board to decide whether to accept such a request to 
postpone  the  vote  on  the  Policy  Board  members'  proposal  or  to  adopt  any  proposal  submitted  by 
government representatives.  
Some may  say  that  this  system  of  allowing  government  representatives  to  express  their  views  and 
submit proposals at MPMs threatens the Bank's autonomy. Needless to say, if the Government tried to 
use this system to impair the Bank's independence in conducting monetary policy, it would be contrary 
to  the  Bank  of  Japan  Law.  However,  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy  is  increased  by  the 
framework of MPMs, in which the Government expresses its views on monetary policy at the meetings 
and the Bank decides on the conduct of monetary policy independently, and by the publication of the 
decision-making  process  in  the  minutes.  Therefore,  I  believe  that  MPMs  provide  a  very  important 
opportunity for enhancing communication between the Government and the Bank.  
Votes 
F. 
After  thorough  discussion,  government  representatives  make  remarks,  and  then  Policy  Board 
members take a vote on the proposal relating to the guideline for money market operations. Based on 
the  discussion,  the  chairman  formulates  a  proposal  reflecting  the  majority  view  of  the  Policy  Board 
members.  Sometimes  other  Policy  Board  members  who  hold  different  views  submit  a  proposal 
separately. A member of the secretariat reads out the proposals, and a vote  is taken. The meeting 
reaches  its  climax  as  Policy  Board  members  cast  their  votes,  since  a  decision  on  the  guideline  for 
money  market  operations  is  finally  made  after  an  intensive  discussion.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the 
proposal  is  decided  by  majority  vote,  and  the  Policy  Board  members  who  have  voted  against  the 
proposal can state their reasons for opposing it. In this way, the guideline for money market operations 
for the intermeeting period ahead is decided.  
BIS Review 19/2003 
 5
 Decisions on the Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments 
G. 
At  the  first  MPM  of  the  month,  Policy  Board  members  then  discuss  "The  Bank's  View"  of  recent 
economic and financial developments, which is published in the Monthly Report of Recent Economic 
and  Financial  Developments  (consisting  of  "The  Bank's  View"  and  "The  Background")  on  the  next 
business  day  after  the  meeting.  The  draft  of  "The  Bank's  View"  is  formulated  based  on  the  Policy 
Board members' discussion, and the discussion becomes extremely active especially at times when it 
is difficult to make a definite assessment of the direction of the economy. This is because members 
attach  importance  to  communicating  their  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  economy  correctly  to  the 
public.  
In addition, the minutes of the meeting held around one month earlier are approved in the MPM. The 
schedule for MPMs for the period six months ahead is approved at the last MPM of every quarter.  
Policy Board members also approve the release of public statements regarding a decision when there 
is  a  change  in  the  guideline  for  money  market  operations  and  when  a  detailed  explanation  of  the 
thinking behind a decision is deemed necessary.  
The MPM finally comes to a close. The ending of MPMs is timed so that Japanese financial markets 
can  digest  the  decisions  made  at  MPMs  within  the  day  of  the  meeting  as  much  as  possible.  At 
present, MPMs usually end at around 1:00 p.m.  
Press release 
H. 
The guideline for money market operations decided at the MPM is released immediately after it ends. 
After  the  MPM,  the  Bank's  senior  official  in  charge  of  external  relations  quickly  enters  the  Bank's 
pressroom, where correspondents are waiting. Immediately after the announcement, the media start to 
report the Bank's decision. Meanwhile, the Bank releases the guideline for money market operations 
simultaneously  in  English  and  Japanese  via  its  Internet  Web  site.  Thus,  almost  instantaneously, 
people around the globe can know the Bank's decision.  
When  there  is  a  policy  change,  the  Governor,  as  the  chairman  of  the  Policy  Board,  holds  a  press 
conference about an hour after the MPM to explain the changes carefully to the public. Even when 
there is no policy change, the Governor holds a monthly press conference two business days after the 
first MPM of the month. The Japanese and the English version of "The Bank's View" of the Monthly 
Report  of  Recent  Economic  and  Financial  Developments  and  the  Japanese  version  of  "The 
Background" are released on the next business day after the approval of "The Bank's View" at the first 
MPM of the month. The English version of "The Background" is released on the next business day 
following the release of "The Bank's View." The minutes of the MPMs are approved at the MPM held 
around one month after the meeting concerned and released after approval. Transcripts of MPMs are 
published ten years after the meetings concerned.  
I. 
Publication of the Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and Prices (The 
Outlook Report) 
Now I would like to talk about the Outlook Report, which is a report on the outlook for the economy 
and  prices  for  the  period  twelve  to  18  months  ahead.  The  Outlook  Report  is  released  after  it  is 
discussed at the second MPM in April and October. In the report, the standard scenario for Japan's 
economy and the risk factors that might cause a revision to the standard scenario are explained, and 
the Policy Board members' forecast of changes in price indexes and real GDP growth rate is included 
as a reference. At MPMs thereafter, the standard scenario and risk factors in the report are discussed 
from  the  longer-term  perspective.  In  short,  the  report  provides  a  common  basis  for  the  members' 
discussions on the state of the economy.  
Concluding remarks 
I have attended nearly 90 MPMs during my term of office as Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, 
the post I was appointed to about the same time the new Bank of Japan Law of 1997 came into effect. 
As a member of the Policy Board, I have taken part in important decision-making concerning monetary 
policy, such as changing the level of the target of the policy interest rate and implementing quantitative 
easing measures unprecedented in the history of central banks. When I look back, each MPM was 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 very intense with active discussion of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. In concluding my speech, 
I would like to make three points regarding MPMs based on my five years' experience at the Bank.  
First, I would like to emphasize the importance of the framework of MPMs in conducting appropriate 
monetary policy. As I mentioned earlier, members' discussions are based on all available data on the 
economy and financial markets reported at MPMs. These data include not only macroeconomic data 
but also anecdotal information regarding financial institutions and firms. This wide range of information 
is extremely important in monetary policy decision-making, because the Bank must adjust monetary 
policy to changes in economic activity and financial markets while at the same time forecasting the 
likely effect of policy measures in the long term.  
Second, transparency of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy has been enhanced by MPMs. I have 
attached  special  importance  to  increasing  the  transparency  of  the  Bank's  decision-making  process, 
having previously been a journalist who had watched the Bank's conduct of monetary policy closely. 
Given  the  faster  diffusion  of  information  due  to  progress  in  IT,  a  certain  degree  of  confidentiality  is 
required because there is a risk that people might be misled by rumor, which could lead to disruption 
of financial markets. However, the Bank needs to promptly release its decisions on monetary policy 
and explain explicitly to the public and financial markets the thinking behind each decision, including 
its assessment of the economic situation. This accountability in the conduct of monetary policy is an 
important responsibility of an independent central bank. I have made a special effort to increase the 
transparency of not only the details of the Bank's decision but also the thinking behind the decision. 
This  is  because,  if  the  Bank's  thinking  and  actions  are  interpreted  correctly  by  market  participants, 
medium- to long-term interest rates will start to factor in future monetary policy, and this will prevent 
sharp economic fluctuations.  
In this regard, the immediate release of decisions made at MPMs, press conferences by the Governor, 
and the publication of the Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments and the 
minutes of MPMs contribute greatly to enhancing the transparency of the Bank's conduct of monetary 
policy.  
And  third,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  there  is  a  very  active  exchange  of  views  among  Policy  Board 
members  at  MPMs.  We  often  hear  criticisms  outside  the  Bank  when  a  decision  is  reached  by 
unanimous  vote  at  MPMs  that  there  must  have  been  very  little  discussion  at  the  meeting,  or  the 
decision must have already been made prior to the MPM. As a member of the Policy Board, I strongly 
object  to  these  views.  As  I  have  repeatedly  said,  each  member  is  fully  prepared  to  give  his  or  her 
views on the economic situation and the appropriate direction of monetary policy before attending an 
MPM. In the period immediately before a meeting, I concentrate on forming the views that I plan to 
express by using all available information and holding discussions with the staff of departments and 
offices concerned. There are frequently cases where members disagree, but this is because they take 
seriously  their  responsibility  as  a  Policy  Board  member  devising  appropriate  monetary  policy. 
Members' remarks and proposals on monetary policy measures made at MPMs are released in the 
minutes and transcripts of MPMs.  Members are therefore under the pressure not only  of what they 
have said being constantly examined by market participants, but also of being judged some time in the 
future  on  whether  they  made  the  right  decision  on  monetary  policy.  The  Policy  Board  established 
under the old Bank of Japan Law of 1942 was once criticized as the "silent Board," where there was 
very little exchange of views. As you can see, this is not at all true. Since a decision is reached after 
considerable discussion, members attach significant importance to the decisions made at MPMs and 
are confident in implementing the measures decided at the meeting.  
As I said at the outset, it has been five  years since the first MPM was held under the new Bank of 
Japan Law. We were pioneers at the time, and since then we have steadily improved various aspects 
of  MPMs,  such  as  the  way  reports  are  given  by  staff  and  the  way  members'  discussions  are  held. 
There is no end to this process of improvement, because the framework of MPMs must be enhanced 
in line with economic and financial developments and the nature of issues that are discussed at them. 
I have no doubt that the framework of MPMs will continue to be improved by the new Governor and 
Deputy  Governors  along  with  the  six  other  members  of  the  Policy  Board  to  achieve  the  goal  of 
contributing to the sound development of the national economy through the pursuit of price stability.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 19/2003 
 7
