 Michael C Bonello: Securing financial stability - problems and prospects for 
new EU members1 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  Financial  Stability 
Seminar, St. Julians, 27 March 2003. 
 In  today’s  globalized  world  where  private  financial  flows,  facilitated  by  market  deregulation  and 
electronic  trading,  have  become  a  substantial  multiple  of  merchandise  trade,  safeguarding  financial 
stability represents an increasingly complex policy challenge. For the central banking community in the 
accession countries, the wider scope of liberalisation implied by the rules of the Single Market and, in 
particular, by the EU Financial  Services Action Plan, adds a further dimension to this challenge. Of 
particular  relevance  in  this  regard  are  the  liberalisation  of  capital  flows  and  the  free  movement  of 
services,  processes  which  are  already  well  underway  in  our  countries.  It  is,  therefore,  particularly 
appropriate that central bankers, regulators and others having an interest in financial stability should 
come together on the eve of EU enlargement to assess the adequacy of the institutional and policy 
frameworks within which they operate. 
Current issues in financial stability 
It is today generally accepted that a well-developed and healthy financial system is a prerequisite for 
sustained  growth,  not  least  because  of  its  intermediary  role  between  savers  and  borrowers  and  its 
ability to diversify risks. A sound financial system also contributes to exchange rate stability by way of 
its stabilising effects on external trade and financial flows and is, of course, necessary for the effective 
transmission of monetary policy. 
As the size and importance of financial systems have grown, so have the sources of potential threats 
to their stability. Apart from the magnitude of short-term private funds which move across the globe 
daily,  financial  stability  stands  to  be  undermined  by  the  emergence  of  such  factors  as  asset  price 
bubbles  and  by  the  blurring  of  the  erstwhile  distinction  between  financial  markets  and  institutions, 
developments  which  complicate  the  task  of  the  authorities  charged  with  overseeing  the  financial 
system. 
Clearly,  “financial  stability”  has  assumed  a  much  broader  meaning  than  that  implied  by  the  terms 
“financial supervision” and “banking stability”, with which it used to be associated in the past. These 
wider  ramifications  of  the  concept  are  well  captured,  I  believe,  by  the  definition  proposed  by  Mr 
Malcolm  Knight,  the  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  who  is  soon  to  take  over  as 
General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements. He defines a stable financial system as 
one  in  which  all  economic  agents  -  households,  business  firms,  financial  services  firms  and 
government - can confidently hold and transfer financial assets without experiencing serious risks of 
disturbances that undermine financial values or repayment prospects.2 
The notion which this definition conveys very clearly is that risks to stability need not originate within 
the financial system itself. In particular,  while a sound clearing  and payment system and regulatory 
framework remain vital prerequisites, a healthy macroeconomic environment characterised by stable 
prices, interest rates and exchange rates is equally necessary for financial stability. These variables 
also affect the exposures of different entities to various categories of risk. This is very much what we 
observe in practice,  where even imbalances arising  in some other sector often  create ripple effects 
throughout the financial system and, where this is not robust enough, in the rest of the economy. 
Consistently with this view, it can be argued that financial stability is best pursued by implementing a 
coherent  set  of  policies  which  respond  to  the  underlying  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  Recent 
episodes of financial crisis, for example, have shown that through their effects on expectations and on 
                                                      
1  This  paper  was  delivered  at  a  seminar  organised  by  Société  Universitaire  Européenne  de  Recherches  Financières 
(SUERF), in conjunction with the Central Bank of Malta on Thursday 27 March 2003. 
2  Knight, M. 2002. “The Central Bank’s Role in Fostering Financial System Stability: A Canadian Perspective”, in Financial 
Risks, Stability, and Globalization; ed. O.E.G. Johnson. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund. pg. 314. 
  asset prices more generally, unchecked variations in property prices can contribute to precipitating a 
crisis. Similarly, it is often forgotten that a combination of excessive public deficits with an over reliance 
on short-term capital flows and an overvalued currency is the perfect recipe for a turnaround in market 
confidence, and consequently for sudden reversals in capital flows. 
Nonetheless,  of  all  the  possible  links  between  financial  stability  and  the  other  objectives  of 
macroeconomic policy, it is the one between the two key functions of central banks - price stability and 
financial stability - which has received most attention. And this for very good reasons. For a start, we 
know from experience that inflation brings about distortions in the allocation of resources, and such 
misallocation  is  incompatible  with  the  achievement  of  financial  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis.  We 
have  also  learnt  that  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  depends  on  the  effectiveness  of  the 
transmission channels. Central banks can only influence short-term interest rates. The ultimate impact 
on  prices  of  monetary  policy  decisions  travels  over  time  through  various  channels  in  the  financial 
system, and uncertainty could ensue if these do not function efficiently. Another reason for this focus 
of attention could be that while the supervisory function has been relocated outside central banks in 
many countries, responsibility for the maintenance of systemic stability remains with central banks. 
The  relationship  between  financial  and  monetary  stability  is  not,  however,  necessarily  limited  to 
complementarities. In a situation characterised by both rising inflationary pressures and tight liquidity 
conditions, for example, a decision to raise interest rates would be consistent with the central bank’s 
price  stability  objective  but  could  also  affect  the  profitability  of  credit  institutions.  It  is  thus  hardly 
surprising that one of the topical issues facing central banks today concerns the appropriate weight 
that should be given to financial stability considerations in the formulation of monetary policy. From a 
broader policymaking perspective, moreover, there is also the  question about  the role that financial 
stability concerns should play in the formulation of macroeconomic policy more generally. I am sure 
that the second seminar session will provide further insights in this regard, when the interrelationship 
between fiscal policy, monetary policy and financial stability will be considered. 
Policy transparency, good governance and market discipline 
The  relationship  between  macroeconomic  policy  and  financial  stability  also  serves  to  highlight  the 
importance of policy transparency and good governance, both at the national and corporate level. In 
fact, it is generally  agreed that the  likelihood of disturbances to the financial system can be  greatly 
diminished  if the authorities manifest their policy  intentions clearly, and explain the rationale behind 
policy measures once decisions have been taken. This helps to reduce the chances of investors and 
creditors making uninformed decisions, only to reverse them later. This aspect has become especially 
relevant  in  the  context  of  capital  account  liberalisation,  particularly  in  those  countries  that  operate 
variants  of  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes.  It  is  even  more  so  in  countries  which  are  simultaneously 
engaged  in efforts to place public finances on a stable footing and to gain credibility for the central 
bank’s monetary policy. Here, a sudden shift in investor confidence could have serious repercussions, 
not only for financial stability but also for the conduct of monetary and fiscal policy. Within this context 
it is relevant to note that while in general accession countries have made significant progress towards 
achieving macroeconomic stability, this progress has been far from uniform and challenges remain in 
this  respect  too.  The  paper  to  be  given  by  Dr  Lipschitz  and  the  presentations  on  EU  country 
experiences should provide some interesting perspectives on these issues. 
The  relevance  of  transparency  and  good  governance  also  applies  at  the  corporate  level,  not  least 
because financial difficulties in large corporations could undermine the well-being of individual financial 
institutions  and  markets.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  small  jurisdictions.  Now  it  is  a  fact  that 
corporations will always know a lot more about their financial position than any outside entity charged 
with monitoring them, and financial intermediaries are no exception in this regard. This is particularly 
true  at  a  time  when  the  complexity  of  financial  products  and  the  intensity  of  cross-market risks  are 
stretching  the  capacity  of  central  bankers  and  supervisors  to  remain  fully  in  control.  Several  recent 
episodes in the financial world indeed confirm that the innate human predisposition to maximise self-
interest can induce behaviour that is not in harmony with the public interest. 
The implications of this are two-fold. While rules and regulations continue to play an important role in 
preventing  systemic  shocks,  they  will  increasingly  have  to  incorporate  incentives  and  credible 
deterrents  to  discourage  excessive  risk-taking  and  moral  hazard.  Second,  the  efforts  of  central 
bankers  and  supervisors  need  to  be  supplemented  with  direct  oversight  by  the  stakeholders  of 
financial institutions themselves, be they shareholders, creditors or customers. Stated otherwise, good 
governance  and  market  discipline  are  becoming  at  least  as  important  as  prudential  controls  for  the 
  well-being of the financial system. That, in turn, calls for a host of other measures ranging from the 
regular disclosure by the institutions of detailed information about their performance and the adoption 
of international accounting standards to the enforcement of shareholder rights, the creation of deposit 
insurance and investor protection schemes and the simplification of judicial procedures. In this regard, 
I believe that Dr Summer will be explaining how accession countries score in terms of some of these 
criteria. 
EU financial market integration presents new opportunities but also some risks 
While  it  is  recognised  that  the  well-being  of  the  financial  system  has  come  to  depend  on  a  host  of 
factors, the regulatory and institutional framework in place continues to play an important role both in 
crisis  prevention  and  management.  The  prospect  of  EU  membership  has  already  contributed 
significantly  in this regard, spurring accession countries to  evaluate the adequacy of the framework 
governing the financial sector. Perhaps more important is the fact that the on-going harmonisation of 
rules and practices with EU standards in the area of financial stability will provide market players with 
an added assurance that this framework will continue to evolve in line with international best practice. 
This assurance should also facilitate the further development of the financial sector in these countries, 
as  foreign  banks  and  other  financial  services  providers  seek  to  tap  what  is  soon  to  become  an 
enlarged market of almost 500 million people, either directly by setting up shop in these countries or 
indirectly through the cross-border provision of financial services. The advantages for financial stability 
of  a  diversified  financial  structure  are  well-documented.  Suffice  it  to  recall  that  because  different 
financial  market  segments  react  differently  to  economic  shocks,  the  presence  of  different  types  of 
intermediaries and markets functioning alongside each other should strengthen the financial system’s 
capacity  to  absorb  liquidity  shocks  emanating  from  specific  institutions  or  market  segments.  For 
accession countries, the scope for diversification presented by EU membership is significant, not only 
because the financial sector tends to be small relative to their economic size, but more so because 
intermediation in these countries is dominated by the banks. In fact, a recent ECB report concludes 
that  the  financial  sectors  of  accession  countries  could  assimilate  a  fifteen-fold  increase  in  absolute 
terms.3 
Financial integration in the euro area, moreover, may also promote financial stability in the accession 
countries through the advantages inherent in a single currency area. For a start, the disruption arising 
from  currency  risk  is  eliminated,  domestic  economies  become  immune  to  currency  misalignment 
episodes that disturb trade and currency risk premiums disappear from interest rates. A large currency 
area,  furthermore,  means  deeper  and  more  liquid  financial  markets,  which  allow  participants  to 
diversify their risks and, in the absence of currency risk, to focus more on credit risk. 
Another contribution which EU membership should make to financial stability in accession countries 
stems  from  the  increased  competition  which  will  result  from  the  entry  of  foreign  service  providers, 
particularly if this induces indigenous institutions to find innovative ways to hedge risks and diversify 
asset portfolios, and to adopt international best practices generally. While cross-country studies on this 
aspect remain sparse, a recent World Bank study4 reveals instances where foreign bank entry did lead 
to improved operations and to greater access to foreign capital. Drawing on data for 80 countries, this 
study also shows that foreign bank entry does tend to reduce domestic bank profitability, non-interest 
income and, to some extent, overall expenses. Coupled with the finding that the presence of foreign 
banks contributes to a higher level of loan-loss provisioning, this leads the authors to conclude that, 
through  its  effects  on  competition,  foreign  bank  entry  improves  the  efficiency  and  functioning  of 
indigenous banks. While there is nothing automatic about the realisation of such benefits, one might 
reasonably expect that in the long run the completion of the Single Market in financial services should 
contribute to the emergence of a healthier financial system in the accession countries. 
Now it could of course also be argued that the extension of the “single passport” to most aspects of 
the provision of financial services foreseen by the Financial Services Action Plan could well expose 
the accession countries to new risks, particularly those emanating from within the EU itself, with which 
                                                      
3  Caviglia, G., Krause, G & C., Thimann. 2002. Key Features of the financial sectors in EU accession countries, in Financial 
Sectors in EU Accession Countries. ed., C. Thimann C. Frankfurt: European Central Bank. 
4  Claessens, S., Demirguc-Kunt, A & H. Huizinga. 1998 (rev 2000). How does Foreign Entry Affect the Domestic Banking 
Market? World Bank Working Paper No. 1918. Washington: World Bank. 
  these  countries  are  already  closely  integrated.  Indeed,  the  ECB  has  itself  recently  stated  that  the 
integration  of  financial  markets  in  the  region  could  increase  the  chances  of  systemic  disturbances 
affecting  more  than  one  Member  State.5  In  this  regard,  Dr  Buch’s  paper  on  the  implications  for 
financial stability of foreign bank entry should help to place the discussion in an empirical context. 
Another important aspect of financial market integration relates to regulation and supervision. As the 
process  intensifies,  the  distinction  between  different  types  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  will 
become increasingly blurred. In such a scenario, it will be even more important for all institutions with 
financial  stability  responsibilities  -  be  it  the  central  bank,  supervisory  authority  or  other  government 
agency - to co-ordinate their efforts in the area of system oversight and to share any information which 
could be relevant to the proper fulfilment of their respective functions. Indeed, whereas until recently 
the  prevailing  concern  related  to  the  choice  of  institutional  arrangement  for  the  supervision  of  the 
financial  sector,  it  is  now  sometimes  argued  that  it  is  not  the  institutional  framework  which  matters 
most, but rather the existence of adequate mechanisms guaranteeing the exchange of information and 
policy co-ordination between the entities responsible for overseeing systemic stability and those that 
monitor the health of individual financial institutions. Beyond that, it is claimed, any institutional set-up 
can work. Likewise, any one can fail. 
While this conclusion might be valid from a national point of view, it does little to address the question 
of  whether  information  exchange  and  policy  co-ordination  relating  to  financial  sector  developments 
affecting the EU as a whole would be more appropriately addressed by a supranational EU institution 
with supervisory responsibilities, or whether such tasks are best handled by the national authorities of 
member countries. This issue has certainly gained in importance in recent years with the increased 
recognition  of  the  links  between  supervision  and  monetary  policy.  It  has  served  to  highlight  the 
anomaly  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  institutional  framework  governing  monetary  policy  in  the 
region,  which  is  centralised  in  the  ECB,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  framework  governing  financial 
sector supervision, which is largely decentralised. The signing earlier this year of a Memorandum of 
Understanding on co-operation in the area of crisis management between the supervisory authorities 
and the central banks of the 15 Member States has underlined the links between these two functions 
even more. 
Now some might conclude that if it has been possible to devise a mechanism for crisis management in 
the EU without the need to create a supranational supervisory body, it should be equally possible to 
develop a similar co-operative arrangement for crisis prevention. On the other hand, it could also be 
argued that, not having had the experience of a financial crisis in the region, it is still too early to say 
whether such an arrangement would work in practice. This topical issue relating to the pros and cons 
of  the  unification  of  supervisory  structures  at  the  EU  level  will  be  addressed  by  Dr  Gruenbichler. 
Accession countries have a special interest in this matter, not only because their central banks and 
supervisory authorities will be invited to sign this accord, but because they will in time also have to 
adhere to whatever institutional arrangements are adopted by the EU in this area. 
Conclusion 
The issues being discussed during this seminar are wide-ranging indeed. And though they are not of 
interest  exclusively  to  policy  makers  in  accession  countries,  financial  stability  issues  are  especially 
pertinent for these countries, since they aim to meet the requirements for adopting the single currency 
as soon as possible after joining the EU in May 2004. First, because the existence of a positive link 
between financial system stability and economic growth means that anything that harms stability would 
slow down the pace of real convergence with the EU economy. Second, because the break out of a 
systemic crisis has immediate effects on asset prices and other price variables, it could also imperil 
the  nominal  convergence  process  and,  with  that,  an  early  entry  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
(EMU). 
Accession countries, therefore, have a specific interest in keeping at bay forces which are known to be 
inimical to financial stability and in adopting structures and practices which have proved effective in 
countries which have already completed their journey to EMU. It is thus appropriate that the seminar 
                                                      
5  European  Central  Bank.  2003.  Press  Release  on  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  high-level  principles  of 
co-operation between the banking supervisors and central banks of the European Union in crisis management situations. 
Frankfurt. 10 March. 
  should  be  brought  to  an  end  with  presentations  on  the  experiences  of  three  euro  area  member 
countries. 
 