 Eva Srejber: Growth and competition - lessons from the past 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Sparbanken Gripen, 
B(cid:229)stad, 25 August 2003. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come here and speak on the occasion of Sparbanken Gripen(cid:146)s 150th 
anniversary. In my speech today, I intend to attempt to draw some conclusions from the experiences 
of our economic history during this period. One of my conclusions is that Swedish growth has been 
stimulated during the periods when we have allowed the market economy to operate under clear and 
fixed  game  rules,  including  a  stable  framework  for  both  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy.  If  these 
conditions have not existed, we have paid a price in the form of weaker economic growth. This speech 
does not contain any signals regarding current monetary policy. 
The past 150 years have been an exciting time, in particular the first part of this period. This was when 
Sweden  changed  from  being  a  remote,  developing  country  with  a  high  infant  mortality  rate, 
widespread poverty and starvation, into a prominent industrial nation. Around 1850 Sweden entered 
into  a  dynamic  period  of  rapid  development  and  change.  A  wave  of  liberalisation  swept  across  the 
country  and  opened up important markets. GDP growth amounted to more than 2 per cent  a  year, 
which was twice as high as the growth rate during the first half of the 19th century. A doubling of the 
GDP  growth  rate  might  not  sound  particularly  exciting,  but  over  time  it  has  very  major  effects.  An 
increase in the GDP growth rate from one to two per cent entails the standard of living doubling within 
35  years  instead  of  70  years.  For  Sweden  the  stronger  growth  rate  during  the  second  half  of  the 
19th century meant that we emerged from the developing country stage. 
A  number  of  factors  contributed  to  this  development.  Free  trade  was  an  important  element.  Our 
exports abroad were central to this process, which was of course facilitated by the development of the 
railway system. During the first decades after 1850, there were three main export products contributing 
to  a  very  rapid  export  upturn;  oats,  iron  and  timber.  The  importance  of  exports  of  oats  from  the 
southern part of Sweden is something of a curiosity. Oats were the fuel of that time. All of the horses 
providing transport in industrial cities like London required oats and much of this came from G(cid:246)taland. 
The construction of the railway, as well as investment in industry, housing construction and agriculture 
naturally required capital. This was mainly obtained from abroad. Sweden was a typical example of a 
country with an expansionary economy making use of saving in other parts of Europe. This borrowing 
from abroad was on a very large scale and, prior to the outbreak of the First World War, Sweden was 
probably the most indebted nation of the time. 
High level of international mobility 
If one looks at this period in diagram form, it is quite striking how much growth varied, even if a five-
year  sliding  average  is  used.  The  fluctuations  in  economic  activity  were  considerable  and  this  of 
course  put  households  in  a  vulnerable  position,  as  there  was  broadly  speaking  no  social  welfare 
system at that time. Although living conditions improved rapidly, they were still insufficient for many 
people.  There  was  extensive  emigration.  However,  a  large  number  of  these  emigrants  returned  to 
Sweden and we had a widespread interchange with other countries. There were very few limitations to 
international mobility for people, capital, products and ideas. 
If we instead look at price developments, we can observe average low rates of price increase around 
2 per cent a year during this time, and during the period as whole. However, there are also substantial 
variations. There were general price falls - deflation - on a number of occasions. Deflation is normally 
associated  with  very  large  shocks  such  as  those  during  the  1930s  depression  in  the  USA  and 
Germany, but at the end of the 19th century, there were also price falls in Sweden during an otherwise 
favourable  economic  climate.  One  important  explanation  for  this  is  that  deflation  is  not  necessarily 
caused by weak demand in the economy. Rapid productivity growth can also generate a price fall and 
this  was  what  occurred  periodically  during  the  second  half  of  the  19th  century.  In  these  situations 
deflation need not be the bugbear to economic development that it is often made out to be. 
On the other hand, if we move forward a few years to the period during and after the First World War, 
we do see large shocks - falling GDP combined with very high inflation, followed by severe deflation at 
BIS Review 37/2003 
 1
 the  beginning  of  the  1920s.  This  was  when  Sweden  experienced  its  most  severe  economic  crisis, 
rather than during the 1930s as was the case in the USA and Germany, for instance. 
If we move forward to the post-war period, this was a unique time of high and constant growth. During 
the period following the Second World War and up to the 1970s, standards of living rose at a record 
rate throughout the world. An interesting fact is that although growth in Sweden during this period was 
higher  than  it  had  been  at  any  other  time,  it  was  nevertheless  rather  low  in  an  international 
comparison. Many European countries, including our Scandinavian neighbours, grew at an even more 
rapid rate. 
However, from the 1970s the problems increased. Growth waned and inflation rose. We managed to 
temporarily stimulate growth by means of substantial devaluations, but there was no proper follow-up 
and the economy overheated, only to turn around entirely at the beginning of the 1990s, resulting in 
extensive problems for the financial sector. Since then we have had a decade or so with better growth 
and more balanced developments. The average growth rate during these years was just over 3 per 
cent. This was very different from the average growth we had during the previous ten years. During 
the  transition  phase  between  these  periods  a  number  of  important  changes  were  implemented 
regarding the allocation of resources in society. Here I am referring to the deregulation of the financial 
markets, reforms in the pension, tax and social insurance systems and a reduction in the burden of 
taxation.  In  addition,  wage  formation  has  been  improved,  which  has  probably  been  facilitated  by 
monetary policy focussing on price stability. It seems to me probable that the return to macroeconomic 
stability  and  in  particular  the  structural  reforms  have  actively  contributed  to  the  favourable 
developments of the past decade. On the other hand, I do not believe that the changeover to a floating 
exchange  rate  has  been  crucial  in  itself.  Over  the  past  century  Sweden  has  mostly  had  a  fixed 
exchange rate and usually shown good growth. 
At  the  same  time,  the  past  ten-year  period  has  been  a  special  one  in  terms  of  the  euphoric 
expectations  of  the  (cid:147)new  economy(cid:148)  connected  to  telecommunications  and  IT.  This  contributed  to 
soaring stock market prices, followed by a fall of historic proportions. History can demonstrate similar 
episodes. The railway construction in the 19th century gave rise to similar over-optimism, as did the 
introduction  of  electric  and  internal  combustion  engines  at  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century. 
Sometimes, these periods of over-optimism have put considerable strain on the financial system. The 
strain caused by developments in recent years appears to be comparatively limited. 
When inventions with a broad potential for application are introduced, it generally takes a long time 
before we learn the best way to use them. We tend to be fixed on the current system solutions and 
find it difficult to see new opportunities. The sobering process that has occurred since the exorbitant 
expectations at the end of the 1990s with regard to telecommunications and IT therefore does not rule 
out the possibility that this technology will stimulate future productivity growth. Following the electricity 
euphoria at the beginning of the 20th century, various applications gradually changed everyday life for 
industry  and  households.  Sweden  was  not  fully  electric  until  a  few  decades  later.  Essentially, 
therefore,  I  am  optimistic  with  regard  to  what  future  applications  in  telecommunications  and  IT  can 
achieve for economic growth. 
The financial sector - the lubricant of the economy 
The financial sector has played a very central role in the development of the economy over the past 
150 years. It still does, although the general public is sometimes critical of the financial sector - often 
without  considering  the  services  the  sector  has  to  offer  and  how  daily  life  would  look  without  this 
sector.  The  fundamental  functions  of  the  financial  sector  -  financing,  risk  management  and 
intermediation  of  payments  -  are  indispensable  to  society.  Financing  entails  bringing  together  the 
different  wishes  of  savers  and  investors.  Savers  want  their  money  to  be  available  directly,  while 
investors often require long-term loans. These opposing wishes can be reconciled via banks, and also 
directly via the financial markets. The latter assumes that there are well-developed secondary markets 
with a large turnover in, for instance, equity. This enables companies to borrow long-term while savers 
can quickly sell their shares if they so desire. Risks are managed through the spread in borrowing, but 
also  by  transferring  them,  against  payment,  to  others  in  the  financial  market.  The  spread  and 
redistribution of financial risks enables investments to be made that would not otherwise have been 
possible. The third and final main task is the intermediation of payments, which enables payment to be 
smoothly made and received for goods and services sold either in the conventional manner or via, for 
instance, the Internet. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2003
 In countries like Sweden we tend to take it for granted that these functions work. However, if we try to 
imagine that they did not exist, we will realise how extremely central they are to the functioning of the 
economy and to our welfare. If we imagine a country where savers and investors did not have access 
to  functioning  and  reliable  banks  and  financial  markets,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this  would  hamper 
development. The effect would be a tendency for savings to move abroad, while profitable investment 
projects did not get off the ground in countries with an undeveloped financial sector. If we look back at 
the  1950s,  we  can  see  that  the  intermediation  of  payments  functions  much  more  smoothly  today. 
Then, we used to stand in line to receive a pay packet, life assurance employees bicycled round to 
customers(cid:146) homes to collect premiums and almost everyone stood in line at the post office to pay their 
rent, electricity bill, etc. 
From freedom to regulation and the return to freedom 
The  conditions  for  Sparbanken  Gripen  and  the  financial  sector  have  certainly  varied  over  the  past 
150 years.  During  the  first  part  of  this  period,  the  financial  sector  was  able  to  operate  under 
considerable freedom. Bank deposits were developed as a basis for the banks(cid:146) lending. This meant 
that  the  banks  created  money  by  expanding  credit  to  the  extent  that  they  dared  to  reduce  their 
reserves. The banks also played an important role in the foreign borrowing that occurred, mainly in the 
form  of  bond  issues  in  Germany  and  France.  The  banking  system  was  particularly  expansionary 
around the year 1900, when many new banks were established. Some of these did not last long. In 
1907  the  financial  sector  suffered  a  widespread  crisis  and  many  banks  went  into  liquidation,  were 
refinanced or taken over by other banks. The next financial crisis coincided with the deflation at the 
beginning of the 1920s. This crisis was particularly severe in rural Sweden, partly because of a severe 
fall  in  agricultural  product  prices.  Deflation  made  the  situation  difficult  for  farmers  encumbered  with 
debts and thereby for the banks active in rural areas. 
As a reaction to the crisis during the 1920s, the difficulties of the 1930s with the Kreuger crash and in 
particular  the  outbreak  of  the  Second  World  War,  the  central  government  tightened  its  grip  on  the 
financial sector. Many of the regulations introduced at that time still remained towards the end of the 
1980s. During this period of regulation, the financial sector looked very different. It is probable that the 
regulations then curbed the development of economic activity. The regulations covered, for instance, 
the  central  government  guaranteeing  financing  of  housing  construction  and  the  central  government 
borrowing requirement. Interest rates were kept lower than the equilibrium level with the hope that this 
would stimulate  investment and growth. This of course resulted in a  large  demand for loans,  which 
was managed by means of rationing. A necessary condition for this regulatory system was that the 
country  was  screened  off  with  the  aid  of  currency  regulation  that  prevented  savers  from  taking 
advantage of higher interest abroad. One might think it self-evident that an individual should be able to 
decide  where  in  the  world  he  or  she  invests  his  or  her  savings,  but  for  a  long  time  we  lacked  this 
freedom. In other words, one of the financial markets(cid:146) fundamental tasks was eliminated - allocating 
capital to the most profitable investments. During this long period of regulation we as a country forgot 
our  own  experiences  from  the  19th  century  on  the  value  of  free  movement  of  capital  and  the 
importance of the price mechanism in efficient allocation of resources. 
Deregulation  since  then  has  meant  that  there  are  currently  greater  similarities  with  the  late 
19th century/early  20th century than  with the intervening period  of regulation. I have used the  word 
deregulation  here.  On  a  general  level  this  is  an  appropriate  description,  but  one  can  also  describe 
developments in terms of changes in regulation. This is because, at the same time as considerable 
deregulation has occurred, there are other regulations remaining and new ones have been introduced. 
One  important  difference,  however,  is  that  today(cid:146)s  regulations  are  aimed  at  allowing  the  price 
mechanism  to  function,  i.e.  they  are  market-conforming.  These  regulations  are  usually  aimed  at 
protecting savers and investors against risks and abuse. In this sense it is a case of re-regulation. 
The  financial  sector  thus  fulfils  a  central  role  as  a  lubricant  for  the  economy.  An  efficient  financial 
sector increases a country(cid:146)s potential growth rate. Today approximately 80,000 people are employed 
in the financial sector, although the number of bank employees in Sweden is in relative terms lower 
than  in  any  other  OECD  country.  This  and  other  indicators  show  that  we  have  a  relatively  efficient 
financial sector. 
BIS Review 37/2003 
 3
 Growth based on productivity and labour 
I have emphasised, in this roughly sketched outline, the important role of growth in the development of 
our standard of living. However it also plays a central role in monetary policy discussions, as demand 
in the economy in relation to production capacity is decisive for whether inflationary bottlenecks will 
arise or whether we will underutilise the production potential. It is the potential growth rate that sets the 
limits. We at the Riksbank must take into account this rate and any changes in its development, even 
though monetary policy does not directly affect potential growth. Similarly, we must take into account 
changes in competitive conditions, as changes here can have both direct and indirect effects on the 
development  of  inflation.  Possible  measures  to  strengthen  potential  growth  are  an  issue  for  other 
forms of economic policy, involving, for instance, the stimulation of competition to improve allocation of 
resources. 
The high growth rate over the past decade has been primarily generated by the fact that we have used 
available resources more efficiently. On the other hand, we have not supplied many more resources 
either  in  the  form  of  hours  worked  or  of  capital/investment.  From  the  mid-1980s  up  to  1993  the 
opposite  applied.  The  limited  increase  in  productivity  that  arose  then  was  due  to  investment, 
i.e. capital intensity increased. Over the past ten years we have had an impressive annual increase in 
factor productivity, while capital intensity has increased at a slow rate. 
It is worrying that the increase in labour supply has been, and still is, so limited. In this aspect we differ 
from  most  of  the  other  countries  that  have  been  aided  by  increased  labour  supply  in  raising  their 
growth rate. An important explanation for the poorer development in Sweden is the amount of long-
term  sickness  leave  and  early  retirement.  Worry  over  these  tendencies  increases  if  one  takes  into 
account the fact that future retirements may further limit the labour supply. However, let us leave the 
discussion of the labour supply and concentrate instead on the productivity aspect. 
The combination of price stability and budget stability is an important explanation for the development 
in productivity.1 Price and budget stability increase households(cid:146) and companies(cid:146) willingness to make 
long-term  decisions.  Stable  prices  also  entail  better  information  value  in  relative  prices,  which 
improves the allocation of resources. 
If we consider other factors that have stimulated the upturn in productivity in recent years, there are 
several  central  changes.  One  generally  seeks  explanations  in  factors  such  as  technological 
developments, education, competence and incentives among the work force, as well as the allocation 
of resources in society. 
At the same time, the pressure on companies to use resources efficiently has increased during the 
1990s.  Greater  competitive  pressure  resulting 
internationalisation  and 
deregulation  in  various  sectors  has  increased  the  need  for  companies  to  economise  their  scant 
resources. Less extravagant use of resources means that the labour force and capital are employed in 
other areas  where they contribute better to the national economy.  Although the changeover can be 
difficult  for  those  who  lose  their  jobs,  a  better  allocation  of  resources  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
improving welfare. 
from  both 
increased 
Openness is important 
Productivity is also affected by a country(cid:146)s capacity to utilise technological progress in other countries. 
This  capacity  is  in  turn  dependent  on  how  open  a  country  is  to  impulses  from  outside,  which  is 
determined by the obstacles to ideas, products, services and production factors moving freely across 
borders. The capacity to reconsider regulations and institutions so that changes can be adopted is an 
important part of this openness. 
The  negative  experiences  of  the  closed  economies  during  the  interwar  period  led  to  trade  barriers 
being successively lowered after the Second World War. A gradual increase in free trade stimulated 
the global economy and this was particularly important for small countries like Sweden. Freedom for 
savers to choose the country in which to save was also introduced in many countries. The obstacles to 
ideas,  products,  services  and  production  factors  moving  freely  across  borders  has  declined  further 
                                                      
1  The importance of price and budget stability for productivity growth has been demonstrated, for instance, by William Easterley in 
(cid:147)When is stabilisation expansionary(cid:148), the World Bank, Dec 1995. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2003
 during the 1990s, partly due to our EU membership and this ought to have had a positive effect on 
factor productivity. 
Internationalisation has thus contributed to an increasingly large part of the corporate sector becoming 
exposed  to  competition.  Increased  competition  means  that  companies  must  become  more  efficient 
and  cost-conscious,  which  in  turn  should  have  a  positive  effect  on  productivity.  In  addition,  a  new 
Competition  Act  was  introduced  in  Sweden  in  1993,  containing  an  express  ban  on  anti-competitive 
cooperation  between  companies  and  a  ban  on  abuse  of  a  dominant  position.  There  has  also  been 
some  further  deregulation.  For  instance,  state  monopolies  have  been  abolished  and  freedom  to 
establish new companies with regard to, for instance, transport, communications and energy has been 
introduced. 
Changed  competitive  conditions  thus  affect  productivity  growth,  but  they  can  also  affect  price 
developments more directly. Despite the fact that we gained much stiffer legislation on competition in 
1993, developments in this field appear to be moving slowly.  Swedish  prices remain higher than in 
other countries in several areas without explanations for this in the form of differences in VAT rates 
and  wage  levels. Increased competition can contribute to price  levels converging, but this assumes 
that the relative price changes will be accepted and it can entail, as in the 1990s when electricity and 
telecommunications were deregulated, such large price reductions in some sectors that our inflation 
rate will be lower than that of other countries. 
Special interests and consumer interests 
Limits to competition are a clear example of how special interests dominate over general consumer 
interests. There are many examples of this in various areas of the Swedish economy, and in particular 
the construction sector. This means that we allow inefficiency to remain, which reduces growth and the 
development  of  most  people(cid:146)s  standard  of  living.  One  interesting  and  very  recent  example  of  how 
special interests have declined concerns pharmaceutical prices. 
A change in this field was introduced in October last year, which in principle means that pharmacies 
are  obliged  to  exchange  a  drug  in  a  prescription  for  a  cheaper  equivalent  (generic)  unless  the 
customer  is  willing  to  pay  the  difference.  The  effect  of  this  new  regulation,  combined  with  patents 
expiring, has led to significant price competition. Pharmaceuticals companies have gradually lowered 
their prices through more than 3,500 reductions, which benefits us as individuals when we purchase 
prescription  drugs  and  as  tax-payers  as  the  cost  of  the  county  councils(cid:146)  subsidies  for  prescription 
drugs declines. 
Pharmaceuticals(cid:146) costs are included in CPI as one of many sub-indices and are intended to reflect the 
average household(cid:146)s costs for prescription drugs. Over the past ten years this index has risen at an 
average rate of 12 per cent a year. Now this increase has been turned around to a small decrease. 
The  difference  between  the  historical  rate  of  increase  and  the  current  price  fall  corresponds  to  a 
saving of approximately SEK 1 billion a  year2 for Swedish households. Correspondingly, the county 
councils(cid:146) costs have been reduced by approximately SEK 2 billion. 
There are large sums involved here and they deserve some attention. Nevertheless, it is difficult to find 
articles  dealing  with  these  large  savings  and  with  the  increase  in  competition.  The  main  aspect 
appears to have been lost in the media. Instead, one finds articles on the difficulties for our monopoly 
company Apoteket to adapt, as it exists on a margin of approximately 20 per cent. 
It  would  be  beneficial  to  have  more  discussion  of,  and  attention  paid  to,  the  question  of  how  to 
stimulate competition. In this particular case a beneficial change appears to have strongly stimulated 
competition.  If  we  are  to  achieve  increased  competition  in  other  areas,  too,  it  is  necessary  to 
constantly  emphasise  consumer  interests  so  that  allocation  of  resources  becomes  as  efficient  as 
possible  and  protected  sectors  are  not  allowed  to  operate  inefficiently  to  the  detriment  of  potential 
growth. 
                                                      
2  Statistics Sweden calculates households(cid:146) consumption of pharmaceuticals to be approximately SEK 10 billion a year. 
BIS Review 37/2003 
 5
 What can we learn from 150 years of history? 
To summarise, there have been many changes in the Swedish economy in recent times. The external 
framework is currently characterised by considerable fiscal policy and monetary policy stability, which 
facilitates  planning  and  decision-making  for  both  households  and  companies.  Both  our  own  history 
and that of other countries shows clearly that a stable external framework is an important basis for 
economic growth. 
We have also gone back to being open towards the outside world. During the war we were not, for 
obvious reasons. After that we were open for a long period according to the rhetoric, but less so in 
practice. Today we have regained a freedom for ideas, products, services and production factors that 
is reminiscent of the late 19th century and early 20th century. In both of these aspects we appear to 
have done our homework. 
At the same time, it should be remembered that many markets in Sweden still show clear signs of a 
lack of competition. This entails a considerable cost and in this field we appear to have more to learn 
from history. The significance of this is underlined by the fact that the various parts of the economy are 
interlinked, which often means that a strengthening of the weaker parts is more important for the whole 
than for the particular industry or sector. 
The complementarity of the economy3 makes it particularly important to remedy our weak links and to 
listen with humility to the proposals of, for instance, the OECD and IMF. It is often easier to identify the 
problems if one can look at things with a little perspective. I believe that the Swedish economy has 
considerable unused potential for stronger growth if we concentrate on this, that is to say, on how to 
make our joint share of the cake grow. 
                                                      
3  The significance of complementarity in economic policy has been demonstrated by, for instance, Aziz and Wescott 1997 in (cid:147)Policy 
Complementarities and the Washington Consensus(cid:148). 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2003
