 David Dodge: The Bank of Canada’s views on the Canadian economy and 
inflation 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Finance Committee, Ottawa, 29 April 2003.  
 Good afternoon, Madame Chair and members of the committee. I would like to start by saying how 
much we at the Bank of Canada appreciate the opportunity to come here twice a year, following the 
release of our semi-annual Monetary Policy Report. We are very aware of the need to keep Members 
of Parliament and, indeed, all Canadians informed about what we're doing and why. It's important that 
we explain our views on the economy and on inflation. So, thank you for the opportunity.  
I'm going to spend a few minutes summarizing for you our most recent Monetary Policy Report. But, 
before I do that, I'd like to say a few words about my colleagues here with me today.  
I am delighted to introduce to you our newly appointed Senior Deputy Governor, Paul Jenkins. Paul 
has been with the Bank of Canada since 1972 and, for the past 11 years, he has served as a Deputy 
Governor.  In  that  role,  Paul  has  been  responsible  for  the  Bank's  analysis  of  international  economic 
and  financial  issues  and  for  our  liaison  with  related  international  bodies,  such  as  the  International 
Monetary Fund. He's also been in charge of the strategic direction and oversight of the Bank's public 
communications.  
Paul has a deep understanding not only of economic and monetary policy issues, but also of the Bank 
and its staff. I know he will provide energetic leadership in helping the Bank continue its tradition of 
excellence in promoting the economic and financial welfare of Canada.  
Also with me today is Deputy Governor Chuck Freedman. Chuck will retire in September, after almost 
30 years at the Bank. He's been a Deputy Governor since 1988, and his leadership in the areas of 
monetary  policy,  financial  institutions,  and  Canada's  clearing  and  settlement  systems  has  been 
invaluable.  One  of  Chuck's  most  important  contributions  has  been  his  tireless  promotion  of 
bilingualism at the Bank. I can't begin to say how much we will all miss him—especially those of us on 
the Bank's Governing Council—not only for his expertise, but also for his enthusiasm and keen wit and 
intellect.  
Last  week,  we  released  our  spring  Monetary  Policy  Report,  in  which  we  discuss  economic  and 
financial  trends  in  the  context  of  Canada's  inflation-control  strategy.  I  last  testified  before  this 
committee in October, following the release of our autumn Monetary Policy Report.  
To place our recent experience in some context, let me go back a bit further than that. Following the 
11  September  2001  terrorist  attacks  in  the  United  States,  the  Bank  of  Canada  quickly  and 
aggressively cut its policy interest rate to shore up confidence and support domestic demand. By the 
spring  of  2002,  evidence  had  already  started  to  build  that  demand  was  growing  faster  than  the 
economy's production capacity.  
Monetary policy actions must always be forward looking. So, even though demand pressures were not 
yet showing up in prices, we raised our key policy rate three times between April and July 2002, by a 
total of three-quarters of a percentage point.  
When we met with you last autumn, inflation in Canada was on the rise. But we refrained from raising 
interest rates because of the prevailing geopolitical and financial uncertainties, high yield spreads and 
restricted access to funding for riskier corporate borrowers, and the expectation that global economic 
weakness would restrain total demand for Canadian goods.  
Since then, inflation has been above the 2 per cent target. The total year-over-year CPI inflation rate 
reached  a  peak  of  4.6  per  cent  in  February,  falling  back  somewhat  to  4.3  per  cent  in  March.  Key 
factors  behind  the  jump  in  inflation  are  the  sharp  rise  in  oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  increases  in 
insurance premiums, and strong domestic demand. That demand has led to price pressures in certain 
sectors, such as shelter and some services.  
In this environment, some indicators of short-term inflation expectations have edged up. These include 
data from the survey taken by the Bank's regional offices and the average private sector consensus 
forecast. Longer-term expectations of inflation, however, remain around 2 per cent.  
BIS Review 20/2003 
 1
 To assess the future trend of inflation, the Bank uses a measure of core inflation, which strips out the 
eight most volatile items in the CPI basket, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes on the remaining 
CPI components. Core inflation now sits around 3 per cent. It should fall to about 2 1/2 per cent in the 
second half of this year, and to about 2 per cent by early 2004.  
Total CPI inflation  will continue to be  importantly affected by swings in crude oil prices. If oil prices 
were to settle at about $25 per barrel by mid-2003—as futures prices suggest—and if the Canadian 
dollar were to stay close to current levels, total CPI inflation would likely fall temporarily below the core 
rate in the first half of 2004, before steadying out at a rate close to core inflation.  
In view of the domestic inflation situation and the underlying momentum of domestic demand, we have 
raised  our  target  overnight  rate  by  25  basis  points  on  each  of  our  last  two  policy  announcement 
dates—in March and in mid-April—bringing it to 3.25 per cent.  
As  I  said  before,  economic,  financial,  and  geopolitical  uncertainty  figured  prominently  in  the  global 
picture last October. Some of the geopolitical and financial uncertainty has lifted in recent months, and 
the Bank expects that it will continue to recede. However, weak domestic demand in some regions of 
the world is still a concern. So, over the near term, a degree of global economic uncertainty remains.  
Even with all this, the risks confronting the world economy now appear to be better balanced than they 
were last autumn. And, by year-end, we expect that business and household confidence levels should 
improve.  
In  Canada,  domestic  demand  has  remained  quite  strong.  There  is  uncertainty,  however,  about  the 
possible economic impact of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), particularly in the Greater 
Toronto  Area.  As  I  said  last  week,  we  expect  that  economic  growth  in  the  second  quarter  will  be 
somewhat weaker than we projected in the Monetary Policy Report because of the impact of SARS. 
But  it  is  too  soon  to  make  an  assessment  of  the  magnitude  of  its  effect  on  economic  activity.  We 
continue to monitor the situation very closely.  
We  expect  that  the  Canadian  economy  will  strengthen  towards  the  end  of  2003,  partly  thanks  to  a 
pickup in economic activity in the United States. Average annual growth in Canada is expected to be 
about 2 1/2 per cent this year. During 2004, our economy should strengthen further, expanding at a 
rate above its 3 per cent growth of potential. This means that most of the small amount of economic 
slack that is likely to open up in Canada during 2003 will have closed by the end of next year.  
For  this  reason,  the  Bank  continues  to  believe  that  further  reductions  in  monetary  stimulus  will  be 
necessary  over  time  to  return  inflation  to  its  2  per  cent  target  and  to  sustain  output  levels  close  to 
capacity. The timing and pace of further increases in policy interest rates will depend on the strength 
of domestic demand, the evolution of inflation expectations, and the pace of economic expansion in 
the United States and in overseas economies.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2003
