 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Challenges of financial education in Malaysia 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
the Insurance Consumer Education Programme, Kuala-Lumpur, 29 August 2003. 
 Saya  berasa  amat  berbesar  hati  mengalu-alukan  kehadiran  tuan-tuan  dan  puan-puan  ke  majlis 
pelancaran  Program  Pendidikan  Pengguna  bagi  industri  insurans  dan  takaful  pada  pagi  ini. 
Pelancaran  program  ini  merupakan  satu  lagi  perkembangan  penting  dalam  pembangunan  industri 
insurans dan takaful. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  economic  and  financial  landscape  in  Malaysia  has  undergone  significant  transformation.  In  the 
process, the economy has become more diversified with new sources of growth. In tandem with these 
changes, we have seen the modernisation of the financial sector that has also become increasingly 
more  diversified  to  meet  the  new  requirements  of  the  economy.  There  has  also  emerged  new 
distribution  channels  and  channel  convergence  within  the  financial  sector.  The  financial  sector  has 
also  increasingly  leveraged  on  advances  in  technology  which  has  significantly  changed  the  way 
financial business is being conducted. As market advances continue to expand the range of financial 
products and services, consumers are being faced with increasingly complex choices and options in 
the  management  of  their  personal  finances  and  exposure  to  risk.  In  this  more  complex  financial 
landscape,  it  becomes  important  for  consumers  to  have  improved  access  to  information.  Financial 
education for Malaysian consumers is central to this process. It is therefore a matter that is accorded 
high priority by the Central Bank.  
It  therefore  gives  me  great  pleasure  today  to  launch  the  Consumer  Education  Programme  for  the 
insurance  and  takaful  industries.  This  represents  an  important  step  in  the  ongoing  evolution  of  the 
development  of  our  financial  system.  Indeed,  this  also  represents  a  part  of  the  overall  efforts  to 
promote market integrity and consumer protection over the whole spectrum of banking, insurance and 
takaful activities in the market. For consumers to fully realise the benefits of increased opportunities 
available in this continuously changing financial environment, consumers need to be in a position to 
actively manage their financial assets while at the same time safeguard their financial future.  
The public response to the launch of the Consumer Education Programme for the banking sector early 
this year has been most encouraging. To date, more than two million visitors have accessed the Bank 
Negara Malaysia(cid:146)s (cid:147)Banking Info(cid:148) website and more than 360,000 booklets have found their way into 
the hands of consumers. The launch of the Consumer Education Programme for the insurance and 
takaful  industries  today  will  be  part  of  this  on-going  effort  to  enhance  the  ability  of  consumers  to 
understand  and  draw  meaningful  comparisons  of  alternative  financial  products  and  make  better-
informed decisions in financial planning.  
In formulating a consumer education strategy, the distinct features of the insurance industry have been 
taken into consideration to meet the information needs of insurance consumers. Insurance contracts 
are essentially formed on the basis of disclosures made by prospective policyholders about the risks to 
be insured. Such disclosures determine if an insurer will assume the risk and the price at which it is 
assumed.  The  ability  to  enforce  a  claim  against  an  insurer  will  depend  on  the  accuracy  and 
completeness  of  the  disclosures.  This  underwriting  and  claims  assessment  process  distinguishes 
insurance from other financial products. There is also a wider range of intermediaries in the insurance 
industry compared with other financial service industries. The entire spectrum includes the insurance 
agents, insurance brokers and advisers in the distribution process, and the loss adjusters, managed 
care organizations, lawyers and auto repair workshops in the claims process.  
The  unique  features  of  insurance  have  significant  implications  on  disclosures  and  liabilities  which 
directly  affect  the  insuring  public.  The  implications  become  even  more  significant  as  competitive 
pressures  give  rise  to  the  rapid  introduction  of  new  products  that  require  a  better  understanding  of 
what  they  entail  on  the  part  of  the  average  consumer.  The  specific  objectives  of  the  Consumer 
Education Programme for the insurance and takaful sector are therefore: 
 to  promote  public  understanding  of  critical  information  when  buying  insurance  and  takaful 
products and services; 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
   to familiarise the public with the underwriting and claims processes; and 
to create awareness of ethical market practices such that consumers can be more assertive 
and discerning in making decisions. 
The  Consumer  Education  Programme  seeks  to  provide  relevant  information  to  consumers  about 
insurance products, their costs and benefits, processes and documentation involved in the insurance 
cycle,  and  more  importantly,  the  rights  and  responsibilities  of  the  various  parties  to  an  insurance 
contract. It is also to promote greater awareness among consumers about the means and avenues for 
redress in the event of dispute or dissatisfaction with any insurance product or service.  
This Consumer Education Programme for the insurance sector will extend over a 10-year horizon and 
will be undertaken on several levels under a step-by-step approach to reach out to the various target 
groups.  Similar  to  the  Consumer  Education  Programme  for  banking,  the  insurance  education 
programme has been given the acronym: (cid:147)InsuranceInfo(cid:148) (or (cid:147)InfoInsurans(cid:148) in Bahasa Malaysia). Over 
time,  it  is  envisaged  that  the  acronym  and  the  programme  will  become  readily  recognizable  in  the 
public domain.  
In  its  first  year,  the  Consumer  Education  Programme  will  focus  on  the  wide  dissemination  of 
information in 12 priority areas that have been identified. These include issues on the fundamentals of 
insurance and takaful products and services, highlighting the important terms and conditions, rights 
and  obligations  under  a  policy  contract  as  well  as  the  redress  avenues  available,  and  the  common 
insurance  and  takaful  products.  With  participation  from  the  insurance  associations,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  has  produced  12  booklets  that  set  out  the  important  information  for  consumers  in  these 
areas.  These  booklets  can  be  obtained  from  the  principal  offices  and  branches  of  insurance 
companies  and  takaful  operators,  as  well  as  from  selected  branches  of  banks  that  have 
bancassurance arrangements with insurers. 
literacy  among  Malaysians 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In addressing the challenges of financial education, collaborative partnerships are important. No single 
organisation can be expected to meet all the demands for consumer education. While Bank Negara 
will  continue  to  actively  engage  the  insurance  industry  in  the  development,  production  and 
dissemination of educational materials and initiatives, the process needs to be driven by the industry.  
Insurance intermediaries provide the direct link to the insuring public and therefore is an essential part 
of  the  efforts  to  increase  familiarity  on  insurance  by  the  community.  With  approximately  147,000 
agents currently in the market, the agency force can contribute significantly towards raising the level of 
financial 
the  various  consumer 
associations, through their direct contact with consumers, have an important role to play in promoting 
an  active  consumer  movement  by  providing  useful  guidance  to  consumers  in  dealing  with  issues 
relating to insurance and takaful matters. Their wide network, close proximity, and good relationship 
with  consumers  can  contribute  towards  the  successful  implementation  of  the  Consumer  Education 
Programme.  
Just  as  the  rapid  deployment  of  new  information  technology  has  expanded  the  scope  of  financial 
services, so too, has it increased our options for meeting the challenges of financial education. In this 
regard,  the  InsuranceInfo  website  represents  an  important  delivery  channel  which  has  significant 
potential to be used extensively to bring relevant and timely information to the public. All the pamphlets 
and  booklets  can  be  downloaded  from  the  website.  Over  time,  the  website  will  be  continually 
enhanced to provide for a  more interactive and user-friendly interface  with consumers that will also 
enable  consumers  to  provide  feedback  on  the  programme  and  obtain  prompt  answers  to  their 
questions.  
InsuranceInfo.  Similarly, 
through 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Consumer  Education  Programme  represents  one  of  several  important  elements  in  the  overall 
strategy of enhancing the consumer protection infrastructure. To achieve the desired outcome of high 
standards  of  market  conduct  that  are  founded  on  principles  of  integrity,  sound  ethics  and 
professionalism, Bank Negara Malaysia has adopted a combination of regulatory policy instruments. 
These include policy development, regulatory initiatives, compliance reviews and ongoing surveillance. 
Recent initiatives that have been implemented in the area of strengthening market conduct within the 
insurance sector include: 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
       The  framework  for  the  introduction  of  qualified  independent  advisers  is  currently  being 
finalized. Such independent advisors will form a new distribution channel for the sale of life 
insurance products. These intermediaries will be licensed under the Insurance Act and will 
be  held  to  the  highest  standards  of  prudential  conduct,  accountability  and  governance  to 
safeguard the interests of consumers. 
The entry requirements for agents have now been raised under a graduated implementation 
programme that commenced in April 2003. Under the programme, examinations have been 
made mandatory to maintain continuing education standards of agents. 
Guidelines dealing with unfair practices in insurance business have been introduced in April 
2003  to  provide  a  more  comprehensive  framework  for  the  regulation  of  insurance  market 
practices.  Among  other  things,  the  Guidelines  provide  for  enhanced  disclosures  to 
consumers, requirements  for  insurance  to  be  sold  on  equitable  terms  and  conditions,  and 
specific restrictions against misrepresentation and unfair discrimination. 
The Guidelines on Claims Settlement Practices introduced in 1995 have now been revised to 
incorporate new measures and improved market practices in claims handling, as well as the 
specification of minimum fraud control and risk management practices relevant to the claims 
process.  
A  minimum  standard  on  product  disclosure  and  transparency  in  the  sale  of  medical  and 
health insurance policies was issued in May 2003. The standard requires insurers and their 
intermediaries  to  provide  sufficient  details  of  the  essential  features  of  medical  and  health 
policies  so  that  policyholders  will  understand  the  important  provisions  of  the  policies,  in 
particular, with respect to premiums, benefits, exclusions and limitations under the policies. 
A survey has also been commissioned to determine the level of consumer satisfaction with 
financial services, including insurance. The results of the survey will provide important input 
for  the  development  of  a  service  quality  index  for  financial  services  that  will  serve  as  a 
benchmark  for  financial  institutions  to  evaluate  their  service  levels  and  identify  areas  for 
improvement. 
In  our  efforts  to  promote  a  larger  role  for  consumer  activism,  attention  has  also  been  directed  at 
enhancing dispute resolution mechanisms for consumers to seek redress. Within the insurance sector, 
the  Insurance  Mediation  Bureau  established  in  1992  constitutes  the  main  avenue  outside  the  court 
system for resolving disputes between policyholders and their insurers. To further enhance the role of 
the  Insurance  Mediation  Bureau  as  a  dispute  resolution  mechanism,  an  expanded  scope  for  the 
Bureau involving higher limits for claims falling within its purview and the inclusion of third party claims 
is being considered. This will provide greater access to the Bureau for a wider spectrum of the insuring 
public.  At  the  same  time,  efforts  are  also  underway  to  merge  the  mediation  bureaus  of  both  the 
banking  and  insurance  sectors  into  a  single  new  Financial  Mediation  Bureau  that  will  serve  as  a 
one-stop  centre  for  the  resolution  of  a  broad  range  of  retail  consumer  issues  raised  against  the 
financial institutions that are regulated by the Central Bank.  
With  effect  from  1  June  this  year,  we  have  also  made  it  a  requirement  for  all  insurers  and  takaful 
operators to establish dedicated complaints units in their respective organizations. The experience has 
been that most complaints can be resolved in-house by the service providers themselves, in particular 
those  complaints  that  involve  delays  in  claims  settlements  due  to  institutional  procedures,  which 
generally comprise the bulk of public complaints. The establishment of the complaints unit by insurers 
and  takaful  operators  is  expected  to  promote  a  more  pro-active  approach  in  the  management  of 
complaints. Such consumer complaints also provide valuable information regarding any shortcoming 
in the products and services. Responding to consumer complaints also promotes customer goodwill. 
Certainly,  as  consumer  awareness  and  financial  literacy  increases  with  the  implementation  of  this 
Consumer  Education  Programme,  it  is  essential  for  financial  service  providers  to  recognise  the 
opportunity to build customer loyalty and increase customer retention through this mechanism.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The advent of new technology and other market innovations will bring new challenges and possibilities 
for  businesses  and  consumers.  We  can  expect  that  this  pace  of  change  in  the  financial  services 
industry will continue to increase. In striving to adjust to these changes, we should not underestimate 
the significant improvements in financial and business practices that can be achieved by empowering 
consumers through education.  
BIS Review 38/2003 
 3
 As  we  continue  on  this  drive  to  raise  the  standards  of  individual  economic  and  financial  well-being 
through  consumer  education,  the  broad  involvement  of  all  parties  involved  in  every  stage  of  the 
programme(cid:146)s  implementation  is  vital  to  encourage  expanded  linkages  between  business  and 
consumer  education  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Our  success  in  this  important  endeavour  will  have  a 
significant  bearing  on  how  well  prepared  our  society  is  to  meet  the  challenges  of  an  increasingly 
dynamic and complex financial environment.  
Dengan itu, saya ingin mengambil kesempatan ini untuk mengucapkan terima kasih kepada semua 
pihak  yang  terlibat  di  atas  kerjasama  dan  sumbangan  serta  komitmen  yang  diberikan  bagi 
menjayakan  Program  Pendidikan  Pengguna  ini.  Usaha-usaha  sedemikian  diharap  akan  dapat 
membaiki  dan  meningkatkan  lagi  prestasi  dan  keupayaan  industri  insurans  dan  takaful  dalam 
memberikan pengguna produk dan servis bertaraf antarabangsa. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2003
