 Michael C Bonello: Single currency issues – a central bank perspective 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the conference “The Euro 
- the impact on business”, organised by the Malta Federation of Industry, 16 January 2003. 
 By way of introduction, it is important to stress that Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro 
are key aspects of the Treaty on European Union. They are a logical consequence of the process of 
European  integration,  and  in  particular  of  the  economic  rationale  of  increased  trade  as  the  driving 
force for the further integration of citizens, institutions and markets. Indeed, the arguments for more 
closely integrated markets, namely that greater trade and financial integration will increase economic 
efficiency and improve welfare, can equally be made for a single currency.  
In the case of the EU, the advantages of a single market postulated by  economic theory  appear to 
have been amply realised. Since internal borders were removed ten years ago, it is estimated that the 
Single Market has helped to create 2.5 million extra jobs; the EU’s combined GDP in 2002 was 1.8%, 
or euro 164.5 billion, higher than it would have been; and each household was on average 5,700 euro 
better off.1 Market opening is, therefore, not only good economics but also very good social policy. 
Further benefits can be expected to flow from the introduction of the single currency. A recent study 
has in fact suggested that currency union approximately doubles trade.2 And specifically with regard to 
the euro, another study has concluded that in the case of Hungary, euro area membership may raise 
the GDP growth rate by 0.6 to 0.9 of a percentage point in terms of a twenty-year average.3  
The  euro  thus  lies  at  the  very  heart  of  the  EU  and  it  is  therefore  no  surprise  that  EU  membership 
carries with it an obligation to participate in EMU and to adopt the single currency.  
Participation in EMU requires a number of preparations, relating to:  
• 
• 
• 
the legal transposition of the acquis on EMU into national law; 
fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria; and  
the  setting-up  of  the  necessary  institutions  and  mechanisms  for  the  co-ordination  of  fiscal 
and economic policy, which remain at the discretion of national governments. 
While the Central Bank will be expected to play a leading role in the event of Malta taking up the offer 
of  EU  membership,  the  country’s  eligibility  to  join  EMU  and  its  ability  to  participate  on  an  on-going 
basis  thereafter,  without  pressures  arising  in  other  sectors  of  the  economy,  also  depend  on  the 
commitment of the other policy-makers. This is because the Maastricht convergence criteria include 
not only a fiscal dimension, which is clearly outside the remit of central banks, but also others that are 
only partly influenced by the actions of central banks. 
This being said, the exchange rate criterion, which relates to the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II), 
falls  well  within  the  competence  of  central  banks.  I,  therefore,  propose  to  focus  today  on  the 
implications of this criterion for the Central Bank of Malta. 
The implications of the single currency for exchange rate policy 
Exchange rate policy is determined by the Minister of Finance on the basis of recommendations made 
by  the  Central  Bank.  In  practice,  this  means  that  the  Bank  must  have  a  considered  view  on  which 
exchange rate strategy is appropriate at any particular time. A key task of the Bank in the run-up to 
EMU, therefore, would be to assess the implications of the exchange rate criterion for the evolution of 
                                                      
1  European  Commission,  Directorate  General  Internal  Markets.  “The  Internal  Market  –  Ten  Years  Without  Frontiers”. 
Brussels, January 2003. 
2   Andrew K Rose, “The Effect of Common Currencies in International Trade: A Meta-Analysis”, (draft) University of California, 
Berkeley, 8 April 2002 
3   Attila Csajbok, Agnes Csermely, “Adopting the Euro in Hungary: Expected Costs, Benefits and Timing”, National Bank of 
Hungary, Occasional Papers 24. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 1
 policy. This criterion requires, as a condition for joining EMU, that a country participate in ERM II for at 
least two years without resorting to a devaluation against the euro.  
Timing issues related to entry in ERM II 
In this process a first decision relates to the exchange rate strategy to be pursued in the interim period 
between now and entry into ERM II after EU accession. The EU Treaty is not restrictive in this regard. 
Any  exchange  rate  strategy  is  acceptable  as  long  as  it  contributes  to  real  convergence  and 
macroeconomic stability, and is compatible with ERM II by the time of entry in the mechanism. And 
since pegs to currencies other than the euro are incompatible with ERM II, our current exchange rate 
regime, which includes the euro, the US dollar and sterling, would need to change. 
In  view  of  the  positive  experience  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  and  the  absence  so  far  of 
pressures  on  the  lira  during  the  on-going  capital  account  liberalisation  process,  our  strategy  in  this 
regard is to maintain this fixed regime but to gradually reduce the weight of the US dollar and sterling 
until  the  euro  is  the  sole  reference  currency.  This  adjustment  should  not  pose  unsurmountable 
difficulties given that the euro already carries a weight of 70%. As for the timing and pace of the move 
to a full euro peg, these would depend, among other things, on the expected date of entry in EMU, 
which  is  conditioned  by  the  two-year  period  embedded  in  ERM  II,  and  also  on  the  pace  of  the 
economy’s convergence to EU income levels and economic structures.  
Issues raised by Malta’s prospective participation in ERM II 
During  the  ERM  II  phase,  which  for  most  new  members  would  start  soon  after  EU  accession,  the 
Maltese lira will be fully pegged to the euro and the exchange rate would be allowed to fluctuate by up 
to ±15% around a central rate to be agreed with the European Central Bank (ECB). A major issue, 
therefore,  concerns  the  level  of  the  central  rate  and  the  size  of  the  fluctuation  bands.  Although  the 
central  rate  could  be  re-aligned  if  it  cannot  be  sustained  within  the  chosen  bands,  the  initial 
determination of this rate is crucial because it signals to the market what the authorities consider to be 
the appropriate level of the exchange rate.  
Determining the appropriate central rate, however, is not an easy task. While the available evidence 
suggests that in the current economic environment the Maltese lira exchange rate is sustainable at 
prevailing  levels,  the  Central  Bank  is  nevertheless  undertaking  the  necessary  econometric  work  in 
order to estimate an equilibrium rate. 
The choice of the fluctuation bands is equally important. A narrow band has the advantage of limiting 
exchange rate risk and contributing to the  Bank’s credibility in the area of monetary  policy.  A wider 
band, on the other hand, would ease pressures on the monetary authorities to intervene in the foreign 
exchange markets to maintain the exchange rate within the agreed bands. Given Malta’s dependence 
on foreign trade and investment, the Bank’s commitment to price stability and its positive track record 
with a fixed peg, a narrow band, and the lesser degree of uncertainty and volatility associated with it, 
would be preferable. I should add that as real convergence is progressively achieved and as structural 
reforms are implemented, a narrow band should become even more feasible.  
A smooth transition to EMU indeed requires more than satisfying the exchange rate criterion and the 
other four Maastricht criteria. To be able to implement the ECB’s monetary policy without difficulties, 
new euro area members should also achieve a minimum degree of real convergence. The ECB will, in 
fact, give its opinion on the level of real convergence achieved by each country before it is allowed to 
enter EMU. In reflecting on the future evolution of exchange rate policy in Malta, the Central Bank will 
thus also continue to monitor developments in the rest of the economy, particularly in so far as they 
affect the sustainability of the Maastricht criteria. 
Implications of the single currency for the composition of the external reserves 
From the date of EU accession until the end of the ERM II phase, Malta would qualify as “a Member 
State  with  a  derogation”,  the  lira  would  remain  the  national  currency  and  monetary  policy  would 
continue to be set by the Central Bank. As noted above, however, in the process of moving from EU 
accession to ERM II the euro would progressively gain in importance as the reference currency in the 
currency basket until it finally ceases to function as a foreign currency on joining the EMU. In addition, 
upon  EU  accession  the  Central  Bank  will  be  expected  to  transfer  an  amount  of  external  reserves, 
other than the euro and a number of other specified currencies, to the ECB. In order of time, therefore, 
  the composition of the external reserves of the Central Bank would change to reflect, first, the move 
towards a 100 per cent peg to the euro, then the transfer of a portion of the non-euro reserves to the 
ECB, and lastly the adoption of the euro as the national currency. The Bank is currently studying how 
the  necessary  adjustments  could  take  place  without  increasing  its  exposure  to  exchange  rate  risk. 
Given the implications which the simultaneous move out of euro assets by all acceding countries could 
have for the international value of the euro, moreover, the Bank - in common with the central banks of 
the other acceding countries - would co-ordinate these adjustments with the ECB.  
Operational framework for open market operations and reserve management 
Upon joining EMU, the Central Bank would act as agent for the ECB in the management of the ECB’s 
foreign  reserve  assets  and  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  At  this  point,  the  Bank  would 
practically  act  as  an  interface  between  those  parties  eligible  to  participate  in  the  euro  area’s 
open-market  operations  and  foreign  exchange  transactions  and  the  ECB.  This  function  has 
implications for both the Bank’s institutional set-up and its operational framework. 
First,  the  Bank  must  have  the  necessary  legal  power  to  carry  out  these  tasks.  In  this  regard,  the 
Central  Bank  of  Malta  Act  already  permits  the  Bank  to  hold  and  exchange  virtually  any  financial 
instrument  and  foreign  asset.  Additionally,  however,  it  requires  a  good  understanding  of  the 
operational  framework  governing  such  transactions,  including  the  financial  instruments  and  legal 
documentation  that  apply  to  transactions  with  eligible  counterparties,  the  criteria  which  determine  a 
counterparty’s  eligibility  to  participate  in  these  transactions  and  those  that  determine  whether  a 
particular  asset  can  be  used  as  collateral.  Whereas  most  of  the  instruments  currently  used  by  the 
Central Bank are already in line with those of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB), further 
adjustments are necessary to achieve full compliance. To this end, the Bank has set up a Monetary 
Operations  Committee  and  a  Foreign  Reserves  Operations  Committee  to  identify  the  appropriate 
additional adjustments to the Bank’s operational framework. 
The ability to interface with the ECB also requires that the systems which each Member State uses for 
the  settlement  of  cross-border  payments  and  the  transfer  of  assets  –  in  other  words,  the  payment 
system and the securities settlement system – are somehow linked with those of the other members. 
This linkage is a prerequisite for the efficient conduct of monetary and foreign exchange operations in 
the  euro  area.  As  far  as  the  domestic  payment  system  is  concerned,  the  new  Malta  Real-time 
Inter-Bank Settlement System (MaRIS) already provides for the immediate delivery and settlement of 
wholesale financial payments in line with principles governing the EU’s TARGET system. This is an 
innovation  whose  advantages  the  business  community  in  particular  will  come  to  appreciate  in  time. 
Meanwhile, discussions between the Central Bank and the Malta Stock Exchange are underway on 
the changes that need to be made to the securities settlement system.  
Of course, having in place the right systems which permit funds and security titles to be transferred 
between  Malta  and  the  euro  area  is  not  enough.  A  key  task  of  every  central  bank  is  that  of 
safeguarding  the  stability  of  such  systems.  Whereas  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  this  holds  true 
irrespective of EU membership, one cannot overlook the fact that the ECB has a direct interest in the 
stability of payment systems throughout the EU.  Appropriate oversight mechanisms are accordingly 
being put in place 
Information - another important element in the ESCB’s strategy 
In this regard, both the Central Bank of Malta and the ECB would require continuous access to the 
necessary  information  to  enable  them  to  gauge  whether  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  are 
performing  well.  Such  information,  and  a  minimum  level  of  forecasting  capabilities,  are  in  fact 
necessary  for  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  tasks  of  a  central  bank,  particularly  for  the  maintenance  of 
financial stability and the formulation of monetary policy.  
Central banks of accession countries will therefore assume statistical reporting obligations towards the 
ECB  as  soon  as  they  become  members  of  the  ESCB,  that  is  upon  EU  accession,  although  these 
obligations  are  less  onerous  than  those  which  apply  to  euro  area  members.  This  future  obligation 
should not pose any difficulty for the Central Bank as the existing legislation already gives it the power 
to access information directly and to publish it. 
In addition to these enabling powers, however, the Bank must also be equipped with the necessary 
technological  and  operational  infrastructure  and  communication  facilities  to  enable  it  to  receive 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 3
 information from reporting agents and to forward it to the ECB. It must also ensure that the relevant 
information  follows  the  agreed  methodology.  Recognising  this  future  obligation,  the  Central  Bank 
almost three years ago established a broad-based representative committee to identify the changes 
required in the way monetary and financial statistics are classified and reported. This work has been 
completed and the reporting forms have been updated accordingly. To facilitate the collection of this 
information,  moreover,  a  common  database  is  being  established  between  the  Bank  and  the  Malta 
Financial Services Authority. In the meantime, the Bank and the National Statistics Office are working 
to  establish  a  common  direct  reporting  database  which  will  permit  the  dissemination  of  balance  of 
payments related data to the ECB and EUROSTAT. 
The steady flow of information between the ECB and the national central banks is equally important 
from the point of view of transparency and effectiveness. The latter requires that ECB decisions be 
communicated  in  each  Member  State  as  early  as  possible.  For  this  purpose,  the  Central  Bank’s 
communications  facilities  will  have  to  be  upgraded.  In  particular,  the  Bank  must  have  an  archiving 
system capable of receiving, storing, retrieving and sending working documents to the ECB. Such a 
system is being developed. 
Conclusion 
Joining a common currency area clearly involves a complex and multifaceted process with implications 
of both a substantive and technical nature. This has become particularly evident as the emphasis of 
the Bank’s preparations has shifted away from legislative issues to the implementation phase. Much 
useful work has already been done, the Bank has been considerably strengthened as a result and we 
are fully in step with the central banks of other accession countries.  
Looking immediately ahead, the Bank’s integration within the ESCB now requires it to be represented 
on all the decision-making organs of the ECB. In fact, the Bank has already been invited to nominate a 
representative to sit  on each of the twelve committees of the ECB  in an observer capacity as from 
April. These technical committees deal with issues ranging from accounting, auditing and legal matters 
and  banking  supervision,  to  market  operations,  payment  and  settlement  systems,  statistics  and 
information technology. 
The early presence of accession countries’ central banks on these committees serves to underline the 
fact that adopting the single currency involves more than the physical introduction of euro notes and 
coins would suggest, although this, too, will be one of the Central Bank’s responsibilities should the 
day  come  when  euro  notes  and  Maltese-designed  euro  coins  become  legal  tender.  Indeed,  the 
adoption of the euro touches upon the most fundamental aspects of a central bank’s core functions, its 
operational  framework  and  its  institutional  set-up.  It  could  be  described  as  the  start  of  a  new  and 
challenging  phase  that  will  give  another  dimension,  not  only  to  the  Central  Bank  itself,  but  to 
policy-making in Malta more generally. And, not least, as may be seen from the papers presented at 
this  seminar,  the  single  currency  also  holds  out  the  prospect  of  significant  efficiency  gains  and, 
therefore, of financial savings. 
 