 TT Mboweni: Inflation, growth and employment opportunities  
Lecture  by  Mr  TT  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Department  of 
Economics, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, 6 March 2003. 
 Introduction 
the  Portfolio  and  Select  Committees  on  Finance,  Deputy  vice-chancellor,  
1. 
Members  of 
Professors,  
Staff,  
Students,  
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is very pleasant to be on this side of the beautiful Hex River Mountains and to speak to you on a 
number  of  issues  right  at  the  core  of  central  banking.  The  accusation  is  often  heard  that  central 
bankers  have  narrowed  the  world  down  to  inflation,  and  do  not  have  an  open  mind  on  any  other 
matters.  Not  true!  The  way  in  which  these  matters  come  together  -  the  principles  behind  their 
interaction - will be central to my talk to you today.  
The magnitude of the challenges facing our economy 
2. 
Starting  with  a  longer-term  picture  of  inflation,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  double-digit  inflation 
which reigned from 1974 to 1992 left considerable scars on our economy. Its redistributive impact was 
nasty,  with  the  buying  power  of  the  most  vulnerable  groups  in  society,  the  poor  and  the  elderly,  in 
particular being undermined. The plight of a pensioner who retired twenty years ago using interest on 
a fixed deposit to provide for himself or herself is illustrated by the cost of a basket of consumer items 
which cost R100 in early 1983. The cost of that basket shot up to R380 in early 1993, and currently 
amounts  to  R815.  Although  inflation  has  receded  to  single-digit  levels  and  has  averaged  around 
7,8 per cent per annum over the last ten years, this is still enough to very significantly erode the living 
standard of the most vulnerable groups in our society over time. Some distortions therefore remain, 
leading to frictions and misallocation of resources. 
High  unemployment  continues  to  characterise  the  South  African  labour  market.  Based  on  the 
responses of a representative sample of 30 000 households sampled  in the February  2002  Labour 
Force  Survey,  Statistics  South  Africa  puts  the  official  unemployment  rate  at  29,4  per  cent.  The 
absolute  number  of  the  unemployed  amounts  to  4,7  million  people.  And  these  are  people  who  are 
looking for jobs - it does not cover those who have given up. The opportunity cost to our economy is 
huge: even if each of them would only produce goods and services to the amount of R650 per month 
(the equivalent of the minimum wage in the lowest-paying areas), their combined output would amount 
to almost R40 billion per annum - almost as much as the value actually added in our entire agriculture, 
forestry and fishing sector. 
Disillusionment and desperation often accompany unemployment. Unemployment insurance - soon to 
be  expanded  to  more  sectors  -  can  help  to  relieve  some  of  the  symptoms,  but  what  is  of  course 
needed  is  the  creation  of  a  sufficient  number  of  sustainable  job  opportunities  to  absorb  the 
unemployed. 
To  this  end,  most  economists  agree  that  sustained  real  GDP  growth  of  around  5  to  6  per  cent 
per annum  is  needed.  Whereas  South  Africa  barely  managed  to  record  an  average  growth  rate  of 
1,5 per cent per annum during the 1980s, this has indeed accelerated to around 3 per cent per annum 
since 1994. Nevertheless, a significant and sustained further improvement is needed. The question is 
how? And in what way could monetary policy contribute towards such stronger growth?  
Inflation and growth: is there a trade-off? 
3. 
Can more growth (and the other side  of the coin, less unemployment) be bought by  allowing more 
inflation? This question has interested economists a lot since 1958 when A W Phillips and R G Lipsey 
published  their  analysis  of  the  relation  between  unemployment  and  the  rate  of  change  of  money 
wages  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  1861  to  1957.  Empirical  evidence  indicated  the  existence  of  an 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 1
 inverse  relationship  between  wage  inflation  and  unemployment.  This  implied  that  an  inflation-
accommodating monetary and fiscal policy stance - an easy-money policy - could be used to reduce 
unemployment. 
However, this relationship turned out to be fragile at least and quite false at worst. Firstly, empirical 
evidence which accumulated in numerous countries increasingly undermined the Phillips curve theory 
as inflation accelerated but the hoped-for reduction in unemployment either failed to materialise or did 
not last for long. Secondly, economic theories were developed which explicitly incorporated learning 
behaviour.  Assuming  adaptive  expectations  it  could  be  shown  that  "the"  Phillips  curve  (with  the 
unemployment rate on the horizontal axis and inflation on the vertical) would shift upward over time. 
The true picture would then consist of a short-term Phillips curve where the trade-off holds for a while, 
but a long-term Phillips curve which is vertical.  
Some  rational  expectations  models  went  further,  and  implied  that  stimulatory  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies  would  be  fully  expected  and  reflected  in  prices  without  having  quantity  effects.  This  would 
mean that there would be no short-term Phillips curves, just a long-term vertical relationship. 
Looking  at  South  African  empirical  information  in  this  regard,  there  are  unfortunately  severe  data 
problems.  The  data  on  registered  unemployment  (people  registering  as  unemployed  in  order  to 
receive unemployment insurance payouts) is patchy and where available, not consistent over time. As 
far  as  the  Labour  Force  Surveys  are  concerned,  they  only  started  in  2000  and  have  a  six-monthly 
frequency. 
But assuming growth in real GDP is the mirror image of unemployment, adequate data of high quality 
is  available  to  investigate  the  proxy  relationship  -  that  between  inflation  and  real  GDP  growth.  This 
relationship turns out to be very loose. On a few occasions there are signs of the expected short-term 
relationship, with higher growth accompanying higher inflation, but most of the time it doesn't seem to 
persist. Over the long term, no trade-off seems to hold. In fact, it is noteworthy that from 1982 to 1992 
average inflation amounted to 14,6 per cent against average real GDP growth of 0,7 per cent, while 
from 1992 to 2002 inflation averaged 7,6 per cent per annum and real growth 2,7 per cent. The lower 
inflation,  the  better  economic  growth.  This  runs  against  the  logic  of  the  Phillips  curve,  but  makes 
perfect sense for central bankers who tend to stress the deadweight losses flowing from high inflation. 
An uncertain environment with high inflation is certainly not conducive to a true reading of price signals 
and relative scarcities, brisk fixed capital formation and sound resource allocation in general. (Some 
observers  would  of  course  argue  that  both  the  low  growth  and  the  high  inflation  of  the  1970s  and 
1980s were caused by outside factors such as various supply side shocks. Correlation doesn't prove 
causality. And so the debate will continue…) 
Pursuing this line of reasoning further, a number of studies covering a large number of countries have 
been  done,  inter  alia  by  IMF  officials,  to  estimate  the  rate  of  inflation  above  which  the  distortions 
introduced by inflation really start to drag the real growth rate of the economy down. Not surprisingly, 
these studies come up with different answers. Growth-destroying inflation starts at low single digits, 
high  single  digits  or  (at most)  slightly  above  the  ten  per  cent  mark,  depending  on  the  methodology 
used. A little inflation may be good, for example making it easier to lower real prices and wages in 
industries experiencing more competition without having to lower nominal prices and wages. 
However, it must be pointed out that low inflation should not solely be pursued because it is conducive 
to sustainable economic growth. It should also be pursued because equity, fairness and development 
in the broadest sense would be sacrificed if inflation were left to spiral upward. 
What is currently happening to inflation, growth and employment? 
4. 
It is by now well-known that the South African government has set a target of 3 to 6 per cent for CPIX 
inflation.  In  2002,  the  actual  outcome  was  10  per  cent.  While  disappointing,  this  outcome  was  not 
unexpected in the light of the 34 per cent depreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate of the 
rand during 2001. It fed higher rand prices for imported products into the inflation spiral. In order to 
brake these inflationary forces, the Reserve Bank therefore raised its repurchase rate on 4 occasions 
from January to September 2002, on each occasion by 100 basis points. 
The  2001  depreciation  of  the  rand  was  fairly  soon  reflected  in  production  prices.  Twelve-month 
production price inflation accelerated from a low point of 7,8 per cent in September 2001 to a double-
digit rate of 11,5 per cent in January 2002 and eventually reached a maximum of 15,4 per cent in both 
August and September 2002. Consumer prices tend to lag a bit behind production prices, and this is 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2003
 indeed  what  happened  again:  Twelve-month  CPIX  inflation  accelerated  from  a  low  point  of 
5,8 per cent in September 2001 to double-digit rates from August 2002 and recorded a recent highest 
level of 12,7 per cent in November 2002. Food prices played an important role in this process. At the 
production  price  level  twelve-month  food  price  inflation  peaked  at  around  30  per  cent,  while  at  the 
consumer  level  it  peaked  at  around  20  per  cent.  For  key  food  items  like  maize,  Southern  African 
production fell below demand, driving prices towards import parity - which meant very high levels in 
rand terms during most of the past 18 months, given what had happened to the exchange rate. 
But  year-on-year inflation rates can be deceptive, making it worthwhile to also analyse shorter-term 
price movements. One way of doing so is to calculate the percentage change from quarter to quarter 
in the relevant price index, and then to annualise it. Calculated in this way, production price inflation 
shot up to 25,8 per cent in the first quarter of 2002, but receded during the course of the year to only 
5,0 per cent in the fourth quarter. Consumer prices were much more sticky; annualised CPIX inflation 
on  balance  accelerated  from  11,5  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002  to  14,5  per  cent  in  the  final 
quarter.  By  January  2003,  however,  the  month-to-month  rate  of  CPIX  inflation  reflected  some 
moderation  flowing  through  from  some  of  the  slowdown  in  production  prices;  it  receded  to  an 
annualised  rate  of  6,0  per  cent.  At  that  time  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  rand  had  swung  the 
month-to-month  rate  of  production  price  inflation  around  to  an  annualised  rate  of  decline  of 
6,4 per cent. It is not only in Japan where prices can decline! But I should hasten to add that there is 
no  comparison  between  Japan's  long-term  price  deflation  and  South  Africa's  short-term  decline  in 
production prices which is so closely related to exchange rate movements.  
How do inflation prospects look going forward? To some extent this has already been dealt with in the 
Reserve Bank's Monetary Policy Review of October 2002. It projected that CPIX inflation would peak 
towards the end of 2002 (which it did), and then would decline fairly dramatically during the course of 
2003  (which  also  seems  to  be  in  progress).  The  disciplined  monetary  policy  stance  and  continued 
sound control over the government finances were already set to reign in the inflation spiral, and are 
now receiving some additional help from the relatively strong exchange rate - stronger than had been 
incorporated in the central scenario of the October 2002 projections. New projections will of course be 
tabled at the forthcoming Monetary Policy Committee meeting, to be held on 19 and 20 March. Some 
downward  rigidity  in  inflation  should  always  be  expected  with  various  ratchet  effects,  sticky 
nontradeables' prices and the like, but the resolve of the MPC to steer inflation through difficult terrain 
to within the 6 to 3 per cent target range should not be underestimated.  
Doing  all  the  right  things  and  the  things  right  as  far  as  macroeconomic  policy  is  concerned,  with 
enhanced  stability,  clear  medium-term  policy 
transparency  and 
accountability,  confidence  is  growing  and  fixed  investment  expenditure  is  rising.  Furthermore,  the 
rising investment expenditure is spread over many industries. This bodes well for future growth. The 
transition  from  volatile  real  GDP  growth  that  did  not  quite  match  population  growth  in  the  1980s  to 
more  consistent  growth  of  around  3  per  cent  per  annum  in  recent  years  is  very  significant.  As  the 
consistent track record grows, the athlete is likely to graduate to the stage where 3 per cent is much 
too pedestrian. 
Declining  employment  numbers  have  since  1989  been  recorded  in  the  core  formal  sectors  of  the 
South  African  economy.  These  numbers  are  not  comprehensive;  while  it  inter  alia  includes 
government,  manufacturing  and  mining,  it  for  instance  doesn't  include  industries  such  as  computer 
programming. But it is broad enough to make it worthwhile to note that core formal sector employment 
turned  around  in  the  second  quarter  of  last  year,  growing  at  an  annualised  rate  of  1,8  per  cent, 
followed  by  2,4  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter.  While  two  swallows  do  not  make  a  summer,  it 
nevertheless represents good news.  
frameworks,  and  adequate 
A note on lags in monetary policy 
5. 
In monetary policy formulation we are acutely aware of the long and variable lags inherent in monetary 
policy.  We  have  to  assess  the  current  economic  situation  and  economic  problems  at  hand  as 
comprehensively  and  quickly  as  possible.  And  we  cannot  simply  look  out  of  the  window  like  a  rain 
forecaster to get an initial feel for the situation. A huge amount of statistical work, including large-scale 
surveys of economic agents in various sectors, has to be done to get the facts on the table. 
Then  we  have  to  decide  which  policy  instruments  to  use  and  to  what  extent.  Utilising  inputs  from 
economic  researchers,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  deliberates  on  issues  and  after  thorough 
debate  takes  a  decision.  Next  we  have  to  implement  those  instrument  changes.  With  operational 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 3
 departments that are well-geared, this element of monetary policy is usually quick and clean. But then, 
of course, the economy has to respond to the new instrument settings. 
Many things can only be speeded up to a certain point. Even with the utmost dedication and effort, a 
comprehensive picture of the economic situation can only be tabled about two months after the end of 
the  quarter  concerned,  although  many  individual  bits  of  information  are  available  and  are  analysed 
earlier  on.  The  MPC  process  itself  is  fairly  quick,  taking  two  days.  Monetary  policy  changes  can 
generally be implemented almost immediately. The really frustrating part is the "outside lag". This is 
generally  held  to  be  about  18  to  24  months.  When  the  MPC  senses  an  imminent  acceleration  in 
inflation  and  raises  interest  rates  to  counter  it,  private  sector  banks  usually  raise  their  own  interest 
rates  within  days.  However,  with  so  many  transactions  already  irrevocably  in  the  pipeline  and  with 
many economic agents not very sensitive to interest rates, credit extension and expenditure are slow 
to react. Eventually they do, of course. It is usually only at that time, when expenditure slows down 
significantly, that price and wage setters start to discover real resistance to further increases. It could 
easily be 18 months or longer from when policy interest rates are raised to when it fully works through 
and moderates the inflation rate.  
In this world of long lags, credible inflation targeting seems a useful mechanism to shorten the outside 
lag and perhaps moderate the magnitude of the interest rate changes required to achieve a particular 
outcome. If there is no doubt that the authorities are committed to the inflation target and will in the 
end prevail, economic agents are likely to set their prices and wages at levels readily reconcilable with 
the inflation target, and are likely to view deviations from the target as temporary. Less interest rate 
medicine  is  likely  to  be  required  with  such  a  forward-looking  expectations  formation  process.  Less 
sacrifice would therefore be required to get to the inflation target range and to remain there. But this 
could only work if the central bank is fully committed to the inflation target, is independent and willing 
to use its policy instruments to the full extent needed, and if all economic agents know this. 
In cricket, one-day games have risen in popularity as the tempo of life has accelerated. Most people 
simply do not have five days to watch the traditional kind of match. So things have been speeded up; 
without it, the Cricket World Cup tournament would have taken ages to complete. It seems preferable 
to also speed up the tempo at which inflation unwinds and returns to our 6 to 3 per cent target range, 
working along the lines of the forward-looking expectations process described previously. While I have 
no doubt at all regarding the Reserve Bank's independence and commitment to achieving the inflation 
target, the lag structure in economic agents' response will be most interesting. May we have a one-day 
match rather than a marathon! 
Conclusion 
6. 
Low  inflation  and  financial  stability  support  sustainable  economic  growth,  development,  equity  and 
employment  creation.  They  are  not  in  opposition  to  it.  While  some  short-term  trade-offs  cannot  be 
denied, allowing  inflation to take root has  dire long-term consequences. CPIX inflation  is already  in 
deceleration mode, and the Reserve Bank will vigorously ensure that it ends up in the 6 to 3 per cent 
target range. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2003
