 Ingimundur Friðriksson: Monetary policy and the current monetary situation 
Address  by  Mr  Ingimundur  Friðriksson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  to  a  civic  club 
meeting in Reykjavík, 26 February 2003. 
 The framework for monetary policy in Iceland was altered decisively in March 2001. The government 
and  the  Central  Bank  issued  a  joint  declaration  adopting  inflation  targeting  as  the  mainstay  of 
monetary policy and abandoning the fixed exchange rate policy which had been followed for just over 
a  decade.  To  begin  with,  a  relatively  narrow  target  band  was  set  in  the  previous  regime  for  the 
reference exchange rate of 2¼% in either direction around the central value for the króna. This was 
widened in two stages, to end up as a 9% deviation in either direction early in 2000. During this period, 
price  stability  was  the  principal  objective  of  monetary  policy  and  a  stable  exchange  rate  was  an 
intermediate target. Since the adoption of inflation targeting, the Central Bank’s inflation forecast could 
be  said  to  have  actually  served  as  an  intermediate  target  of  monetary  policy,  with  the  ultimate 
objective price stability. Inflation targeting has established itself in many countries in recent years and 
has  formed  the  backbone  of  monetary  policy,  for  instance,  in  the  UK,  Sweden,  Norway  and  New 
Zealand, with good results in each case. 
In May of 2001 the Icelandic parliament Althingi unanimously adopted a new Central Bank Act, which 
entailed  extensive  changes  from  the  previous  legislation.  Taking  into  consideration  innovations  in 
central bank legislation in other countries, this Act consolidated the new inflation targeting policy. The 
most  significant  change  from  the  earlier  legislation  was  to  set  a  single,  principal  objective  for  the 
Central Bank, i.e. to promote price stability. The Bank was also granted the independence to apply its 
instruments in  order  to  achieve this objective. Furthermore, it  was  assigned the task of maintaining 
Iceland’s foreign exchange reserve and fostering an efficient and reliable financial system, i.e. financial 
stability.  The  Act  also  stipulated  that  the  treasury  may  not  borrow  from  the  Central  Bank.  Specific 
requirements were set out concerning transparency and accountability towards both the government 
and the public. For example, the Bank is now obliged to publicly account for its monetary policy and for 
monetary and exchange rate developments and its actions in these areas at least quarterly.  
The  principal  objective  of  current  Central  Bank  monetary  policy,  as  stated  in  the  joint  declaration 
issued by the Bank and the government in March 2001, is to keep inflation as close as possible to 
2½%. Should inflation deviate from this target by more than 1½ percentage points in either direction, 
the Bank is to provide the government with a written public account explaining what has caused this 
deviation, how the Bank intends to respond and how long it expects that it will take for inflation to once 
again return to within the targeted inflation limits.  
The Central Bank has only one instrument at its disposal to achieve this objective: interest rates. The 
significant interest rate here is that used in the Bank’s repurchase transactions with credit institutions, 
sometimes referred to as the Central Bank’s policy interest rate. Such transactions in fact represent 
the Bank’s liquidity facility for these institutions. The commercial and savings banks subsequently set 
their  own  rates  of  interest,  having  regard  to  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  rate,  and  short-term  market 
interest rates generally change in phase with the Central Bank rate. If other factors remain constant, 
changes in the Central Bank interest rate also affect long-term interest rates, but here other aspects 
also enter the picture. The response of these rates to changes in the Central Bank rate is therefore not 
always predictable and tends to occur with a certain time lag.  
Inflation  forecasting  plays  a  crucial  role  in  Central  Bank  policy.  It  produces  four  forecasts  annually, 
which  are  published  in  its  quarterly  Monetary  Bulletin.  The  inflation  forecast  extends  just  over  two 
years into the future, on a quarter-by-quarter basis. As in other countries, interest rate changes by the 
Central  Bank  take  quite  some  time  to  have  an  impact  throughout  the  economy.  This  makes  it 
necessary  to  have  a  forward-looking  policy,  with  the  inflation  forecast  based  on  state-of-the-art 
methodologies. In addition to its inflation forecast, the Central Bank publishes a quarterly assessment 
of the economic and monetary situation and prospects, including a national economic forecast, and 
their probable impact on price level developments. If inflation looks likely to exceed the Bank’s target 
limits in a long-term perspective, the Bank will raise its policy interest rate, or cut this rate if inflation is 
heading below the target limit.  
In preparing its inflation forecasts and regular assessment of the economic situation and outlook, the 
Central Bank examines a wide variety of indicators. These include both statistical data and information 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 obtained  from  interviews  with  representatives  of  industry,  special  interest  groups,  credit  institutions 
and others. Much of this statistical data is available on the Bank’s website.  
Decisions by the Central Bank’s Board of Governors are made following in-depth examination of these 
indicators,  based  on  the  Bank’s  evaluation  of  the  situation  and  prospects,  the  premises  behind  the 
inflation forecast and the inflation forecast itself. In accordance with the provisions of the Act which 
entered  into  force  in  the  spring  of  2001,  the  Board  adopted  internal  rules  on  the  preparation  of, 
arguments for and presentation of its monetary policy decisions. The rules were formally approved at 
the beginning of 2002 and published in the quarterly Monetary Bulletin. 
The  inflation  target  adopted  in  March  2001  removed  the  earlier  fluctuation  bands  set  for  the  ISK 
exchange  rate  and  the  exchange  rate  was  floated.  The  new  monetary  policy  framework  was 
introduced under rather difficult conditions, with a sliding exchange rate and mounting inflation. It is fair 
to say that the tight monetary stance is the main reason that inflation receded as sharply as it did in 
2002. Experience has shown that the monetary policy passed this demanding trial with flying colours 
and no one should any longer doubt its value for the Icelandic economy. It works in Iceland just as it 
does everywhere else. 
The Central Bank responded to imminent inflationary pressure by raising its interest rates in 1998 and 
still  further  in  1999  and  2000.  The  interest  rate  increase  served  to  reduce  excess  demand  in  the 
economy and the ISK exchange rate rose, thus slowing increases to the consumer price index (CPI) in 
an  overheated  economy.  Early  in  2000  the  fluctuation  bands  for  the  króna  were  widened,  in  part 
because  the  previous  limits  were  then  felt  to  be  restraining  the  rising  exchange  rate,  which  was 
regarded as  necessary  to  counter  inflationary  pressure. The exchange rate peaked in the spring of 
2000, when it was just over 12% higher than at present.  
Market expectations changed in the spring of 2000, and the exchange rate began a downward trend. 
There are no doubt various explanations as to why this occurred but probably the major factors were 
concern at a sizeable current account deficit and the resulting enormous need for foreign financing, 
together with Icelandic investments in foreign securities during that same year, not least by pension 
funds. The downward exchange rate slide lasted until late November 2001. 
Several times during the period from mid-2000 until well into 2001, the Central Bank intervened in the 
currency  market  in  an  attempt  to  prevent  a  further  decrease  in  the  exchange  rate.  The  Bank 
intervened in particular when a downward spiral seemed to be forming, or when the Bank felt that its 
intervention could have a positive effect in changing market expectations. This was based in part on 
the Bank’s conclusion that the exchange rate had already dropped more than was reconcilable with 
long-term equilibrium in the economy. The Central Bank expended substantial sums in intervening on 
the foreign exchange market, over ISK 40 billion in total, without this sufficing to halt the slide of the 
króna. At best, it may have slowed the depreciation until the economy had cooled somewhat, and it 
also  contributed  to  making  the  inflationary  impact  of  the  exchange  rate  drop  less  than  it  would 
otherwise have been. 
An article by Gerður Ísberg and Þórarinn G. Pétursson in this February’s issue of the Central Bank’s 
Monetary Bulletin describes the Bank’s actions on the foreign exchange market during 2000 and 2001 
and  assesses  their  impact.  The  article  concludes  definitively  that  at  best  the  intervention  had  only 
short-term effect in each case and the market soon returned to its previous situation. In other words, 
their conclusion is that intervention on the foreign exchange market against strong prevailing currents 
has precious little effect unless accompanied by corresponding changes in the domestic interest rates. 
This is in full accord with the experience in other countries. 
In recent public discussion the claim has often been made that the exchange rate of the króna is far 
too high and that the Central Bank needs to take steps to bring it down again. The fact of the matter is 
that the Bank’s means of controlling the exchange rate are overestimated and the power of the market 
underestimated when the claim is made that the Central Bank can, through its actions, direct the króna 
to a specific level. The proposal has been made, for instance, that the Central Bank cut its interest 
rates substantially with the aim of lowering the exchange rate. In this context it should be pointed out 
that the Bank has cut its policy rate substantially, from 10.4% only a year ago (11.4% two years ago) 
to 5.3% at present. The Bank’s nominal policy rate has not been lower since 1994 and the real policy 
rate  is  at  its  lowest  since  1996.  The  domestic  and  foreign  interest  rate  differential  has  narrowed 
significantly.  In  addition,  the  Central  Bank’s  interest  rate  is  now  below  the  estimated  equilibrium 
interest rate and thus has a stimulating effect on the economy. The impact of interest rate changes 
generally is only visible after a certain time lag, prompting one to conclude that the effect of the major 
decrease in interest rates during the past year has yet to be fully felt.  
  As is well known, the exchange rate for the króna plummeted in 2000 and 2001, and for quite some 
time was substantially below a level reconcilable with long-term equilibrium. This occurred at a time 
when the price of key exports was very high, making the years 2000 and 2001 especially favourable 
for the export sector and in fact also for import competing sectors. Enterprises in these sectors now 
understandably feel the effects of the rise in the exchange rate. It is not to be expected, however, that 
the same conditions will again arise in these sectors as prevailed, for example, during 2001 and in the 
early  part  of  2002.  In  this  connection  it  could  be  mentioned  that,  based  on  the  predictions  on 
performance made by financial enterprises, the contribution margin in fisheries companies will be fairly 
good this year, although not as good as in 2001 and 2002, which were quite exceptional. 
In the February issue of its Monetary Bulletin, the Central Bank published an analysis of the proposed 
major construction projects in East Iceland1 and possible responses for economic management. The 
article  concludes  that  unless  economic  counter-measures  are  taken,  the  projects  will  create 
overheating  in  the  economy,  inflation  and  instability.  Although  their  scope  will  be  considerable,  the 
projects are not so large that economic stability cannot be preserved and inflation contained by means 
of appropriate responses in economic management.  Mitigating measures would be most effective if 
they  involved  both  monetary  and  fiscal  restraint,  as  well  as  internal  adjustment  of  the  national 
economy, including a rise in the exchange rate. The more restraint shown on the fiscal side, the less 
need there will be to raise interest rates. A higher króna exchange rate also means less cause to raise 
interest rates. 
The exchange rate was fairly stable from the spring of 2002 until early this winter. It then began to rise 
and continued to do so steadily until early February of this year. The Central Bank has stated its view 
that  the  exchange  rate  rise  in  recent  months  has  been  primarily  due  to  the  effect  of  the  proposed 
major construction projects in East Iceland. The operations of the aluminium smelter will likely cause 
the  equilibrium  exchange  rate  for  the  króna  to  be  higher  than  otherwise.  Furthermore,  it  appears 
evident that the influx of foreign currency in connection with these projects will be considerable, with 
higher domestic interest rates than otherwise. All of this affects market expectations and makes the 
króna exchange rate higher than it would be in the absence of plans for major development in East 
Iceland. The economy could thus be said to have already begun adaptation to the coming projects, i.e. 
the exchange rate adjustment has begun and is even well on its way.  
In view of what has already been said, it is clear that industry and business in Iceland has to prepare 
itself for a higher exchange rate than  would have been the case  without this major development. It 
naturally demands careful management and cost-cutting in operations where required. 
As  mentioned  previously,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  now  practices  inflation  targeting  intended  to 
keep inflation as close as possible to 2½% per year. The Bank’s latest forecast predicts that inflation 
will be slightly below this mark during the next two years, or just over 2%. Following this forecast, the 
Bank  cut  its  policy  rate  by  0.5  percentage  points..  All  other  things  being  equal,  this  will  mean  that 
inflation  will  be slightly higher than that  assumed in the forecast. Were interest  rates to be  lowered 
significantly from the current level, it would very likely set off a new wave of inflation and instability, 
which would be to the advantage of neither wage earners nor industry. 
As mentioned, there seems to be some overestimation of the possibility of the Central Bank to control 
the  market  rate  of  exchange.  But,  as  was  also  pointed  out,  the  Bank’s  intervention  on  the  foreign 
exchange  market,  expending  large  sums  in  2000  and  2001,  had  only  a  short-lived  effect.  In  this 
connection, it should also be noted that since last autumn the Central Bank has regularly purchased 
foreign currency in the domestic interbank market. When this decision was announced, it was stated 
that the Bank intended to purchase the equivalent of ISK 20 billion of currency by the end of 2003. To 
start  with  the  Bank  purchased  USD  1.5  million  on  Mondays  and  Wednesdays  each  week.  This 
January  the  Bank  also  began  to  purchase  this  same  amount  on  Fridays  as  well,  and  in  February 
purchases  were  added  on  Tuesdays  and  Thursdays.  Currently 
thus  purchases 
USD 7.5 million each week, or the equivalent of USD 390 million on a yearly basis. Even though the 
impact of these purchases on the exchange rate will likely be slight in the long term, as is generally the 
case with such intervention on the foreign exchange market, the króna rate will be somewhat lower for 
a while than would have otherwise been the case.  
the  Bank 
                                                      
1   Aluminium smelter and related power plants. 
  As was previously pointed out, the Central Bank spent the equivalent of ISK 40 billion to try and shore 
up the falling króna in the years 2000 and 2001. As a result, the Bank’s net external position worsened 
significantly and since that time its currency reserves have to a considerable extent been maintained 
with foreign short-term loans. The Bank’s plans to purchase the equivalent of ISK 20 billion in foreign 
currency, announced last autumn, involved paying off at least a major portion of short-term debt. This 
was also the primary purpose of the purchases. 
The  decision  on  foreign  currency  purchasing  was  taken  under  completely  different  conditions  than 
existed later in the winter when the major development projects in East Iceland changed from plans to 
reality. The Central Bank’s foreign currency reserves are currently ISK 36 billion (USD 460 million) and 
it could be argued that they need to be considerably greater. Considering the new circumstances and 
the altered outlook due to  the expected major development and resulting influx  of foreign currency, 
barring unexpected changes the Central Bank will very likely continue its regular purchases of foreign 
currency on the domestic interbank market even after reaching the ISK 20 billion point. By so doing 
the Bank would avail itself of the opportunity to boost its foreign currency reserves beyond that which 
would otherwise be practical.  
Public  discussion  in  recent  weeks  has  been  characterised  by  considerable  criticism  of  the  Central 
Bank and its monetary policy. From the Bank’s point of view, the debate seems a bit peculiar in some 
respects,  not  least  because  views  have  typically  been  attributed  to  it  which  have  no  basis  in  the 
writings, speeches or other statements issued by the Bank or its executives. As has been pointed out, 
people also seem to overrate the ability of the Central Bank to direct market developments, as well as 
to  expect  it  to  strive  to  achieve  all  sorts  of  objectives  which  it  has  practically  no  possibility  of 
accomplishing, and which are in fact not part of its role, such as ensuring a certain exchange rate, full 
employment, etc. After the introduction of inflation targeting in 2001, the Central Bank has no specific 
objective as far as the exchange rate is concerned. This is in accordance with its policy of targeting 
inflation and a floating exchange rate. This has been interpreted to mean that the Bank is completely 
disinterested in developments in the exchange rate. This is not true. The exchange rate for the króna 
is very important, the events of the past year or two are more than sufficient indication of that. As the 
Bank has previously pointed out, the real exchange rate at present is not far from average over the 
past 20 years, nor much above the average of the past 10 years. The nominal exchange rate since the 
beginning of this year is in fact slightly lower than it was during the same months two years ago. The 
exchange  rate  for  the  króna  is  determined  by  the  situation  and  strength  of  the  national  economy, 
external  equilibrium  and  market  expectations.  The  present  exchange  rate  thus  reflects  to  a 
considerable extent factors which the Central Bank can do little to influence. 
The large exchange rate fluctuation from 2000 to  2002 can be attributed to specific circumstances, 
and the exchange rate is unlikely to fluctuate as substantially in the immediate future as it did during 
this period. It should be borne in mind, however, that the nature of the Icelandic economy and its small 
size  does  mean  that  currency  fluctuations  as  a  rule  will  be  greater  than  between  the  currencies  of 
larger economies. In this connection, however, it can also be pointed out that the Euro lost more than 
one-quarter of its value against the US dollar from the beginning of 1999 until it bottomed out, and 
since that time has risen once more by just over one-fifth. 
The Central Bank is not unconcerned about the exchange rate, but has limited means of influencing its 
development,  as  has  been  explained.  There  is  only  so  much  the  Bank  can  do  to  restrain  currency 
fluctuations.  A  substantial  lowering  of  interest  rates  could  possibly  force  the  exchange  rate  down 
somewhat, but this would mean sacrificing other and more important objectives for precious little gain. 
The joint declaration issued by the government and the Central Bank in March of 2001 states that the 
Bank  will  intervene  in  developments  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  through  buying  and  selling 
foreign  currency  if  it  deems  this  to  be  necessary  in  order  to  achieve  its  inflation  target,  or  if  it  is 
concerned that exchange rate fluctuations could threaten financial stability. There is no cause for so 
doing at present. 
As I mentioned, the primary objective of the Central Bank’s monetary policy is to foster price stability. 
Price  stability  is  recognised  to  be  a  prerequisite  for  long-term  economic  growth  and  thus  improved 
welfare. The Central Bank has lightened its monetary restraint substantially in recent months. In the 
course  of  ten  months,  the  policy  rate  has  been  cut  very  significantly,  resulting  in  a  real  policy  rate 
which is lower now than it has been since 1996, as I mentioned. At the same time, the Bank has also 
given notice that further relaxation is envisaged in the form of lower required reserves by the Central 
Bank. The impact of the recent interest rate cuts has yet to be fully reflected in the economy. Although 
claims  are  frequently  advanced  that  the  real  exchange  rate  for  the  króna  is  currently  too  high,  the 
Central Bank cannot influence the real exchange rate except for a limited time. Too much relaxation of 
  monetary policy at present would only prepare the ground for the next period of over-expansion and 
inflation, with accordant instability.  
As mentioned, the Central Bank announced an interest rate cut of 0.5 percentage points earlier this 
month  and  plans  to  relax  reserve  requirements.  The  announcement  of  the  Bank’s  decision  also 
pointed out that there were opposing arguments as to whether and to what extent further relaxation of 
monetary  restraint  would  be  implemented.  Following  the  announcement  of  the  interest  rate  cut,  the 
government  announced  its  plans  to  allocate  funding  to  various  construction  projects  to  support 
employment, with several local authorities following suit. Furthermore, it now appears likely that work 
will  get  underway  this  year  on  an  enlargement  to  the  Norðurál  aluminium  smelter  and  power 
developments  linked  to  it.  These  factors  will  naturally  be  taken  into  consideration  in  decisions  on 
monetary policy in the weeks and months to come. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  the  framework  of  monetary  policy  was  changed  in  2001  with  the 
introduction  of  inflation  targeting.  This  is  in  line  with  international  developments  in  recent  years, 
resulting in Central Banks being entrusted with a single main objective, i.e. to promote price stability. 
Price  stability  was  set  as  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  because  inflation  is  above  all  a 
monetary  phenomenon. There is little point in setting  objectives for monetary policy  which it cannot 
achieve. Applying monetary policy to achieve price stability also contributes to economic stability. This, 
in  turn,  is  a  prerequisite  for  future  growth  in  the  economy  and  making  the  most  efficient  use  of  its 
scarce  resources.  Other  public  authorities,  industry  and  interest  groups  also  need  to  adapt  their 
decisions to accord with this inflation targeting. 
 