 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Report on the state of the UK economy 
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Chartered 
Institute of Bankers in Scotland Biennial Dinner, Glasgow, 20 January 2003. 
 Mr President, My Lord Dean, my Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
May I begin, Mr President, by thanking you and the members of the Council for your great kindness in 
conferring  the  Honorary  Fellowship  of  the  Institute  on  me  this  evening.  I  very  much  appreciate  the 
honour it represents - and it is indeed a great honour for a sassenach. 
But  even  more  than  that,  for  me  it  symbolises  the  broader  -  and  very  longstanding  -  fellowship 
between the Bank of England and the banking community here in Scotland - a fellowship, and indeed 
a friendship, which I myself have so much enjoyed ever since I first began my regular visits here over 
25 years ago. As I move towards my retirement this evening will serve as an enduring reminder of the 
warm personal and professional relationships - with the bankers in Scotland, including many of you 
here this evening - that I have been privileged to develop over that time. And I will wear your - in fact I 
can now say our - splendid new tartan with both pleasure and pride. 
This  is  the  fifth  occasion  in  just  the  past  eight  years  on  which  I've  had  the  pleasure  of  giving  this 
biennial  report  on  the  state  of  the  UK  economy  to  our  Scottish  stakeholders.  On  each  previous 
occasion I have been able to report to you relatively steady growth of overall output, a continuing fall in 
unemployment and stable low inflation. But I've then gone on to discuss the risks and uncertainties 
ahead  and  to  worry  out  loud  as  to  whether  or  not  we  could  keep  it  up.  On  each  occasion  I  have 
concluded - usually somewhat tentatively - that we could. And indeed we have in the UK - as a whole, 
though  I  have  to  admit  it  was  a  close  run  thing  last  winter  in  the  wake  of  the  unexpectedly  sharp 
economic slowdown that hit the whole of the industrial world from the beginning of 2001. 
Despite that global economic shock - which produced near-simultaneous recession in the world's three 
largest economies, the US, Japan and Germany - we in the UK - at the overall, aggregate, level have 
now enjoyed continuous quarter by quarter growth at an annual average rate of 2¾% throughout the 
past 10 years. That is far and away the longest period of consecutive quarterly growth since quarterly 
estimates began nearly 50 years ago - and the annual average growth rate has remained somewhat 
above most estimates - at least until recently - of the longer term trend rate of some 2¼% - 2½%. The 
number of people in employment has recently reached an all-time high in the UK as a whole; and it is 
very close to its all-time high also here in Scotland. And the number of people claiming unemployment 
benefit  is  at  a  27-year  low  both  in  the  UK  as  a  whole  and,  again,  up  here  north  of  the  border. 
Meanwhile retail price inflation - on the Government's target measure - has averaged 2.5% over the 
past 10 years. That is exactly in line with the present inflation target which recognises that consistently 
low inflation is a necessary - though not in itself a sufficient - condition for sustainable growth. And that 
of course is the universal central banker's mantra! 
That's the good news. The bad news, of course, is that over the past two years the imbalance within 
our overall economy which I referred to when I last spoke to you - between the internationally-exposed 
sectors  including  much  of  manufacturing  industry,  and  more  recently  some  parts  of  the  financial 
services  industry,  which  have  been  under  intense  pressure,  and  the  more  domestically-oriented 
sectors, where I don't say things have been easy but where the pressures have been less severe - 
that imbalance has persisted, and indeed it has got worse. The grim fact is that there is nothing that 
we in the UK can do directly to address the global economic weakness which has been at the heart of 
our  problem.  In  order  to  keep  overall  demand  in  the  economy  moving  forward  in  the  face  of  the 
slowdown  overseas,  which  has  depressed  both  financial  sentiment  and  business  investment  in  this 
country, as well as net external demand, we had no choice but to seek to buoy up the other elements 
of domestic demand. Without that we, too, would have seen negative growth in this country. 
In terms of monetary policy that in effect meant cutting interest rates - to 4% - their lowest level for 40 
years - in order to sustain the growth of consumer spending. And we were subsequently helped by the 
Chancellor's decision to increase public spending. That's something  which, as a central banker, I'm 
supposed to frown upon - and it clearly is important for the stability and efficiency of the economy that 
it is kept within bounds over the medium and longer term in line with the Chancellor's Golden Rule. But 
I must confess to you that it is something that I positively welcomed in the immediate situation with 
BIS Review 3/2003 
 1
 which  we  were  confronted.  Without  it  we  would  have  been  even  more  dependent  upon  consumer 
demand than we have been. 
In the event domestic consumption growth has continued to hold up pretty well; but it has done so - 
inevitably - on the back of a rapid build-up in household indebtedness, including mortgage debt, which 
in turn was associated with a sharp acceleration in the rate of increase in house prices - to some 25% 
on average across the UK over the past year. And that is something that, as we've been pointing out 
for some time, clearly can't be sustained for ever. 
So that's the background against which I turn once again to the question of whether we can continue 
to maintain reasonably steady  growth  of output,  with high  levels of employment and continuing  low 
inflation over the next two years or so. 
Now  there  is  no  denying  that  we  are  -  as  we  always  are  -  faced  with  significant  uncertainties  and 
potential risks in the period ahead, even without the possibility of imminent war with Iraq. 
The  global  economy  may  not  pick  up  gradually  -  as  we  certainly  hope  that  it  will  -  and  some  real 
gloomsters still talk of the possibility of a double dip back into recession. Domestically the gloomsters 
talk of the risk of a sudden sharp fall in the rate of growth in consumer spending - often related to a 
"crash" in house prices generally. That's to say not just a sharp moderation in the rate of increase in 
house prices but a fall in their actual level generally. And the real pessimists argue that the longer the 
fall is delayed the more dramatic it will be. Now it is certainly true that if these risks were to materialise 
then we would indeed be hard pressed to keep the economy moving forward.  
But  such  risks  need  to  be  kept  in  proper  perspective.  The  question  is  -  are  these  possible 
developments a necessary - or even the most likely - outcome? I don't think that they are. 
It's entirely understandable - in the light of the global industrial slowdown and generally weak export 
markets,  and  after  a  third  year  in  a  row  of  sharply  falling  equity  prices,  that  business  and  financial 
market confidence should remain subdued. And people seem sometimes surprised to be told that, on 
the macro-economic data, we passed the trough a year or more ago. The US economy, in particular, 
on which so much of the rest of the world depends actually expanded by just over 3% in the year to 
the third quarter of last year - which is well above its long-term annual average rate until the surge in 
the later 1990s. The Eurozone also grew - though only by around 1% over the same period, and there 
was even positive growth in Japan. Now that's not exactly a strong recovery after the slowdown, but it 
follows only a relatively mild recession. 
More  recent  data  certainly  have  been  somewhat  mixed  -  perhaps  reflecting  Alan  Greenspan's 
predicted  "soft-patch"  through  the  winter;  and  we're  in  the  shadow  of  uncertainty  over  Iraq.  But, 
looking  beyond  that,  the  US  economy  is  underpinned  by  its  robust  financial  system,  by  continuing 
rapid underlying productivity growth, and by strongly supportive monetary and fiscal policies, so that 
most forecasters anticipate US growth of 2 ½ - 3% this year and somewhat more next. There's even 
been a better tone in equity and credit markets since mid-October, and some signs of a recovery in 
ICT investment. 
On  that  basis  -  and  notwithstanding  the  recent  disappointing  performance  of  the  Eurozone  - 
particularly the German - economy - that suggests a reasonable prospect of a continuing but relatively 
slow pick-up in the rate of growth in our major export markets. And we should also be helped by the 
recovery of the euro against both sterling and the dollar through the past year. 
This  moderately  positive  external  environment  should,  looking  forward,  bring  a  gradual  pick  up  in 
external  demand  and  help  to  stabilise,  and  subsequently  improve,  the  prospects  for  business 
investment in the UK. So the key question on the domestic front remains what is likely to happen to 
consumer demand: will it fall away abruptly - as some people fear - or will it moderate more gradually 
as others expect? The truth is that no-one can know the answer with any great confidence - those who 
claim to know with certainty are always the ones to be wary of in the forecasting business. 
Those  who  look  for  a  sharp  downward  adjustment  typically  point  to  the  ratio  of  household  debt  to 
income, and to the ratio of house prices to earnings. They discount the relatively low debt-service to 
income ratio  on the  grounds that  it could rise sharply  if interest rates  went up, and ask what might 
happen if unemployment were to start to rise sharply.  
To  my  mind  those  arguments  have  a  degree  of  circularity.  The  possibility  of  a  sharp  rise  in 
unemployment  depends  substantially  on  a  sharp  slowdown  in  consumer  spending  rather  than  the 
other way round. Similarly a sharp rise in interest rates is less likely if consumer spending is slowing 
down. So it is not all obvious to me at least that the household sector will suddenly run for cover in the 
  current  environment,  where  the  labour  market  remains  remarkably  robust,  and  the  prospect  for 
inflation - and hence the prospect for interest rates - remains relatively benign, remaining somewhat 
above target in the near term but moving down gradually as we move into next year. 
I don't say that things could not turn out rather worse than that - and there are other uncertainties, like 
development  of  the  exchange  rate,  or  the  effect  of  the  upcoming  increase  in  National  Insurance 
Contributions, which I have not touched upon this evening. Uncertainty is a fact of economic life. But I 
do say that it would be unwise - as some have implied - to set monetary policy on the basis of the 
worst possible outcome, even if one knew what that would actually mean in policy terms. 
At the time of our last Inflation Report published in November the MPC's collective view of the most 
likely outcome for the UK, looking over the next two years, was for growth at around trend with inflation 
close to target. But we were - and we remain - acutely conscious of the uncertainties and risks around 
that prospect. And we review the position intensively both at our regular monthly policy meetings and 
in the context of our quarterly forecasting round. And in that context, I give  you my assurance that, 
despite the fact that we have not changed interest rates now for over a year, we stand ready to do so 
at any time if and when we see the risks to our central expectation beginning to crystallise in either 
direction. 
Mr  President,  let  me  conclude  by  suggesting  once  again  this  year  that  yes,  we  can  keep  the  UK 
economy moving forward, but I don't pretend that it will be easy. Sadly I am attending this dinner for 
the last time as Governor this evening, so I will not be accountable to you for how we get on. But I will 
leave the  Bank of England in the  good hands of my  successor, Mervyn  King,  when I step  down  in 
June, and I have every confidence that he will, by the time of your next dinner, have a positive story to 
tell.  
 