Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business  Economists  and 
(NSW  Branch),  Sydney, 
17 September 2003. 
the  Economic  Society  of  Australia 
 Thank you to the Australian Business Economists and the Economic Society for the invitation to speak 
to you today. It is a pleasure to renew my association with both groups, which goes back many years.  
As the title of my address indicates, I intend to offer an update of our thinking about recent economic 
performance and prospects for the period ahead. I(cid:146)ll begin by taking stock of the international scene, 
and  then  move  on  to  the  Australian  economy.  I  will  then,  having  set  the  context,  make  a  few 
comments about recent monetary policy issues.  
The global economy 
The world economy, and particularly the group of large industrial countries, has performed weakly for 
the past three years or so.  
Much attention has, as always, focussed on the US. The characteristics of this particular episode in 
the US are well known: a very large share price boom and bust; a capital investment boom, which then 
broke sharply, after views about the likely return on investment changed dramatically; a stabilising role 
played  by  the  US  household  sector,  which  has  been  prepared  to  borrow  and  spend;  and  periodic 
shocks  to  confidence  resulting  from  terrorist  acts,  war  and  so  on.  The  outcomes  might  have  been 
much  worse,  but  for  exceptionally  large  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  stimulus  applied  by  the  US 
authorities, and the fact that holdings of assets whose prices declined were not highly leveraged. In 
fact, given the magnitude of the events, the US economy has done well to perform the way it has. 
Outcomes for the world economy might have been better, on the other hand, had global demand not 
been so dependent on the US. Unfortunately, Japan and Europe also relapsed into weakness in 2001. 
In the case of the euro area, performance has been less convincing than that of the US over the past 
couple  of  years.  Mainland  Europe  shared  some  of  the  business  cycle  problems  of  the  US  but  had 
neither the same degree of supply-side dynamism, nor the same scope for expansionary policy action, 
to aid recovery. Japan, as we all know, has struggled for some years to deal with financial imbalances, 
deflationary pressure, supply-side inflexibility, and political stalemate regarding remedial measures. 
China,  on  the  other  hand,  has  increasingly  been  an  important  force  in  the  world  economy.  It  is 
probably reaching the point of equality with Japan, about now, in terms of its size in international trade. 
China(cid:146)s growing economic importance is evident in the data, and also in the way in which the renminbi 
exchange rate is becoming an important political issue - just like the yen. 
Against  that  general  backdrop,  assessments  of  the  near-term  outlook  for  the  global  economy  have 
undergone  some  important  changes  over  the  past  eighteen  months.  Through  the  first  half  of  2002, 
indications of strengthening growth saw hopes rising for better times, only to be disappointed in the 
second half of the year. Activity remained sluggish and confidence took a hit from the aftershocks of 
the bubble, in the form of, inter alia, accounting and governance scandals (that is, some of the sorts of 
things which emerge after every period of excess).  
During the first half of 2003, growth and confidence were still at a rather low ebb. Things which did not 
help confidence were the anticipation of war in Iraq, and the associated rise in oil prices. The outbreak 
of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) was also very damaging to a part of the international 
business scene still struggling with the effects of earlier shocks. 
Then  there  was  the  spectre  of  deflation.  It(cid:146)s  understandable  that  this  would  be  a  concern,  since 
inflation rates were already below zero in a few countries, and low to very low in most others. A period 
of below-par growth was likely, if anything, to push inflation down further. My own views about the way 
we should think about deflation were given nearly a year ago. I thought that it was possible that a few 
more countries could experience deflation briefly, but that the likelihood of widespread, protracted and 
corrosive  deflation  was  low,  at  least  absent  a  significant  policy  error.  Nonetheless,  since  prudent 
central banks operate on the logic of least regret, some of them had to give attention to the issue, just 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
in case, and they did so during the past nine months. The US Federal Reserve, in particular, made it 
clear that it wanted to err on the side of ease, since even a low probability of inflation falling (cid:145)too far(cid:146) 
was something to be resisted, and openly discussed measures that could be employed were interest 
rates to reach the zero lower bound. 
The  Iraq  war  was  over  quickly  and  its  direct  economic  effects  have  been  expansionary  for  the  US 
economy  in  recent  months.  But  all  these  accumulated  worries  affected  perceptions  of  the  outlook 
through  to  mid  year.1  The  clearest  indication  of  this  was  that  bond  markets  pushed  down  yields  to 
levels not seen in decades. There were some special factors in operation but, even allowing for those, 
the tone of bond markets in May and June can only be described as particularly pessimistic. There 
also seemed to be some uncertainty, even if only briefly, about the US Administration(cid:146)s intentions for 
the US dollar. Given the rapid rise against the US dollar of the Australian dollar during that period, this 
caught our attention. 
There was a period, in other words, when it was not that hard to imagine a rather nasty international 
outcome - one where the fear of deflation in the US and elsewhere, regardless of how well based it 
was, could affect behaviour, and where the US dollar could be moving rapidly downwards, exporting 
any deflation pressure to other countries, including Australia. While the probability of this scenario was 
still  not  that  high,  it  seemed  to  be  increasing,  to  the  point  where  it  caused  us  some  discomfort. 
Readers of the Governor(cid:146)s 6 June remarks to the House Economics Committee could see quite clearly 
the degree of concern at that time. 
We can all feel some genuine relief that things have looked better since. After a weak early part of the 
year, the US economy is doing much better in the second half. SARS had a big, but temporary, impact 
in east Asia, but relatively little impact elsewhere. East Asia is now recovering quickly from that. China 
continues to grow rapidly. The US economy, while experiencing very low inflation, has not slipped into 
deflation, and some countries which have experienced deflation seem to be experiencing a bit less of 
it now (e.g. China). Japan has, I think it is fair to say, surprised most people with solid growth over 
recent quarters. The euro area remains the weakest of the major regions, although there are tentative 
signs of improving conditions there in some of the most recent survey data.  
For  the  first  time  in  a  while,  consensus  forecasts  for  world  growth  are  edging  higher,  not  lower. 
Financial  market  pricing  also  clearly  has  retreated  from  the  pessimism  in  May  and  June:  the 
exceptionally low bond rates have risen to being simply quite low. Share markets had already turned 
somewhat more optimistic earlier, and have remained so. While we could argue about the extent to 
which future profits growth in the US is required to validate current pricing, what seems in little doubt is 
that actual profits in the US have recovered quite strongly to date. That is testimony to the capacity of 
the  US  corporate  sector  to  respond  aggressively  to  problems,  which  is  ultimately  a  source  of 
dynamism  for  the  US  economy.  Finally,  after  a  very  strong  upward  trend  earlier  in  the  year,  the 
Australian dollar has traded fairly steadily in recent times. 
None of this is to say that the world economy is completely out of danger. Things could still go wrong 
while ongoing adjustments continue. There could be new shocks. Or the US expansion might wane if 
the growth in demand and output does not find some reflection in higher employment, thus starving 
the system of some of the fuel for further expansion in demand. Even if things are proceeding well, we 
will inevitably see the odd patch of weak data. Once the danger of excessive near-term weakness is 
past, moreover, there will be issues to address - like the long-term trend in government finances in a 
number of countries. 
But  these  sorts  of caveats  apply  in  every  cycle,  to  some  degree.  The fact  remains  that  things  look 
better than they did three or four months ago, and noticeably better than we feared, at that time, they 
might look by now. That we are now talking about whether the pick-up extends into 2004, rather than 
whether it is occurring at all, is welcome progress.  
                                                      
1  The bigger issue has always been, and remains, the nature of the peace. This will probably cost more than the war and 
presumably adds to uncertainty about the medium-term economic outlook, but seems not to affect short-run perceptions in 
the same way as actual conflict. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
The Australian economy 
The Australian economy has been significantly affected by the weakness in the world scene over the 
past few years. This is most evident in the trends in exports. In the June quarter of 2003, aggregate 
export  volumes  were  about  2  per  cent  lower  than  in  the  middle  of  2000  (just  before  the  Olympics 
spike). This is a series which in the 1990s grew at an average rate of 7‰ per cent per year. If that is a 
crude gauge of (cid:145)normal(cid:146) performance, there was an export volume shortfall of over 20 per cent by the 
middle of this year. That(cid:146)s over 5 per cent of GDP, which is a much more substantial effect than seen 
in the Asian crisis. 
Why was the effect bigger on this occasion, even though the Asian crisis had a bigger impact on the 
growth rates of our particular trading-partner group? The answer is mainly, I think, because the Asian 
crisis was a regional problem which occurred against a backdrop of strength elsewhere (as we now 
know,  but  didn(cid:146)t  at  the  time).  So  many  of  Australia(cid:146)s  exporters  could  find  other  markets.  That  is 
obviously harder to do when the problem lies with the global economy. In addition, of course, there 
was the effect of the drought on rural exports, and of the events of 11 September 2001 and SARS on 
exports of tourism services, which were over and above the normal effects of global weakness. 
How  has  the  economy  handled  the  loss  of  income?  In  a  world  of  open  capital markets,  one  would 
expect that a temporary reduction in income would in part be reflected in slower growth of spending, 
but  in  part  also  in  a  temporary  change  in  our  saving  behaviour  -  saving  less  of  our  own  income, 
drawing more on the saving of others. That is, we smooth our living standards in the face of swings in 
income. This behaviour means that there is some slowing in GDP growth, but much less than would 
be the case, were our spending behaviour to be confined to following much more closely the reduction 
in income. 
At  the  same  time,  as  we  all  know,  a  long-term  adjustment  has  been  under  way  in  the  structure  of 
households(cid:146) balance sheets, which has been tending to elevate spending relative to income for some 
time. It so happens that the direction of this effect has, in the past couple of years, suited what was 
needed to adapt to the international conjunctural circumstances.  
We can(cid:146)t distinguish from the data what was the result of this structural change and what was due to a 
cyclical response to a particular income shock. But the broad effects of the combined forces are fairly 
clear in the national income accounts. We have seen domestic final demand rise by over 4‰ per cent 
over the past year - to be sure, more moderate than the 6-7 per cent pace it was recording a while 
back, but still faster than average. Real net exports fell by 3‰ per cent of GDP over the latest year, 
influenced by the world economy and the drought. Between them, those two factors did most of the 
work pegging GDP growth back to a below-average 2 per cent over the year. Over the same period, 
the current account deficit has increased by about 3 per cent of GDP. This is smaller than the decline 
in real net trade volumes because Australia(cid:146)s terms of trade have continued to improve over the past 
year - by nearly 3 per cent, which is worth about ‰ per cent of GDP in additional income. 
So the Australian community, by having access to capital markets, and facing macroeconomic policy 
settings which remained on the expansionary side, was able to continue to increase its spending at a 
very  strong  pace,  even  though  income  growth  was  impaired  by  international  events.  This  involved 
declining rates of saving out of current income, and some extraction of accumulated equity from the 
dwelling stock. Generally speaking, to have that flexibility is a good thing - with the proviso that, as 
with all good things, we don(cid:146)t want to over-indulge.  
We can anticipate that, over the coming year, the two factors weakening overall performance over the 
past year will not recur, and indeed some reversal of these effects is likely. It is widely acknowledged 
now  that  there  will  be  a  strong  recovery  in  farm  production.  The  prospect  of  some  continuing 
improvement in  international conditions means that the downward trend in non-farm exports should 
bottom out, and a recovery begin. 
At  the  same  time,  domestic  demand  growth  should  moderate  a  little.  Capital  spending  by  firms  will 
probably continue to rise, but not as quickly, on current indications, as it has over the past year. Some 
decline in dwelling construction activity has occurred, although this looks smaller than earlier thought. 
Consumption  spending  looks  likely  in  the  near  term  to  continue  to  benefit  from  steady  growth  in 
incomes,  high  levels  of  confidence  and  the  higher  and  more  accessible  wealth  available  to 
households. 
If this outlook is correct, growth in the economy has probably already slowed as much as it is likely to. 
The year-ended growth rate of non-farm GDP will decline for another quarter as an earlier very strong 
quarter drops out. But the pace of expansion through the second half of 2003 is probably going to be 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 3
at least as good as it was in the first. If the global economy continues on its present track, Australian 
growth should clearly be picking up by the first half of next year. Inflation will be pushed down a bit by 
the earlier exchange rate appreciation for a while, but is still thought likely to be about 2‰ per cent in 
the medium term, based on the usual assumptions about oil prices, exchange rates and interest rates, 
and the above growth outlook. 
This picture is much as was described in our Statement on Monetary Policy on 11 August. Since that 
document was published, it is fair to say that the downside risks to the global economy have retreated 
further.  Most  recent  data  on  the  Australian  economy  also  seem  consistent  with  a  moderation  in 
non-farm  growth  in  the  first  half  of  the  year,  but  suggest  that  it  has  neither  been  particularly 
pronounced, nor showed signs of being long-lived.  
Risks and policy considerations 
It has become much better understood in recent years that once a coherent framework for monetary 
policy  is  in  place,  the  regular  policy  decision  is  essentially  a  matter  of  responding  to  the  changing 
balance of risks to the outlook. The RBA(cid:146)s Board certainly has had a busy time over the past year or 
more evaluating and deciding how to respond to the evolving balance of international and domestic 
risks. It takes a lot more work than you might think to leave rates unchanged for fifteen consecutive 
months! 
In  the  middle  of  last  year,  it  looked  as  though  the  international  economy  was  returning  to  stronger 
conditions, and Australian domestic demand was growing very strongly indeed. To foster an inflation 
outcome  consistent  with  our  medium-term  target,  we  believed  that  it  would  be  prudent  under  such 
conditions to return interest rates to normal, or (cid:145)neutral(cid:146), from a relatively expansionary setting. Two 
initial  steps  were  taken,  and  the  likelihood  of  further  steps  clearly  signalled.  But  in  the  event,  the 
process did not continue, because the world economy began turning out differently to what we had 
assumed. By the end of 2002, it was clear that any thought of near-term tightening could go off the 
agenda for a while. The world economy had clearly lost some momentum, and for the time being, this 
meant  that  a  steady  interest  rate  structure  would  probably  be  associated  with  achieving  our  policy 
objectives. 
That  remained  the  story  through  to  the  middle  of  2003,  as  the  Iraq  war  came  and  went,  most 
international  data  looked  on  the  soft  side,  the  drought  continued,  and  financial  market  sentiment 
waxed and waned. The outlook for Australia was for moderate growth - quite a good outcome in the 
circumstances  -  but  our  feeling  was  that  the  risks  stemming  from  international  developments  were 
tilted to the downside. Inflation, if anything, looked a little higher than had been expected, although our 
judgement was that in the medium term, it would still turn out to be consistent with the target. 
That was a macroeconomic outlook which certainly did not, in my view at least, amount to an obvious 
case for monetary policy to be noticeably easier than was already in place. A reasonable case could 
be made that policy should be easier than neutral - but it already was, and had been for some time. 
Our  conviction  that  the  level  of  interest  rates  was  exerting  stimulus  to  the  economy  -  a  conviction 
strengthened when we looked at the demand for credit and the behaviour of asset markets - and a 
view that the  inflation-targeting framework does not  call for trying to fine  tune  outcomes, have both 
been important in policy deliberations.  
At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  obvious  that  the  shifting  assessment  of  the  balance  of  risks  to  the 
outlook (which can occur without there necessarily being major changes to central forecasts) has also 
been critical. When, after a period of disappointing international outcomes in the first half of 2003, the 
external  threats  to  the  economic  outlook  seemed  suddenly  to  be  building  up  rather  dangerously 
through May and early June, it looked like a case to ease policy was building. 
Throughout this period, the situation was complicated by another type of risk. While views about the 
international  situation  were  changing,  at  home  the  demand  for  credit  from  households,  far  from 
diminishing, seemed to be strengthening. Apart from the fact that this meant that the near-term outlook 
for domestic demand might well be stronger than assumed, the Bank had an obligation to consider the 
medium-term soundness of the economy in addition to the short-run conjuncture. There is no doubt 
that  the  preparedness  of  households  to  borrow  has  been  imparting  some  strength  to  demand  and 
general  buoyancy  to  the  economy  and  asset  markets,  and  that  this  has  been  helpful  in  supporting 
growth in the circumstances of the past couple of years. But there cannot be much doubt either that 
running up debt today must diminish the scope to do so in future, and that it must also impair, at the 
margin, the capacity of some households to cope with adverse shocks which might come along. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2003
There  are  times  when  the  above  is  a  risk  which  just  has  to  be  incurred  because  another  possible 
outcome is even worse. A disastrous international environment, coupled with a soaring exchange rate, 
would  probably  be  one  such  time. That  is  why,  in  June,  we  publicly  contemplated  the  possibility  of 
easing. But  we had to be fairly sure that the alternative was going to be pretty bad before we took 
action  which  we  knew  would  be  likely  to  inflame  an  asset  market  and  borrowing  boom.  Monetary 
policy might not be able to do much to end an asset price boom without a fair bit of collateral damage - 
so,  at  least,  it  is  commonly  claimed.  But  whatever  one(cid:146)s  view  on  that,  surely  policy  should  avoid 
needlessly adding to the boom. (cid:145)First, do no harm(cid:146) is a good motto here. 
We have sought to balance these various concerns over the past several months. Although in early 
June a case to ease looked like it was building, it had not strengthened sufficiently by the time of the 
July  meeting  to  warrant  action.  In  August  the  case  got  weaker,  and  it  got  weaker  again  by  early 
September. Essentially what happened was that the risks to growth from abroad abated, while those 
posed by the rapid rise in debt did not.  
This recent experience, and the one a year earlier, is instructive in the discussion about central bank 
communication. What it shows is that, while it is natural for market participants and the media to want 
central banks to say more and more about their intentions, people need to keep very much in mind 
that our assessment of what we might need to do is, of necessity, highly conditional on a view of the 
future. And the future often turns up the unexpected - to which we need to respond by revising our 
intentions.  So  it  is  important  that  observers  not  only  listen  to  the  central  bank(cid:146)s  words,  but  also 
continue to look closely at the actual information coming in. I know the majority of you do.  
Secondly, because the future cannot be known, and because things can change quickly, people need 
some understanding of the principles which guide central bank behaviour. So there is probably more 
to be gained by continued efforts at articulating how our framework for policy works, than by providing 
ever more frequent commentary on events. Such information hopefully provides interested observers 
with a device to filter, in real time, the information becoming available. This, combined with a periodic 
account, after the event, of how we filtered it, is the most helpful form of transparency - describing how 
we think about things and, within that framework, why we did what we did. The most recent Statement 
on Monetary Policy, in fact, goes a good deal further down this track than most of its predecessors. 
Conclusion 
The world economy is still not entirely in the clear, but is better than it was, and a fair bit better than it 
might have been. It is sensible at present to look for further improvement, while keeping in mind the 
possibility of regression. If things work out acceptably well abroad, the Australian economy will next 
year have a better chance of balanced growth than we have had for a few years. We will continue to 
assess the evolving balance of risks and will respond, in a measured fashion, as needed - and we(cid:146)ll do 
our best to keep you informed. 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 5
