 David Dodge: Meeting global challenges - the importance of sound economic 
policies 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canada-UK  Chamber  of 
Commerce, London, UK, 12 March 2003.  
 I am delighted to be in London to speak with you today.  
We are facing a time of great economic and political uncertainty. While economic activity is close to 
potential  in  Canada,  most  other  countries  are  facing  very  weak  demand  and  lacklustre  economic 
prospects. And, of course, there is the overriding prospect of a war in Iraq.  
Voltaire said that "doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is an absurd one." We policy-makers 
are rarely burdened with certainty at the best of times, and definitely not these days! In an environment 
as unsettled as this one, it is easy to become preoccupied with the here and now. But, during such 
times, it is even more important that we remain focused on the medium-term goals of macroeconomic 
policy. And that's what we're trying to do in Canada.  
Many of my colleagues at international meetings this year have commented on Canada's economic 
strength. It is true that we've had some good luck. But Canada's strong performance during the past 
two or three difficult years for the world economy primarily reflects extraordinary efforts made during 
the 1990s to get our macroeconomic framework - that is, our monetary and fiscal policies - right.  
Canada, of course, was not alone in making these efforts. During the 1980s, a consensus developed 
among  OECD  nations  on  the  combination  of  policies  most  likely  to  deliver  sound  economic 
performance. The consensus grew out of the unhappy experiences of earlier policy experiments. And 
it was built around four key principles: trade liberalization, structural reform, fiscal prudence, and low 
and stable inflation.  
These four principles work like the four legs of a chair. The chair is steadier  when all four legs are 
equally sturdy. Similarly, an economy is more stable when progress is made on all four policy fronts. 
And when one of the legs starts to weaken, the best way to restore stability is to build that leg back up, 
not to cut down the other three.  
Canadians spent a great deal of effort over the past decade or so putting the four elements of this 
policy  framework  into  place.  It  involved  considerable  short-term  economic  pain.  But  the  phrase 
"short-term pain for long-term gain" is more than just a cliché. Canada is now receiving the economic 
payoff from this effort. Since 1997, our economy has consistently exceeded the average growth rates 
of the world's most industrialized countries. And it is expected to do so again this year.  
The first principle: trade liberalization  
Let me briefly review those four principles and the progress that Canada has made on each. I'll start 
with the principle of trade liberalization. We all know that freer international trade helps countries to 
more  fully  exploit  the  gains  that  come  from  increased  specialization  and  greater  productivity  and 
competitiveness.  Canada's  economy  made  some  difficult  adjustments  to  freer  trade  during  the  late 
1980s  and  early  1990s.  First,  we  signed  the  Canada-US  Free  Trade  Agreement,  which  came  into 
effect  in  1989.  Then,  in  1994,  Mexico  joined  the  group  through  the  North  American  Free  Trade 
Agreement.  
Both  of  these  agreements  sparked  a  great  deal  of  political  controversy.  And  many  Canadian 
companies  were  understandably  anxious  to  avoid  increased  competition.  As  well,  the  Free  Trade 
Agreement came into effect at a time when monetary policy was tight, to fight the high inflation rates of 
the day.  
Despite initial misgivings, Canadian companies rose to the challenge of increased competition. Some 
of the sectors that we used to protect the most - such as furniture, clothing, and wine - have since 
established  a  strong  presence  in  international  markets.  Overall,  Canadian  exports  have  flourished 
under these agreements.  
BIS Review 13/2003 
 1
 And that strengthens our resolve to see freer trade extended beyond regional trading blocs. Canada is 
hoping to see meaningful progress at the World Trade Organization's Doha round of multilateral talks. 
Clearly, agriculture is going to be a major hurdle. The developed countries, including all of us in the 
G-7,  have  a  considerable  way  to  go  in  terms  of  liberalizing  agricultural  trade.  And  there  are  other 
sectors  where  major  effort  is  required.  This  effort  must  be  made  so  that  the  global  economy  can 
benefit. It won't be easy but, in the long run, it will be worth it.  
The second principle: structural reform  
Complementing trade liberalization is the second principle, which focuses on the need to improve the 
structure  of  national  economies.  The  goal  here  is  twofold:  first,  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  our 
economies  to  adjust  to  changing  world  economic  conditions;  and  second,  to  ensure  the  longer-run 
viability of our social - and income - security arrangements.  
Structural adjustments are always difficult because reforms will affect various groups in differing and 
often painful ways. Further, the economic benefits of increased flexibility may take a fairly long time to 
emerge. But these difficulties should not sway us from the task of reducing rigidities and increasing 
efficiency.  
Canada has made some progress on a number of fronts. For example, governments have taken steps 
to reduce distortions in the personal income tax system, and have implemented a goods and services 
tax  to  replace  the  outdated  tax  on  manufacturers.  Unemployment  insurance  benefits  were  also 
reduced and restructured to strengthen the incentive to work.  
Another important structural reform was to our public pension system. In 1996, Canadian federal and 
provincial governments agreed to changes that would put the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans on 
a sustainable footing. This meant some restructuring of benefits and a sharp increase in contributions - 
moves that were as unpopular as they were necessary.  
The surpluses in the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans now represent almost 1 per cent of GDP. 
Furthermore, these surpluses are set aside in special funds that cannot be touched by governments 
for  general  use.  The  assets  of  the  public  plan  are  now  managed  by  the  Canada  Pension  Plan 
Investment Board, a body that is entirely independent of government. Its sole mandate is to invest the 
contributions in markets, in order to generate the best possible returns, consistent with prudence, over 
the long term.  
The third principle: fiscal prudence  
This leads me to the next principle, which relates to fiscal policy and the need for a more disciplined 
approach to managing the public purse. Fiscal policy must be guided by the principle of putting the 
ratio of public debt to GDP on a sustainable, downward track.  
In Canada's experience, this was a difficult hurdle to overcome. To be sure, the fiscal consolidation of 
the 1990s was painful. I was federal Deputy Minister of Finance at that time, and I can tell you that 
many difficult and unpopular decisions had to be taken. Equally important, the provinces had to make 
tough choices as they reduced their public spending and restored their fiscal health. But as difficult as 
those years were, waiting would only have made matters worse.  
Well, here's the good news: the vicious circle of rising deficits and debt has become a virtuous circle of 
balanced  budgets  and  falling  debt.  Reducing  the  deficit  in  the  1990s  helped  Canada's  international 
credibility. This led to a reduction in the risk premium demanded by international investors. The fiscal 
improvement  meant  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  was  able  to  lower  interest  rates  more  easily  when 
economic circumstances warranted. Not only did lower interest rates reduce debt-servicing costs, they 
also  stimulated  economic  growth,  which  brought  in  more  revenues  to  the  government.  The  extra 
revenues and lower debt-servicing costs, in turn, led to an even better fiscal position. At the end of 
2002, Canada's total government surplus represented just over 1 per cent of GDP - not including the 
surplus in the pension plans.  
Last month, Finance Minister John Manley announced a fifth consecutive surplus in the federal budget 
and projected that the budget  will continue to be in  a balanced position or better for the next three 
years.  The  budget  maintained  the  fiscal  planning  framework  of  previous  years.  That  framework 
includes  a  $3  billion  contingency  reserve,  which  is  used  to  reduce  debt  if  it  is  not  needed.  It  also 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2003
 includes $1 billion in the upcoming budget year for additional economic prudence, and $2 billion in the 
following year, as further assurance that Canada won't fall back into deficit.  
Canada is expected to have one of the lowest debt burdens in the G-7 this year. Not only have we 
reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio, but we have paid down almost $50 billion of federal debt. This has led 
to  the  restoration  of  Canada's  Triple-A  credit  rating  and  has  freed  up  about  $3  billion  of  resources 
every  year  for  the  federal  government.  The  main  point  is  that  while  the  initial  work  of  fiscal 
consolidation is certainly difficult, it is necessary in order to enjoy the dividends later on.  
The fourth principle: low and stable inflation  
The fourth principle relates to monetary policy - the responsibility of the Bank of Canada. This principle 
recognizes that, over the medium term, monetary policy should work to keep inflation low, stable, and 
predictable.  
Let me explain how we do this. Since 1991, following a joint agreement with the federal government, 
the Bank of Canada has operated with a system of inflation-control targets. I don't plan to spend a lot 
of time explaining our system to this audience, because the United Kingdom adopted a system very 
similar to ours a couple of years after we did.  
We aim to keep consumer price inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. If the 
trend  of  inflation  moves  away  from  the  target  in  either  direction,  the  Bank  will  take  action  so  that 
inflation returns to the target within 18 to 24 months.  
Canada's inflation-targeting framework works in a symmetrical way, minimizing the chances of both a 
sustained upward drift in inflation and the threat of deflation. Indeed, through most of the past decade, 
we  have  managed  to  keep  inflation  around  the  2  per  cent  target  midpoint.  And  so,  Canadians' 
expectations for inflation have become firmly anchored around 2 per cent. This climate of low, stable, 
and predictable inflation has helped to smooth out the ups and downs in the economy and to create 
the best possible environment for longer-term economic growth in Canada.  
Inflation and the economic outlook  
Let  me  now  give  you  the  Bank  of  Canada's  views  on  the  state  of  the  Canadian  economy  and  the 
outlook. First, a bit of history. Following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, 
the Bank of Canada, like other major central banks, moved quickly and aggressively to cut its policy 
interest rate to shore up confidence. That dramatic monetary policy action helped a great deal. By the 
spring of 2002, it became evident that our economy hadn't been knocked off track by the events of 
11 September. Indeed, evidence was starting to build that the economy was growing faster than its 
production potential, taking up the remaining small amount of economic slack. So, we raised our key 
policy rate three times between April and July, by a total of three-quarters of a percentage point.  
But by late last summer, we were seeing the effects of financial headwinds, geopolitical uncertainties, 
and continued weakness in the global economy. These factors remained in play through the autumn. 
As a result, we refrained from raising interest rates, even though inflation was accelerating.  
Our initial analysis was that this increase in inflation would be temporary. However, both core and total 
CPI  inflation  remain  well  above  target.  This  reflects  the  impact  of  higher-than-expected  prices  for 
crude oil and  natural gas,  continuing increases in auto insurance  premiums, and price pressures in 
certain  sectors,  such  as  housing,  food,  and  some  services.  The  higher  inflation  also  suggests  an 
underlying firmness in the price-setting environment. In other words, relative price increases wouldn't 
be pushing up trend inflation if there was not sufficient demand.  
Indeed,  final  domestic  demand  -  especially  household  spending  -  has  remained  robust.  However, 
economic growth in Canada moderated in the final three months of 2002, largely because of weaker 
exports - most notably, a decline in automotive shipments to the United States.  
Even with this slowing growth in the fourth quarter, upward revisions for previous quarters leave the 
level  of  economic  activity  slightly  higher  than  we  had  been  monitoring.  In  fact,  Canada's  economy 
remains near full capacity.  
Let  me  list  some  of  the  indicators  that  support  this  view:  high  industrial  capacity  utilization;  near 
record-high  labour  force  participation  rates;  a  record-high  employment-to-population  ratio;  corporate 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 3
 profits at their highest level since early 2001; and, as I said a few moments ago, above-target trend 
inflation.  
While we continue to foresee growth somewhat below potential in the first half of this year, we expect 
increased demand in the second half of 2003 and into 2004, as global uncertainties diminish. But with 
an  appropriate  reduction  in  the  amount  of  monetary  stimulus,  we  see  the  level  of  output  remaining 
close to capacity during this year and into 2004.  
So,  in  making  our  interest  rate  decision  on  4  March,  we  weighed  the  following  considerations: 
domestic  inflation  pressures,  the  expectation  that  Canadian  economic  activity  will  remain  near 
potential  in  2003  despite  geopolitical  uncertainties,  the  stimulative  stance  of  monetary  policy,  and 
improved conditions in capital markets. Taking all of these factors into account, the Bank raised its key 
policy rate by one-quarter of a percentage point to 3 per cent.  
Even  with  this  increase,  the stance of monetary  policy  remains stimulative. Thus, over time, further 
reductions in monetary stimulus will be required to return inflation to the target over the medium term. 
But, as we have said, the timing and pace of increases in policy interest rates will continue to depend 
on  a  number  of  considerations.  These  include  the  strength  of  demand  pressures;  the  evolution  of 
inflation expectations; the impact on confidence of geopolitical and global economic uncertainties; and 
the way in which developments in the Middle East affect demand and inflation, both globally and in 
Canada. The Bank will continue to closely monitor all of these factors.  
 Let me conclude. At the beginning of my talk today, I noted that, for over a decade now, Canada has 
followed  a  policy  based  on  the  four  key  principles:  trade  liberalization,  structural  reform,  fiscal 
prudence, and inflation control. It's never easy to follow those principles, but, over the medium term, 
they do lead to better economic performance.  
Canada's  recent  economic  record  is  evidence  of  that.  We  have  maintained  an  enviable  growth 
performance  through  what  has  been  a  very  difficult  period  for  the  world  economy.  We  remain 
optimistic - and so do others - that we will continue to do so. Both the OECD and the IMF predict that 
Canada's economy will outperform those of other G-7 countries this year.  
But  these  are  difficult  times.  Significant  geopolitical  and  global  economic  uncertainties  continue  to 
overhang the economic outlook for all countries. It is during times like these that policy-makers may be 
tempted to put the four principles aside and focus instead on short-term economic problems.  
In Canada, we have learned that it is by sticking to these principles that we create economic structures 
that can  withstand turmoil. The four policy principles have proven to be the most effective  tools for 
meeting the challenges of a very uncertain world.  
4 
 BIS Review 13/2003
