 Ian Plenderleith: Is monetary policy different in Africa? 
Speech by Mr Ian Plenderleith, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at a symposium 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 29 August 2003. 
 A  good  deal  of  attention  has  been  directed  in  recent  years  to  the  very  interesting  and  germane 
question  of  how  far  the  challenges  facing  central  banks  in  conducting  monetary  policy  in  emerging 
market economies differ from those facing their colleagues in developed countries. 
Are the very evident differences, for example in economic and social structure, in the pace of change 
and in exposure to shifts in the global economy, so significant as to require a difference in approach to 
conducting monetary  policy?  If so,  what  are the material differences and  what  adjustments do they 
require policymakers to make, in focus or in process? In particular, can inflation targeting, which was 
adopted  with  such  good  effect  by  a  vanguard  of  (mainly)  developed  countries  in  the  early-1990s, 
deliver similar beneficial results for the  larger  phalanx of emerging market economies who followed 
suit in the late-1990s? 
The purpose of this contribution is not to add to the burgeoning theoretical literature, but to offer some 
observations from practical experience of both worlds. 
That experience needs some disclaimer at the outset. Thirty years of wrestling with British monetary 
policy  at  the  Bank  of  England  certainly  does  not  entitle  one  to  claim  any  extended  track  record  of 
success, though the last ten years went a lot better than the previous 20. Equally, six months (so far) 
contributing to the conduct of monetary policy in South Africa is far too narrow a span to allow one to 
claim any first hand expertise in the distinctive circumstances of emerging market economies. But the 
privilege of serving successively on the Monetary Policy Committees of two such different countries is 
given to relatively few central bankers and it has been fascinating to try to assess whether monetary 
policy really is different in Africa. 
What  strikes  one  initially,  in  moving  from  a  developed  to  an  emerging  market  economy,  is  the 
remarkable  similarity  in  the  monetary  policy  process.  This,  on  reflection,  perhaps  ought  not  to  be 
surprising, given the effort the international community has invested in recent  years in promulgating 
standards of international good practice for the conduct of macro-economic policy. 
In  terms  of  the  structure  of  the  policy  framework,  one  obvious  common  feature  is  the  critical 
importance of government establishing a disciplined and coherent framework for fiscal and monetary 
policy  to  work  in  mutual  support,  so  that  weakness  in  the  public  finances  does  not  undermine 
monetary  discipline  and  so  that  the  commitment  to  low  inflation  is  seen  to  be  embedded  as  a  key 
feature of the government’s overall economic strategy.  Another common feature is the need for the 
central  bank  to  be  able  to  act  independently  in  pursuing  low  inflation,  and  to  have  the  technical 
expertise  and  professional  competence  to  do  its  job  and  command  public  confidence.  Yet  another 
common 
reasonably  developed  and 
competently-regulated  financial  system.  In  all  these  respects  South  Africa  scores  highly,  as  indeed 
international scrutiny through visiting IMF/World Bank missions has confirmed. 
In process, too, the procedures through which monetary policy are conducted are remarkably similar. 
There are differences, but they are essentially ones of form, rather than substance.  
Thus, as in other inflation-targeting countries, the inflation target is set as a key government economic 
objective.  A  structured  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
the  central  bank  meets  at  regular, 
pre-announced  intervals  to  take  a  considered  decision  on  interest  rates,  enabling  policy-makers  to 
step aside from their day jobs for 36 hours and concentrate on a communal review of the monetary 
outlook. The emphasis, as elsewhere, is on a forward-looking assessment, weighing uncertainties and 
risks in the unknown future. Also, as elsewhere, the process is surrounded by lively public debate as 
to what monetary action should be taken, with market commentators showing commendable lack of 
reticence  in  arguing  their  views.  Key  to  the  value  their  contributions  can  add  is  the  high  degree  of 
transparency in the process. In South Africa, as elsewhere, communication and explanation are key 
elements in monetary policy achieving its behavioural effects, and also critical features in the process 
by which the central bank is, quite properly, held accountable for its actions. 
the  country 
to  have  a 
the  need 
feature 
for 
in 
is 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
 All  these  elements,  then,  look  and  feel  remarkably  similar  to  a  central  banker  migrating  from  an 
advanced  developed  country  to  an  emerging  market  economy.  What  is,  of  course,  fundamentally 
different  is  the  economic,  social  and  cultural  environment  in  which  the  policy  process  has  to  be 
operated. 
This  difference  in  the  environment  could  simply  be  regarded  as  a  feature  that  raises  the  level  of 
uncertainty facing policy-makers as to what is going on in the economy - a difference in degree, but 
not  such  as  to  make  the  challenges  different  in  kind  in  any  fundamental  way.  A  higher  level  of 
uncertainty can in fact matter a lot in itself, in making policy-makers less confident of their judgements 
and  more  inclined  to  wait  and  see.  But  there  are  grounds  for  arguing  that  the  distinctly  different 
environment  in  emerging  market  economies  goes  further  in  its  implications  for  the  way  in  which 
monetary policy has to be operated. Four possible effects can be identified. 
First, because they are undergoing significant structural change, many emerging market economies 
may  be  more  vulnerable  to  shocks  than  fully-developed  economies.  Of  course,  all  economies 
experience shocks, but the frequency and scale may be greater in emerging market economies. 
These shocks can have their origin in the domestic economy (a poor crop) or arrive unexpectedly from 
overseas  (higher  oil  prices).  Either  way,  they  are  difficult  enough  to  handle  if  they  impact  on  the 
demand  side,  but  more  often  the  emerging  market  central  banker  has  to  grapple  with  sharp 
movements in cost pressures on the supply side. The orthodox response to shifts in supply conditions 
is  to  accept  the  first-round  effect  on  prices  and  concentrate  monetary  action  on  heading  off 
second-round  impacts  that  can  otherwise  generate  an  inflationary  cycle.  This  may  be  conceptually 
clear, but in practice it is a hideously difficult distinction to have to translate into monetary decisions. It 
is a good discipline in these circumstances to remind oneself regularly that higher interest rates will not 
help to make the maize crop grow higher. 
South Africa’s experience in 2001-02 is a good case in point. A precipitate and largely inexplicable fall 
in  the  exchange  rate  in  the  latter  part  of  2001  combined  with  higher  fuel  costs  and  increases  in 
domestic  food  prices  to  deliver  a  severe  inflationary  shock.  The  central  bank’s  response,  to  raise 
interest  rates  in  progressive  steps  in  2002,  was  exemplary  and  appears  to  have  worked  well,  with 
inflation now falling steadily back towards target range as the shock recedes. But the consequences 
were to make the central bank’s task of embedding low inflation in the fabric of the economy much 
more challenging, because of the inevitable questions this experience raised as to whether, faced with 
such shocks, monetary policy really could achieve permanently low inflation. That it can, and is doing 
so,  is  now  gaining  wider  acceptance,  as  reflected  in  continuing  evidence  of  falling  inflationary 
expectations. But it has required, alongside carefully-timed monetary tightening, a strong effort by the 
central  bank  to  communicate  its  determination.  The  prevalence  of  supply-side  shocks  would  thus 
seem to be one area in which emerging market economies may face particular challenges in operating 
monetary policy. 
Another may arise from the impact of the exchange rate. Movements in exchange rates may have a 
relatively larger impact in emerging market economies, and their currencies may be more exposed to 
underlying volatility. Certainly, recent experience in South Africa suggests that the recovery in the rand 
over  the  past  year  has  been  an  important  factor  in  containing  inflation.  In  part  this  recovery  has 
reflected the general weakening in the dollar, and factors such as higher commodity prices have also 
been an influence. But the currency’s recovery has also been an important channel by which monetary 
tightening  worked  its  way  through  to  the  economy.  If  the  relationship  between  interest  rates  and 
exchange  rate  movements  were  predictable,  the  effectiveness  of  the  exchange  rate  transmission 
channel  would  be  helpful  to  monetary  policy.  But  in  practice  this  relationship  remains  rather 
inscrutable. 
Moreover,  the  fact  that  emerging  market  currencies  are  subject  to  volatility  resulting  from  shifts 
unconnected with the country itself, such as the recent substantial adjustments by the dollar and the 
euro, means that movements in the exchange rate can have impacts on domestic monetary conditions 
that can be both large in their effects and impossible to anticipate. Of course, it can always be argued 
that in these circumstances the central bank should try to moderate movements in the exchange rate 
in greater or less degree. But the instruments available, for example through capital controls or official 
intervention, if maintained for any period, do not have at all an encouraging track record and may have 
counter-productive  side-effects  by  impeding  desirable  structural  adjustment  or  actually  increasing 
exchange  rate  volatility.  The  appropriate  remedy  is  to  stick  to  the  fundamentals,  focusing monetary 
action determinedly on low inflation while taking into account impacts from the exchange rate as one 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
 amongst  a  range  of  relevant  influences.  But  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  these  impacts  may  be 
particularly significant for emerging market economies. 
A further distinctive feature is more straightforward, but can easily be overlooked - that policy-makers 
in emerging market economies tend to have less information available to them about developments in 
the economy. This is essentially a form of resource constraint. It applies to statistics, where relevant 
series  may  be  available  less frequently,  or  in  less  comprehensive  or  disaggregated  form,  or  simply 
less reliable. In South Africa, what was in origin a relatively minor distortion in the compilation of the 
CPI  produced  a  downward  revision,  when  it  was  discovered,  of  nearly  2  percentage  points  in  the 
12-month rate of inflation. This at least had the merit of being a rare example of a good news shock. 
Such  events  are  not  unique  to  emerging  market  economies:  the  UK  and  others  have  experienced 
problems with important statistical series from time to time. But diverting scarce resources to statistical 
compilation is inevitably a problem in an economy where the relevant skills are often a key constraint 
on  economic  development  as  whole.  The  same  applies,  too,  more  generally  to  knowledge  of  the 
transmission mechanism: understanding of functional relationships across the economy is bound to be 
less secure when the structure of the economy is undergoing rapid change. The existence of a large 
informal economy further complicates the task. 
This  leads  to  a  fourth  implication  for  monetary  policy  in  an  emerging  market  economy.  This  is  the 
critical  role  played  by  confidence  in,  and  the  credibility  of,  the  policy  framework.  This  has  both  a 
domestic  and  an  international  dimension.  Domestically,  there  is  a  critical  need  to  win  public 
acceptance of the value of low inflation and public confidence in the determination and ability of the 
central bank to achieve it. Internationally, confidence that the policy framework will be adhered to can 
have  a  powerful  influence  on  investment  inflows  and  on  the  exchange  rate.  These  factors  are,  of 
course,  crucial  to  monetary  policy  in  any  country.  But  the  task  of  buttressing  them  is  the  more 
challenging in emerging market economies because the track record of commitment is relatively much 
shorter. 
These  can  be  argued  to  be  some  of  the  distinctive  challenges  faced  by  monetary  policy-makers  in 
emerging market economies. Are they, however, sufficiently distinctive as to require any fundamentally 
different approach in the conduct of monetary policy? The answer, to quote Evelyn Waugh, has to be, 
(cid:147)Up to a point, Lord Copper.(cid:148) They are not different in kind from the factors which central banks in any 
country  have  to  face.  But  they  do  perhaps  play  a  more  predominant  part  in  the  monetary  policy 
judgement in emerging market economies than elsewhere. 
This suggests two final observations.  
First, because of the uncertainties, central banks in emerging market economies may understandably 
tend to be relatively cautious in adjusting their policy stance, in the sense of spacing adjustments in 
relatively smaller steps over more extended periods. No central banker need ever apologise for being 
regarded as being cautious. But it does mean that, even in circumstances in which there may be a 
case for contemplating more bold action, the balance of risks may argue against such an approach. 
Secondly,  given  the  challenges,  can  an  inflation  targeting  framework  realistically  be  expected  to 
deliver the desired results in the emerging market context? If the various distinctive features identified 
above - periodic unexpected shocks, exchange rate volatility, imperfect information sources and public 
confidence that is not yet fully robust - occurring in whatever combination, result in the central bank 
missing its target for any extended period, there is of course a danger that the credibility, or even the 
feasibility,  of  the  process  could  be  called  into  question.  But  arguably,  it  is  precisely  in  these 
circumstances that the clarity an inflation target can be most helpful, and powerful, in communicating 
the central bank’s policy  intentions. That the challenges are formidable is not a reason for stepping 
back  from  clarity.  It  is,  instead,  a  powerful  reason  in  favour  of  the  clarity  of  an  inflation  target  can 
deliver, reinforced by effective communication by the central bank, consistency in its conduct of policy 
and transparency in explaining its actions. In this broader perspective, the fundamentals of monetary 
policy are not, in any meaningful way, different in Africa.  
BIS Review 38/2003 
 3
