 Li Ruogu: The Chinese economy and world economic outlook 
Statement by Mr Li Ruogu, Assistant Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Seventh Meeting 
of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington, D.C., 12 April 2003. 
 World economic outlook: vulnerability, risk and policy response 
I. 
Since our discussion of the world economic outlook last autumn, the global economy has shown some 
positive signs, but the road to full recovery continues to be bumpy, and, in some areas, vulnerabilities 
have even increased. In particular, geopolitical instability has aggravated financial market turbulence. 
The current situation shows that the widespread impact of this instability on the economies of some 
countries,  especially  on  energy  prices  and  consumer  confidence,  will  certainly  not  end  in  the  short 
term. Therefore, I consider a more comprehensive and objective assessment of the negative impact of 
these factors on the global economy by the IMF staff is justified. In addition, I note the following areas 
of vulnerability in the world economy. 
1. 
The over-investment that occurred during the time of the U.S. economic boom in the 1990s 
created a great deal of excess capacity. This problem has not yet been solved effectively. 
Therefore, a full recovery of the U.S. economy is still going to take some time. At present, 
the  Japanese  economy  is  still  lingering  on  the  verge  of  deflation,  and  the  situation  of  the 
major euro area economies remains grim. All these factors are extremely unfavorable for the 
recovery  of  the  world  economy,  the  growth  of  which  is  overly  dependent  on  the  United 
States. I believe that it is necessary to assess fully the enormous risk of the overdependence 
of the  world economy  on the U.S. economy  at a  time  when the U.S. economy  itself faces 
great adjustment pressures.  
The  impact  of  the  fall  in  asset  prices  in  the  industrial  countries  has  not  yet  fully  unfolded. 
While the slide in stock prices in the last two years has been partially made up by a rise in 
real estate prices, the real estate market cannot remain prosperous forever. Moreover, in a 
certain sense, the previous longstanding prosperity implies a definite bubble component. The 
breaking of the real estate price bubble would certainly be no less a blow to investment and 
consumption than the breaking of a stock market bubble. In addition, owing to the existing 
problems in the balance sheets  of banks and  insurance companies  in  the major industrial 
countries, considerable stock market uncertainty still exists. 
Some  countries  are  finding  increasingly  less  room  for  making  macroeconomic  policy 
adjustments. Since 2000, many developed countries have successively lowered their interest 
rates and increased their fiscal deficits in response to the worsening domestic and foreign 
economic situation. Since interest rates in some countries have now fallen to the lowest level 
in decades, there is limited room for further lowering interest rates and increasing deficits. 
Therefore,  while  the  risk  of  global  economic  volatility  is  rising,  the  use  of  policy  means  to 
achieve an economic upturn is severely restricted. 
The volatility of exchange rates among the major currencies will have a differing impact on 
the economic adjustment of some countries. At present, the depreciation of the dollar has 
put  pressure  on  the  economic  recovery  of  the  euro  area.  If  exchange  rate  volatility  and 
international capital flows were to affect each other, there will be an even greater impact on 
the emerging market economies whose financial sectors are still not robust. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
In consideration  of these  vulnerabilities, I believe that staff’s overall forecast for the  world  economy 
and  the  U.S.  economy  is  too  optimistic  and  that  they  have  underestimated  the  negative  impact  of 
geopolitical instability. 
In light of the  existing vulnerabilities in the  world economy, I believe that all countries should adopt 
appropriate policy measures to manage and resolve them. In particular, the major developed countries 
need to assume even more responsibility and pursue supportive macroeconomic policies. The United 
States  should  pay  more  attention  to  its  existing  macroeconomic  weaknesses  and  enhance  policy 
coordination with other countries to prevent the negative impact of sharp exchange rate volatility on 
the vulnerable world economy. The euro area should accelerate structural reform in the labor market 
area  and  pursue  a  looser  monetary  policy,  when  necessary.  Japan  should  focus  on  solving  the 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 1
 problem of nonperforming loans and endeavor to carry out financial sector reform to create conditions 
conducive  to  economic  recovery.  To  promote  economic  growth,  the  developing  countries  need  to 
further  expand  domestic  demand,  improve  financing  conditions,  pursue  a  robust  macroeconomic 
policy, and speed up structural reform. 
Crisis prevention: surveillance, standards and codes 
II.  
In recent years, the IMF has conducted extensive research and made considerable efforts in the area 
of crisis prevention and resolution. In my opinion, the IMF should now set priorities and focus on those 
areas that can really enhance the crisis prevention capabilities of member countries. 
Enhanced surveillance will be achieved by adjusting its focus. In light of the current situation in which 
the world economy is more dependent on the economies of the industrial countries, the IMF needs to 
tighten  its surveillance  of the macroeconomic and financial policies of the major industrial countries 
and  support  developing  countries  in  promoting  structural  adjustment  and  preserving  their  growth 
momentum  to  achieve  an  early  and  full  recovery  of  the  global  economy.  The  industrial  countries 
should enhance policy coordination, actively open up their markets to developing countries, accelerate 
the transfer of capital and technology to them, and seriously assume responsibility for preserving the 
sustainable  growth  of  the  global  economy.  To  overcome  the  problem  of  imbalances  caused  by 
globalization  and  fundamentally  improve  the  global  capacity  to  withstand  vulnerability  requires  the 
establishment of a new equitable and reasonable international economic and financial order. 
In addition, the IMF needs to preserve a balance in overseeing the public and private sectors because 
in most cases market volatility is the result of the interaction between the two. If only the public sector 
is to be monitored and is required to increase its transparency, this goes against our original intention 
of calling for increased transparency. That being said, I believe that much work remains to be done 
increasing transparency on short-term capital flows. It is hoped that the IMF will pay attention to this 
important area. 
At present, there is still no realistic plan on how to involve the private sector in crisis resolution. In my 
opinion, the basic principle for private sector participation in crisis resolution is to work out a plan that 
will be acceptable to both the public and private sectors, and both investors and recipients. 
As for standards and codes, I want to emphasize two points. One, the formulation and implementation 
of all standards and codes is aimed at promoting development and achieving prosperity for all, rather 
than merely implementing these standards and codes. Therefore, the formulation and implementation 
of standards and codes must achieve the objective of promoting economic development. To ensure 
that  standards  and  codes  are  more  objective  and  fair,  the  formulation  process  should  have  the  full 
participation  of  the  developing  countries.  In  consideration  of  the  differences  among  countries  at 
different  stages  of  economic  and  institutional  development,  we  should  let  all  countries  voluntarily 
choose their own implementation timetables based on their respective circumstances. This will be the 
only way to ensure that the implementation of standards and codes can achieve the aim of promoting 
development. Two, the facts show that observing the pertinent standards and codes is certainly not 
enough to effectively prevent the occurrence of crises. Therefore, we should not overemphasize the 
role of promoting standards and codes in crisis prevention. The implementation of standards should 
also  proceed  in  an  orderly,  gradual,  and  realistic  way  in  accordance  with  real  circumstances. 
Otherwise, it could divert attention from more important areas. 
In my opinion, the most fundamental crisis prevention measure is the promotion of economic growth 
and  social  development.  The  international  community  should  reach  a  consensus  on  this  and  take 
effective  steps  to  achieve  economic  growth  for  the  whole  world,  particularly  for  the  developing 
countries. 
Since  the  late 1990s,  international  financial  crises  have  occurred  frequently  and  the  crisis  countries 
have found it difficult to access financing on the international financial market, thus posing a threat to 
global  financial  stability.  The  IMF  should  actively  consider  using  the  existing  financing  facilities  for 
increased support to crisis countries. Meanwhile, it needs to actively promote a quota increase and the 
general  allocation  of  special  drawing  rights.  In  particular,  the  IMF  needs  to  complete  the  special 
one-time allocation of SDRs as soon as possible to strengthen the capacity of member countries to 
withstand crises. 
In addition, the establishment of a new equitable and reasonable international economic and financial 
order remains one of the basic means of crisis prevention. Therefore, the IMF needs to continue to 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2003
 examine  the  flaws  in  the  existing  international  monetary  system,  reform  the  irrational  international 
financial  architecture,  and  gradually  establish  a  new  international  monetary  system  that  genuinely 
reflects the basic features of economic globalization, fully reflects the interests of the many developing 
countries, and provides institutional safeguards for the sustainable growth of the global economy. In 
this process, widespread participation of the developing countries is needed. 
Crisis management: sovereign debt restructuring 
III.  
Establishing  a  fair  and  reasonable  sovereign  debt  restructuring  method  is  important  both  for  crisis 
prevention  and  resolution,  and  for  private  sector  participation.  In  the  last  two  years,  the  IMF  has 
conducted  much  valuable  research  on  the  issue  of  sovereign  debt  restructuring.  While  this  work 
deserves affirmation, the existing options still have certain flaws. 
The  automatic  stay  mechanism  of  the  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism  (SDRM)  would  be 
favorable to ensuring the smooth conduct of restructuring negotiations. However, since it would widely 
involve the revision of the laws of all countries and amendment of the IMF Articles of Agreement, I’m 
afraid that it would hardly be achievable in the short term. It would certainly not be easy to ensure the 
independence  and  fairness  of  the  dispute  resolution  forum,  not  to  mention  the  many  technical 
problems that still need to be solved. 
The Collective Action Clause (CAC) cannot solve the collective action problem for multiple sovereign 
debts, which is one of the major reasons for the emergence of the statutory approach, i.e., the SDRM. 
In addition, the CAC impact on the bond issuance cost in emerging market economies is still pending 
more  empirical  analysis  and  study.  Its  design  should  contribute  to  capital  inflows  for  developing 
countries, and its application should reflect the voluntary principle.  
As for the recently proposed code of good practices, there is also a great deal of controversy in this 
area and its implementation should not be rushed. I particularly want to emphasize that it should not 
include coercive terms aimed at developing countries. 
In short, the establishment of the SDRM still has a long way to go. The SDRM and CAC both have 
reasonable elements and could supplement each other. We support the continued study and steady 
improvement of these two approaches, but no rash conclusion should be reached at the current stage. 
IV.  
The problem of the development of the low-income countries: poverty reduction 
strategy, debt reduction, millennium development goals, and the voice of the 
developing countries 
Owing  to  the  worsening  international  economic  situation  in  recent  years,  low-income  developing 
countries vulnerable to external shocks have been faced with even greater difficulties with regard to 
exports, capital inflows, and poverty reduction. We call  on the  international community to pay more 
attention  to  the  development  of  low-income  countries,  and  we  support  the  IMF  in  its  enhanced 
cooperation  with  other  international  agencies  together  with  intensified  assistance  and  effectiveness. 
We  call  on  the  developed  countries  to  increase  their  international  development  assistance  to 
low-income countries, take real actions to implement the Monterrey Consensus, and meet the United 
Nations’ 0.7 percent ODA/GNP target as soon as possible. 
We  stress  that  trade  is  an  important  means  not  only  of  development  financing  for  developing 
countries, but also of achieving economic and social development and integrating all countries with the 
world economic system. Therefore, we call on the industrial countries to renounce trade protection and 
continue to further open up their markets to developing countries to create a favorable international 
environment.  We  encourage  developing  countries  to  maintain  their  reform  and  development 
momentum. Meanwhile,  we urge the IMF  to conscientiously oversee the progress of the developed 
countries in the reduction of trade protection. 
As always, the Chinese government supports the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. 
We appreciate all the IMF/World Bank efforts so far. We are pleased that progress has been made in 
the strategy for economic development and poverty reduction. We hope that the two institutions will 
streamline their procedures, fully bring into play the autonomy and initiative of the HIPCs in formulating 
the  development  strategy,  and  increase  their  financial  assistance  to  these  countries.  While  China 
remains a developing country with quite low per capita income, we stand ready to do everything in our 
capacity to contribute to the debt reduction of the HIPCs. Not only has the Chinese government made 
BIS Review 19/2003 
 3
 loans and contributed to the IMF’s Poverty  Reduction and Growth Facility  and  Enhanced Structural 
Adjustment Facility, it also has reduced debt for certain heavily indebted poor African countries on a 
bilateral basis by RMB10 billion. In 2002, China also promised to waive debt for certain of Asia’s least 
developed countries and decided to donate funds to the East African Regional Technical Assistance 
Center recently established by the IMF. 
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) 
V.  
The  Chinese  government  is  paying  close  attention  to  AML-CFT  and  is  actively  engaged  with  the 
international community in this area. In early 2003, the People’s Bank of China announced three new 
AML  regulations.  We  call  on  the  pertinent  AML  organizations  to  create  the  conditions  for  the 
expansion of their representation  as soon as possible. In  particular,  they should include developing 
country members to enhance the rationality and authority of their proposals. In our opinion, the first 
priority  of  AML  work  should  be  the  financial  centers  of  certain  developed  countries  where 
money-laundering  activities  are  now  relatively  rampant  and  the  amounts  of money  being  laundered 
relatively larger. Since the IMF does not have the required expertise in the AML area, particularly in 
the  law  enforcement  arena,  and  since  this  work  is  not  its  core  business,  the  IMF  should  not 
overemphasize  it.  In  the  course  of  the  pilot  program  and  promotion  of  proposals,  the  IMF  should 
always adhere to the principles of voluntary and cooperative participation and respect the sovereignty 
and national conditions of the governments of all countries. 
The Chinese economy 
VI.  
In recent years, while expanding its domestic demand, China has also been steadily opening up to the 
outside  world  and  participating  in  global  economic  cooperation  and  integration,  and  preserving  its 
sustained  and  sound  economic  growth  momentum.  The  Communist  Party  of  China  held  its 
16th National  Congress  in  October  2002  and  achieved  a  smooth  succession  to  the  leadership.  The 
new  Chinese  government,  which  took  office  in  March 2003,  will  continue  the  policy  of  stimulating 
domestic demand through pursuing a proactive fiscal policy and robust monetary policy to promote the 
sustained,  rapid,  and  sound  development  of  the  national  economy  and  overall  progress  in  social 
causes. 
For the first two months of 2003, industrial output grew 17.5 percent, and fixed capital investment grew 
32.8 percent,  both  showing  the  fastest  growth  since  the  same  period  in 1996.  Meanwhile,  business 
efficiency improved sharply, and industrial profits grew 120 percent. Imports and exports maintained 
their fast growth, being up 44 percent from the same period in 2002. This included export and import 
growth of 32.8 percent and 57.1 percent, respectively, for a trade deficit of nearly US$600 million and 
marked  the  first  time  that  imports  have  exceeded  exports  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  The  total 
volume of retail sales grew 9.2 percent, 0.7 percentage points more than in the same period in 2002. 
Use  of  foreign  capital  saw  sustained  and  rapid  growth,  with  the  contracted  amount  being  up 
59.1 percent (US$14.2 billion) and real use of foreign capital being up 53.6 percent (US$7.54 billion). 
The  consumer  price  index  increased  by  0.3 percent.  Money  supply  also  increased  correspondingly, 
including broad money, which was up 18 percent from the same period in 2002. We are now paying 
close attention to the development of the macroeconomic situation. While preventing deflation, we also 
need to avoid economic overheating. 
For 2003, we project that annual economic growth will remain at around 7 percent; the CPI will rise 
1 percent;  foreign  trade  will  grow  7 percent;  and  the  registered  urban  unemployment  rate  will  be 
4.5 percent. 
Due  to  strong  export  growth,  the  economy  of  the  Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  (SAR) 
started  to  improve  in  the  second  half  of 2002. While  it  still  faces  various,  we  firmly  believe  that  the 
Hong Kong SAR economy will definitely weather its difficulties and resume quite strong growth under 
the  leadership  of  the  Hong  Kong  SAR  government.  The  central  government  will  firmly  support  all 
measures taken by the SAR government to restore economic growth. 
Since  China’s resumption of its exercise of sovereignty over Macao,  we are pleased to see that its 
economy has been more prosperous and its society more stable under the leadership of the Macao 
SAR  government.  It  is  expected  that  Macao  SAR  will  maintain  a  quite  high  economic  growth  rate 
in 2003. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2003
