 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
17 February 2003. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  appear  before  your  Committee  today.  As  usual,  I  will  begin  my  introductory 
remarks  by  reporting  to  you  on  the  ECB's  assessment  of  economic  and  monetary  developments, 
before turning to the ECB recommendation on the adjustment of voting modalities in the Governing 
Council, which the ECB adopted following the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice and on which the 
European Parliament and the European Commission have been invited to give their opinion. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
In its first meeting of December 2002, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to lower the key ECB 
rates by 50 basis points. The basis for this decision was the assessment that the prospect for inflation 
to fall below 2% in the course of 2003, against the background of subdued economic growth, and for it 
to remain in line with price stability thereafter, had strengthened. With this move, the key ECB interest 
rates reached a very low level by historical standards. 
Before turning to our assessment of the current economic outlook for the euro area, I would like to 
report  that  on  5  December  2002  we  also  reviewed  the  reference  value  for  monetary  growth,  which 
plays  an  important  role  under  the  first  pillar  of  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  strategy.  The  Governing 
Council decided to leave the current value unchanged at an annual growth rate of 4½% for the broad 
aggregate M3, as the evidence continues to support the assumptions which have formed the basis of 
the derivation of the reference value since 1999, namely a trend potential output growth of 2-2½% per 
annum and a trend decline in M3 income velocity of ½-1% per annum in the euro area.  
When comparing current developments with the reference value, it is important to bear in mind that the 
assessment  of  monetary  developments  is  essential  for  long-term  trends  in  inflation  and  that  the 
reference value is therefore to be seen as a medium-term concept. Short-term movements of M3 do 
not necessarily have implications for future price developments. Moreover, deviations of M3 from the 
reference  value  must  be  analysed  in  conjunction  with  other  real  and  financial  indicators  in  order  to 
understand their implications for price stability. 
Turning to our current assessment on the outlook for price stability in the euro area, and starting with 
the  first  pillar,  M3  growth  remained  high  in  the  last  quarter  of  2002.  The  continued  strength  in 
monetary  growth  reflects  an  ongoing  pronounced  preference  for  liquidity  in  an  environment  of  high 
financial, economic and geopolitical uncertainty. In addition, the low level of interest rates in the euro 
area makes the holding of liquid assets relatively attractive. Overall, although liquidity remains ample, 
it  is  unlikely  at  this  stage  that  it  will  give  rise  to  inflationary  pressures,  given  the  current  economic 
environment and the expectation that some of the portfolio shifts will be reversed once the financial 
market uncertainty diminishes. This assessment is supported  by  the continuing moderate growth  of 
loans to the private sector, particularly to non-financial corporations.  
As  regards  the  information  under  the  second  pillar,  recently  published  data  and  survey  information 
indicate that economic growth in the euro area remained subdued around the turn of the year and that 
the overall sentiment in the economy remained lacklustre. While these indications suggest that growth 
dynamics will remain weak for the early part of this year, the most likely scenario remains that of a 
gradual increase of real GDP growth rates, starting in the second half of 2003. The current low levels 
of interest rates should contribute to this scenario materialising. In addition, while the appreciation of 
the euro over recent months is likely to contribute to a dampening of export growth to some extent, this 
should be counterbalanced by the assumed recovery in the world economy. In this respect, it should 
also be taken into account that the price competitiveness of euro area companies remains favourable 
in a medium-term perspective. 
At the same time, uncertainty regarding the economic outlook remains high, in particular due to the 
ongoing geopolitical tensions. Further turbulence in the oil markets could have a negative impact on 
economic  activity  throughout  the  world  and,  therefore,  on  euro  area  employment  as  well.  These 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 1
 concerns  could  weigh  adversely  on  confidence.  In  addition,  the  accumulated  macroeconomic 
imbalances outside the euro area have led to uncertainty surrounding the strength of the recovery in 
other major economies.  By  way  of conclusion, there are still  downside risks to the outlook for euro 
area economic activity.  
Turning to prices, HICP inflation has remained slightly above 2% in recent months. On the one hand, 
there  was  upward  pressure  from  oil  prices  and  from  various  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and 
administered  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  the  strengthening  of  the  euro,  together  with  base  effects, 
helped to limit year-on-year consumer price increases. Looking ahead, given the outlook for moderate 
economic  growth,  the  gradual  pass-through  of  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  should  contribute  to  a 
dampening of inflationary pressures. Overall, the most likely outcome remains that inflation will fall and 
eventually  stabilise  at  a  level  below  2%  in  the  course  of  2003.  However,  the  volatility  in  oil  prices 
makes it very difficult to forecast prospects for inflation movements accurately, especially in the short 
term. 
Moderate  wage  developments  are  a  major  prerequisite  in  order  for  price  stability  to  prevail  in  the 
medium  term.  This  will  also  help  to  improve  the  prospects  for  economic  growth  and  further 
employment  creation. When  looking  back  we  see  that  wage  growth  followed  an  upward  trend  until 
recently,  despite  the  economic  slowdown.  This  indicates  that  significant  structural  rigidities  have 
prevented an appropriate adjustment of wages. 
Taking all of the above into account, at its last meeting on 6 February 2003, the Governing Council 
concluded that following the decision to lower the ECB key rates by 50 basis points in December, the 
monetary policy stance remained appropriate to preserve a favourable outlook for price stability in the 
medium term. Consequently, the ECB kept its key interest rates unchanged. Their already low level 
should help to counterbalance the negative effects on economic activity that currently stem from the 
high  degree  of  worldwide  uncertainty  and  should,  therefore,  contribute  to  a  sustainable  economic 
recovery in the course of 2003.  
For the time being, we still assume that the high degree of uncertainty will decline in the course of this 
year. However, at this juncture it is not possible to assess how the ongoing geopolitical developments 
will affect the world economy and, in particular, the euro area economy. The Governing Council will 
continue to monitor closely all factors that may affect the prospects for inflation in the euro area. 
The euro area outlook will also very much depend on progress in other policy areas. As regards fiscal 
policy,  full  adherence  to  the  fiscal  policy  framework  laid  down  in  the  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  provides  a  sound  basis  for  limiting  the  risk  of  fiscal  imbalances  occurring  and  thus 
contributes significantly to favourable financing conditions for the private sector. At the same time, it 
preserves an appropriate medium-term orientation for fiscal policy. The Governing Council supports 
the  steps  taken  by  the  Commission  to  maintain  the  functioning  of  the  framework,  including  the 
implementation of excessive deficit procedures and the issuing of early warnings, where required.  
Furthermore, I should also like to stress that it is the implementation of structural reforms at the micro 
level  that  ultimately  raises  the  production  potential  in  the  euro  area.  By  improving  flexibility  in  the 
economy  and  making  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  external  shocks,  structural  reforms  will  also 
reduce the high level of unemployment. The slow progress in structural reform is one of the key factors 
currently hampering a recovery in confidence.  
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  recent  communication  by  the 
Commission on the implementation of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. Renewed momentum in 
the  process  of  structural  reform  will  not  only  be  crucial  to  foster  confidence  among  consumers  and 
investors in long-term growth and employment opportunities in the euro area, but it should also have a 
positive effect on spending and investment decisions in the short and medium term.  
Finally, I should like to mention that after four years of practice with our monetary policy strategy, the 
Governing  Council  has  considered  that  it  is  the  appropriate  point  in  time  to  take  stock  of  our 
experience so far and to reflect on the various elements of the strategy. All this does not necessarily 
imply that we see a need for any changes. We are very satisfied with our strategy and with the fact 
that it has given appropriate and effective guidance to monetary policy decisions. Let me also assure 
you that there will be no change in our firm commitment to our overriding objective of maintaining price 
stability  over  the  medium  term,  i.e.  avoiding  both  inflation  and  deflation.  Indeed,  this  could  not  be 
otherwise, since the achievement of the price stability objective is at the core of our mandate in the 
Treaty. 
  2. 
The ECB Recommendation on the adjustment of voting modalities in the Governing 
Council 
On  3  February  2003,  the  Governing  Council  adopted  a  recommendation  on  the  adjustment  of  its 
voting modalities, which will prepare the Governing Council for a future expansion of the euro area. 
With the  timely submission of this recommendation,  and  a  hopefully rapid completion of the  overall 
procedure,  we  hope  to  preclude  any  uncertainty  about  the  continued  effectiveness  of  the  ECB's 
governance structures in view of a future expansion of the euro area. In this context, I should like to 
emphasise how much I appreciate your Committee's efforts to respect an ambitious timetable in order 
to present in good time the Opinion of the European Parliament as foreseen by the Treaty. 
As you are aware, the task of coming up with a new voting system presented the Governing Council 
with  a  formidable  challenge.  I  know  that  the  final  outcome  of  our  discussion,  the  rotation  of  voting 
rights based on three groups, has met with certain criticisms not only from the media, but also from the 
members of this Committee. Therefore, allow me to highlight a few crucial features of the new voting 
system, which might help to clear up any misunderstandings about the functioning of the system and 
the motivation behind it. 
First of all, I should like to stress that the "enabling clause" contained in the Treaty of Nice had set us 
clear legal limits, in that any reform should be restricted to a change in the voting modalities only. More 
fundamental  reform  options  were,  therefore,  outside  the  scope  of  our  discussions.  For  example, 
suggestions  by  academics  or  media  commentators  to  restrict  the  membership  of  the  Governing 
Council,  to  delegate  decision-making  on  monetary  policy  to  the  Executive  Board  or  some  form  of 
Monetary Policy Committee would call for more fundamental changes to the Treaty than foreseen by 
the "enabling clause". 
The Governing Council sought to devise a system which maintains its capacity for timely, efficient and 
euro-area focused decision-making in a substantially enlarged euro area. Therefore, we recommend 
to cap the number of NCB governors with a voting right at 15, which is the number of governors under 
the "Maastricht" framework if all current Member States were to have adopted the euro, with the six 
members of the Executive Board retaining a permanent voting right. At the same time, we introduced 
as a new element the principle of "representativeness", linked to the desire that at any moment in time 
the  NCB  governors  exercising  the  voting  right  represent  a  reasonable  share  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole. This desire to ensure "representativeness", by way of the differentiation among governors on 
the basis of the country ranking, should not be misunderstood as an attempt to re-introduce national 
elements  into  decision-making.  On  the  contrary,  the  allocation  of  governors  to  groups  is  a  purely 
auxiliary  device,  which  is  used  exclusively  to  determine  who  votes  when.  For  substantive 
decision-making  –  and  that  is  what  was  crucial  to  us  –  the  tried-and-tested  principles  of  the 
Eurosystem  constitution  have  been  kept  fully  intact:  the  principle  of  ad  personam  participation  of 
governors remains valid and the "one member, one vote" principle applies to all members exercising a 
voting right. All of this will ensure that, also in a future enlarged Governing Council, it is the force of 
arguments that counts in our deliberations and not which country an NCB governor comes from and 
whether this is a large or a small country.  
Finally, given that the sequencing of future euro area expansions is highly uncertain, the new voting 
system had to be sufficiently robust and able to accommodate up to 27 euro area Member States, so 
as to avoid having to change the rules every time a new Member State joins the euro area.  
In  view  of  all  these  complications  I  believe  we  have  succeeded  in  devising  a  suitable  new  voting 
system which should muster the unanimous support of the Council and eventually be ratified by the 
Member States. I know that it is not as simple as we would have liked. It is, however, as simple or 
complex  as  any  other  rotation  system  and  fairly  similar  to  the  system  operating  at  the  Federal 
Reserve, where the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks are also allocated to groups and exercise 
their voting right in the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) with different frequencies.  
I hope that our exchange of views later on will help to clarify any other outstanding issues. 
BIS Review 8/2003 
 3
