 Shri Vepa Kamesam: Payment and settlement systems 
Inaugural  address  by  Shri  Vepa  Kamesam,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Seminar  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  organised  by  Fixed  Income  Money  Market  and 
Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA), Mumbai, 6 May 2003. 
 The Payment and Settlement System is an essential part of the financial system of a vibrant economy. 
Consolidation, Development and Integration of the financial infrastructure and reforms in the payment 
and settlement systems of the country that address the twin issues of safety and efficiency have been 
engaging the attention of the Central Bankers and Financial Institutions the world over. Payment and 
Settlement Systems are no longer the backwaters of either the banks or the Central Banks. 
The Reserve Bank has taken up the mission critical approach to the establishment of an integrated 
payment  and  settlement  system  in  the  country.  A  number  of  initiatives  have  either  already  been 
implemented or are in an advanced stage on the drawing board. Identification and classification of the 
Systemically  Important  Payment  System  (SIPS)  have  been  done  and  various  measures  have  been 
initiated  to  facilitate  real  time  or  near  real  time  large  value  inter-bank  funds  transfer  in  secured 
environment. 
Recent initiatives: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
The PDO/NDS/SSS project, comprising inter alia the Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) is an 
initiative,  which  provides  for  an  electronic  platform  for  facilitating  trading  in  Government 
Securities and Money Market Instruments. The System has been operational for over a year 
now and the manner in which you have used the System is laudable. We have been actively 
fine-tuning the PDO-NDS system, based on your feedback and we will continue to do so in 
the interest of the banking community. The Securities Settlement System (SSS) will, in the 
near future, provide on-line depository services for the Government Securities. 
The Clearing Corporation of India Ltd., established at the behest of the Reserve Bank, has 
established  itself  as  a  Central  Counterparty  and  is  presently  extending  guaranteed 
settlement for trades done in the Government Securities Market and the Forex market. The 
number of products launched by CCIL in its short duration of existence speaks volumes of 
both the CCIL and the financial sector. The forex trading platform, offered by CCIL, for taking 
care of the settlement of inter-bank rupee-US dollar deals, provides for a deep, liquid and 
transparent forex trading facility. This will help in improving market efficiency and integrity. 
Special EFT has  been  introduced to facilitate funds  settlement on T+0  basis thrice a day. 
This facility is available from 2500 bank branches located in 500 centres. 
The  Centralised  Funds  Management  System  is  one  such  initiative,  which  provides  for  a 
Centralised Funds Enquiry System to the treasury branches of the banks in the first phase 
and the Centralised Funds Transfer System in the second phase, allowing the banks to do 
an optimal deployment of funds. I am sure that most of you have already been actively using 
the  funds  enquiry  module  of  CFMS  as  a  platform  for  a  having  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  your 
account balances at various RBI locations. Very shortly, you will be in a position to use this 
platform to do a near real time transfer of funds between your accounts in pursuance of your 
day-to-day funds management exercise. 
Real time gross settlement system: 
The Real Time Gross Settlement System is the key critical element and provides the missing link in 
the process of the setting up of the Integrated Payment and Settlement System in the country. The 
Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  has  now,  the  world  over,  been  the  preferred  mode  of  the 
settlement of large value inter-bank payments, with more and more countries moving towards it. In the 
SAARC region, we are now being joined by Sri Lanka, which has also decided to move over to RTGS. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 1
 (b) 
2 
 INFINET  provides 
RTGS, as a settlement process, minimizes settlement risks by settling individual payments in real time 
in  the  books  of  account,  held  at  the  Central  Bank.  Under  RTGS,  the  practically  instant  settlement 
ensures fast, secure, final and irrevocable settlement of payment transactions. 
The Real Time Gross Settlement System on implementation will be a defining moment in the history of 
the Payment and Settlement Systems in the country. It will be, in fact, a significant step towards the 
creation of an integrated, robust, safe, secure and modern Payment and Settlement System and I am 
sure all of you are looking forward to be part of the revolution. 
Let me apprise you of the roadmap for the implementation of the RTGS System. In June 2003, we will 
have a demonstrable RTGS package for testing and familiarization. It will be like an induction platform 
for  the  banks  to  the  RTGS  Standalone  System,  which  will  be  delivered  in  October  2003.  After 
completion of testing and acceptance, RTGS system will become operational before year-end. 
We have been building up awareness about the RTGS System. Already a series of Workshops and 
Seminars have been organized for your Treasury and IT Heads. We have also organized a ‘Seminar 
on Liquidity Management in RTGS Environment’ to apprise you of the challenges that you may face on 
the  operationalisation  of  the  RTGS  System  and  the  manner  in  which  you  have  to  control  and 
co-ordinate your liquidity management measures to derive optimal benefits from the RTGS System. 
It cannot be disputed that that the technological innovations, in general, have been at the core of the 
reform process in the services sector globally  and the financial sector, in particular. For the  last so 
many decades, it has been driving the business re-engineering process in our banking industry. We, at 
the  RBI,  have  been  actively  studying  these  developments  and  readying  ourselves  to  provide  for  a 
technology  framework  and  operating  environment,  conducive  to  the  banks.  Let  me  share  with  you 
some of the initiatives that we have undertaken. 
A reliable communication backbone to facilitate improvement in financial services, the Reserve Bank 
of India has, through IDRBT, set up the INFINET - a ‘Closed User Group’ network as the exclusive 
domain  for  the  applications  of  the  entities  in  the  banking  and  financial  sector.  As  you  all  know,  the 
INFINET  is  a  blend  of  VSAT  technology  and  terrestrial  leased  line  technology  based  Wide  Area 
Network. 
the 
implementation of all the Systemically Important Payment System Applications.  
Reserve Bank’s concerns and focused attention on the twin issues of security over the INFINET and 
message standards for intra/inter-bank applications have led to the development and implementation 
of the Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS), a standard messaging protocol, which would 
be  riding  on  the  INFINET  communication  backbone.  SFMS  has  adequate  in-built  security  and  with 
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), provides for a security solution of international standards. SFMS will 
also act as an alternative for accelerating the integration of the branches of the banks. 
Secondly, a state-of-the-art, robust and secure platform - IBM S-390 System with a complete standby 
installation - has been made operational in Mumbai centre to ensure the availability of the requisite 
technical  infrastructure,  capable  of  robustness,  operational  resilience  and  redundancies  to  ensure 
Business Continuity. The Disaster Recovery Site is being set up at a geographically distanced location 
from Mumbai. 
You will all agree that these efforts are incomplete without the total involvement and participation of 
the end-users of the payment and settlement system. The proverbial “last mile” problems will have to 
be  resolved.  In  order  that  the  benefits,  as  conceived  of  under  the  Integrated  Payment  Systems 
Architecture in the country, cascade down to the smallest branch of every bank and to every customer, 
you will have to be in an extremely high level of preparedness in terms of systems and operational 
processes, technology and human resources, to make the most of these and the newer opportunities, 
arising due to the fast changing canvas. 
In the area of Information Technology, specific attention will have to be paid to the TEN Core Issues, 
which  we have now  been advocating for sometime. These are fundamental to the participation and 
realization of optimal advantages from the RTGS System round the corner. 
A Payment System Gateway as the Single Point of Interface with the INFINET for participation in the 
Systemically Important Payment System Applications: 
(a) 
Connectivity between the Payment System Gateway and the Primary Site and Standby Site 
of the RBI. 
Computerisation of bank branches with Connectivity. 
the  robust  and  reliable  communication  backbone 
for 
for 
BIS Review 21/2003
 (c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
Setting up of intra-bank intra-city leased line network. 
Connectivity with the Hub at each RBI site under the 21-centre Intercity Leased Line Network 
of the INFINET. 
Synchronous Systems across the bank - Hardware, Operating System and Communication 
Platform. 
IDRBT CA CPS, Implementation of PKI and Creation of Registration Authority. 
Uniformity in Message Format for Inter/Intra bank Applications across the banking sector and 
Implementation of SFMS. 
Internal Applications of the bank and Interface with the RTGS System. 
Development,  Documentation  and  Implementation  of  the  Information  Systems  Security 
Policy in the bank.   
I am aware that quite a few of the above requirements have already been met by the majority of the 
banks present here. I urge upon those,  who have not  yet met them or partially  met them to do the 
same  urgently.  Most  important  and  critical  among  these  are  the  Connectivity  and  Security  Issues. 
Unless all your branches are networked, the benefits of a secured and modern Payment System will 
not  percolate  to  the  end-users  of  the  banking  system  i.e.  the  ordinary  public.  Further,  unless  the 
security features of the entire Transaction Cycle are enhanced to the level of international standards 
(which  is  being  sought  to  be  achieved  through  the  implementation  of  the  PKI  and  use  of  Digital 
Certificates), the common man will not repose his full confidence in the Electronic System of Funds 
Transfer.  That  is  why,  the  RBI  has  been  emphasing  ‘Connectivity’  and  ‘Security’  as  the  Core  and 
Critical  Pre-requisites,  to  be  duly  addressed  by  the  banking  sector  for  participation  in  the  RTGS 
System. 
The  RTGS  system  will  be  a  mode  for  large  value  inter-bank  settlement,  to  be  widely  used,  for 
enhancing your risk control measures, for faster and efficient settlement of your liabilities and for better 
customer services for the ultimate users in the value chain. The success of this system will be one 
more step towards realizing our objectives of a modern, secure, resilient and Integrated Payment and 
Settlement System in the country. We are sure that all of us will be partners in this step forward. 
BIS Review 21/2003 
 3
