 David Dodge: The benefits of sound economic policies 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Italian  Bankers  Association, 
Rome, Italy, 18 March 2003.  
 It  is  truly  a  pleasure  for  me  to  visit  this  magnificent  and  historic  city.  I  certainly  appreciate  the 
opportunity to speak to your association today.  
Canada and Italy share many similar characteristics. We both belong to the G-7, and we are among 
the  smaller  members  of  that  group.  Our  two  economies  vary  greatly  from  region  to  region,  both  in 
terms of structure and strength. Overcoming these regional disparities is one of the great challenges 
we both face. After the serious inflation problems of the 1970s and early 1980s, Canada and Italy are 
now enjoying the benefits of a low-inflation environment. And we both trade a great deal with a large 
partner  -  in  our  case,  with  the  United  States,  in  your  case,  with  the  rest  of  the  euro  zone.  We  in 
Canada and you in Italy have recently taken steps to overhaul our tax systems, and we both face the 
challenges of an aging population.  
Given our similarities, there is clearly much we can take from each other. What I would like to do today 
is talk about some of the lessons that  we in Canada have learned about economic policy in recent 
years.  
The "four legs" of economic policy  
During the 1980s, a consensus began to take shape among OECD countries on a set of economic 
policies  that  would  provide  the  strongest  base  for  sustained  economic  growth.  There  are  four 
principles involved in this consensus. I like to think of them as the four legs of a chair. Just as a chair is 
steadiest when all of its legs are the same length, policy-makers can get the best results by paying 
equal  attention  to  all  four  principles.  And  when  one  of  the  legs  starts  to  weaken,  the  best  way  to 
restore stability is to build that leg back up, not to cut down the other three.  
Over the past decade or so, Canadians spent a great deal of effort putting the four elements of this 
framework into place. It certainly was not easy. It involved a fair bit of short-term economic pain. But 
the phrase "short-term pain for long-term gain" is more than just a cliché. Canada is now reaping the 
economic benefits of this effort.  
Of course, part of the reason for our recent good performance is the basic structure of our economy. 
For  example,  the  current  global  economic  uncertainties  are  having  their  greatest  effect  on  large, 
multinational firms. But Canada's economy consists more of small and medium-sized enterprises. As 
well, while the hard-hit technology sector has become an increasingly important part of the Canadian 
economy  in  recent  years,  it  still  represents  a  smaller  share  of  our  economy,  compared  with,  for 
example, the United States.  
But good fortune is only part of the story. Without Canada's commitment to the OECD's "four legs" of 
sound economic policy, our recent performance would no doubt have been poorer.  
So, what are the "four legs" of the OECD consensus? The principles that I am referring to deal with 
monetary policy, fiscal policy, trade liberalization, and structural reform. I will spend a few minutes on 
each of these, drawing on Canada's experience in recent years.  
Let me start with the one that relates most directly to the Bank of Canada's primary responsibility - 
monetary policy. The OECD consensus holds that price stability is the appropriate goal for monetary 
policy  over  the  medium  term.  In  Canada,  we  try  to  achieve  this  goal  through  an  inflation-targeting 
framework. The Bank of Canada reached an agreement with the federal government and introduced 
this policy  in 1991. Under  that  agreement,  we aim to keep inflation, as measured by the consumer 
price index (CPI), at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range over the medium term.  
We have found that this inflation-targeting system has been  very effective  in  promoting low, stable, 
and  predictable  inflation  in  Canada.  Following  a  period  of  higher  and  more  variable  inflation  in  the 
1970s  and  1980s,  the  inflation-control  targets  have  helped  to  anchor  monetary  policy.  After  the 
agreement  came  into  effect,  inflation  quickly  fell  into  the  target  range.  Subsequently,  inflation 
expectations have become focused on the target, helping to promote sustained economic growth.  
BIS Review 15/2003 
 1
 Here  in  Italy,  the  inflation-targeting  monetary  authority  is  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  Italy's 
recent inflation record is certainly favourable. But there is a slight difference in the approaches of the 
ECB and the Bank of Canada that I will mention. At the Bank of Canada, we explicitly run monetary 
policy in a symmetric way around our 2 per cent target. The ECB's only explicit commitment is to keep 
inflation below 2 per cent.  
There are always challenges to operating a single monetary policy in a country with diverse regions. 
As I said earlier, Canada, like Italy, has several regions with different economic structures. The ECB 
faces the even more daunting challenge of conducting monetary policy for an entire continent! But the 
important point I want to make here is that both the ECB and the Bank of Canada are determined to 
keep price stability as the medium-term policy goal. That is the first of the four legs.  
The second leg of the consensus has to do with fiscal policy. In the years leading up to the mid-1990s, 
provincial  and  federal  governments  in  Canada  were  in  the  habit  of  running  budget  deficits.  These 
deficits built up as governments continued to borrow, primarily to finance current consumption. It was 
an unsustainable situation, made more serious by our aging population. Clearly, social spending had 
to be put on a viable long-term course. And so fiscal policy needed to be based on a plan for putting 
the ratio of public debt to GDP on a steady downward track.  
In Canada's experience, this was a difficult hurdle to overcome. The fiscal consolidation of the 1990s 
was painful. I  was the federal  Deputy  Minister of Finance at the time, and I can tell  you  that many 
difficult and unpopular decisions had to be taken. Equally important, the provinces had to make hard 
choices as they reduced their public spending and restored their fiscal health. But as difficult as those 
years were, waiting would only have made matters worse.  
Now, here's the good news: the vicious circle of rising deficits and debt has become a virtuous circle of 
balanced  budgets  and  falling  debt.  Reducing  the  deficit  in  the  1990s  helped  Canada's  international 
credibility. And this led to a reduction in the risk premium demanded by international investors. The 
fiscal improvement meant that the Bank of Canada was able to lower interest rates more easily when 
economic circumstances warranted. Not only did the lower interest rates reduce debt-servicing costs, 
they also stimulated economic growth, which brought in more revenues for the government. The extra 
revenue and lower debt-servicing costs, in turn, led to an even better fiscal position. Canada's total 
government  surplus  at  the  end  of  2002  represented  just  over  1 per cent  of  GDP,  which  does  not 
include the surpluses in public pension plans.  
Last month, Finance Minister John Manley announced a fifth consecutive surplus in the federal budget 
and projected that the budget  will continue to be in  a balanced position or better for the next three 
years.  The  budget  maintained  the  fiscal  planning  framework  of  previous  years.  That  framework 
includes a $3 billion contingency reserve,  which  is used to reduce debt  if it is not needed for other 
purposes. It also includes $1 billion in the 2003–04 budget year for additional economic prudence, and 
$2 billion in the following year, as further assurance that Canada won't fall back into a deficit position. 
Not only have we reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio, but the federal government has paid down almost 
$50 billion of debt. This has led to the restoration of Canada's Triple-A credit rating and has freed up 
about $3 billion of resources every year for the federal government. The main point is that while the 
initial  work  of  fiscal  consolidation  is  certainly  difficult,  it  is  necessary  in  order  to  enjoy  the  fiscal 
dividends later on.  
The third leg of the consensus deals with trade liberalization. Countries need freer international trade 
to  exploit  the  gains  that  come  from  increased  specialization,  enhanced  productivity,  and  greater 
competitiveness.  
Canada's recent experience in this area first involved signing the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, 
which came into effect in 1989. In 1994, Mexico joined the group through the North American Free 
Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA).  Both  of  these  agreements  sparked  a  great  deal  of  domestic  political 
controversy. But they also opened markets and created tremendous opportunities. Canada's exports 
have flourished as a result.  
But freeing up trade means more than setting up regional free-trade blocs, such as NAFTA and the 
European  Union.  Canada  is  hoping  to  see  meaningful  progress  at  the  World  Trade  Organization's 
Doha  round  of  multilateral  talks.  Clearly,  agriculture  is  going  to  be  a  major  hurdle.  The  developed 
countries,  including  all  of  us  in  the  G-7,  have  a  considerable  way  to  go  in  terms  of  liberalizing 
agricultural trade. And a number of other sectors will also require a major effort. This effort must be 
made so that the global economy can benefit. It won't be easy, but in the long run, it will be worth it.  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 The fourth policy leg has to do with structural reform. These adjustments are always difficult because 
reforms will affect various groups in differing and often painful ways. Further, the economic benefits of 
the increased flexibility may take a fairly long time to emerge. But these difficulties should not sway us 
from the task of reducing rigidities and increasing efficiency so that our economies can better adjust to 
a rapidly changing world.  
Canada has made some progress in a number of areas. The federal government has made changes 
to its system of unemployment insurance, trying to base the program more on insurance principles and 
to  improve  the  employability  of  labour.  Canada  has  also  taken  steps  to  reduce  distortions  in  the 
personal income tax system and has implemented a goods and services tax to replace the outdated 
tax on manufacturers.  
More recently, we made some major changes to our public pension system. The Canada and Quebec 
Pension Plans were established in 1966 using a "pay-as-you-go" system. But changing demographics 
put  pressure  on  the  plans,  as  they  are  doing  in  Europe.  By  1996,  the  federal  and  provincial 
governments agreed to changes that would put the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans on a firmer 
footing. This meant some restructuring of benefits and a sharp increase in contributions - moves that 
were not popular, but they were certainly necessary.  
The Canada and Quebec Pension Plans now generate surpluses that represent almost 1 per cent of 
GDP. These are set aside in special funds that cannot be touched by governments for general use. 
Indeed, the federal and provincial governments agreed to set up the Canada Pension Plan Investment 
Board,  an  entirely  independent  body.  Its  sole  mandate  is  to  invest  the  contributions  in  markets,  in 
order to generate the best possible returns, with due consideration for prudence, over the long term. I 
should also point out, because the Canadian and Italian systems are different, that all public sector 
employees in Canada belong to pension plans that are fully funded.  
I know that you in Italy are struggling with pension reform, and I know how difficult the issue is. But 
such reforms are important, and I wish you well in your efforts. The challenges you are facing serve to 
highlight the fact that implementing the fourth leg of the OECD policy consensus is not easy. But we 
must all continue to make progress and not lose sight of the four principles.  
The  payoff  that  Canada  is  now  seeing  gives  me  confidence  in  the  value  of  the  OECD  consensus. 
Despite the global economic slowdown, despite the collapse of the share prices of many technology 
firms,  despite  the  effects  of  the  September  2001  terrorist  attacks  against  the  United  States,  and 
despite the corporate governance and accounting concerns, Canada's economy has remained strong. 
And most forecasters expect us to lead the G-7 in economic growth again this year.  
Given all the uncertainty in the global economy, it is more important than ever that national authorities 
around the world stick to this policy framework. It is only by staying the course that we can establish a 
steady base for sustained growth over the long term.  
Canada's economic prospects  
Let  me  now  give  you  the  Bank  of  Canada's  views  on  the  state  of  the  Canadian  economy  and  the 
outlook. First, a bit of history. Following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, 
the Bank of Canada, like other major central banks, moved quickly and aggressively to cut its policy 
interest rate to shore up confidence. That dramatic monetary policy action helped a great deal. By the 
spring of 2002, it became evident that our economy hadn't been knocked off track by the events of 
11 September. Indeed, evidence was starting to build that the economy was growing faster than its 
production potential, taking up the remaining small amount of economic slack. So, we raised our key 
policy rate three times between April and July, by a total of three-quarters of a percentage point.  
But by late last summer, we were seeing the effects of financial headwinds, geopolitical uncertainties, 
and continued weakness in the global economy. These factors remained in play through the autumn. 
As a result, we refrained from raising interest rates, even though inflation was accelerating.  
Our initial analysis was that this increase in inflation would be temporary. However, both core and total 
CPI  inflation  remain  well  above  target.  This  reflects  the  impact  of  higher-than-expected  prices  for 
crude oil and  natural gas,  continuing increases in auto insurance  premiums, and price pressures in 
certain  sectors,  such  as  housing,  food,  and  some  services.  The  higher  inflation  also  suggests  an 
underlying firmness in the price-setting environment. In other words, relative price increases wouldn't 
be pushing up trend inflation if there was not sufficient demand.  
BIS Review 15/2003 
 3
 Indeed,  final  domestic  demand  -  especially  household  spending  -  has  remained  robust.  However, 
economic growth in Canada moderated in the final three months of 2002, largely because of weaker 
exports - most notably, a decline in automotive shipments to the United States.  
Even with this slowing growth in the fourth quarter, upward revisions for previous quarters leave the 
level  of  economic  activity  slightly  higher  than  we  had  been  monitoring.  In  fact,  Canada's  economy 
remains near full capacity.  
Let  me  list  some  of  the  indicators  that  support  this  view:  high  industrial  capacity  utilization;  near 
record-high  labour  force  participation  rates;  a  record-high  employment-to-population  ratio;  corporate 
profits at their highest level since early 2001; and, as I said a few moments ago, above-target trend 
inflation.  
While we continue to foresee growth somewhat below potential in the first half of this year, we expect 
increased demand in the second half of 2003 and into 2004, as global uncertainties diminish. But with 
an  appropriate  reduction  in  the  amount  of  monetary  stimulus,  we  see  the  level  of  output  remaining 
close to capacity during this year and into 2004.  
So,  in  making  our  interest  rate  decision  on  4  March,  we  weighed  the  following  considerations: 
domestic  inflation  pressures;  the  expectation  that  Canadian  economic  activity  will  remain  near 
potential  in  2003  despite  geopolitical  uncertainties;  the  stimulative  stance  of  monetary  policy;  and 
improved conditions in capital markets. Taking all of these factors into account, the Bank raised its key 
policy rate by one-quarter of a percentage point to 3 per cent.  
Even  with  this  increase,  the stance of monetary  policy  remains stimulative. Thus, over time, further 
reductions in monetary stimulus will be required to return inflation to the target over the medium term. 
But, as we have said, the timing and pace of increases in policy interest rates will continue to depend 
on  a  number  of  considerations.  These  include  the  strength  of  demand  pressures;  the  evolution  of 
inflation expectations; the impact on confidence of geopolitical and global economic uncertainties; and 
the way in which developments in the Middle East affect demand and inflation, both globally and in 
Canada. The Bank will continue to closely monitor all of these factors.  
 So, to conclude, these are certainly challenging economic times. But we in Canada remain convinced 
of the merits of the economic policy consensus reached at the OECD. To reiterate, these policies are: 
a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  medium-term  price  stability;  a  fiscal  policy  aimed  at  reducing  public 
debt-to-GDP ratios; trade liberalization; and meaningful structural reform. Canada's positive economic 
experience  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  in  the  face  of  stressful  times  for  the  global  economy,  is 
strong evidence that this framework is the right one. In Canada, there is a determination to stick with 
these policies which, especially during these uncertain times, are demonstrating their value.  
4 
 BIS Review 15/2003
