 Willem F Duisenberg: Changing fortunes - financing world growth 
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  2003  Spruce 
Meadows Round Table, Calgary, 5 September 2003. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be part of this round table discussion today and I would like to thank the 
organisers  for  inviting  me  to  share  some  thoughts  with  you  on  the  topic  of  financing  world  growth. 
Since  2000,  we  have  witnessed  terrorism,  war  and  declines  in  world  equity  markets,  all  of  which 
contributed to increasing an already ongoing deterioration in confidence in most countries. Now with 
the end of the major hostilities in Iraq, the reduction in geopolitical uncertainties and lower oil prices, a 
gradual upturn in world economic activity is expected and it is important that policy-makers do all they 
can to support it. 
Given the breadth of this topic and therefore the strong temptation to overrun on my time allocation, I 
will focus on just two points. First, I would like to say a few general words about the roles and, may I 
add,  limitations  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  in  reviving  global  demand,  and  the  importance  of 
microeconomic policies in this respect, in particular the role of structural reform in increasing potential 
growth.  Second,  with  the  help  of  regional-specific  examples,  I  would  like  to  present  some  future 
challenges with respect to microeconomic policies and structural reforms in the world.  
Monetary and fiscal policy, and structural reform 
The  achievement  and  maintenance  of  strong  growth  implies  a  perspective  that  extends  beyond 
shorter-term  cyclical  developments.  Indeed,  over  the  medium  term,  economic  growth  tends  to  be 
negatively  affected  by  the  considerable  costs  associated  with  inflation,  and  the  prospect  of  stable 
prices is therefore a key factor of growth. By being strictly geared towards maintaining price stability in 
a credible and lasting manner, monetary policy makes an important contribution to achieving a high 
level of output and employment, and to sustaining growth. Confidence in lasting price stability removes 
the  inflation  risk  premium  on  interest  rates,  ensuring  low  real  interest  rates,  which  in  turn  foster 
investment, growth and employment. Theoretical and empirical evidence clearly confirm that there is 
no long-term trade off between price stability and economic growth. Trying to use monetary policy to 
fine-tune economic activity or to gear it above a sustainable level will, in the long run, simply lead to 
rising inflation - not to faster economic growth.  
Fiscal policy also plays a key role in contributing to macroeconomic stability. Stable, sustainable and 
efficient  fiscal  policies  exert  a  favourable  effect  on  long-term  growth  performance.  They  stimulate 
savings,  capital  formation,  employment  and  innovation.  And  they  facilitate  the  task  of  the monetary 
policy-maker in maintaining price stability. Sound public finances should rely on automatic stabilisers, 
rather than discretionary fine-tuning, to dampen the cyclical fluctuations of aggregate demand. Theory 
suggests that there are delays and risks associated with the latter - getting the timing wrong may result 
in pro-cyclical polices and make a monetary policy orientated towards price stability more difficult. In 
the medium term, fiscal policies can best contribute to sustaining non-inflationary growth by pressing 
ahead with fiscal consolidation.  
Ultimately, over the economic cycles, growth will reflect conditions on the supply side of the economy. 
It is therefore microeconomic, and not macroeconomic, policies that can promote the supply of labour 
and capital and their efficient allocation, further innovation and the diffusion of new technologies, and 
as a result, mitigate problems such as structural unemployment. 
Structural reforms in the labour  and goods markets are a key  element of any  long-term strategy  to 
improve  investment,  growth  and  employment  prospects.  First,  more  flexible  markets  increase  the 
speed with which countries can adapt to economic shocks, thereby speeding up economic recovery. 
Second,  increased  competition  in  labour  and  product  markets  is  conducive  to  a  high  level  of 
innovation  and  the  rapid  spread  of  technological  progress.  This  in  turn  supports  long-term  growth, 
without contributing to inflationary tendencies. Third, structural reform may facilitate the transmission 
of monetary  policy. In more rigid  economies, interest rate changes are  transmitted to prices after a 
longer delay, and structural barriers can prevent the economic efficiency gains of the primary objective 
of monetary policy - price stability - from being fully realised.  
BIS Review 39/2003 
 1
 It  is  important  to  mention  here  the  close  interplay  between  rigidities  in  capital,  labour  and  product 
markets, which can strengthen one another. These interdependencies mean that structural reforms in 
any one of these markets will have an impact on the functioning of the others. It must be emphasised 
therefore  that  only  a  comprehensive  reform  programme  can  create  the  necessary  conditions  for 
stronger economic dynamism.  
The  need  for  structural  reforms  tends  to  become  most  urgent  and  evident  to  policy-makers  during 
economic  downturns.  But  don’t  forget  that  structural  reforms  do  not  provide  short-term  solutions  to 
economic problems. Although they can have positive short-term confidence effects, it normally takes 
time for their benefits to unfold. Hence I cannot emphasise enough the need to speed up the pace of 
structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets. 
Structural reforms in various regions of the world 
Let me now turn to the issue of future challenges with respect to microeconomic policies and structural 
reforms in particular economic areas. I shall start with structural reforms in the euro area, and then 
move  on  to  say  a  few  words  about  structural  reform  in  the  EU  Neighbouring  Regions,  the  United 
States, Latin America and, finally, East Asia. 
Euro area 
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  remained  subdued  in  the  first  half  of  2003.  However,  there  is 
increasing reason to expect that  it  will recover gradually  in the second half of 2003 and strengthen 
further in 2004. Although the outlook for price stability is favourable, having allowed interest rates to 
fall to historically low levels, monetary policy cannot by itself generate lasting and sustainable growth 
and employment in the euro area. Part of the weakness in economic growth in the euro area may be 
linked  to  a  lack  of  ambition  in  recent  years  in  both  fiscal  and  structural  reforms  to  improve  the 
conditions for investment and employment in the euro area.  
The euro area needs structural reforms which increase the flexibility of labour, financial and product 
markets and effectively increase potential output growth, job creation and investment.  
Although the extent and implementation of labour market reforms have been uneven across countries, 
the efforts made in the 1990s resulted in positive progress in two areas: first, in fostering employment 
growth across most sectors, which rose to 1.5% per year on average between 1997 and 2001, and 
second, in helping groups, such as women, the young and old and the least educated, to enter the 
labour  market.  Labour  market  reforms  should  now  focus  on  reducing  high  structural  unemployment 
and  increasing  participation  and  employment  rates.  Indeed,  it  is  important  that,  alongside  social 
considerations, the countries of the euro area give more weight to economic efficiency within labour 
markets. 
Capital  market  reforms  can  also  play  a  major role  in making  the  euro  area  economy  more  flexible. 
Much has been achieved, not least due to the introduction of the euro, and the bulk of the Financial 
Services  Action  Plan  has  been  implemented.  However,  the  further  integration  of  national  capital 
markets towards a truly European financial market would be an important step towards safeguarding 
markets against country-specific shocks.  
Finally, greater efforts must be made to remove existing barriers in product markets. Since the early 
1990s state enterprises  have undergone extensive privatisation, the use of state aid has fallen  and 
market  entry  barriers  have  been  lowered,  although  not  evenly  across  all  countries  or  sectors.  In 
addition, there are still significant barriers to the further removal of price pressures, and these will need 
to be phased out. 
EU Neighbouring Regions  
The  ten  countries  that  are  about  to  join  the  European  Union  have  made  considerable  economic 
progress in recent years in terms of macroeconomic stabilisation and structural reforms. As a group 
and  individually,  these  countries  have  achieved  significant  and  sustained  improvements  in  their 
economic fundamentals. In this regard, the perspective of EU accession has been an important anchor 
for policies. However, the process of catching-up in real incomes has been significantly slower than 
expected at the start of transition, and today, as they prepare to join the EU, there is still a significant 
GDP per capita gap with the current Member States. Improving the growth performance of acceding 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2003
 countries remains an issue of vital importance. While EU membership itself and the lagged effects of 
earlier  reforms  should  foster  the  catching-up  process,  sustained  policy  action  is  needed  to  further 
improve the growth environment in the acceding countries. Reforms should, in particular, be conducive 
to capital accumulation and bring about tangible increases in total factor productivity.  
In other EU neighbouring regions, efforts in structural reforms have varied considerably. Following a 
severe financial crisis in 2001, Turkey witnessed a strong rebound in 2002 and began an ambitious 
process  to  reduce  inflation,  while  still  struggling  with  some  of  its  long-standing  problems.  This 
achievement  was supported by structural - though still  insufficient - reforms. In Russia, after a  long 
delay in the early  years of transition, a first package of structural reforms has been implemented in 
recent  years,  positively contributing to the strong recovery the country  has been enjoying since the 
1998 crisis.  
United States 
Turning  to  the  United  States,  labour,  product  and  capital  markets  have  reached  a  high  degree  of 
flexibility.  This  reflects  both  the  traditional  market-oriented  nature  of  the  US  economic  system  and 
reform efforts over the past 20 years, including a variety of deregulation measures in the 1980s. The 
flexible microeconomic structure of the US economy has helped to make it one of the strongest growth 
poles in the world, with GDP growth averaging 3.3% from 1983 to 2002 (compared with 2.4% in the 
euro  area).  At  the  same  time,  the  US  experience  shows  that  no  country  can  consider  structural 
reforms as (cid:147)completed(cid:148). In its latest Article IV report on the United States, the IMF identified a number 
of  areas  where  further  efforts  would  be  desirable,  including  the  budgetary  framework,  the  social 
security  system  and  the  energy  sector.  Also,  the  series  of  corporate  failures  in  2001-02  revealed 
weaknesses  in  corporate  governance  practices,  including  accounting  and  audit  rules,  which  are 
currently being addressed by the US authorities. 
Latin America  
Over the last two years, growth in most Latin American countries has been weak. This year, however, 
there are signs of a modest upturn, with confidence slowly returning. This has been due, in part, to the 
direction  of  the  structural  reform  agendas  of  many  countries  in  the  region.  To  strengthen  the 
foundations  for  growth,  policy-makers  must  remain  committed  to  implementing  structural  reforms. 
Countries that have made the greatest strides in reform are already reaping the benefits. Both Mexico 
and  Chile,  which  are  at  the  most  advanced  stage  of  reform  in  the  region,  have  proven  remarkably 
resilient to turmoil in regional economies and have weathered the period of weak global growth well, 
considering  their  exposure  to  sluggish  mature  economies.  Other  countries  in  the  region  have 
embarked on reform agendas and should be encouraged by the international community to see them 
through as swiftly as conditions allow. 
East Asia  
As  for  the  crisis-hit  countries  in  Asia,  economic  performance  has  been  positively  correlated  with 
progress  in  reforms.  Stronger  average  growth  potential  in  countries  such  as  Korea  and  Malaysia 
reflects  partly  the  authorities’  determination  in  pushing  through  corporate  reforms,  reforming  the 
financial  sector  and  strengthening  insolvency  laws.  In  China,  the  authorities  have  repeatedly 
emphasised  that  banking  reform,  if  coupled  with  the  restructuring  and  privatisation  of  state-owned 
enterprises, is key to strong growth and financial stability in the medium term. 
The  situation  in  the  Japanese  economy  calls  for  urgent  structural  reforms.  Authorities  have  made 
some progress in addressing the fundamental weaknesses and a reform strategy has been set out. 
First,  banking  sector  reform  has  been  appropriately  focused  on  strengthening  loan  classification 
practices and accelerating the disposal of non-performing loans (NPLs). However, while progress has 
been made on the former issue, financial institutions still hold large amounts of NPLs in their portfolios 
and more progress would be desirable. Second, a strategy to promote deregulation in the product and 
labour  markets  has  been  set  up.  The  successful  implementation  of  structural  measures  in  the 
Japanese product and labour markets would have the benefit of not only increasing potential output 
and employment, but also decreasing the vulnerability of the Japanese economy to economic shocks. 
BIS Review 39/2003 
 3
 Concluding remarks  
Let me conclude by first addressing the economic policy-makers in the euro area. I am convinced that 
economic activity in the euro area can only be lifted to a new, structurally higher, level by far-reaching 
and  progressive  structural  reforms.  In  this  respect,  the  major  contribution  that  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy  can  make  is  to  maintain  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment,  entailing  price  stability  and 
sound public finances. Moreover, as I have already argued, the effectiveness of both monetary and 
fiscal policy in bringing about macroeconomic stability hinges on the microeconomic functioning of the 
euro area economy, which can only be enhanced by embarking on structural reforms. I am pleased to 
observe  that  some  countries  in  the  euro  area  have  already  realised  that  the  only  solution  to 
addressing the current economic slowdown lies in structural reforms to strengthen the functioning of 
the economy. I warmly welcome the efforts of the governments of these countries and sincerely hope 
that others will follow their example.  
Second, as I have sketched out in my remarks to you today, while the need for structural reforms is 
pressing in the euro area, in all other regions of the world - albeit to different extents and to address 
somewhat different problems - there are benefits of structural reform to be won.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2003
