 T T Mboweni: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  83rd  ordinary 
general meeting of shareholders, Pretroria, 26 August 2003. 
 Introduction 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  achieved  considerable  success  on  many  fronts  under  difficult 
economic conditions during the past year. In the monetary field, prompt action during 2002 helped to 
restrain  inflationary  expectations  as  well  as  to  maintain  international  confidence  in  the  country(cid:146)s 
commitment  to  responsible  macroeconomic  policies.  The  strength  of  international  confidence  is 
reflected  in  the  recovery  in  the  rand(cid:146)s  international  value,  which  was  a  major  factor  in  reining  back 
inflationary  pressures.  In  the  process,  the  oversold  net  open  foreign  reserve  position  (NOFP)  was 
finally expunged in May 2003. 
Against this background, it has been possible to lower interest rates in recent months. Price stability, 
on  the  basis  of  permanent  low  inflation,  is  an  essential  precondition  for  the  economy  to  be  able  to 
achieve  sustainable  potential  growth  rates  and  thereby  deliver  lasting  improvements  in  living 
standards for all sectors of our society. The Bank therefore remains dedicated to its task of keeping 
inflation  within  the  target  range,  and  will  continue  to  be  ready  to  take  prompt  action  whenever 
necessary to that end. 
In  the  banking  sector,  financial  stability  has  been  restored  after  the  serious  liquidity  problems 
experienced  in  the  first  half  of  2002.  The  banking  sector  remains  soundly  capitalised  and  well 
managed,  and  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  further  application  of  international  best 
practices in banking supervision. The highly-developed structure and international competitiveness of 
the country(cid:146)s financial system as a whole remains a significant national strength. 
In  the  administration  of  the  Bank,  costs  were  reduced  significantly  and  in  a  number  of  instances 
departments were restructured, streamlined and staff numbers reduced. 
The international economic environment 
The global economic recovery remains weak and fragile. Having improved towards the end of 2001 
and during the first half of 2002, global economic activity suffered a setback in the second half of 2002 
when  business  confidence  was  detrimentally  affected  by  revelations  of  corporate  accounting 
malpractices, further declines in equity  values and the threat of  war against Iraq. In the first half of 
2003  equity  prices  generally  began  to  rise  and  the  war  in  Iraq  was  concluded  without  severely 
impacting on oil production. Yet growth in most of the large industrial countries failed to meet earlier 
expectations. 
Although  household  spending  was  resilient,  business  investment  in  most  advanced  economies 
remained  low.  Lingering  political  uncertainties  arising  from  the  war  in  Iraq,  the  outbreak  of  Severe 
Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome  (SARS)  and  the  excess  capacity  in  many  manufacturing  sectors, 
inhibited  the  expansion  of  investment.  Consumption  expenditure  was  supported  in  the  USA  and 
Europe  by  firm  property  prices  and  the  willingness  of  households  to  incur  debt.  The  increasing 
household  debt  burden,  low  personal  sector  saving  and  the  widening  current-account  deficit  of  the 
United  States,  pose  a  threat  to  the  strength  and  sustainability  of  the  world  economic  recovery.  In 
addition,  economic  growth  in  other  advanced  economies  could  be  curtailed  by  structural  problems 
such as inflexible labour and product markets and imbalances in welfare systems. 
The economic growth rates of emerging-market economies diverged considerably during 2002 and the 
first  half  of  2003.  Growth  on  the  whole  was  quite  robust  in  Asia  and  in  the  transition  economies  in 
Europe,  while it was moderate in Africa and  weak in Latin America. The strong growth in Asia  was 
mainly the result of substantial inflows of foreign direct investment and the stimulation of intra-regional 
trade  by  the  rapid  economic  expansion  in  China.  European  transitional  economies  benefited  from 
increased and more diversified exports, while the growth in Africa was negatively affected by factors 
such as political instability, a severe drought in the northern and southern parts of the continent and 
the  HIV/Aids  pandemic.  Financial  constraints  and  socio-political  events  were  mainly  responsible  for 
the low or negative growth of countries in Latin America. 
  As  could  be  expected  under  these  circumstances,  unemployment  increased  in  most  advanced 
economies  as  well  as  in  Latin  America  and  Africa.  Employment  creation  in  emerging-market 
economies remains one of the most pressing challenges facing the world to ensure the maintenance 
of stability and the reduction of poverty. This requires the orderly removal of structural impediments to 
promote skills and create employment opportunities. Such steps should facilitate the task of monetary 
authorities when external shocks disturb the economies. 
With the exception of parts of Latin America and some countries in Africa, global inflation remained 
low.  Small  increases  in  prices  were  recorded  despite  a  marked  rise  in  oil  and  other  international 
commodity prices during 2002. In the first half of 2003 the rate of increase in international commodity 
prices levelled off and contributed to the global disinflationary trend. Japan and a few other countries 
in  Asia  actually  experienced  a  decline  in  the  aggregate  level  of  prices  in  2002  and  the  first  half  of 
2003. The low inflation in the world is assisting South Africa in combating domestic inflation. 
The combination of low economic growth, increased  unemployment and disinflation generally led to 
the adoption of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies in advanced economies. Interest rates were 
brought  down  to  very  low  levels  in  most  developed  countries  and  fiscal  deficits  widened.  However, 
these  measures  were  unable  to  prevent  some  major  corporate  defaults.  Although  this  exerted 
pressure  on  the  world  financial  system,  institutions  were  generally  able  to  cope  with  the  situation. 
Japanese  banks  were  affected  by  bad  debts  and  low  profits  and  some  banks  in  Europe  also 
encountered problems. Insurance companies and pension funds fared worse than banks. Of further 
concern is the volatility experienced in exchange rates and its effect not only on the financial sector, 
but also on real economic activity. In particular, the US dollar has weakened substantially, which could 
have major repercussions for the world economy. 
Domestic economic developments 
The weakness of the US dollar was a major factor in a significant recovery in the external value of the 
rand.  Having  declined  by  34  per  cent  on  a  trade-weighted  basis  during  2001,  the  nominal  effective 
exchange rate of the rand recovered by 24 per cent in 2002 and by a further 12 per cent up to the end 
of  July  2003.  The  performance  of  the  rand  was  also  related  to  South  Africa(cid:146)s  inherent  economic 
strength  and  to  the  sound  and  consistent  macroeconomic  policies  pursued  by  the  authorities. 
Improved  international  perceptions  of  these  strong  fundamentals  were  reflected  in  a  significant 
narrowing  in  spreads  on  internationally-traded  South  African  bonds,  and  was  recognised  by  higher 
ratings of the country by two major international rating agencies, which further underpinned the rand(cid:146)s 
recovery. The positive sentiment in the market was supported by attractive domestic interest rates and 
an increase in the country(cid:146)s terms of trade. 
Similarly, the real effective exchange rate of the rand recovered markedly since the beginning of 2002. 
This  index,  which  reflects  the  trade-weighted  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  deflated  by  the  production 
price differential between South Africa and its main trading partners and competitor countries, rose by 
an estimated 16 per cent over the eighteen-month period up to the end of June 2003. Even after this 
increase the level of the real effective exchange rate of the rand was still below the index values of 
early 2000, i.e. before the currency market turbulence. This indicates that South African producers are 
fairly price competitive, but the profitability of their international transactions has, of course, fluctuated 
considerably over the past three years. 
Domestic output could not escape the impact of the still subdued global economy. Growth in real gross 
domestic product slowed down from 3‰ per cent in the first half of 2002 to 3 per cent in the second 
half and 1‰ per cent in the first half of 2003. This deceleration in economic growth was spread across 
most sectors, with agriculture output actually contracting in the first half of 2003. 
The  slower  growth  was  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  aggregate  employment  in  the  formal 
non-agricultural  sectors  of  the  economy  in  2002.  An  employment  gain  of  54  000  workers  was 
recorded. However, preliminary indicators point to a loss in employment opportunities in the first half of 
2003. Over the same period, productivity growth receded while the average remuneration per worker 
rose at an estimated annualised rate of 10 per cent. As a result, nominal unit labour cost continued to 
increase at a rate above the upper limit of the inflation target band of 6 per cent. 
The  decline  in  the  rate  of  economic  growth  was  due  to  a  fall  in  the  volume  of  exports,  whereas 
domestic demand continued to increase strongly. The level of short-term interest rates seems to have 
had  little  effect  on  domestic  demand.  The  rate  of  increase  in  domestic  final  demand  declined  only 
marginally from 4 per cent in 2002 to 3‰ per cent in the first half of 2003. The annualised growth in 
  real gross domestic expenditure nevertheless remained at 4‰ per cent in the second half of 2002 and 
in the first half of 2003. 
Growth  in  real  household  consumption  expenditure  slowed  only  slightly  from  an  annualised  rate  of 
3 per cent in the second half of 2002 to 2‰ per cent in the first half of 2003. The sustained high growth 
in consumption expenditure was made possible by relatively strong increases in personal disposable 
income as well as by a rise in household debt. Household disposable income benefited from higher 
salaries  and  wages,  improved  social  transfers  from  government  and  income  tax  reductions.  At  the 
same  time,  the  low  level  of  the  debt-to-income  ratio  of  households  and  expectations  of  imminent 
reductions in interest rates encouraged some households to incur debt. Real household consumption 
expenditure  accordingly  retained  a  large  part  of  its  earlier  buoyancy  at  the  cost  of  a  significant 
increase in debt. The ratio of household debt to disposable income was nevertheless still relatively low 
at 53 per cent at the end of June 2003. 
The  steadfast  growth  in  household  consumption  expenditure  was  accompanied  by  an  annualised 
increase in real government consumption expenditure varying from quarter to quarter between 3‰ and 
4 per cent throughout the past year. These growth levels have been maintained since the beginning of 
2001 and signify the greater emphasis on service delivery in government(cid:146)s fiscal strategy. 
The rate of increase in real fixed capital formation picked up during 2002 and reached an annualised 
level of 9 per cent in the second half of the year. This rate then receded to a still high 8 per cent in the 
first  half  of  2003,  brought  down  by  a  decline  in  the  fixed  investment  of  the  agricultural  sector 
associated  with  lower  profits  of  farmers  because  of  the  marked  drop  in  the  prices  of  some  key 
agricultural products. Other sectors continued to spend large amounts on the replacement of obsolete 
capital equipment and the development of new ventures. This demonstrates that positive expectations 
and  sound  fundamentals  can  sometimes  carry  more  weight  in  fixed  investment  decisions  than  the 
level of short-term interest rates. 
In contrast to the continued strong growth of domestic demand, exports performed less well. In fact, 
the  volume of exports  of goods  and non-factor services declined  by  1‰  per cent in  2002  and by  a 
further 2‰ per cent in the first half of 2003. With the exception of receipts from tourists visiting South 
Africa,  the  exports  of  other  goods  and  services  were  negatively  affected  by  the  decline  in  global 
economic  activity.  In  2002  the  decline  in  the  volume  of  exports  coincided  with  an  increase  in  the 
volume of imports. Despite a decrease in crude oil imports, the volume of total imports continued to 
increase in the first half of 2003. The terms of trade strengthened in both 2002 and the first half of 
2003, while net dividend and interest payments declined. These developments could nevertheless not 
prevent the balance on the current account from reverting from a surplus in 2002 to a deficit of 1 per 
cent of gross domestic product in the first half of 2003. 
This deficit was more than neutralised by a financial inflow from the rest of the world consisting mainly 
of  foreign  direct  investment,  borrowing  by  the  South  African  government  in  international  capital 
markets and net inflows of other portfolio capital. As a result, the gold and other foreign reserves of the 
country rose from US$12,6 billion at the end of 2001 to US$18,5 billion at the end of June 2003. 
On the monetary and financial fronts, the main developments during the past eighteen months can be 
summarised as follows: 
1. 
The rate of increase in the monetary  aggregates slowed down significantly. For instance, 
the  growth  in  the  broadly  defined  money  supply  (M3)  measured  over  periods  of  twelve 
months declined from around 19 per cent in the early part of 2002 to less than 13 per cent 
in December 2002 and to single-digit rates during most of the first six months of 2003. The 
weaker  demand  for money  reflected  a  slowdown  in  inflation  and  a  weaker  growth  in  real 
income. 
The public(cid:146)s demand for bank credit remained resilient. Having declined from 12,5 per cent 
in  June  2002  to  7,8  per  cent  in  December,  the  twelve-month  growth  rate  in  banks(cid:146)  total 
loans and advances to the domestic private sector picked up again to 12,7 per cent in June 
2003.  The  continued  buoyancy  in  the  demand  for  bank  credit  by  the  private  sector  was 
supported  by  relatively  low  debt  levels,  expectations  of  a  decline  in  interest  rates  and 
ongoing increases in the prices of houses, flats and townhouses. 
The money market continued to be relatively liquid. The Reserve Bank mainly used foreign 
exchange swaps, Reserve Bank debentures and reverse-repurchase agreements to drain 
surplus liquidity, while the phasing out of the banks(cid:146) vault cash holdings forming part of their 
2. 
3. 
  4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
required cash reserves also contributed towards this end. The daily liquidity requirement of 
banks was maintained at around R11 billion by these measures. 
Short-term interest rates began to move downwards from April 2003. Having increased by 
about 400 basis points in conjunction with the repo rate during the first nine months of 2002 
and then stabilising at this higher level for the next six months, short-term rates declined by 
approximately 200 basis points up to the end of July 2003. 
Private-sector  companies  made  increased  use  of  the  primary  bond  market  to  finance 
activities. With subdued share prices and the cost of funding in the money market higher 
than in the bond market, several companies issued bonds. The outstanding value of private-
sector loan stock listed on the Bond Exchange of South Africa therefore increased from R29 
billion in June 2002 to R42 billion in June 2003. 
Long-term  bond  yields  trended  downward  from  late  March  2002,  reflecting  the  market(cid:146)s 
favourable  view  of  the  long-term  prospects  for  inflation  and  the  impact  of  a  small  public-
sector borrowing requirement. In combination with the high level of short-term interest rates, 
this led to a sharply inverted  yield curve. However, after the reduction  in the repo rate in 
June 2003, the shape of the yield curve began to normalise. 
The  recovery  in  the  external  value  of  the  rand  was  mirrored  to  a  considerable  extent  by 
movements in share prices on the JSE Securities Exchange South Africa. Expectations of 
the  impact  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  on  corporate  profitability,  together  with  the 
gloomy international sentiment among equity investors, led to a marked decline in domestic 
share  prices.  From  a  high  point  on  22  May  2002,  the  all-share  price  index  declined  by 
37 per cent to a recent low point on 25 April 2003. Subsequently, share prices recovered by 
20 per cent to the end of July. 
Public finance 
A more expansionary fiscal policy stance has been adopted by government since the 2001 Budget, 
while  the  policy  remained  supportive  of  lowering  inflation  and  promoting  stability.  This  cautious 
expansionary fiscal stance is set to be maintained over the medium term to increase the long-term 
growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  Government(cid:146)s  main  goal  is  reducing  unemployment  and  ensuring 
that economic growth and development benefit all communities. 
In  accordance  with  this  policy  stance,  government(cid:146)s  deficit  was  well-contained  in  the  fiscal  year 
2002/03. The non-financial public-sector borrowing requirement amounted to only 1 per cent of gross 
domestic  product  in  that  year.  This  was  made  possible  by  continued  strong  growth  in  revenue 
collections  and  considerable  discipline  applied  to  government  expenditure.  On  account  of  the  low 
deficit and a downward revaluation of foreign-currency denominated loans, the ratio of government(cid:146)s 
outstanding debt to gross  domestic product declined  from 46 per cent at the end of March 2002 to 
41 per cent at the end of March 2003. 
Monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  was  dominated  in  the  past  year  by  having  to  respond  to  the  inflationary  pressures 
arising from exogenous shocks in the form of a substantial depreciation in the external value of the 
rand in late 2001 and a sharp rise in international oil prices. These shocks were mainly responsible for 
a surge in the twelve-month rate of increase in the consumer price index for metropolitan and other 
urban areas excluding interest on mortgages (CPIX) from a low of 5,8 per cent in September 2001 to a 
peak  of  11,3  per  cent  in  October  and  November  2002.  The  twelve-month  rate  of  increase  in  the 
all-goods production price index also rose from 7,8 per cent in September 2001 to a level of 15,4 per 
cent in August and September 2002. 
As a result, the Monetary Policy Committee was obliged to increase the repo rate by 400 basis points 
in  total  during  the  first  nine  months  of  2002.  These  increases  were  prompted  by  the  fact  that  the 
inflationary pressures, which were at first mainly confined to rising food and energy prices, became 
more  broadly  based  and  in  the  end  not  only  influenced  the  prices  of  goods  but  also  the  prices  of 
services which are not directly affected by exchange rate developments. The increase in the repo rate 
was further based on factors such as rising inflation expectations, increasing nominal unit labour costs 
and high growth in money supply and bank credit extension. 
  The Monetary Policy Committee concluded at its meeting in November 2002 that the level of interest 
rates  was  appropriate  to  avert  an  inflation  spiral.  Although  it  was  still  unclear  at  that  time  whether 
inflation had peaked, the repo rate was kept unchanged because a number of developments indicated 
that  inflationary  pressures  could  begin  to  abate.  These  included  a  decline  in  the  quarter-to-quarter 
production  price  index  from  26,0  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002  to  11,2  per  cent  in  the  third 
quarter; a strengthening in the external value of the rand; a decline in international oil prices; slower 
growth in bank credit extension; and a deceleration in the pace of growth in the more broadly defined 
money supply aggregates. 
Given  the  time  lag  between  a  change  in  monetary  policy  and  its  ultimate  impact  on  inflation,  the 
increases in the repo rate were unable to prevent the breaching of the inflation target of 3 to 6 per cent 
for 2002. In South Africa it is estimated that it takes between 18 and 24 months for a change in short-
term  interest  rates  to  fully  impact  on  the  rate  of  increase  in  consumer  prices.  In  2002  the  rate  of 
increase in the CPIX averaged 9,3 per cent, or 330 basis points above the upper limit of the target. 
Apart  from  the  direct  monetary  policy  steps  that  were  taken  during  2002,  the  Minister  of  Finance 
announced in October that the inflation target of 3 to 5 per cent for 2004 and 2005 would be adjusted 
and that the target for 2004 would be set at 3 to 6 per cent. Subsequently, it was announced that the 
target for 2005 would remain at this level and that the target for 2006 would be made public in October 
2003.  These  announcements  were  made  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  exogenous  shocks  had 
thrown the downward path of inflation off course and that an excessively tight  monetary  policy  with 
high short-term costs in terms of output losses should be avoided as far as possible. 
By the time of the March 2003 meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee it was clear that the rise in 
inflation had been contained. The twelve-month rate of increase in CPIX had fallen to 9,3 per cent and 
that of the production price index to 6,2 per cent. In addition, the growth in money supply and bank 
credit extension had come down to single-digit levels and the rand had recovered remarkably in the 
second  half  of  2002.  Despite  this  more  positive  picture,  some  other  developments  caused  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  remain  cautious  about  changing  the  policy  stance  prematurely.  In 
particular, the Committee was influenced by the fact that the meeting took place on the day that the 
war in Iraq started. At that stage it was uncertain what the impact of the war would be on the global 
economy, and more specifically on oil prices. Other considerations that led to the decision to keep the 
repo rate unchanged included concerns about the level of wage settlements, rising unit labour costs, 
large increases in some administered prices and a forecast that CPIX inflation would be close to the 
upper limit of the inflation target in 2004. 
At its June 2003 meeting the Monetary Policy Committee was confronted by a revision of the inflation 
figures by Statistics South Africa. Although the turning point and the pattern of change between the 
previous and the revised monthly series coincided fairly closely, the revision brought about almost a 
2 percentage  point  lower  than  originally  estimated  year-on-year  increase  in  the  CPIX  for  the  early 
months of 2003. The revision  affected the  inflation outlook as well as the Reserve  Bank(cid:146)s forecast. 
Taking this revision and more recent economic developments into consideration, the Bank(cid:146)s forecast 
indicated that the inflation rate would move within the target range during the second half of 2003 and 
would come close to the mid-point of the target range in 2004. 
A number of other factors also influenced the decision to reduce the repo rate by 150 basis points at 
this meeting. First, the end of the war in Iraq had brought greater stability to the oil market. Second, it 
was clear that the exchange rate of the rand was maintaining its recovered levels in spite of continued 
volatility. Third, there were clear signs that inflation pressures emanating from abroad would remain 
weak. Finally,  inflation expectations had  declined  in  South  Africa and domestic conditions generally 
favoured disinflation. 
Another  development  at  this  meeting  was  the  decision  to  increase  the  number  of  meetings  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  from  four  to  six  per  year.  The  previous  decision  to  limit  the  number  of 
scheduled meetings to four was prompted by the argument that the meetings should coincide with the 
availability  of  quarterly  data.  However,  this  led  to  long  intervals  between  some  meetings.  It  was 
therefore  decided  that  even  if  the  latest  quarterly  data  were  not  available  at  each  meeting,  there 
should be enough high-frequency statistics to take informed decisions. More frequent meetings should 
have the added advantage of reducing the fear of sudden and unexpected interest rate adjustments, 
and in this way promote monetary policy transparency further. 
On 14 August 2003, the Monetary Policy Committee announced a further reduction of 100 basis points 
in the repo rate to a level of 11 per cent. This decision was taken because the decline in the inflation 
rate  continued  to  be  in  line  with  the  Reserve  Bank(cid:146)s  projections  and  the  inflation  outlook  generally 
  remained favourable. However, the Committee expressed concern about the high rates of increase in 
some  administered  prices,  the  level  of  wage  settlements,  the  continued  strong  performance  of 
domestic demand and the acceleration in money supply growth in the second quarter of 2003. 
Exchange rate policy 
Exchange rate policy was left unchanged in the past year. As in the preceding year, the determination 
of the external value of the rand was left to the market and the Bank did not intervene in the foreign-
exchange market to affect the exchange rate. Although the Bank would prefer to have a strong rather 
than a weak rand from an inflation perspective, it does not have a target for the exchange rate. As has 
been  emphasised  on  numerous  occasions,  it  is  not  the  Bank(cid:146)s  policy  to  intervene  in  the  market  to 
affect the level or the direction of change of the exchange rate of the rand. 
The exchange rate of the rand was quite volatile during the past year. Unfortunately, this seems to be 
a  fact  of  life  for  most  emerging-market  economies  and  even  for  some  of  the  more  advanced 
economies irrespective of the monetary policy frameworks that they have adopted. Although the Bank 
would, of course, prefer to have greater exchange rate stability, fluctuations in the external value of the 
rand  are  unavoidable  in  the  current  international  monetary  system  of  generally  floating  exchange 
rates. We know from experience that even if the rand was pegged to another currency or to a basket 
of currencies, it would still float against most currencies and fluctuate widely at times. 
The  authorities  can  only  aim  at  creating  underlying  economic  conditions  that  are  conducive  to 
exchange rate stability. One of the factors that has contributed to the large fluctuations of the rand in 
the  past  has  been  the  large  oversold  NOFP  of  the  Bank.  The  Bank(cid:146)s  stated  objective  has  been  to 
eliminate this open position, which stood at US$ 23,2 billion at the end of September 1998. During the 
past year the Bank purchased fairly modest amounts of foreign currency in the market at appropriate 
times, and also delivered the proceeds of the government(cid:146)s global eurobond issue of US$ 1,25 billion 
in May 2003 against the oversold forward exchange book of the Bank. These transactions converted 
the oversold NOFP of US$ 1,8 billion in mid-2002 to an overbought position of US$ 0,9 billion at the 
end  of  July  2003.  Having  removed  this  perceived  vulnerability,  the  price  discovery  process  in  the 
foreign-exchange market has been displaying a better two-way trading pattern. 
With the oversold NOFP now expunged, the Bank has shifted its focus to reducing its oversold forward 
book  and  to  seeking  over  time  to  strengthen  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserve  position.  The 
balance on the oversold forward book stood at US$ 4,1 billion at the end of July 2003, compared with 
US$ 7 billion at the time of the previous annual meeting of the Bank. 
In accordance with the policy of a phased and gradual dismantling of exchange controls, the Minister 
of  Finance  announced  further  exchange  control  relaxations  in  his  Budget  Speech  on  26  February 
2003.  These  included  a  new  dispensation  for  offshore  portfolio  investments,  a  mechanism  for 
unwinding the pool of emigrants(cid:146) blocked funds and an exchange control amnesty. 
Stability in the banking sector 
The liquidity problems experienced by smaller banks and the eventual erosion of the deposit base of 
some of the bigger banks in the first half of 2002, were resolved in a satisfactory manner during the 
past  year.  In  this  process,  however,  certain  consequences  for  the  banking  industry  could  not  be 
avoided. The activities of two of the larger banks, Saambou Bank Limited and BoE Bank Limited, were 
merged with those of the big domestic banks. In addition, the reluctance of depositors to place funds 
with  smaller  banks  caused  some  of  these  banks  to  cancel  their  banking  registrations,  while  others 
redesigned their ownership structures and downsized their balance sheets. 
The  turbulence  experienced  in  the  banking  sector  therefore  resulted  in  a  consolidation  of  activities 
before a return to stability was achieved. At the end of June 2003, approximately 83 per cent of total 
deposits by the public landed in the vaults of the big four banks. These changes have also made it 
more  difficult  to  start  new  banks  or  for  small  banks  to  remain  in  business.  This  could  affect  the 
availability  of  operational  capital  for  new  entrepreneurs,  which  is  highly  essential  for  economic 
development.  Small  banks  are  often  more  willing  than  bigger  banks  to  finance  high-risk  ventures 
because they are more versatile and can more easily target niche markets. 
Despite these developments, South Africa(cid:146)s banking system remains sound. Banks operating in the 
country are well capitalised, with an average risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio of 12,4 per cent at 
  the end of June 2003. Moreover, 35 banks holding 98 per cent of total banking assets have capital 
adequacy ratios exceeding the statutory minimum of 10 per cent. The liquidity of the banking sector 
was also generally adequate. The average daily amount of liquid assets held in June 2003 exceeded 
the minimum requirement by about 20 per cent. 
Growth in the total assets of banks moderated appreciably during 2002, but grew rapidly in the first six 
months  of  2003  because  of  changes  in  regulatory  and  accounting  practices  that  require  many 
off-balance  sheet  items  to  be  included  in  balance  sheets.  However,  the  quality  of  assets  remained 
high.  Non-performing  loans  amounted  to  nearly  R25  billion  at  the  end  of  June  2003,  which 
represented  only  2,6  per  cent  of  total  loans  and  advances.  The  provisions  made  by  banks  for 
non-performing loans were also adequate. 
Although household debt to disposable income rose in the first half of 2003, this ratio is still well below 
the average of the preceding five years. The ratio of corporate debt to profits, which is an indication of 
the debt-servicing capacity of businesses, increased from 5,4 per cent in the second quarter of 2002 to 
6,4  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2003.  This  ratio  is  above  the  average  of  the  past  five  years, 
probably because of a decline in corporate profits as well as an increase in corporate debt. 
Banks continue to be managed well. The average efficiency ratio improved in the past year, as did the 
return  on  equity  and  assets.  A  special  independent  investigation  concerning  corporate  governance 
has confirmed that South Africa(cid:146)s leading banks are committed to high standards of management. The 
banks adhere broadly to international best practice. Certain suggestions were nevertheless made to 
improve  the  functioning  of  banks.  The major  deficiency  that  the  investigation  encountered  was  that 
some of the boards of banks are too big to operate cohesively. It was therefore suggested that the 
size  of  boards  should  preferably  be  restricted  to  16  members  and  that  the  number  of  executive 
directors should ideally not exceed four. 
Although continued vigilance is required to ensure that banks comply with evolving standards, there 
are  no  major  concerns  in  this  regard.  Banks  are  well  on  course  to  bringing  their  risk-management 
systems and data models in line with what could be required for compliance with Basel II in 2007. This 
new capital accord is a radical reform of the previous one and will have an impact on banks in areas 
such  as  regulatory  capital,  credit  and  operational  risk  management,  and  data  and  disclosure 
requirements. Banks are positive about complying  with the new accord and regard it as a strategic 
challenge.  The  application  of  the  new  framework  will  require  the  re-engineering  of  supervision 
processes  and  organisational  structures.  In  collaboration  with  other  supervisors,  the  Bank  is 
developing an implementation strategy for Basel II. 
Following international corporate failures, accounting and auditing standards have been revised or are 
being  overhauled.  As  part  of  the  ongoing  endeavours  to  ensure  the  quality  and  transparency  of 
financial  reporting,  a  shift  was  made  during  the  past  year  away  from  historical  cost  to  fair  value 
accounting of financial instruments, i.e. the application of Accounting Statement AC 133. As indicated 
earlier, this led to a substantial increase in the reported total assets of banks. A Ministerial Panel for 
the Review  of the Accounting  Professions(cid:146)  Bill is revising the regulations applicable to  auditors and 
accountants. 
Although all these standards are aimed at promoting the integrity of financial markets and institutions 
and ensuring stability, there is some concern about the management of the transition and the ultimate 
cost of complying with the increase in legislation that affects banks. Preparing for Basel II is in itself a 
considerable task. Combined with the onerous requirements of new anti-money laundering and anti-
terrorist funding legislation, corporate governance standards and impending community reinvestment 
legislation, it increases the risk that banks could lose sight of their main business objectives. Non-bank 
financial institutions may also not escape this burden. South Africa(cid:146)s recent accession to the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) on money laundering will affect the operations of almost all financial firms. 
Another  challenge  facing  the  banking  sector  is  to  provide  broader  access  to  affordable  financial 
services.  A  large  portion  of  the  population  still  does  not  have  access  to  banking  facilities.  The 
challenge  of  broadening  access  to  finance  has  to  be  addressed  with  deference  to  the  regulatory 
objective of achieving a high degree of economic efficiency and consumer protection in the economy. 
This  will  require  a  balance  between  the  introduction  of  changes  to  achieve  the  objective  of  greater 
participation and the maintenance of financial stability. 
The financial sector is in the process of developing a Financial Sector Black Economic Empowerment 
Charter to promote increased black ownership of and access to financial firms. As in the case of the 
  Mining  Charter,  the  key  elements  of  the  Financial  Sector  Charter  are  likely  to  include  ownership, 
career and procurement opportunities, and human resources development. We support this process. 
Moreover,  ever  since  the  attacks  on  the World  Trade  Centre  on  11  September  2001,  the  need  for 
multilateral co-ordination to ensure continuity in financial systems has been high on the agenda of the 
banking sector. The Bank has assisted in the establishment of a Financial Sector Contingency Forum 
for  such  contingency  planning.  A  key  objective  of  the  forum  is  to  identify  crisis  events  that  may 
threaten  the  stability  of  the  South  African  financial  sector  and  to  develop  appropriate  plans, 
mechanisms and structures to mitigate such potential threats and manage crisis events. 
Regional economic co-operation 
The  promotion  of  regional  economic  co-operation  in  Africa  generally  and  in  the  Southern  African 
Development Community (SADC) more specifically continues to form part of the major activities of the 
South African Reserve Bank. The Bank fully supports the New Partnership for Africa(cid:146)s Development 
(Nepad) goals of accelerated growth and sustainable development, poverty eradication and reversing 
the  marginalisation  of  Africa  in  the  globalisation  process.  We  will  continue  to  play  an  active  role 
towards the realisation of these ideals. 
The  Bank  has  also  participated  actively  in  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  in  the  SADC 
region during the past year. The major initiatives undertaken included the establishment of a Common 
Monetary  Area  Cross-border  Payment  Oversight  Committee;  the  implementation  of  a  cross-border 
foreign exchange recording system in Namibia, Swaziland and Zimbabwe; significant progress in the 
harmonisation  of  national  payment  systems,  information  and  communication  technology  capacity, 
banking  supervision  and  exchange  control;  and  agreement  on  the  promotion  of  the  focus  on  price 
stability as an appropriate and realisable target of macroeconomic convergence as a prerequisite for 
monetary integration. 
Internal administration 
In  order  to  achieve  the  objective  of  price  and  financial  stability  and  to  ensure  that  all  activities  are 
conducted  efficiently,  a  number  of  changes  were  again  made  to  the  internal  administration  of  the 
Reserve Bank in the past year. In particular, the reduction of costs without loss of productivity received 
high  priority.  Staff  and  operational  costs  were  thoroughly  scrutinised  to  minimise  expenses.  A 
moratorium  was  placed  on  appointments  with  effect  from  1  August  2002  to  reduce  staff  numbers. 
Moreover,  voluntary  early  retirement  packages  were  also  offered  during  April  2003  to  282  staff 
members aged 50 and older to curtail costs. A total of 173 responses have been received to date, of 
which 114 staff members indicated that they accept the offer. 
A  number  of  initiatives  were  launched  in  the  area  of  information  and  communication  technology 
focusing on cost reduction and improved efficiency. The renewal of the mainframe and the improved 
management of the network infrastructure will result in significant cost saving over time, address future 
capacity requirements and improve the availability and reliability of the Bank(cid:146)s infrastructure. 
In reviewing the implementation of the Bank(cid:146)s cash handling strategy, the average overnight  notes-
held-to-order  limit  for  commercial  banks  was  increased,  the  service  arrangements  for  Mpumalanga 
and  Limpopo  provinces  were  terminated,  and  a  levy  was  introduced  on  banknotes  deposited  and 
withdrawn  by  banks.  The  Bank(cid:146)s  seven  branches  have  met  all  the  distribution  and  circulation 
requirements of banks and the cash industry. The overall productivity of the branches has kept track 
with established requirements and their processing of banknotes averaged 95 per cent of the installed 
capacity. 
Strategies  to  combat  the  counterfeiting  of  banknotes  and  coin  are  being  developed.  In  line  with 
international best practice, the Bank will enhance the security features of banknotes in the near future 
to deter counterfeiting. A decision has also been made to introduce a new R5 coin in response to the 
counterfeiting of such coins. 
Significant  progress  has  been  made  to  strengthen  the  Bank(cid:146)s  ability  to  oversee  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  the  payment  system  and  to  strengthen  its  regulatory  framework.  In  aligning  South 
Africa(cid:146)s  payment  system  practices  and  arrangements  with  international  developments,  discussions 
have taken place  with domestic banks and the Continuous Linked Settlement Bank in London. The 
aim is to reduce foreign exchange settlement risk through the synchronisation of the settlement of the 
  two  legs  of  a  foreign  exchange  transaction  in  a  single  time  zone.  The  Bank  also  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  Bankers  Services  Company  (Bankserv)  to  determine  the  feasability  of 
transferring the ownership and operation of the SARB-link network to Bankserv to reduce costs. 
In  a  further  effort  to  avoid  duplication  and  save  costs,  the  former  Money  and  Capital  Market 
Department  and  International  Banking  Department  were  merged  into  one  new  department,  the 
Financial  Markets  Department.  The  merger  reflected  the  increased  integration  of  South  Africa  into 
global  financial  markets,  which  made  a  distinction  between  domestic  and  international  financial 
markets less relevant. The merger had the added benefit of facilitating and improving the co-ordination 
of monetary policy implementation, while allowing for a more efficient allocation of human resources. 
Cost saving was also an important objective in the operations of the Bank(cid:146)s subsidiaries. As a result of 
the  current  and  projected  low  domestic  and  international  demand  for  coin,  the  staff  of  the  SA  Mint 
Company (Pty) Limited was reduced by some 40 per cent through a combination of natural attrition, 
early retirements and a retrenchment programme. In addition, the management of the SA Mint was 
restructured  to  improve  efficiency.  In  the  SA  Bank  Note  Company  (Pty)  Limited  marketing  was 
intensified  to  increase  capacity  utilisation.  The  marketing  initiatives  paid  off  with  the  award  of  two 
further banknote printing contracts from African countries. 
The training and development of staff continue to be important objectives of the Bank. In this regard 
the South African Reserve Bank College again played a major role by offering  a variety of learning 
programmes.  The  various  departments  also  put  considerable  effort  into  on-the-job  training  of  staff 
members. The Bank is further committed to achieving its objectives for staff transformation by 2005, 
and reports annually on its progress to the Department of Labour in terms of the Employment Equity 
Act, No 55 of 1998. 
In keeping with the decision of the shareholders on 25 April 2002 to terminate the listing of the Bank 
on the JSE Securities Exchange South Africa, an Over-the-counter Share Transfer Facility for trading 
Reserve  Bank  shares  was  established.  This  facility  has  delivered  the  desired  results  and 
87 registrations in respect of 240 237 shares were effected up to 31 March 2003. 
Finally, the extensions to the head office building, which were started in 2001, were completed. The 
building  now  meets  the  Bank(cid:146)s  requirements  in  respect  of  office  space,  parking  and  conference 
facilities.  Staff  members  who  had  to  work  in  other  buildings  or  who  had  to  be  relocated  to  other 
premises for the duration of the building alterations, have been moved back to the head office building. 
Acknowledgements 
All these improvements in the functioning of the Reserve Bank could only be achieved with the help of 
other  persons  and  institutions.  In  conclusion,  I  therefore  want  to  thank  everyone  who  assisted  the 
Bank to accomplish its objectives. In this regard I have to name the Presidency, the Government and 
Parliament for their support of our work. 
I also wish to express my appreciation to the Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank, including the 
deputy governors, for their commitment to the Bank. In particular, I want to thank Dr M T de Waal, who 
retired from the Board, for his contributions over the past years. Last but not least, I want to thank the 
management and staff of the Bank for the outstanding way in which they performed their duties. They 
have  responded  with  vigour  to  all  the  challenges  we  have  encountered  and  have  demonstrated 
commitment and high professionalism in performing their work. 
This is a truly remarkable institution to be associated with. 
Thank you. 
 