 Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy and the Swedish economy 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish  Society  of 
Financial Analysts, Stockholm, 5 March 2003. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come here and speak at the Swedish Society of Financial Analysts. This 
is my first public appearance in my new role as Deputy Governor of the Riksbank. It is stimulating to 
meet people and discuss economic issues. At the same time, I feel a little nervous, as I know I am 
facing  an  audience  who  are  used  to  examining  and  interpreting  statements  by  the  Riksbank.  One 
difference between this post and my previous work is that a member of the Executive Board must to 
some extent exercise caution when speaking publicly. This is to avoid creating any misunderstandings 
among participants in the financial market, who try to translate statements by representatives of the 
central bank into future interest rate policy. This means that some of you may not be acquainted with 
me, but my aim is to be as honest and clear as I possibly can. 
What I intend to start talking about today is the development of the economy in recent years and to 
follow this  with a  look ahead at the challenges facing both the  Swedish  and  international economic 
climates, and finally say something about monetary policy.  
Those of you who are familiar with the economic assessments I have made know that I sometimes 
have not shared the Riksbank’s conclusions. But please remember that this should not be interpreted 
to  mean  that  I  have  a  different  opinion  of  the  Riksbank’s  objectives.  I  consider  it  a  good  thing  to 
conduct  an  open  discussion  on  the  policy  pursued.  And  I  hope  that  you  intend  to  take  part  in  this 
discussion, as the whole point of an open central bank is to facilitate such discussion and allow it to 
improve monetary policy. 
Riksbank focuses on total inflation picture 
I  shall  begin  by  describing  the  way  the  Riksbank  works.  The  Riksdag  has  assigned  two  main 
objectives  to  the  Riksbank:  to  maintain  price  stability  and  to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment 
system. Today I shall concentrate on the first of these two objectives. 
The  Riksbank  has  defined  the  target  for  monetary  policy  as  to  limit  inflation  to  2  per  cent,  with  a 
tolerated  deviation interval of plus/minus one percentage point. This tolerated interval  indicates that 
deviations are likely, but that they will be limited. The objective is worded in terms of the consumer 
price index (CPI), which is a broad index consisting of the prices in a basket of goods and services 
consumed  by  an  average  Swedish  household.  As  interest  costs  and  indirect  taxes  included  in  CPI 
inflation are not assessed to have a long-term effect on inflation, the Riksbank has chosen to normally 
focus on UND1X, which is an index that excludes these factors. From time to time there may also be 
reason to disregard other price changes that are assessed as temporary. Our ambition will then be to 
make it clear that we have done so. 
By raising and lowering the steering interest rate - the repo rate - the Riksbank attempts to influence 
inflation. As it is so difficult to steer inflation in the short term, the Riksbank makes an assessment of 
developments for the coming 1-2 years. This is the period of time usually assumed necessary for an 
interest rate adjustment to work its way through the economy and have a full impact on the rate of 
price increase, i.e. inflation. 
The  Riksbank  uses  a  simple  rule-of-thumb  when  shaping  its  monetary  policy.  If  the  total  picture  of 
inflation shows that it is expected to be above or below the target level, the steering interest rate is 
adjusted accordingly.  
There are four main factors in the analysis of future inflation that stand out as central to the shaping of 
monetary policy: the development of total resource utilisation, international price trends, the exchange 
rate and the general public’s inflation expectations. 
Inflationary pressure varies according to the demand situation and to changes in resource utilisation. 
The stronger the upturn in demand in relation to potential production, the greater the risk that prices 
and wages will rise rapidly and vice versa. This is why we who work in central banks around the world 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 must analyse the picture of economic activity as a whole, despite the fact that inflation is our target 
variable.  
International  price  trends,  where,  for  instance,  oil  prices  are  an  important  factor,  affect  domestic 
inflation  by  way  of  imports.  An  assessment  of  international  resource  utilisation  can  provide  an 
indication, for instance, of how international prices may develop.  
The development in the value of the krona is important in the assessment of inflation. A change in 
the exchange rate has a direct effect on inflation in that the price of imported goods and services is 
affected,  and  also  an  indirect  effect  via  aggregate  demand.  If  the  value  of  the  krona  changes  in 
relation to other important trading currencies, this affects the competitiveness of Swedish goods and 
services and thereby demand and resource utilisation. 
Inflation expectations among households and companies can also affect the price-setting and wage 
formation  processes  and  thereby  inflation.  One  purpose  of  a  clear  inflation  target  and  a  monetary 
policy governed by such a target is to firmly establish the inflation target with the general public.  
At the same time, one should remember that the Riksbank is forced to take into account many other 
factors  that  influence  price  trends.  These  are  often  non-recurring  factors,  such  as  supply  shocks  in 
various forms, which are often difficult to predict. But above all it can be difficult to use monetary policy 
to prevent them having an impact on inflation. Monetary policy has an impact with a time lag, and it 
does not always reach the source of such a price rise. For instance, a central bank cannot prevent oil 
prices rising in the wake of the concern over a possible war in the Middle East. On the other hand, a 
central bank could of course try to quickly tighten demand in the country to push down prices in other 
areas and thus ensure the average rate of price increase remains in line with the target level.  
The  focus  on  inflation  1-2  years  ahead,  entails  monetary  policy  being  conducted  gradually,  little  by 
little,  rather  than  a  constant  acceleration  and  braking,  which  would  risk  creating  unnecessary 
variations in demand and which could in turn have a negative effect on production and employment. 
The focus on the coming 1-2 year period thus means that temporary rises or falls in the inflation rate 
can be tolerated. However, it is important that the Riksbank is clear in its communication of whether it 
considers the rise to be temporary and when it expects it to subside. 
One-off shifts in price levels can have a more lasting effect on future inflation if, for instance, those 
involved do not believe that the rise is temporary, assessing that it will be lasting and thus wishing to 
compensate  for  the  upturn.  If  this  occurs,  monetary  policy  must  be  used  to  intervene,  even  if  the 
economic  situation  in  itself  does  not  provide  cause  for  concern  with  regard  to  inflation,  to  prevent 
inflation taking a hold through expectations. The reason for this is quite simply that it is more costly in 
terms  of  reduced  production  and  employment  to  force  down  inflation  expectations  once  they  have 
become established at a higher level rather than to prevent them rising.  
Parallels between the current situation and 2001 plus 2002 
Let  us  take  a  look  at  the  current  situation  and  begin  with  the  price  rises.  Now,  as  in  spring  2001, 
inflation has risen as a result of temporary factors pulling up the general level of prices. During 2001 
mad-cow  disease  and  foot-and-mouth  disease  pushed  up  meat  prices  and  poor  harvests  led  to 
soaring  prices  on  fruit  and  vegetables.  Then  as  now  there  was  also  a  water  shortage  in  the 
hydroelectric  power  companies’  reservoirs,  which  pushed  up  electricity  prices.  At  the  moment,  it  is 
electricity and oil prices that are soaring and have pushed up inflation figures above the target level in 
January. This becomes particularly clear if one separates energy prices from the inflation figures for 
January (Diagram 1). 
The Riksbank’s assessment is that the upturn in inflation is temporary, as it was in 2001, and we can 
expect  to  see  lower  inflation  as  early  as  the  late  spring  and  summer.  However,  our  assessment  is 
based  on  the  assumption  that  those  setting  prices  will  not  try  to  compensate  themselves  for  the 
temporary  price  increase.  If  this  occurs,  there  is  a  risk  of  inducing  tendencies  towards  an  inflation 
spiral, which the Riksbank could not stand by and witness in silence. At the same time, it would be 
very unfortunate, particularly in the light of the challenges facing the Swedish economy, to be forced to 
manage contagion effects from the energy price rise with interest rate rises.  
If one looks at the economic climate, I consider the similarities between the present situation and this 
time last year to be more striking than a comparison with 2001. Here I am mainly referring to the fact 
that economic prospects were at that time very uncertain with regard to how far the adaptation process 
had come after the over-optimism of the previous years, which had led to abnormally high share prices 
  and overly large investments by companies in the USA. Let me go back in time roughly one year and 
see what conclusions can be drawn from last year and what implications they might have for future 
developments.  
Developments 2002 to 2003 
At the beginning of last year there were signs of a light at the end of the economic outlook tunnel. I 
wasn’t working at the Riksbank then, so don’t be surprised if parts of my historical description differ 
slightly from that of the Riksbank, as expressed in the Inflation Reports.  
The signs of a turnaround were most pronounced in the USA, but there were also some signals that 
Europe was on the threshold of a recovery. The reduction in stocks appeared to be well on its way, 
which is usually the first requirement for an upturn in production. However, for a production increase 
brought  about  by  adjustment  in  stocks  to  be  durable,  it must  be  supported  by  a  lasting  increase  in 
demand. Household consumption continued to increase, but there was no upturn in investment. The 
imbalances in trade and industry in the USA were perhaps more tangible than many had anticipated. 
Bankruptcies and accounting scandals created further unease on the financial markets, which then fell 
at a rate reminiscent of the 1930s crisis. 
In  Europe  the  signs  of  economic  recovery  mainly  concerned  more  optimistic  expectations; 
expectations which were not later realised. The largest euro economy, Germany, in particular proved 
to be in a poorer condition than anticipated. However, here it was not a question of imbalances like 
those in the USA, but structural problems, such as a high level of unemployment that had set in and 
weak  public  finances,  which  made  it  difficult  to  conduct  an  economic  policy  that  would  support  the 
business climate. Furthermore, the expected supporting forces from the other side of the Atlantic for 
the export industry were weaker the expected.   
In  Sweden,  the  slowdown  during  2001  had  a  limited  effect  on  unemployment.  The  Riksbank’s 
calculations  at  the  beginning  of  2002  indicated  that  resource  utilisation  was  relatively  strained. 
Economic policy had a stimulating effect on the economy, through lower taxes and higher transfers. 
Given these conditions, when the signals of a recovery became clearer at the beginning of 2002, the 
Riksbank elected to raise its steering interest rate on two occasions during the spring, by  a total of 
0.5 percentage points to 4.25 per cent. These increases should also be regarded in the light of the fact 
that inflation was still at a high level then and risked having a negative effect on inflation expectations. 
During the spring the rate of price increase turned back towards the target of 2 per cent as forecast.  
As an external analyst my assessment differed slightly from that of the Riksbank. This applied to both 
the international picture, where it was uncertain whether a turnaround had actually taken place, and 
resource utilisation in Sweden and the risk of tension that could cause rising inflation. I interpreted the 
high rate of wage increase that we had then as a delayed effect of an overheated labour market during 
2000 and part of 2001. Shortages on the labour market had eased considerably in spring 2002. In the 
services  sector,  as  in  construction,  capacity  utilisation  had  fallen  significantly,  which  indicated  that 
wage increases would gradually become more subdued. I therefore perceived the inflation risk as less 
evident and did not see any immediate need for raising the interest rate.   
It  is  clear  that  the  inflation  risk  the  Riksbank  seemed  to  see  declined  as  unease  on  the  financial 
markets  grew  in  the  wake  of  bankruptcies  and  corporate  scandals  in  the  USA.  Gradually,  unease 
increased because of security policy developments. The financial unease gradually infected the real 
economy;  confidence  among  companies  and  consumers  began  to  fall  in  several  countries  over  the 
summer  and  it  became  increasingly  clear  that  total  demand  had  been  negatively  affected.  This 
contributed to enabling the Riksbank to lower the repo rate twice during the autumn, measures that 
were in my assessment quite fitting under the circumstances. 
What we can observe today, compared with one year ago, is that the questions baffling forecasters 
are roughly the same and that they are dominated by the question of how far the adaptation process 
following  from  the  stock  market  bubble  has  come.  Today  an  additional  factor  making  assessments 
more difficult is the threat of war in the Middle East. We do not know whether there will be a war or 
how  it  will  all  end.  The  crisis  also  creates  uncertainty  that  makes  it  difficult  to  correctly  interpret 
economic  signals.  In  addition,  the  more  prolonged  the  crisis  is,  the  greater  the  risk  that  the  actual 
uncertainty will have a negative effect on the real economy.  
I shall now turn towards the future and discuss developments over the coming 1-2 years.   
  Right conditions for a recovery in the USA… 
One difference now compared with the situation one year ago is that the adaptation of the imbalances 
in the US economy has probably progressed further. Consolidation of balance sheets has continued, 
productivity  is  strong  and  normal  business  activity  patterns  indicate  that  the  conditions  should  be 
relatively  favourable  for  an  increase  in  industrial  production  during  the  spring.  Low  stocks  levels  in 
relation to sales and an investment ratio that is below the long-term trend would indicate this is the 
case.  An  expansionary  economic  policy  provides  further  support  for  the  optimism.  However,  the 
question most people are asking themselves now, as they were in 2002, is whether the adaptation to 
the imbalances has reached a sufficient stage to enable a broad, lasting increase in demand that can 
take over as the driving force behind a production increase. It is much too early to be able to give a 
clear answer here. 
If  we  look  at  households  in  the  USA,  we  can  see  that  they  have  become  more  passive  since  the 
December Inflation Report was published. The explanation could be the security policy unease and 
the still weak stock markets. Continuing high oil prices will also cut into disposable incomes. However, 
the expansionary economic policy should partly counteract these effects. 
All  in  all,  I  believe  that  the  picture  of  a  relatively  prolonged  recovery  in  the  USA,  where  growth 
gradually increases over the year and attains the economy’s long-term sustainable level, remains for 
the most part intact. 
… while the conditions for a turnaround in the euro area are poorer. 
The total international recovery expected during the coming year does not look to be as strong as the 
Riksbank anticipated in December. The background to this is that developments in the euro area in 
general and in Germany in particular look rather gloomier than they did before. The euro area’s export 
industry is hampered by international uncertainty, as well as a stronger euro and a weak labour market 
is affecting households’ consumption and confidence in the future.  
This  means  that  the  international  economic  prospects  look  rather  poorer  now,  which  was  also  the 
conclusion  of  the  Executive  Board  at  its  monetary  policy  meeting  on  6  February.  However,  this 
assessment  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  Iraq  crisis  will  develop  in  a  way  that  will  not 
significantly deteriorate economic prospects.  
Flat growth path for the Swedish economy 
The  financial  unease  has  also  affected  the  Swedish  economy.  Industrial  production  has  stood  still 
during the autumn and order books have been slow to fill. This is perhaps not so strange in the light of 
the  “wait-and-see”  mentality  prevailing  on  important  export  markets.  However,  as  the  international 
economic climate improves, this and the cyclical pattern for investment are expected to give impetus 
to industrial production in Sweden.  
Over the past six months, Swedish households have become increasingly pessimistic in their view of 
the future, which is perhaps understandable taking into account the negative news with which they are 
confronted: rising energy prices, higher taxes and expected cuts. The scope for consumption will be 
under pressure from these factors in the near future. At the same time, households’ savings were at a 
high level in 2002, which means that there may be some scope to increase consumption despite the 
restraining effects. 
Altogether,  I  believe  there  is  also  reason  for  a  downward  revision  of  the  estimate  of  the  Swedish 
growth rate over the coming years. The expected upturn is assessed to be somewhat superficial. This 
also  assumes  that  the  Iraq  conflict  does  not  develop  in  a  way  that  will  seriously  deteriorate  future 
prospects. 
The shaping of monetary policy 
A decisive factor in the shaping of monetary policy in future is the total picture of inflation prospects. A 
slightly more subdued growth in demand both in Sweden and abroad is expected to lead to capacity 
utilisation  being  slightly  less  strained.  At  the  same  time,  energy  prices  have  pushed  up  inflation. 
However,  the  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  the  upturn  in  inflation  is  temporary  and  that  there  is 
  reason to expect lower inflation as early as the late spring and summer. Although, as I said earlier, this 
assumes  that  those  setting  prices  and  wages  do  not  attempt  to  compensate  themselves  for  the 
temporary price rise.  
All  in  all,  it  is  a  question  of  balancing  the  risks  of,  for  instance,  a  weaker  growth  in  the  economy, 
against the risk that the upturn in inflation will have contagion effects. 
This is what the Executive Board must do at its monetary policy meeting on 17 March.  
 
UND1X including and excluding
energy
Chart 1
UND1X
UND1X excluding energy
4
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
1998
0
2003
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
1999
2000
2001
2002
 0
1995
1996
1997
 