 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 10 July 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB, which was also attended by the President of the ECOFIN Council, 
Mr Tremonti. 
Following our regular economic and monetary analysis, we have concluded that the current monetary 
policy stance is appropriate in view of the favourable outlook for price stability over the medium term. 
Accordingly, we have decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Interest rates in the 
euro  area  are  low  by  historical  standards,  both  in  nominal  and  real  terms,  thus  lending  support  to 
economic activity and helping to safeguard against downside risks to economic growth. The Governing 
Council will continue to monitor carefully all factors that might affect this assessment. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in detail. 
In  the  context  of  our  economic  analysis,  the  latest  data  and  information  continue  to  suggest  that 
economic growth in the euro area remained subdued in the second quarter of the year, after virtually 
stagnating  in  the  first  quarter.  The  indicators  available  broadly  point  to  a  stabilisation  of  activity  but 
there are no signs as yet of an underlying strengthening in production and confidence. At the same 
time, financial market developments seem to reflect a somewhat more optimistic assessment of the 
economic  outlook  both  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area.  On  the  whole,  we  continue  to  expect  a 
gradual  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  This  should  be  supported  by  lower 
inflation  and  thus  higher  real  disposable  income,  the  low  level  of  interest  rates,  and  a  recovery  in 
external  demand  for  euro  area  goods  and  services.  This  assessment  is  in  line  with  all  available 
forecasts and projections. 
Nevertheless, downside risks to this main scenario are still relevant. While concerns over the SARS 
virus  have  faded,  there  are  risks  relating  in  particular  to  the  accumulation  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances outside the euro area and to the extent  of the adjustment still needed  in the euro area 
corporate sector to enhance productivity and profitability. 
Turning  to  price  developments,  the  outlook  over  the  medium  term  remains  favourable.  For  the 
remainder of this year, annual HICP inflation rates are expected to fluctuate around the current level of 
2%, the rate recently estimated by Eurostat for June. In early 2004 a significant base effect related to 
energy prices should lead to a marked fall in annual HICP inflation rates, assuming broadly unchanged 
oil  prices  and  exchange  rates.  Subsequently,  the  exchange  rate  pass-through  and  a  moderate 
economic recovery should contain price pressures. In this respect, wage developments in particular 
are expected to remain consistent with a favourable outlook for price stability. Other price indicators, 
such  as  developments  in  producer  prices,  tend  to  support  this  picture.  Moreover,  all  available 
forecasts  and  projections  as  well  as  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  point  in  the  same  direction, 
namely that price stability in line with our aim of inflation below but close to 2% will be maintained over 
the medium term. 
In the context of our monetary analysis, substantial excess liquidity has accumulated in the euro area 
as  a  consequence  of  the  extended  period  of  high  M3  growth.  This  strong  growth  has  continued  in 
recent months, as economic uncertainty and the low level of interest rates across the whole maturity 
spectrum have increased the attractiveness of holding liquid assets. At the same time, the low level of 
interest rates has helped support recent growth in loans to the private sector. While the large amount 
of excess liquidity should be less of a concern in a period of moderate economic activity, monetary 
developments need to be  closely monitored in terms of their implications for price stability over  the 
medium to long term. 
To sum up, our economic analysis confirms the expectation that price dynamics will remain moderate 
in the euro area in the context of a gradual economic recovery and the strengthened euro exchange 
rate. The monetary analysis indicates that the strong expansion of M3 should, for the time being, not 
be seen as adversely affecting this outlook. Hence, cross-checking the information from the two 
BIS Review 32/2003 
 1
 pillars  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  remains 
favourable. 
With medium-term inflation expectations firmly anchored at levels consistent with price stability, and 
with interest rates at historical lows, monetary policy has made a significant contribution to improving 
the conditions for a recovery in economic growth. However, other policy-makers also have to assume 
their responsibilities. Part of the weakness in economic growth in the euro area can be linked to a lack 
of ambition in the areas of fiscal and structural reform to further improve the conditions for investment 
and employment. 
A strong commitment to the Stability and Growth Pact and adherence to well designed medium-term 
fiscal  consolidation  strategies  in  those  countries  currently  struggling  with  increasing  fiscal 
imbalances  would make a major contribution to  improving confidence. In  a similar  way, progress in 
structural reforms in the labour and product markets would not only increase the euro area’s growth 
potential and enhance its ability to better withstand external shocks, but it would also eliminate a great 
deal of the uncertainty currently clouding long-term planning and prospects. 
In  the  current  situation,  characterised  by  subdued  economic  growth  and  low  confidence,  structural 
reform and a steady and reliable course of fiscal policy, in line with the European fiscal framework, are 
of the highest priority. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2003
