 Willem F Duisenberg: Presentation of the ECB(cid:146)s Annual Report 2002 to the 
European Parliament 
Introductory statement by  Dr Willem F Duisenberg,  President of the European Central Bank, at the 
presentation of the ECB(cid:146)s Annual Report 2002 to the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 3 July 2003.  
 It is my pleasure to present to you today the ECB(cid:146)s Annual Report for 2002, a year that was marked by 
significant  progress  on  our  path  towards  a  more  integrated  Europe.  In  particular,  2002  saw  the 
successful introduction of the euro in its tangible form, as euro banknotes and coins have been swiftly 
accepted and embraced by the citizens of the euro area. Moreover, Heads of State or Government, at 
their summit meeting in December last year, took the historic decision to invite ten countries to join the 
European Union (EU) as of 1 May 2004. 
Economic and monetary developments 
At  the  same  time,  the  environment  in  which  monetary  policy  was  conducted  in  2002  was  one  of 
considerable uncertainty. 
Following  the  slowdown  in  economic  activity  throughout  2001,  a  moderate  recovery  of  real  GDP 
growth in the euro area was recorded at the beginning of 2002. However, as the year progressed, the 
recovery  lost  momentum,  affected  by  renewed  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and  geopolitical 
tensions, which had consequences for oil prices and confidence. Overall, annual real GDP growth in 
the euro area is estimated to have been only 0.8% in 2002, compared with 1.4% in 2001. 
Despite the subdued pace of real economic growth, HICP inflation remained at 2.3% on average in 
2002, unchanged from 2001, and slightly above the ECB(cid:146)s definition of price stability. This was partly 
due to a number of temporary or one-off factors, including higher oil prices, indirect tax increases and 
adverse weather conditions. On top of this, there were some effects from the cash changeover. While 
the  overall  impact  of  the  cash  changeover  on  inflation  was  small,  its  perceived  impact  was  much 
greater than its actual impact, probably due to comparatively strong price increases in some specific 
sectors. Of greater concern for the medium-term outlook for price stability was the fact that nominal 
wage  growth  remained  relatively  strong  despite  the  weakening  of  economic  activity  and  a  rise  in 
unemployment,  while  productivity  growth  remained  low.  This  development  points  to  persistent 
structural rigidities in the labour markets of the euro area. 
Monetary growth was strong in 2002. While this development was partly the result of high volatility in 
financial markets, which heightened investors(cid:146) preference for short-term liquid and less risky financial 
assets, it also reflected the relatively low interest rates in the euro area in 2002. Overall, however, the 
excess liquidity was not seen to indicate risks to price stability in an environment of subdued economic 
activity and moderate credit growth.  
While some factors pointed to possible upward inflationary pressures at the beginning of 2002, later in 
the year the worsening outlook for economic activity and the sizeable and protracted appreciation of 
the euro increasingly pointed towards lower inflationary pressures over the medium term. Against this 
background, the Governing Council decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points in 
December 2002. 
This was followed in March 2003 by  a reduction of 25 basis points and  by  a further 50 basis point 
reduction in June 2003. These rate cuts provided some counterweight to the various factors having an 
adverse  effect  on  economic  activity  and  thereby  improved  the  prospects  for  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. 
With these decisions, the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations reached 2% in June 
2003.  Interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  are  now  at  record  low  levels  by  historical  standards,  both  in 
nominal and real terms. 
As regards the current outlook for price stability, Eurostat(cid:146)s flash estimate of annual HICP inflation in 
the euro area  was 2.0% for June 2003. The appreciation of the euro,  which has brought exchange 
rates  to  levels  close  to  long-term  averages  and  more  in  line  with  economic  fundamentals,  should 
contribute  to  keeping  inflationary  pressures  low.  In  addition,  in  a  context  of  moderate  economic 
BIS Review 31/2003 
 1
 recovery, wage growth is expected to remain compatible with the maintenance of price stability.The 
strong  monetary  growth  also  should  not,  for  the  time  being,  adversely  affect  the  outlook  for  price 
stability. While the outlook for price stability has remained broadly unchanged since our last decision 
on 5 June, the Governing Council will continue to monitor carefully all factors which are relevant to its 
assessment. 
Although the outlook for price stability is favourable, having allowed interest rates to fall to historically 
low levels, monetary policy cannot by itself generate lasting and sustainable growth and employment 
in the euro area. Other policy-makers also have to take up their responsibilities. Part of the weakness 
in economic growth in the euro area can be linked to a lack of ambition in the areas of both fiscal and 
structural reforms to further improve the conditions for investment and employment in the euro area. I 
probably  cannot  emphasise  sufficiently  the  need  to  speed  up  the  pace  of  structural  reforms  in  the 
labour and product markets, given their positive impact on the euro area(cid:146)s ability to better withstand 
external  shocks,  as  well  as  to  increase  its  growth  potential.  Fiscal  policies  should  also  strive  to 
establish  a  well  designed  consolidation  strategy  in  those  countries  struggling  with  increasing  fiscal 
imbalances. A medium-term, stability-oriented approach for economic policies would eliminate a great 
deal of the uncertainty currently overshadowing long-term planning and perspectives which would also 
have  positive  effects  over  the  shorter  term.  In  fact,  at  present,  the  situation  of  subdued  economic 
growth and the stronger external value of the euro make the structural reforms even more necessary. 
Other issues raised in the draft European Parliament resolution on the ECB(cid:146)s Annual Report 
2002 
Let me now turn to some other issues raised in the draft resolution on the ECB(cid:146)s Annual Report. I have 
noted - and welcome - that in several important aspects the views expressed in the draft resolution are 
very similar to those held by the ECB, for instance as regards the need for Member States to respect 
the  Stability  and Growth  Pact and the  importance of  honouring their commitments under the  Broad 
Economic Policy Guidelines, in particular with respect to structural reforms. I also appreciate the fact 
that your draft resolution welcomes the clarifications of the ECB(cid:146)s monetary policy strategy which we 
made public in May of this year. These clarifications, while reflecting the overall successful experience 
with  the  ECB(cid:146)s  monetary  policy  strategy  since  its  inception,  will  further  foster  understanding  of  the 
monetary policy of the ECB. 
While  the  European  Parliament  and  the  ECB  hold  similar  views  on  many  important  issues,,  some 
differences in views remain, such as regarding the draft resolution(cid:146)s suggestion that the ECB should 
publish the summary minutes and the balance of votes of Governing Council meetings. For a number 
of  reasons,  which  I  have  pointed  out  on  previous  occasions  before  Parliament,  we  believe  that  the 
tools  chosen  by  the  ECB  to  communicate  and  explain  its  decisions  ensure  transparency,  are  more 
readily available and better reflect the institutional environment in which the ECB operates. You will 
also not be surprised that I cannot share the view that the ECB(cid:146)s decision-making process might have 
been  delayed  by  the  fact  that  most  Governing  Council  decisions  have  so  far  been  taken  by 
consensus.  Indeed,  the  Governing  Council  has  taken  its  decisions  in  a  timely  manner,  responding 
appropriately to changing economic conditions whenever required.  
The  draft  resolution  also  refers  to  the  Beige  Book  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  as  being  a 
benchmark for country-by-country reviews to be conducted by the Eurosystem. Let me point out that 
the national central banks within the Eurosystem regularly monitor and analyse macroeconomic, fiscal 
as  well  as  structural  developments  in  their  respective  countries,  publishing  their  findings  in  their 
monthly, quarterly or annual reports. These analyses clearly enhance our understanding of euro area 
developments. However, given its euro area focus, it is natural for the ECB to pay greater attention to 
the euro area perspective in its explanations of the single monetary policy. 
As  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks,  we  are  currently  experiencing  truly  historic 
developments.  The  dream  of  a  united  Europe  stretching  beyond  former  post-war  rifts  is  about  to 
become  reality.  Although  major  challenges  lie  ahead,  as  many  of  the  acceding  countries  are  still 
developing into fully-fledged market economies, I believe that the signing of the Accession Treaty at 
the Athens summit in April testified to our joint belief in an integrated Europe. The clear endorsement 
of  the  Treaty  in  the  national  referendums  that  have  already  taken  place  in  a  number  of  acceding 
countries provides evidence of this commitment.  
It goes without saying that an enlarged European Union will require a number of adaptations in the 
working  procedures  and  the  internal  functioning  of  European  institutions  and  bodies,  including  a 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2003
 reform  of  the  voting  modalities  of  the  Governing  Council.  I  am  well  aware  of  the  views  that  the 
European Parliament has expressed in this regard, but let me again point out that the Nice Treaty set 
clear conditions and limits within which our reform proposal had to be formulated. While the adopted 
changes  in  the  voting  modalities  are,  admittedly,  complex,  the  tried-and-tested  principles  of  the 
Eurosystem  constitution,  in  particular  the  ad  personam  participation  of  governors  and  the  (cid:147)one 
member, one vote(cid:148) principle for the members exercising a voting right, have been kept fully intact. This 
will  ensure  that,  also  in  a  significantly  enlarged  euro  area  in  the  future,  the  Governing  Council  will 
maintain its capacity for timely and efficient decision-making. 
Upon accession, the new Member States will join  Economic and Monetary Union  with the status of 
(cid:147)countries with a derogation(cid:148), and their central banks will become part of the ESCB. At a later stage, 
these central banks will become part of the Eurosystem, once their respective countries have fulfilled 
the  convergence  criteria  for  adopting  the  euro.  A  key  priority  of  the  ECB  is  to  have  in  place  the 
necessary technical and institutional infrastructure to ensure an orderly enlargement of the ESCB and, 
later on, of the Eurosystem. An interesting foretaste of the new, larger ESCB was provided by the last 
General Council meeting on 26 June. For the first time, the governors of the acceding country central 
banks participated as observers in a meeting of the General Council of the ECB.  
With this look towards the future, I should like to conclude my statement. This will be the last time that 
I have the opportunity to present to you the Annual Report of the European Central Bank, which I have 
had the honour to preside over for the last five years. I would like to thank you for the co-operation and 
cordial relations that we have maintained during these years.  
BIS Review 31/2003 
 3
