Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a 
hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of the Storting (Norwegian 
parliament), Oslo, 1 December 2003.  
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The statement is partly 
based on the assessments presented in “Report on monetary policy in 2003 - the first eight months” 
and Norges Bank’s Inflation Report 3/2003. 
The Charts in pdf can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Storting  for  inviting  Norges  Bank  to  appear  for  the  first  time  before  this 
Committee  to  report  and  answer  questions  on  monetary  policy  in  connection  with  the  Storting’s 
deliberations on the Government’s credit report. 
The mandate 
The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2½ per 
cent over time. The target is symmetrical - it is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too 
low,  as  it  is  to  avoid  an  inflation  rate  that  is  too  high.  The  inflation  target  provides  an  anchor  for 
economic agents’ expectations concerning future inflation. It provides an important basis for choices 
concerning  saving,  investment,  budgets  and  wages.  Households,  businesses,  public  entities, 
employees and employers can base decisions on the assumption that inflation in Norway will be 2½ 
per cent over time. 
We have a very open economy with free capital movements. The krone exchange rate fluctuates from 
day  to  day.  We  do  not  have  the  instruments  to  fine-tune  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Stable  inflation 
expectations  may  nonetheless  contribute  to  stabilising  the  exchange  rate.  Stability  in  the  exchange 
rate  and  in  exchange  rate  expectations  over  time  are  dependent  on  stable  inflation  expectations, 
which in turn depend on low and stable inflation. 
Norges Bank sets the interest rate so that future inflation will be equal to the inflation target of 2½ per 
cent. High demand for goods and services and labour shortages normally point to higher inflation. An 
increase  in  interest  rates  curbs  demand  and  keeps  inflation  at  bay.  When  demand  is  low  and 
unemployment rises, inflation will tend to slow. Interest rates will then be reduced. The inflation target 
is therefore a vehicle for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to stabilising output and 
employment. This objective is also expressed in the Regulation on Monetary Policy. 
Normally, Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to achieving inflation of 2½ per cent at the 
two-year horizon. There are two reasons for this:  
• 
• 
Changes in the interest rate affect inflation with a lag.  
A reasonable balance is usually achieved between stabilising inflation on the one hand and 
smoothing fluctuations in output and employment on the other.  
A rapid and pronounced change in the interest rate may be appropriate in cases where there is a risk 
that  inflation  may  deviate  considerably  from  the  target  over  a  longer  period,  or  where  heightening 
turbulence in financial markets or a cost- push shock resulting from wage negotiations indicates that 
confidence  in  monetary  policy  is  in  jeopardy.  Financial  market  confidence  in  the  inflation  target 
provides  Norges  Bank  with  greater  scope  for  promoting  stability  in  output  and  employment  through 
monetary policy. This scope will also increase as the inflation target is incorporated as an anchor for 
wage formation. 
We have also indicated that in the event of runaway overall credit growth and a sharp rise in property 
and house prices as well as equity prices, it may be necessary to reassess the time horizon. 
It  would  in  general  have been  possible  to  achieve  the  inflation  target  at  a  horizon  shorter than  two 
years  by  changing  the  interest  rate  more  rapidly  and  more  markedly.  This  might,  however,  have  a 
greater impact on output and employment. 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 1
Norges Bank has based its monetary policy on flexible inflation targeting, where variability in output, 
employment and inflation are given weight. 
The demand channel  
The exchange rate channel  
The expectations channel 
How do changes in the interest rate affect the economy? 
Norges Bank’s monetary policy instrument is the key rate. Norges Bank’s key rate affects short-term 
money market rates, and expectations concerning future developments in the key rate are decisive for 
banks’  deposit  and  lending  rates  and  bond  yields.  It  may  be  useful  to  distinguish  between  three 
channels through which monetary policy operates:  
• 
• 
• 
The effect on inflation of changes in interest rates occurs with a lag and may vary in intensity. In the 
time  it  takes  for  a  change  in  interest  rates  to  feed  through,  other  factors  will  also  have  an  impact 
resulting  in  changes  in  inflation  and  output.  We  cannot  assume  that  the  various  relationships  are 
entirely stable. 
As  interest  rates  fall,  household  and municipal consumption  and  investment  will  tend  to accelerate. 
This is because they have more money left over after servicing their debt and because borrowing is 
less  expensive.  Corporate  finances  are  strengthened  and  investment  may  become  more  attractive. 
Higher  demand  leads  to  higher  output  and  employment.  Wage  growth  may  pick  up.  Higher  wage 
growth combined with higher profit margins will result in higher inflation. 
The effect of interest rate changes may be amplified because the interest rate also affects the krone 
exchange rate. When interest rates are lower, more people will borrow money and fewer will invest in 
NOK. Lower interest rates will thus normally lead to a depreciation of the krone. Imported goods will 
then become more expensive and inflation will accelerate. A weaker krone also boosts exports and 
improves profitability in Norwegian business and industry. The effect on the exchange rate of a change 
in interest rates will vary as themes and sentiments shift in the foreign exchange market. 
We  believe  that  expectations  play  an  important  role  when  prices  and  wages  are  set.  Expectations 
concerning  future  inflation and  economic  stability  have  considerable  impact,  not  least  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market.  Inflation  expectations  also  influence  wage  demands  and  have  an  effect  when 
companies  adjust  their  prices.  It  may  be  difficult  to  form  an  opinion  about  how  expectations  are 
generated.  Confidence  in  the  inflation  target  may  provide  an  anchor.  Past  inflation  rates  may  also 
influence  what  we  think  inflation  will  be  in  the  future.  There  is  thus  an  interaction  between  inflation 
expectations and inflation. 
If  there  is confidence  in monetary  policy,  expected  inflation will be  equal  to or close  to  the  inflation 
target.  This  contributes  to  stabilising  inflation  around  the  target.  The  expectations  channel  thus 
amplifies the effects of monetary policy. We therefore place considerable emphasis on ensuring that 
households,  companies,  the  social  partners  and  financial  market  participants  are  confident  that 
inflation will remain low and stable. 
To the question of how high prices are expected to rise, companies, the social partners and others 
answer  that  they  expect  a  rise  of  2½  per  cent  over  time.  Financial  market  participants  also  expect 
future  inflation  to  be  2½  per  cent.  This  is  reflected  in  developments  in  long-term  bond  yields.  This 
indicates that monetary policy has underpinned confidence that future inflation will be 2½ per cent. 
Consumer price developments 
There  were  wide  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Economic 
developments were marked by high and variable inflation. The fixed exchange rate regime, which was 
introduced in 1986, reinstated monetary policy as an instrument of economic policy in Norway and laid 
the foundation for more stable economic developments later on. Inflation slowed gradually from the 
end of the 1980s and has been around 2½ per cent on average since then. The prolonged period of 
low and stable inflation has probably contributed to anchoring inflation expectations. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2003
When the Government introduced flexible inflation targeting, it set a target for core inflation of 2½ per 
cent over time.1  
Core inflation has slowed over the past 12 months and is now considerably below target. 
Stabilising developments in output and employment 
According to the mandate, one of the aims of monetary policy is to stabilise developments in output 
and  employment.  The  economy  grows  over  time.  Output  moves  in  waves.  Actual  output  will  be 
alternately  above  and  below  the  long-  term  trend.  The  difference  between  trend  output  and  actual 
output is called the output gap. Stabilising output means aiming to keep actual output close to trend 
level. 
We have had pronounced economic cycles in the Norwegian economy. The downturn at the beginning 
of the 1990s was followed by an upturn from 1993. This upturn peaked in 1998. The economy then 
shifted  from  an  upturn  with  high  growth  rates  to  an  expansion  with  lower  growth  but  low 
unemployment, labour shortages in many sectors and strong growth in labour costs. 
In recent years, capacity utilisation has declined from a high level and is now on a par with the level 
prevailing in the years 1995-1997, before the rise in costs accelerated. 
Consumer price inflation in 2003 and the background for the deviation from the target 
In the years 1998-2002, the Norwegian economy was characterised by substantial labour shortages 
and  a considerably  higher  rise  in  labour  costs  than among  trading  partners.  Last  year  was  the  fifth 
consecutive year of very high annual growth. Wage growth was substantially higher than the level that 
over  time  is  consistent  with  the  inflation  target  and  with  normal  productivity  growth.  Pay  increases 
varied widely across the different groups. In Norges Bank’s view, there was therefore a substantial risk 
of new wage-wage spirals. Further rounds of such strong wage increases might have led to a decline 
in output and employment. 
Monetary policy was therefore tightened through an interest rate increase last summer while the krone 
remained strong. At the one-year horizon, the strong krone would push down inflation to below 2½ per 
cent, but subsequently the effects of strong wage growth would dominate. Last year, Norges Bank’s 
Executive Board struck a balance between the consideration of stable inflation developments in the 
short term and the consideration of stabilising developments in output and employment. 
Inflation  was  thus  expected  and  intended  to  be  low  in  2003.  In  the  October  2002  Inflation  Report, 
inflation  was  projected  to  fall  to  1¾  per  cent  in  summer  2003.  However,  price  developments  are 
uncertain even six months to a year ahead. There was thus a possibility that inflation could fall even 
lower than projected, and be more than one percentage point below target. As from May 2003, core 
inflation (measured by the CPI-ATE) has been more than one percentage point below target. Average 
core inflation in 2003 is now projected at 1¼ per cent. The difference between the outcome and the 
projection thus proved nevertheless to be unusually wide, largely reflecting the fact that the economy 
was exposed to sizeable, unexpected disturbances. 
Inflation through 2003 has been pushed down in particular by the fall in prices for imported consumer 
goods.  The  low  rise  in  imported  price  inflation  is  a  consequence  of  the  appreciation  of  the  krone 
throughout  2002  and  low  inflation  abroad.  The  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and 
services has also slowed somewhat. This is particularly the case for prices for domestically produced 
goods influenced by world market prices. 
Weaker than expected economic developments in 2003 
The  krone  appreciated  more  in  autumn  2002  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  than  assumed  in  our 
projections. This was related to unexpectedly weak developments in the global economy resulting in 
lower interest rates abroad and a wider interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. 
                                                      
1   A  measure  of  core  inflation  is  the  rise  in  consumer  prices  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and  excluding  energy  products 
(CPI-ATE). 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 3
Negative events such as the accounting scandals in large US companies, fears of terror, war in Iraq 
and the spread of SARS contributed to weak growth and low inflation in other countries. Developments 
in the international equity markets and the risk of higher oil prices also contributed to strengthening the 
krone. 
Changes  in  the  economic  outlook  abroad  are  clearly  reflected  in  developments  in  interest  rate 
expectations. Interest rate expectations in the US have been adjusted downwards considerably since 
summer  2002.  The  same  applies  to  Europe.  Developments  in  interest  rate  expectations  were  a 
reflection of an ailing world economy. 
The situation  has changed  somewhat since  the summer.  A slightly  more  rapid  rise  in  interest  rates 
abroad is now expected. 
Fluctuations in the exchange rate and monetary policy easing 
Interest rate developments abroad have had substantial influence on the effect of interest rate setting 
in Norway. About 40 per cent of the appreciation of the krone from May 2000 to January 2003 can be 
explained by the increase in the interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. When 
the  equity  bubble  burst  in  2000,  capital  was  moved  from  equities  to  interest-bearing  securities, 
affecting capital flows and exchange rate movements. This shift in themes can explain 55 per cent of 
the appreciation of the krone. A third reason may have been high oil prices and fears that war and 
terror would disrupt the oil supply.2  
While growth in the Norwegian economy stalled last winter, wage growth has moderated more rapidly 
than expected. This has had a considerable influence on the inflation outlook. The interest rate has 
been reduced by 4.5 percentage points, and the krone has appreciated by about 10 per cent. 
The interest rate reductions this year will make a significant contribution to bringing inflation back to 
target.  In  the  short  term,  the  effects  will  primarily  be  channelled  through  a  weaker  krone.  In  the 
somewhat longer term, the fall in interest rates will also lead to higher inflation than would otherwise 
have been the case through stronger demand in Norway. 
Inflation back on target at the two-year horizon 
We now expect inflation to move up and stabilise around the inflation target at the two-year horizon. 
Output and employment are picking up. In our projections, capacity utilisation is stable with an output 
gap, as calculated by Norges Bank, close to zero.3  
Uncertainty associated with inflation projections 
Projections are uncertain. Experience of uncertainty surrounding inflation forecasts would indicate that 
when  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  reaching  the  target  of  2½  per  cent,  inflation  will  remain 
within  the  interval  of  +/-  1  percentage  point  around  the  target  in  four  out  of  five  years.  This  is 
consistent with the experience of other countries with an inflation targeting regime. It should be noted, 
however, that this level of accuracy is based on a period of stable inflation in the OECD countries. 
The interest rate reductions and the fall in the krone exchange rate imply that inflation will gradually 
increase and will be considerably higher than the current level as early as next spring. After such a 
period of very low inflation as we have now witnessed, it is appropriate to be particularly vigilant in 
monetary policy in the event that inflation does not increase as projected. 
                                                      
2   These  estimates  are  uncertain  and  must  therefore  be  interpreted  with  caution.  The  analysis  of  developments  in  the 
exchange rate from May 2000 to January 2003 is discussed in more detail in Bjørn Naug (2003): “Faktorer bak utviklingen i 
kronekursen – en empirisk analyse” (Factors underlying developments in the krone exchange rate – an empirical analysis), 
in Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers, no. 31 (Norwegian only). 
3   These projections are discussed in more detail in Norges Bank’s Inflation Report 3/2003. The analyses are based on the 
technical assumption that the interest rate  will move in line with  expectations in financial and foreign exchange markets, 
implying  that  the  interest  rate  will  remain  at  the  current  level  well  into  2004.  Thereafter,  the  interest  rate  in  Norway  is 
assumed  to  rise  gradually  in  pace  with  interest  rates  in  other  countries.  The  forward  exchange  rate  implies  a  moderate 
depreciation of the krone through the projection period. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2003
Share of employment back at trend 
As mentioned earlier, developments in the output gap are a measure of output stability. 
Fluctuations in output are also reflected in changes in the share of the working age population that are 
employed. This share of employment has shown a rising trend since the early 1970s, and has been 
above trend since 1996. This year, it appears that the share of employment will be at about trend level. 
The exchange rate fluctuates 
Fluctuations  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  have  become  more  pronounced  since  1996  and  are  now 
more on a par with fluctuations in the currencies of other small economies with a floating exchange 
rate. The krone has fluctuated between 9.24 and 7.22 kroner to the euro/ecu since 1997. 
Norges Bank has not set a specific target for the level of the exchange rate. However, changes in the 
krone exchange rate are, of course, important in interest rate setting because they affect inflation and 
developments in activity. The response to a change in the exchange rate will depend on its expected 
impact  on  inflation,  output  and  employment.  This  requires  an  evaluation  of  the  reasons  for  and  the 
duration  of  the  change.  Very  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  tend  to  have  very 
limited  effects  on  economic  developments,  while  more  long-lasting  changes  can  have  an  impact. 
However, it is difficult to determine whether exchange rate changes are permanent or temporary. 
Long-term relationship between exchange rate and prices 
In  the  1980s,  the  rise  in  prices  in  Norway  was  considerably  higher  than  among  trading  partners. 
Measured in a common currency, prices are high, but they have over time remained fairly stable in 
relation  to  trading  partners.  The  ratio  of  Norwegian  to  foreign  prices  today,  converted  to  the  same 
currency, is not substantially different from the average over the past 30 years. 
There is evidence to suggest that the exchange rate will contribute to cushioning changes in the price 
ratio.4 When inflation in Norway has been higher than among trading partners for a period, the krone 
has  tended  to  depreciate.  When  there  are  expectations  that  inflation  in  Norway  will  develop 
approximately  in  line  with  other  countries,  the  exchange  rate  will  also  normally  return  to  its  normal 
range in periods when the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak. This relationship is 
the  reason  why  stability  in  the  exchange  rate  and  in  exchange  rate  expectations  over  time  is 
dependent on stable inflation expectations, which in turn depend on low and stable inflation. Evidence 
indicates that an inflation target provides a sound anchor for exchange rate expectations. However, 
these expectations will also depend on fundamental conditions such as developments in government 
expenditure and revenues, productivity growth, oil prices and the terms of trade, excluding oil. 
Deterioration in competitiveness following several years of high wage growth 
High  wage  growth  over  several  years  has  eroded  the  competitiveness  of  the  Norwegian  business 
sector.  Last  year,  the  effects  of  high  wage  growth  were  amplified  by  the  changes  in  the  krone 
exchange  rate.  Although  the  nominal  krone  exchange  rate  has  depreciated  this  year,  the 
competitiveness of Norwegian industries is still rather weak. The krone has now reverted to around the 
level prevailing in the mid-1990s, while labour costs in manufacturing rose by 13 per cent5 more than 
among our trading partners in the same period. 
The developments in the krone exchange rate proved to be reversible, but the loss of competitiveness 
and jobs caused by relatively high wage growth in Norway is difficult to recoup. A precondition for a 
considerable  improvement  in  competitiveness  is  probably  that  real  wage  growth  is  lower  than 
productivity growth in the business sector for a period. Experience shows that this occurs in periods 
when there is excess capacity in the economy. This means that changes in competitiveness over time 
                                                      
4   Q. Farooq Akram (2003): “Reelle likevektsvalutakurser for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rates for Norway) in Norges 
Bank’s Occasional Papers, no. 31 (Norwegian only). 
5   Wage figures for trading partners have been revised since the publication of “Report on monetary policy in 2003 – the first 
eight months”. 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 5
depend  on  real  economic  factors  and  on  aspects  of  wage  formation  and  cannot  be  controlled  by 
monetary policy. However, with flexible inflation targeting, the social partners can normally expect low 
wage growth to have a greater impact on competitiveness because it can result in a weaker krone. 
In Norges Bank’s assessment, the outlook for the internationally exposed sector is brighter today than 
a year ago because the rise in costs has slowed markedly. 
As mentioned earlier, the decrease in wage growth has been of great importance in enabling us to 
reduce the key rate towards an international level. We expect inflation to pick up in the first half of 
2004. Output and employment will probably grow somewhat more than trend. 
Again, thank you for giving me the opportunity to deliver this statement. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2003
