Pridiyathorn Devakula: Thailand - recent economic performance and the road 
ahead 
Speech by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the British Chamber of 
Commerce-Thailand special luncheon, Bangkok, 1 October 2003. 
 Honorable guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to thank the British Chamber of Commerce for the invitation to speak today at 
this special luncheon. It is certainly a pleasure to have the opportunity to share with you my views on 
the economy, and on the prospects for the period ahead. 
These days, Thailand’s strong economic recovery, especially the growth outlook for the next year, has 
frequently hit the news headlines. One hears or reads about favorable economic outcome during the 
first half of this year even though the global environment was much troubled by uncertainties. Real 
GDP grew by 6.7 percent in the first quarter and was dampened only slightly by the repercussions of 
the Iraqi War and the outbreak of SARS to 5.8 percent in the second quarter.  
Such resilience to adverse external shocks is a testimony of the economy’s greater flexibility as well as 
its underlying strengths. With this, the National Economic and Social Development Board has revised 
upward the growth projection for 2003 by about half a percentage point to 5.8-6.2 percent.  
From  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  point  of  view,  it  is  most  important  that  the  current  recovery  has  been 
accompanied by a continued strengthening of economic stability both on the external and domestic 
fronts. While the current account has consistently been in surpluses and external debt falling steadily, 
public debt has also been declining substantially from roughly 57 to 50 percent of GDP over the past 
three quarters. Not only so, the unemployment rate continues to fall, and headline inflation is just 
slightly above 2 percent. As a result, international credit rating agencies have indicated positive views 
on the economy, citing improved growth with stability as the key reason for a number of sovereign and 
bank upgrades in recent months.  
With these upbeat sentiments, let me now share with you my assessment of the economy. I will begin 
by  evaluating  some  aspects  of  the  economy’s  current  performance  and  then  move  on  to  future 
prospects as well as the remaining challenges. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In the initial period when the economy was struggling hard to emerge from the crisis, it was exports 
that had provided a cyclical stimulus in shoring up aggregate demand. At that time, other engines of 
growth,  namely,  private  consumption  and  investment,  were  unable  to  contribute  much  because  the 
business sector was saddled with heavy debt burden, people were losing jobs, and machines were left 
idle as a legacy of over-investment in the prior years. But thanks to the fiscal stimulus, the economy 
eventually began to turn around within about two years after 1997.  
For the past years, however, things have been looking up. Growth momentum from the private sector 
has  picked  up  more  firmly,  making  it  possible  for  the  Government  to  begin  moving  toward  fiscal 
consolidation to ensure medium-term fiscal sustainability. According to current estimates, effective tax 
collection together with the economic expansion could allow the Government to achieve a balanced 
budget a couple of years earlier than planned. It is therefore clear that the thrust of growth has now 
been shifted from the fiscal sector to private hands, with export also contributing in a very significant 
manner.  This  is  a  much  welcome  development,  as  sustainable  growth  cannot  rest  forever  on  the 
shoulder of the government who makes up only about 15 percent of the country’s GDP.  
Ladies and gentlemen,   
The key drivers of the current recovery, as you know, have been the strong performance of export 
and private consumption. 
Export  of  goods  broke  its  highest  record  in  May  this  year  at  6.5  billion  US  dollars  and  has  since 
remained at the monthly average of 6.4 billion US dollars, with the average monthly export growth of 
around 12 percent year-on-year.  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
To many, this is a pleasant surprise given the export performance of other regional countries of late. It 
owes partly to the diversification of Thai export, both in terms of product type and market destination. 
In particular, our export is not concentrated in just one or two commodities but rather well balanced 
between agricultural, agro-industrial, and manufactured goods.  
In  terms  of  market  destination,  in  the  past,  our  export  performance  relied  heavily  on  the  market 
conditions  of  the  G3  countries,  with  our  export  growth  usually  deteriorating  when  these  economies 
were  in  recessions.  However,  the  situation  has  changed  in  recent  years  with  intra-regional  trade 
quickly  gaining  a  more  significant  role.  With  this,  our  export  has  enjoyed  greater  market  access  in 
China  and  other  East  Asian  countries.  The  intensification  of  intra-regional  trade,  which  is  likely  to 
continue,  has  made  Thailand’s  export cycles  less  dependent  on  the  G3  economies,  and  Thailand’s 
strong export performance over the past year amid G3 economic slowdown is just a reflection of our 
more well-balanced export market base. 
On this note, I would like to emphasize that the EU is indeed an important export market for Thailand, 
and export to the United Kingdom in particular comprises around 3-4 percent of Thailand’s total export 
value.  The  good  news  is  that  even  with  keener  competition  in  the  world  market,  Thailand’s  export 
growth to the EU remains quite high at around 18 percent in the first half of this year, thanks in part to 
the contribution of chambers of commerce like yours.  
Regarding export of services, we are all aware that the Thai tourism industry was hit hard by the 
outbreak of SARS in the second quarter. The number of foreign tourists in May dropped by as much 
as 50 percent year-on-year, a magnitude that dwarfed the impact of 911 by comparison. However, the 
severe impact was quickly over by the end of the quarter, and external income from services started to 
return to normalcy by July. For August, the number of foreign tourists indicated positive year-on-year 
growth, and the service account was in strong surplus for the second consecutive month.  
Favorable  conditions  for  the  export  of  goods  and  improving  environment  for  the  export  of  services 
have  allowed  for  a  continued  current  account  surplus  and  a  reduction  in  external  obligations. 
Steady  external  debt  repayments,  both  by  the  public  and  private  sectors,  have  resulted  in  a 
remarkable decline in the external debt stock, from the peak of 112 billion US dollars in June 1997 to 
only 52 billion US dollars at the end of July 2003. Even with the last portion of loan prepayment to the 
IMF two months ago, it is good news that our international reserves position continues to remain at a 
comfortable level of 39 billion US dollars.  
Looking ahead, barring any unusual market developments, export should do well for the rest of this 
year. We have already seen in recent months sizeable raw material import in preparation for export at 
end  year.  Beyond  that,  the  momentum  is  likely  to  benefit  from  encouraging  signs  of  economic 
improvement in the US and Japan. 
Ladies and gentlemen,   
The other important engine of growth in this recovery has been private consumption.  
On  the  one  hand,  strong  household  spending  has  been  induced  by  a  strengthening  of  consumer 
confidence,  especially  confidence  on  future  income  as  farm  income  and  non-farm  employment 
continue to expand favorably.  
On the other hand, consumers have benefited much from lower interest rates and greater access to 
loans  from  financial  institutions,  leasing  firms,  and  other  non-bank  institutions.  This  pick-up  in 
consumption  is  most  clearly  seen  in  the  double-digit  growth  rate  of  durable  consumption  such  as 
passenger cars and motorcycles, which in part reflects a large portion of the stock adjustment or the 
replacement of old cars bought prior to the 1997 crisis. And more recently, rising stock index, higher 
corporate profitability and higher dividend yields as well as recovering property prices have boosted 
household wealth, which would be positive for consumption.  
Therefore, even though we have seen some moderation in consumption growth from the beginning of 
this  year,  favorable  underlying  factors  regarding  income,  wealth,  and  financing  are  likely  to  stay 
supportive of consumption growth in the near term. It is thus likely that consumption will continue to be 
an important contributor to GDP growth, though not as strongly as in late 2002 and early 2003.  
With  consumption  growth  moderating,  the  big  question  is,  “How  then  can  people  be  talking  about 
stronger GDP growth in Thailand next year?” 
Ladies and gentlemen,   
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
No economy can or should rely on private consumption as the main growth driver for an extended 
period of time. For the recovery to be sustained, the economy must eventually be supported by a pick-
up in private capital spending. Thailand is no exception. 
It is understandable why private investment so far has not contributed much to the economic recovery 
following the 1997 crisis. With about half of industrial capacity lying idle at the trough of the situation as 
a result of prior over-investment and demand contraction, there was very little incentive for firms to 
spend further on capital accumulation. Thus, the share of real private investment to real GDP fell from 
the average of 33 percent between 1990 and 1996 to just 11 percent in 1999.  
The  collapse  in  private  investment  is  also  reflected  in  the  large  and  persistent  saving-investment 
surplus,  which  has  thus  far  narrowed  only  slowly  despite  the  strong  recovery  in  GDP.  These 
symptoms  show  that  a  recovery  in  private  investment  has  lagged  substantially  behind  the  overall 
economic recovery and that there is still much room for private investment to catch up and close the 
existing saving-investment gap. 
The good news is that we have already begun to see a gradual pick-up in capital spending. Private 
investment growth that was at a modest 4.7 percent in 2001 has accelerated to 13.3 percent in 2002 
and 17.5 percent in the first half of this year, and the share of real private investment to real GDP has 
also risen to 16 percent last quarter. But will this trend continue long enough to provide the needed 
fuel to sustain the current expansion? 
Economic forecasting, as I have now learned, is a tricky business, not the least with a highly volatile 
component like private investment. In assessing future investment trend, we at the Bank of Thailand 
look at key investment determinants, including the return, cost of capital, and confidence factors.  
Judging  from  the  recent  trend  as  well  as  outlook  for  each  of  the  determinants,  we  have  come  to 
conclude that the prospect of a continued and robust growth of capital spending is good. In terms of 
return, corporate profitability is up, and marginal return to new investment is likely to be on the rise in 
line with a steady increase in the capacity utilization rate. 
The low interest rate environment helps reduce the cost of capital as well as improve firms’ liquidity 
and  leverage  position.  Progress  on  corporate  debt  restructuring  and  the  budding  growth  of  bank 
credits  to  the  industrial  sector  are  also  likely  to  help  relax  firms’  financial  constraints  further.  This 
means easier acquisition of the funding for new projects. Moreover, business sentiment as measured 
by the Business Sentiment Index is on a general rebound. 
Therefore, barring no major disruptions to the recovery process coming from abroad, I expect private 
investment to come into the limelight, replacing private consumption as the main driver of growth in the 
period  to  come.  That  is  to  say,  in  terms  of  growth  drivers,  we  should  soon  graduate  from  the 
combination of export and consumption to the combination of export and investment.  
Ladies and gentlemen,   
It is against this background of economic recovery that the stance of monetary policy in the past two 
years has been accommodative, given the absence of inflationary pressure. Reflecting this, the policy 
interest rate has been cut gradually since late 2001 to help stimulate domestic demand, ease financial 
constraints of the corporate sector, and ensure an uninterrupted process of recovery. So far, the low 
interest rate environment has been instrumental in reinvigorating domestic demand and maintaining 
the  momentum  of  recovery.  Such  an  environment,  I  believe,  would  need  to  be  maintained  until  the 
expansion in consumption and exports was sustained enough to have led to a firmer pick-up in private 
investment. This, for the most part, has been a rationale behind our decision to lower interest rates 
given our strong external position and the absence of inflation.  
Ladies and gentlemen,   
To  recapture,  the  Thai  economy  has  managed  well  both  in  terms  of  growth  and  stability  amidst 
external  uncertainties  and  shocks  like  SARS.  The  recent  performance  reflects  to  a  large  extent 
favorable  ingredients  for  further  prosperity,  including  resilient  confidence,  robust  domestic  demand, 
and export competitiveness. It is fair to say that we have done well, but the true test of success is still 
down the road. At this juncture, it is important that we do not turn the corner to complacency but rather 
face the challenge of how to sustain or even raise growth slightly without creating problems in the long 
run. 
I have three challenges for us to think about. 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 3
First,  the  government  has  emphasized  the  importance  of  balancing  between  external  reliance  and 
domestic strength in order to mitigate the problem of over-dependence on the possibly volatile external 
demand. The government’s dual track policy aims to maintain global links between Thailand and her 
external  markets  while  also  creating  a  strong  and  broad-based  domestic  demand  especially  at  the 
grass-roots level. The merit of programs that reach out to the grass roots like the Village Fund and the 
People’s Bank is to help relax some of the financial constraints on low-income families which have had 
limited access to formal financial services.  
On the upside, more opportunities are being granted to the underprivileged, with long-term benefits 
hopefully  realized  in  the  form  of  greater  ability  to  earn  and  consume.  However,  overdoing  some  of 
these programs may induce households to assume too much risk and accumulate debt beyond their 
ability  to  service.  That  will  eventually  give  rise  to  loan  defaults  and  a  burden  on  the  government’s 
budget. 
At present, Thailand’s household debt is still considered low compared to other emerging countries. At 
the end of 2002, the ratio of Thailand’s household debt to GDP is only 27 percent, significantly lower 
than the ratios observed in other Asian economies. Moreover, this debt accumulation has taken place 
along with a steady increase in household income and asset, thus mitigating the risk of excessive debt 
burden.  
While the debt issue does not look to be serious for now, a build-up of household debt stock could 
imply that private consumption would likely to become more sensitive to interest rate changes. This 
would have a direct implication on monetary policy because even a small change in the policy rate 
could now have a large impact on GDP when households are highly leveraged. It is therefore prudent 
for  us  to  monitor  household  debt  closely  and  ensure  that  the  rise  in  household  leverage  is 
manageable. 
The  second  challenge  is  posed  by  the  slow  recovery  of  commercial  bank  credits.  Despite  some 
positive development, it is clear that credit expansion has not kept up with economic growth, and the 
intermediary process between depositors and investors is still clogged up. While it is true that many 
companies can now resort to other means of financing such as issuing debentures or drawing from 
their retained earnings, the banking sector is still by far the largest source of funds for the corporate 
sector and is likely to remain so for many more years. Thus, a dysfunctional banking sector can surely 
threaten to undermine the strength of the economic recovery.  
In  the  near  term,  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  as  well  as  non-performing  assets  (NPA)  must  be 
reduced more speedily, and indeed this has been one major focus of my work at the Bank of Thailand.  
Of the remaining 773 billion baht of NPL in the banking system at end-June 2003, over 400 billion are 
either in the court process or have completed the court process and in the legal execution process 
with assets awaiting to be liquidated. To speed up the process of asset sales and liquidation, we have 
proposed  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  carve  out  this  portion  of  the  NPLs  from  the  banks  by  an 
independent body that would be assigned the task of asset sales and liquidation. This proposal could 
become effective by early next year and the approach would greatly assist a speedy resolution of NPL 
problems. The remaining NPL of approximately 350 billion baht would not be a difficult problem for 
banks to handle, given the current low interest rate environment, the ongoing economic recovery, and 
improving bank profitability.  
As for the longer term, it is important that the banking system diversifies its services and reaches out 
to meet the needs of the rural population currently considered under-serviced by the industry. This will 
ensure  that  financial  constraints  will  not  remain  as  an  obstruction  to  a  broad-based  economic 
prosperity  of  Thailand.  The  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  which  has  been  drafted  by  the  Bank  of 
Thailand and is currently under the Ministry of Finance’s review, has looked closely at this important 
issue. 
And last but certainly not least, even when the Thai economy can manage to sustain growth, we are 
not  immune  from  new  challenges  and  risks  brought  about  by  globalization.  Outstanding  export 
performance,  strong  domestic  fundamentals,  and  continued  GDP  growth  will  unavoidably  attract 
foreign capital into the country and, as in the recent months, exert upward pressure on the currency. 
While the economy now enjoys a more flexible adjustment mechanism compared with the past, a huge 
influx of foreign capital relative to the size of domestic financial and capital markets can nevertheless 
cause  substantial  market  volatility  and,  if  persists,  can  even  lead  to  the  emergence  of  asset  price 
bubbles. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2003
Regarding the upward pressure on the baht, the Bank of Thailand has been monitoring the currency 
movements  closely  and  has  introduced  a  number  of  measures  to  ensure  that  the  adjustment  is 
orderly, in particularly that the exchange rate volatility is kept at a manageable level for the corporate 
sector. Let me emphasize here that the Bank of Thailand regards the current appreciation of the baht 
as a natural occurrence for an economy on the recovery and is not concerned with a trend movement 
that  is  in  line  with  improved  economic  fundamentals.  However,  with  realization  that  Thailand  has 
always been more open on the inward than the outward direction, we have taken this opportunity to 
liberalize  the  outflow  side  of  the  capital  account  to  make  things  a  bit  more  balanced.  With  this 
intention,  institutional  investors  have  been  permitted  to  invest  in  overseas  securities,  and  the 
establishment  of  mutual  funds  to  invest  on  behalf  of  local  individuals  in  Asian  Bonds  issued  by 
sovereign  and  quasi-sovereign  entities  has  also  been  encouraged.  Moreover,  the  allowed  holding 
period of foreign currency deposits was extended from 3 to 6 months.  
The important lesson here is that we cannot push away globalization. Instead, we must learn to cope 
with and understand it well enough to reap maximum benefit from such an open environment. At the 
same  time,  we  must  reinforce  our  own  immunity  system,  for  example,  by  strengthening  and 
broadening  the  domestic  sector  and  by  having  good  early  warning  indicators  so  that  large  capital 
fluctuations, should they occur, will not put a strain on the economy and impede our growth process. 
Appropriate policy mix regarding interest rate, exchange rate, and capital account liberalization thus 
remains an important challenge for the central bank. 
Ladies and gentlemen,   
I hope I have done my part today in sharing with you my assessment of the economy. My key point is 
that  the  economy  is  now  doing  better  in  terms  of  both  the  growth  prospects  and  macroeconomic 
stability,  and  has  the  potential  to  continue  to  do  well  in  the  next  year  as  the  global  economic 
environment  improves.  This  important  turnaround  has  come  about  through  a  combination  of  hard 
work, luck, and appropriate supportive policies, not to mention the progress that has been made on 
economic restructuring and reforms since the crisis.  
But most important perhaps has been the commitment, the spirit, and the confidence of our private 
sector that have helped steer the Thai economy through one of her most difficult periods. On this, the 
contribution from the organization and people like yourself has played no small part, and I would like 
very much to use this opportunity to acknowledge this.  
Going forward, the challenge is to translate the current momentum into a sustainable growth well into 
the  medium  term.  This,  as  I  noted  earlier,  would  require  a  continued  fostering  of  the  export  and 
consumption  expansion  so  that  capacity  utilization  could  increase  to  the  point  that  private  sector 
capital investment would gain an even firmer footing. 
During this period, monetary policy must remain supportive of the growth process. At the same time, 
we will continue to keep watchful eyes on certain areas of the economy that may expand too fast and 
impose risks to economic and financial stability. Should some of these excesses occur, however, the 
Bank of Thailand will make sure that appropriate measures will be employed to prevent and mitigate 
such risks.  
Ladies and gentlemen,   
Thank you for your attention. 
I think I would just stop now to give time for questions. I’ll do my best to answer any questions you 
may have. 
Thank you.  
 BIS Review 46/2003 
 5
