Burhanuddin Abdullah: Monetary and banking in Indonesia - developments and 
challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  to  the  Financial  Club,  Jakarta, 
21 August 2003. 
 Excellencies members of Indonesian Council of World Affairs 
Distinguished Guests, 
Colleagues and friends, 
Good afternoon, and Assalamua’alamualaikum wr wb.  
It is both a pleasure and an honor for me to be here today to speak before distinguished audience. Let 
me first thank you for inviting me, to share with you some of my thought regarding our current situation 
that could probably shape our future. If one ponders on our world today and tries to look back for a 
while to not too distant past, one may find himself in a bewildering circumstances. It seems that the 
past is to starkly different than that of today and that has no relevance with the present, let alone the 
future that we know nothing of. Our very existence at the present is in danger of detachment from our 
historical  root  of  yesterday.  And,  yet,  we  know  the  passage  of  time  is  a  continuous  events  that 
whatever the dynamic of transition in human endeavour, there is always element of continuity.  
What is the element of continuity of the economy in transition like the one in our country? Does this 
element of continuity need to be preserved as such that whatever the social dynamics, it has to be 
maintained at all cost? Time is the element of continuity for the evolutionary process of nature and 
macroeconomic  stability,  in  my  view,  is  the  element  of  continuity  for  the  Indonesian  economy  in 
transition. The stability is so important that whatever the cost to maintain it, we are ready to pay for it. 
It  is  so  important  simply  because  we  can  not  imagine  what  the  economy  can  do  without. 
Macroeconomic stability is the “word” of the day and macroeconomic stability is a regular preaching of 
central bankers. 
As a person who has been in the central bank for years, and so get used to the phrase “monetary 
stability” and/or “macroeconomic stability” that some time questioning the real meaning of these very 
words. Especially if we look around and see many of our fellow countryman are out of job and many 
more becoming parasites of our social web. Should we forego some degree of stability in return for 
employment opening or should we stick to it, and let the other authorities take care of employment 
issue. 
The mandate that was given to Bank Indonesia by its constitution is precisely “the maintenance of our 
monetary  stability”.  BI  is  no  longer  engage  in  lending  activities  known  as  liquidity  financing  to  be 
extended by our banking sector to a number of the so called “development program”. BI is no longer 
giving a bridging financing to government. The task of BI is so focused on maintaining stability, that it 
was  granted  independence  from  any  policy  interference  from  anybody.  BI  “has  no  function  in 
development”, but take care and nurture of the foundation of development, i.e., stability, without which 
there will be no development at all. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is within this mandate that BI is now trying to perform. In the past several months, we have been 
quite successful in curbing inflationary pressures.  As measured year-over-year, the inflation rate at 
the end of July fell to 5.79%.  This performance was largely due to the appreciation of the rupiah and 
slow growth in base money, in addition to favorable supply factors. For the year of 2003 as a whole, 
we are projecting an inflation rate of 5% to 6%, lower than our target of 9%. 
The  strengthened  rupiah  has  a  positive  impact  in  capping  inflation.  During  the  second  quarter,  the 
rupiah  appreciated  over  4%  from  the  previous  quarter.  After  falling  in  July  2003  when  the  Federal 
Reserve’s last cut US dollar interest rates, the rupiah has traded in a narrow band around Rp8,500. 
The appreciation of the rupiah during the first half of 2003 was associated with a positive sentiment 
towards  the  country,  illustrated  by  higher  dollar  inflows,  related  to  privatization,  the  sale  of  IBRA 
assets, and the upgrade of Indonesia credit rating by S&P from CCC+ to B-. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
I should add, however, that, despite the recent strengthening of the rupiah, the foreign exchange rate 
remains competitive relative to regional competing currencies, including the Thai baht, one of our main 
export competitors. 
The drop in inflationary expectations and the appreciation of the rupiah has allowed Bank Indonesia to 
pursue  a  monetary  policy  that  is  designed  to  facilitate  an  accelerated  recovery  process  by  guiding 
interest rates lower. The 1 month SBI rate declined 390 basis points from 12.93% at the end of 2002 
to  8.99%  on August 20.  This  has  been  accomplished  while  adhering  to  quantity  targeting, whereby 
Bank Indonesia controls growth in base money within an indicative target range. Throughout the year, 
the  growth  of  base  money  has  remained  within  target.    This  gives  us  confidence  that  we  will  be 
maintaining  the  growth  in  money  so  that  there  is  sufficient  liquidity  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  real 
economy, without risking a run-up in inflation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would now like to turn to the banking sector. 
Supported  by  improved  macro-monetary  conditions,  banking  sector  shows  stronger  condition.  This 
was reflected in a stronger capital structure, improved NPLs, stronger profitability and recovery in bank 
intermediation. All banks are now in compliance with the mandatory capital adequacy ratio of 8%. This 
has allowed the banking sector’s net income to grow as new credits extended have increased in the 
first half of the year and non-performing loans continue to remain under control with net NPLs reaching 
only 1.02% in June. 
Given the improved financial condition of the banking sector, the Government is in position to privatize 
banks to be owned other than by the government.  Among our major accomplishments in this area, 
have been the sales of BCA, and Bank Niaga, the privatization of Bank Danamon, and the initial public 
offering  of  20%  of  Bank  Mandiri.  The  Government  will  press  forward  with  the  divestment  of  the 
remaining  IBRA  banks  with  plans  to  sell  majority  stakes  in  Bank  Lippo  and  Bank  Internasionel 
Indonesia  by  November  of  this  year,  and  Bank  Permata  by  February  2004.  The  Government  also 
plans to sell 20% stake in the state-owned Bank Rakyat Indonesia in September of this year. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Despite  all  these  encouraging  development  in  the  area  of  monetary  and  financial  stability,  issues, 
challenges or even problem remains. These problems will remain with us for some time to come. The 
issues on the monetary front is on the mechanics and the cost of maintaining stability. In the banking 
front, reluctant intermediation process and maintaining financial stability in the new environment are 
the  most  pressing  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed.  On  a  wider  circumstances,  we  are  facing 
credibility issues in light of the upcoming separation from the IMF program. 
In  the  monetary  front,  the  challenge  is  rooted  in  the  slow  recovery  of  bank  intermediation  function. 
Bank  lending  is  still  limited  because  of  high  level  of  risks  and  uncertainty  and  the  large  number  of 
companies  still  undergoing  restructuring.  Credit  crunch  phenomenon  has  been  evidenced  and  the 
response of bank loan rates to the SBI policy interest rate is relatively slow and lagging.  
With slacking real sector and bank lending, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the real 
economy  and  inflation  faces  a  number  of  problems.  Since  the  economy  and  financial  sector  are 
undergoing  restructuring,  excess  liquidity  emerges  but  circulates  within  the  financial  markets  only, 
creating a structural breakdown between the real sector and financial system. This problem of excess 
liquidity, together with market segmentation amongst banks, has put greater risks on exchange rate 
volatility and difficulties in monetary management. In the condition of excess liquidity in banking sector 
and non-functioning intermediation, monetary policy is working just like “chasing our own tail”. Banks 
put their excess liquidity in central bank bills (SBIs) and in return BI has to pay interest on SBIs which 
means pumping in the liquidity in the banking sector.  
In  the  banking  sector,  one  of  the  main  challenges  is  to  recover  the  intermediation  function.  In  this 
regards,  Bank  Indonesia  has  created  the  conducive  environment  by  maintaining  monetary  stability 
thus  providing  room  for  lowering  interest  rates,  thereby  delivering  positive  signals  regarding  the 
economic recovery. The positive climate is also an opportunity for the banking sector to re-build its 
internal  condition  through  credit  restructuring  and  strengthening  its  capital  structure.  These  will 
encourage  an  expansion  of  bank  credits.  A  decline  in  interest  rates  has  given  businessmen  some 
reason for optimism in the prospects for recovery. Lower interest rates also provided an opportunity for 
the corporate sector to restructure its financial condition. In the face of limited bank financing, these 
conditions have provided wider room for reputable corporations to find alternative financing through 
bond issuance, both domestic and abroad. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
The Indonesian financial sector is challenged by seemingly possible countermeasure if the Anti Money 
Laundering Act does not conform to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) requirements. We believe 
that the amendment on the Anti Money Laundering Act is an important part in the efforts to maintain 
confidence in international financial transaction and trade and simultaneously improve good corporate 
governance  especially  by  increasing  transparency  of  banking  transaction.  In  this  regard,  Bank 
Indonesia  and  Indonesian  Financial  Transaction  Reports  and  Analysis  Centre  (PPATK)  has  been 
working closely with parliament to pass the amendment. 
Other issue that needs to be addressed is related with our decision to end the IMF program by the end 
of 2003. The real issues is not to continue or to stop the IMF program, but more on how we can cover 
the potential financial gap and credibility gap that might be stemmed from the decision. In addressing 
the  financial  gap  issue,  a  number  of  financing  alternatives  that  have  been  intensively  discussed. 
However, to find the solution for the potential credibility gap, I must remind all of us that it will take 
more than just a solid program. Credibility can only be built if we can develop a credible program and 
at the same time be consistently and strictly adhere to it.  
Bank  Indonesia  has  been  working  closely  with  the  Government  in  developing  our  own  economic 
program to replace the program currently stated in the IMF Letter of Intent. With the support from all of 
us,  we are confident  that we  can  and we  will  be  able  to  obediently  and  consistently  implement  the 
program.  For  monetary  policy,  we  are  in  the  process  of  preparing  the  new  framework  of  monetary 
policy,  i.e.,  inflation  targeting  framework.  This  framework  provides  clarity  in  our  objective  and 
consistency in our monetary policy to pursue price stability, thereby gradually improve credibility.  
In  banking  sector,  to  maintain  financial  system  stability  and  improve  governance  in  banking  sector, 
Bank Indonesia is currently in the process of preparing Indonesia’s Banking Architecture (API) that can 
be used as a comprehensive and forward-looking platform for banking policy. The Indonesian Banking 
Architecture  vision  is  to  create  a  sound,  strong  and  efficient  banking  system  to  preserve  financial 
system stability  and  stimulate  national economic  development.  The  new architecture  consists of  six 
pillars, as follow: 
• 
A sound domestic banking structure with the capacity to meet public needs and to stimulate 
sustainable national economic development. 
A  strong  banking  industry  that  is  highly  competitive  and  has  a  solid  core  capable  of 
absorbing shocks. 
Good corporate governance as means to strengthen banks’ internal condition 
Effective banking supervision and regulations, consistent with the international standards. 
A  complete  infrastructure  in  supporting  sound  banking  industry,  including  preparation  for 
more sophisticated technology in line with a more sophisticated financial transaction.  
Consumer protection and empowerment. 
   Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Before closing my remarks, let me figure out the outlook of our economy. Looking forward to 2004, we 
will  continue  to  strengthen  our  macroeconomic  fundamentals  to  be  the  basis  for  stronger  growth  in 
2004  onward.  While  monetary  policy  will  remain  prudent,  as  both  the  inflation  rate  and  the  risk 
premium  decline,  fiscal  policy  will  stay  focused  on  achieving  sustainability.  This  will  require  further 
steps to increase revenue collection and improve access to financing. But as the recovery continues 
we can begin to look forward to strategic investments to improve the welfare of the people and support 
the development of the economy. 
Good macroeconomic management, however, is not enough to sustain high rates of economic growth. 
High growth requires structural reforms to make the economy more efficient. Such reform programs 
that  the  Government  is  undertaking  include  the  strengthening  of  legal  infrastructure,  improving 
governance  and  increasing  transparency  in  both  public  and  private  sectors.  The  purpose  of  the 
program that we have developed is not reform for reform sake, but to restore investor’s confidence in 
Indonesia. 
We  fully  expect  our  macroeconomic  policy,  coupled  with  the  consistent  implementation  of  our 
structural reform, will allow economic growth to reach 4% this year and will establish the base of real 
growth of 6% over the medium-term.  
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
We do hope our efforts will improve the welfare of our society as a whole.  
May God bless us.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2003
