Toshihiko Fukui: Restructuring Japan's economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Naigai  Josei  Chousa  Kai 
(Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 28 October  2003. 
 The foundation for a gradual recovery in Japan's economy is being laid as the environment for exports 
and business sentiment have improved. This development occurs against the background of a cyclical 
rebound  in  global  demand  for  IT-related  goods  as  well  as  the  progress  of  structural  adjustment, 
including the improvement of corporate profitability.  
Structural  adjustment  of  Japan's  economy  is  but  halfway  complete,  and  many  issues  remain  to  be 
resolved.  Persistent  adjustment  pressures  have  weighed  heavily  on  the  self-sustaining  recovery  of 
domestic demand, which needs to be duly taken into account in the conduct of monetary policy.  
Under such circumstances, the Bank of Japan will continue to firmly maintain its quantitative easing 
policy until the consumer price index registers stably zero percent or an increase year on year. We 
think it important to ensure that the current nascent economic recovery is put on a sustainable path. In 
this regard, on October 10, the Bank decided to take such measures as raising the upper limit of the 
target balance of current accounts in the interest of more flexible and timely monetary operations.  
We need to put the issues facing Japan's economy, including structural adjustment, into a historical 
perspective that encompasses such issues as globalization and the maturity of Japan's society and 
economy.  Hence,  today  I  would  like  to  look  back  upon  the  process  of  structural  adjustment  in  the 
Japanese economy, and address current problems with a focus on three key concepts, "value added," 
"risk" and "sustainability."  
I. 
The Path to Date of the Japanese Economy  
High Economic Growth  
A. 
Let me start by reviewing the high economic growth period between 1955 and 1970. During this 15-
year period, real GDP almost quadrupled with an annual growth rate of nearly 10 percent. Such high 
growth was only possible because of the potential endowed to Japan's economy as well as favorable 
historical and geographical conditions at that time.  
Japan's  endowment  included  a  relatively  high  technological  capacity  and  a  diligent  work  force. 
Moreover, it was willing to absorb technology and culture from abroad. Japan's potential in this regard 
was evidenced by the rapid industrialization after the Meiji Restoration and the subsequent economic 
development.  
In terms of historical and geographical conditions, it should be noted that because the Cold War put a 
number of countries under the influence of communism, Japan could continue to play the role of "the 
world's factory" in the market economies during the period from the late 1950s to the end of the 1960s. 
Furthermore, Japan increased its business fixed investment at a rapid pace because World War II had 
erased a large amount of domestic capital stock.  
The period of high economic growth in Japan coincided with the baby boomers' entrance into the labor 
force.  In  fact,  the  labor  force  increased  from  about  40  million  in  1955  to  about  50  million  in  1970. 
Furthermore, population growth around that time followed a bell-shaped curve, which led to a relatively 
light  burden  being  imposed  by  the  pension  and  other  social  security  systems  compared  to  other 
industrialized countries.  
Shift to a Floating Exchange Rate System and the Two Oil Shocks  
B. 
From  the  1970s  through  the  early  1980s,  the  Japanese  economy  experienced  several  major 
disturbances, including the revaluation of the yen triggered by the "Nixon Shock" and the subsequent 
shift  to  a  floating  exchange  rate  system,  and  the  two  oil  shocks.  In  particular,  the  First  Oil  Shock 
combined with the excess liquidity of the time to produce rapid inflation.  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
In contrast, Japan managed to overcome the Second Oil Shock smoothly, perhaps we can say the 
most smoothly among the industrialized countries. Behind this was not only a timely macroeconomic 
policy response, but also the fact that Japanese industry, having learned the lesson of the First Oil 
Shock, actively improved energy efficiency. As a result of these efforts, Japan's economy became the 
least dependent on oil among the industrialized countries, and at the same time succeeded in making 
energy-efficient technology a new source of value added. This can be cited as a classic example of 
Japan turning a problem to be overcome into a source of strength by using its technological capability. 
The success of Japan's economy in overcoming the Second Oil Shock contributed relatively smoothly 
to raising its international reputation.  
Stronger Yen and the Emergence of the Bubble Economy  
C. 
In the latter half of the 1980s, the Plaza Agreement triggered the large-scale correction of the strong 
U.S. dollar at the time, and Japan experienced a period of economic stagnation caused by the yen's 
appreciation. This stagnation, however, ended rather quickly, and, as is well known, what followed was 
economic expansion accompanied by asset price bubbles.  
The coexistence of high economic growth and low inflation throughout this period suggested gains in 
productivity, and we observed widespread optimism that Japan had overcome the adverse effect of 
not only the oil shocks but also the yen's appreciation. In reality, however, many structural adjustments 
were  simply  postponed,  in  contrast  to  the  period  of  the  oil  shocks  during  which  a  strong  sense  of 
imminent crisis had speeded the adjustment process.  
During this period, the environment surrounding the Japanese economy had already begun to change 
significantly.  The  Cold  War  structure  had  begun  to  be  dismantled,  as  captured  most  vividly  in  the 
pulling down of the Berlin Wall, and the industrialization of emerging economies continued to move 
forward.  As  shown  by  these  facts,  the  conditions  surrounding  Japan's  economy  began  to  undergo 
such sea changes as globalization and intensified competition.  
These  changes  should  have  brought  about  the  strengthening  of  corporate  earnings  power  and  the 
efficient reallocation of resources through active entry into and exit from markets and industries. Rising 
asset  prices  and  overheated  domestic  demand,  however,  distorted  various  signals  for  economic 
adjustment and weakened investment discipline. Rather, a large amount of business fixed investment 
was made based on an excessively optimistic outlook for demand. In this, we can detect the source of 
the future problems, such as excess capacity, excess debt, and excess labor.  
On the financial front, intensified global competition should have led to development of the market for 
financial  intermediation,  which  would  have  supported  the  entry  of  companies  into  markets  and 
industries and promoted more careful evaluation of the risk and return profiles of various projects. The 
latter half of the 1980s should have been a period during which financial intermediation progressed 
from a bilateral transaction basis to a market transaction basis.  
The rise in asset prices, however, expanded bank lending using real estate as collateral, the classical 
bilateral transaction type of financial intermediation. When asset prices finally began to fall, expanded 
bank  lending  created  the  nonperforming-loan  (NPL)  problem,  which  has  adversely  affected  the 
economy since the early 1990s. And households became quite hesitant to provide risk capital when 
they observed scandals involving securities companies and the large volatility of stock prices.  
The  birth  rate  declined  sharply  from  1.81  in  1984  to  1.54  in  1990,  leading  to  the  rapid  graying  of 
society. Of course, there are a variety of factors behind this. One of them seems to have been the rise 
in the number of women playing an active role in the workplace. With a great many companies still 
adhering to such employment practices as the seniority system, taking time off from work to raise a 
child often became a decision with serious consequences. Thus, the institutional set-up did not lend 
itself to checking the declining birth rate.  
In  spite  of  these  demographic  changes,  the  pension  and  other  social  security  systems  remained 
largely based on the bell-shaped population curve.  
As far as the structure of public finance is concerned, both the United States and the United Kingdom 
made progress toward "a smaller and more efficient government" under severe economic conditions 
during the latter half of the 1980s. In direct contrast, Japan enjoyed an increase in tax revenues due to 
the overheated economy and higher asset prices, which led to a delay in reviewing the structure of 
public expenditure.  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
II. 
Restructuring Japan's Economy  
Economic Stagnation since the 1990s  
A. 
Since  the  1990s  began,  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  and  the  progress  of  IT  have  brought  about  an 
acceleration  in  the  globalization  of  market  economies.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  Japanese 
economy has been put under very severe adjustment pressures on a number of fronts, including the 
deflationary  impact  caused  by  the  bursting  of  the  asset  bubbles  and  intensified  competition  with 
emerging economies.  
These adjustment pressures may be divided into three broad categories.  
The  first  is  the  adjustment  pressure  that  has  emerged  as  the  result  of  various  excesses during  the 
bubble  period  and  their  subsequent  bursting.  The  problems  of  excess  capacity,  excess  debt,  and 
excess labor of the corporate sector as well as the NPL problem of financial institutions fall into this 
category.  These  problems  have  exerted  downward  pressure  on  domestic  demand  and  adversely 
affected financial system stability.  
The second is the adjustment pressure stemming from broad changes in economic conditions such as 
market  globalization  and  domestic  demographic  changes.  While  preserving  the  high-cost  structure 
created during the high economic growth and the bubble periods, Japan has begun to face intensified 
competition  from  neighboring  East  Asian  economies,  which  have  been  growing  at  a  fast  tempo 
recently.  The  rapidly  changing  structure  of  the  Japanese  population  has  also  suppressed  expected 
future growth.  
The  third  category  is  the  adjustment  pressure  resulting  from  the  need  to  overhaul  the  institutional 
infrastructure, including the legal system, the structure of public finance, and the pension and other 
social security systems, with a view to making the infrastructure more responsive to the needs of a 
mature society and economy.  
Progress in Corporate-Sector Adjustment  
B. 
Although many problems remain to be resolved, it should be noted that Japanese companies have 
been  making  steady,  albeit  gradual,  progress  in  some  areas.  In  fact,  many  companies  have  made 
efforts to reduce their debt overhang by restraining business fixed investment as well as cutting labor 
costs, in order to improve their earnings power.  
The  larger  the  original  adjustment  pressure,  the  greater  energy  and  longer  time  these  efforts  will 
require.  A  reduction  in  investment  and  labor  costs  is  indispensable  for  companies  to  recover  their 
earnings  power.  If  aggregated,  however,  such  reduction  will  work  to  exert  downward  pressure  on 
domestic demand and thus hinder the recovery of overall business conditions.  
I think the efforts of companies to restructure their businesses have finally begun to bear fruit recently. 
Corporate profits have been increasing since last fiscal year. At present, the ratio of current profits to 
sales  has  approached  almost  its  highest  level  since  the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  This  implies  that 
Japanese  companies  have  been  succeeding  in  lowering  the  break-even  point  by  restructuring  and 
adapting their business structure so that they can secure profits even when sales are sluggish.  
Search for New Business Models  
C. 
Japan's proximity to rapidly growing East Asia has an interesting implication from the viewpoint of the 
corporate  response  to  changes  in  the  global  environment.  On  one  hand,  such  proximity  exerts  a 
strong impact on competition and prices through the inflow of less expensive imports. On the other 
hand, it strengthens the competitiveness of domestic industries rather quickly.  
Although  Japanese  companies  are  significantly  handicapped  by  higher  labor  costs  compared  with 
companies  in  East  Asia  and  other  emerging  economies,  many  export  items,  such  as  electrical 
machinery and transportation equipment, still maintain strong international competitiveness, and the 
trade surplus remains. Behind this, Japanese companies have been producing high value added by 
creating  new  business  models  through  a  combination  of  their  own  technology,  quality  control 
expertise,  the  production  capability  of  East  Asian  economies,  and  the  ability  in  terms  of  design  to 
respond to consumer needs in various countries.  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 3
In the domestic market, including the nonmanufacturing sector, new business models have emerged 
in  which  overseas  production  and  distribution  channels  are  consolidated.  Some  of  the  products 
created under such new business models are beginning to attract consumers and gain market share.  
Institutional and Legal Measures  
D. 
It should be noted that institutional and legal measures have been taken, which allow active entry and 
exit as well as intensified consolidation of the corporate sector.  
For example, in dealing with the bankruptcy and reconstruction of companies, it is important to make 
use of market discipline and create a framework that maximizes the interests of all concerned, while 
retaining the value of companies on a going-concern basis to the greatest possible extent. In line with 
this view, enactment of the Civil Rehabilitation Law and other adjustments to the legal framework have 
been  effected,  and  legal  procedures  expedited.  In  the  area  of  corporate  law,  revision  has  been 
undertaken to help firms reorganize more easily.  
For  financial  system  stability,  various  safety  nets,  such  as  the  establishment  of  a  framework  for 
injecting public funds into financial institutions, have been improved in light of the difficulties that we 
have faced since the 1990s.  
Current Economic Situation 
E. 
Progress in restructuring seems to be having a positive effect on the current economic situation.  
As I stated at the outset, the foundation for a recovery is now being laid. Corporate profits have been 
increasing, and business fixed investment has shown signs of improvement. Exports are once again 
on the rise, particularly in the IT-related goods area. Uneasiness surrounding the financial system has 
also subsided compared to some time ago.  
Some argue that if prices started falling, corporate profits would be squeezed due to the downward 
rigidity  of  nominal  wages,  and  there  would  be  a  high  probability  of  a  deflationary  spiral  emerging. 
Actual experience, however, reveals that Japanese companies have adjusted nominal wages rather 
flexibly  and  increased  profits.  Private  consumption  remains  flat,  with  the  decrease  in  household 
income being offset by an increase in the propensity to consume.  
I believe that an autonomous adjustment mechanism in Japan's economy has been functioning. This 
fact has significant implications for the conduct of macroeconomic policy.  
III. 
Key Issues and Outlook for Japan's Economy  
Structural Issues  
A. 
The  Japanese  economy  still  faces  a  number  of  structural  issues,  which  it  is  striving  to  overcome. 
These may be summarized as follows.  
The first issue is the reallocation of economic resources to improve the efficiency of the economy and 
foster the development of leading industries for the next generation. This may be a necessary process 
of dealing with the legacy of the bubble economy and strengthening the underlying business structure. 
But, at the same time, it may create a problem in that the domestic capital equipment of Japanese 
companies  will  become  obsolete  relative  to  that  of  other  major  countries.  Thus,  once  Japanese 
companies recover their earnings power to a certain extent, their next challenge will be to make their 
capital equipment more productive through new investments.  
Many  Japanese  companies  have  also  reduced  labor  costs  by  restraining  the  hiring  of  new  regular 
employees. Such labor restructuring tends to put an undue burden on the younger generation, and 
entails  the  risk  that  the  vitality  of  the  economy  might  be  impaired  if  the  situation  persists  and  the 
younger generation's willingness to participate in the labor force diminishes. Thus, it is imperative to 
enhance labor market flexibility not only at the level of individual companies but also through the entire 
economy, and expand job opportunities for the younger generation.  
The  second  key  issue  is  the  reactivation  of  the  financial  intermediary  function.  This  includes 
overcoming the NPL problem and improving the infrastructure of market-based credit intermediation. 
Although steady progress has been made, there still remains a fairly long way to go before we feel 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2003
confident that the NPL problem is fully resolved. The complete removal of blanket deposit insurance is 
still  being  postponed.  Market-based  credit  intermediation,  which  can  function  as  a  substitute  or 
complement for bank lending, has not yet fully developed.  
The  third  issue  is  to  redesign  various  systems  so  that  they  adapt  to  the  needs  of  a  new  age.  In 
particular,  it  is  an  urgent  task  for  Japan  to  reform  various  systems,  including  the  social  security 
systems,  the  national  tax  system,  and  the  relationship  between  the  central  government  and  local 
governments.  
Redesigning these systems tends to raise the conflict of interest problem among generations. During a 
high-growth period such as that experienced in the past, a compromise solution to this problem can be 
found relatively easily as the economy is expanding. Recently, however, it is increasingly difficult to 
resolve the conflict based on the premise of economic expansion.  
Importance of Creating Value Added  
B. 
Although these issues are not easy to overcome, let me offer a few comments regarding the key to the 
solution.  
The  first  is  the  need  for  Japan  to  strengthen  its  ability  to  create  value  added  in  various  areas.  Of 
course,  creating  value  added  is  not  limited  to  the  economic  problem,  but  also  includes  more 
comprehensive  concepts  such  as  cultural  and  political  activities.  Here,  I  would  like  to  focus  my 
remarks mostly on value added related to the economic problem.  
As a country becomes richer and the people's standard of living improves, labor costs tend to rise. For 
continued  economic  prosperity,  it  is  thus  vital  whether  or  not  Japan  can  create  high  value  added 
comparable to the increase in labor costs. In addition, the nation's total population is expected to start 
declining from around 2006 and hence we cannot expect much contribution from the population front 
to future economic growth. This is an added reason why raising the capacity to create value added is 
such a pressing item on the agenda.  
This agenda must be achieved in the context of globalization. Globalization means that the division of 
labor proliferates globally. In this regard, we must ask ourselves seriously in what area Japan should 
play a role in creating value added.  
With the advancement of the IT revolution, the costs of obtaining and duplicating information across 
borders have been significantly reduced. Thus, producing similar items will not yield high value, which 
naturally leads to limited profit opportunities. At the same time, precisely because of the advance of IT, 
if unique items are somehow produced, they can easily be spread globally. Under such circumstances, 
it becomes very important to produce things unique to Japan or things that only Japan can produce.  
I believe that Japan has sufficient capability to continue creating unique items, at least in the economic 
area, and is equipped with several advantages.  
Since World War II, Japanese manufacturers have applied their advanced technologies exclusively to 
nonmilitary rather than military use. This has been one of the major features distinguishing Japan's 
application of advanced technology compared with the United States and European countries.  
There is no country other than Japan that is more enthusiastic about applying advanced technology to 
every  corner  of  daily  life.  Examples  include  not  only  automobiles,  home  appliances,  ticket  vending 
machines and passenger gates, but also mobile phones with Internet and photographic functions and 
digital cameras.  
In the context of emerging economies with large populations, people's lives are increasingly affected 
by  new  technologies  such  as  IT  as  their  economies  develop.  In  this  regard,  the  technologies 
developed and applied to daily life in Japan may make large contributions to emerging economies.  
This may be particularly applicable to the case of East Asian countries, which are geographically close 
to  Japan.  Japanese  consumers  are  said  to  be  among  the  most  demanding  in  the  world.  If  we  can 
effectively combine Japan's technology and expertise, which are approved in the demanding domestic 
market,  with  the  production  capability  and  local  consumer  demand  in  East  Asian  countries, 
geographical proximity as well as historical and cultural linkage with Asian countries will likely work to 
Japan's advantage. We have already seen some signs of such a combination materializing.  
Let me digress a little and touch briefly on a serious question of whether the world economy from the 
21st century onward is sustainable in view of the energy and environmental problem. Recently, strong 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 5
interest has been expressed with respect to the development of recyclable energy and the restraint of 
carbon dioxide emissions. Considering the size of the economy and the tempo of growth in Asia, it is 
highly likely that Asia will be the first region to face squarely the question of whether or not the global 
economy is sustainable.  
Measures  to  deal  with  the  energy  and  environmental  problem  should  not  be  considered  simply  in 
terms of costs. From the viewpoint of maintaining the sustainability of the global economy in the future, 
these measures are in themselves a source of value added. As I mentioned earlier, the experience of 
overcoming  the  Second  Oil  Shock  allowed  Japan  to  find  a  new  source  of  value  added  in  energy 
efficiency  and  environmental  protection  technology.  I  am  confident  that  we  can  make  use  of  such 
value added in a variety of areas.  
As  long  as  there  remain  issues  to  be  resolved  and  needs  to  be  addressed,  we  have  infinite 
opportunities to create value added.  
Risk-Resilient Financial Intermediation System  
C. 
My second comment concerns the need to provide a framework sufficient to support private economic 
agents in their efforts to find and develop these opportunities. In this regard, dealing with risks involved 
in economic activity is an extremely important issue.  
Since  it  is  impossible  to  fully  forecast  the  future,  economic  activity  to  produce  value  added  will 
inevitably entail uncertainty. When adequate measures for dealing with the uncertainty are in place, 
economic  agents  can  launch  forward-looking  plans  with  confidence.  Creating  value  added  and 
managing risks are in fact two sides of the same coin.  
The  framework  for  the  diversification  of  risks  among  economic  agents  has  been  developed  as 
fundamental infrastructure for economic development. For instance, modern corporate law, based on 
the  idea  of  limited  liability  of  shareholders,  can  be  regarded  as  the  framework  that  enables  risks 
pertaining  to  economic  activity  to  be  absorbed  by  a  wide  range  of  economic  agents.  Undoubtedly, 
these systems have played an important role in supporting economic development in many countries 
in the modern era.  
In the coming age in which risks pertaining to economic activity will grow as globalization advances, 
financial  intermediation  systems  will  play  a  very  important  role  in  constructing  a  framework  for  the 
efficient diversification of risks and their absorption by the overall economy.  
Companies and other economic agents diversify risks stemming from economic activity by combining 
various  means  of  financing.  Financial  institutions  make  judgments  about  how  to  provide  the  best 
financial  services  by  examining  the  profitability  and  risk  of  economic  activity.  If  such  judgments 
together with those of investors are eventually revealed in market prices such as lending rates and 
bond yields, economic activity will be disciplined and the efficient allocation of resources achieved.  
For  the  efficient  reallocation  of  resources  in  an  economy  as  a  whole,  the  financial  intermediation 
system must be capable of appropriately evaluating profitability and risks, and such evaluation must 
be duly reflected in lending rates and credit spreads.  
When an economy is experiencing high growth, financial institutions need not pay much attention to 
the ability to evaluate profitability and risks, because risks can be absorbed rather easily through larger 
revenues if these institutions maintain a certain volume of assets. Market financing may tend to remain 
as the secondary source of funding.  
When  an  economy  moves  to  a  new  stage  with  an  intensified  competition  and  metabolism,  we 
commonly observe the active entry and exit of companies as well as the transformation of business 
models.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  financial  intermediation  system  must  be  equipped  with  a 
strong  capability  to  deal  with  risks,  and  needs  to  contribute  to  improving  the  power  to  create  value 
added  through  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Toward  this  end,  financial  institutions  will  be 
severely  tested  in  their  ability  to  evaluate  credit  risks,  develop  new  financial  services,  and  manage 
risks. In addition, it is vital to develop market-based financial transactions, which enable a variety of 
investments to be evaluated by multiple investors.  
Fairness  
D. 
My  third  comment  concerns  the  need  for  fairness.  This  is  the  key  concept  for  resolving  conflicts  of 
interest in the reform process of various systems by balancing benefits and burdens.  
6 
 BIS Review 46/2003
In the process of reforming such systems to adapt to economic maturity, we cannot avoid a conflict of 
interest to a certain extent. When economic growth is decelerating, it becomes increasingly difficult to 
avoid such a conflict.  
For example, pension system reform is a kind of agenda that inevitably creates a conflict of interest 
among  generations.  Individual  economic  agents  tend  to  focus  on  their  own  benefits  and  burdens 
rather than the adverse effect on the economy due to the delay in reforming the system. This makes it 
difficult to forge a consensus for the necessary reform.  
Under  such  circumstances,  we  need  to  be  aware  of  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the  fairness 
between  benefits  and  burdens  is  maintained  when  we  try  to  reach  nationwide  agreement  on  the 
revision of the social security system, tax system and other economic systems.  
In addition, a blueprint needs to be developed showing what kind of society and economy Japan aims 
at,  and  a  consensus  must  be  obtained.  Then,  we  must  strive  to  effect  policies  consistent  with  the 
blueprint.  
Concluding Remarks  
IV. 
Before concluding, allow me to mention three points that need to be borne in mind when conducting 
monetary policy in light of the issues faced by the Japanese economy.  
First, maintaining price stability, which is the fundamental mission of the Bank. Economic agents will 
pay increasing attention to the problem of uncertainty stemming from global economic activity. In this 
regard,  it  is  important  to  make  price  stability  an  anchor  for  the  economy  and  remove  the  largest 
impediment  to  people's  activity  to  create  value  added.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  the  Bank  continues  to 
work to overcome deflation, which is the most pressing item on the agenda.  
Second, maintaining financial system stability. The meaning of financial system stability has evolved 
over  time.  During  the  high  growth  period,  the  convoy  system  was  the  norm,  in  which  the  primary 
objective was to prevent exit from the industry by restricting competition among financial institutions. 
Now, financial institutions are required to perform efficient funds intermediation, while strengthening 
their  ability  to  evaluate  profitability  and  risks  as  well  as  improving  their  risk  management  capability 
through  competition.  Systemic  risk  must  be  contained.  Thus,  both  active  risk-taking  and  financial 
system stability are necessary.  
The  financial  system  in  Japan  is  still  on  the  path  to  revitalization,  and  the  risk-taking  capability  of 
financial institutions is not yet sufficient. Financial institutions need to accelerate their efforts by April 
2005 when the blanket guarantee of deposit insurance will be completely lifted. In light of the various 
demands of the new era, the Bank aims to enhance prudential policy as well as the conduct of on-site 
examinations and off-site monitoring.  
The  third  issue  is  how  to  improve  the  financial  market.  In  the  new  economy  in  which  companies 
compete  in  creating  value  added,  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  needs  of  the  time  and  the 
evaluation of one's own business model from the "signals" transmitted by various markets. The market 
mechanism serves as an "antenna" and enforces discipline, which is indispensable for the Japanese 
economy's future prosperity.  
Looking  at  this  from  a  financial  standpoint,  financial  institutions  need  to  strengthen  their  risk-taking 
ability.  At  the  same  time,  we  require  a  framework  in  which  the  optimum  allocation  of  resources  is 
realized through the markets.  
The  Bank  aims  to  contribute  actively  to  this  end.  Since  lending  by  financial  institutions  is  an 
overwhelming  part  of  the  financial  intermediation channel,  it  is  both  pragmatic  and  effective  to  start 
developing new credit markets, including a market for asset securitization. Accordingly, the Bank has 
already begun to implement concrete measures along this line.  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 7
