Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: The Central Bank of Iceland and monetary policy 
Address by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, to a meeting of the 
Reykjavík Rotary Club, Reykjavík, 27 August 2003. 
 I  have  been  invited  to  discuss  here  the  economic  and  monetary  situation  and  prospects  from  the 
perspective  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland.  Before  turning  to  that  subject  I  believe  I  should  devote 
some discussion to the monetary policy framework which has been in place since March 2001. My 
reason  for  doing  so  is  the  misunderstanding,  which  still  often  arises  in  public  debate,    about  the 
Central Bank’s role and its possibilities for influencing specific aspects of the economy. What I have to 
say on that point, it seems, cannot  be stated too often. 
Iceland’s monetary framework was altered in March 2001 when the Government and the Central Bank 
issued a joint declaration adopting inflation targeting as the anchor of monetary policy. 
The  chief  characteristic  of  this  arrangement  is  that  price  stability  is  the  main  objective  of  monetary 
policy. It has also been declared that inflation will be kept within certain limits over a specific period. 
The  Central Bank  is  granted  independence  to  attain  this  target  with  the  instruments at  its  disposal. 
Other  aspects  of  the  new  framework  include  increased  transparency  in  monetary  policy  and 
communication  of  information  from  the  Central  Bank  to  the  public  and  government.  The  number  of 
countries that have adopted an inflation target for their monetary policy implementation has increased 
sharply after New Zealand introduced such a policy in February 1990. In all, 21 countries have now 
moved  onto  a  formal  inflation  target,  including  Canada,  the  UK,  Norway,  Sweden,  Switzerland  and 
Australia. In most countries this has greatly stimulated discussion of monetary policy; central banking 
and  central  bank  policies  and  measures  are  more  in  the  spotlight  and  public  debate  than  before, 
although of course opinions about them are divided as ever. 
One  consequence  of  this  policy  is  that  exchange  rate  stability  is  no  longer  the  anchor  of  monetary 
policy.  This  is  not  because  the  exchange  rate  of  any  currency  is  a  lightweight  factor  in  economic 
developments;  rather,  experience  has  shown  that  in  a  climate  of  unrestricted  cross-border  capital 
flows, central bank instruments are inadequate for maintaining a stable exchange rate. When cross-
border capital flows are unrestricted, a central bank’s primary instrument is interest rates, which in the 
long run can only attain a single macroeconomic goal, i.e. ensuring price stability. It has turned out that 
other countries have benefited from adopting such a framework. 
It  was  in  light  of  this  international  experience  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  monetary  policy 
framework was changed two years ago and formal inflation targeting was adopted. Accordingly, the 
Central  Bank  is  obliged  to  aim  towards  an  annual  rate  of  inflation  which,  measured  in  terms  of  the 
increase in the Consumer Price Index over a twelve-month period, should generally be as close as 
possible  to  2½%.  Inflation  targeting  was  introduced  in  a  climate  where  the  economy  was  severely 
overheating. For this reason an adjustment period was set whereby the Central Bank should aim to 
attain the inflation target by no later than the end of 2003. In fact, this target had already been reached 
in November 2002. Now I shall turn to last year’s inflation developments in more detail. 
In  2001  inflation climbed  rapidly,  from 5.6%  at  the beginning of the  year  and  hit  a  peak  of  9.4%  in 
January 2002. Last year, inflation slowed down steadily: it has been below the Central Bank’s target 
since  November  and  around  2%  over  the  past  four  months.  In  the  beginning  of  August  2003  the 
twelve-month  rise  in  the  CPI  measured  2%.  While  the  CPI  is  used  as  the  official  inflation  rate 
reference,  two  other  indices  are  published,  core  indices  which  provide  a  clearer  picture  of  the 
underlying rate of inflation. The core indices exclude price components that are either fairly volatile or 
more or less beyond the impact of monetary policy, or that reflect relative price changes that monetary 
policy should normally not respond to. Core Index I excludes prices of vegetables, fruit, agricultural 
products  and  petrol,  and  Core  Index  II  excludes  prices  of  public  services  as  well.  Over  the  past 
12 months, Core Index I has risen by 2.7% and Core Index II by 2.4%. Underlying inflation is therefore 
somewhat closer than the CPI to the Central Bank’s target. 
It  is  interesting  to  examine  the  development  of  individual  components  of  the  CPI.  The  housing 
component, for example, has risen by 13.6% over the past 12 months and the upward trend shows no 
sign of coming to an end. Public service prices have also had a considerable impact on the CPI over 
the past 12 months, but the rate of increase has slowed down. Measures taken to forestall an inflation-
BIS Review 45/2003 
 1
triggered national wage review in 2002 included a freeze on public service prices, which was relaxed 
when the risk connected with exceeding negotiated inflation ceilings had abated. There has also been 
a slowdown in the twelve-month rise in private services, which are highly sensitive to domestic wage 
increases. 
On  the  whole,  goods  are  more  sensitive  than  many  other  index  components  to  changes  in  the 
exchange  rate.  Last  year’s  strengthening  of  the  króna  is  clearly  reflected  in  goods  prices,  with  a 
significant drop in import prices. In 2003 prices of both imported and domestic goods have fluctuated 
somewhat. 
For decades, a far too high rate of inflation was one of Iceland’s main economic problems. This had an 
adverse  effect  on  businesses,  making  effective  planning  difficult.  It  also  had  an  adverse  effect  on 
households, partly because a large proportion of household debt is indexed to inflation. It is certainly a 
welcome achievement for the Icelandic economy to have triumphed over inflation. I sometimes think 
people  take  inflation  rather  too  lightly  and  some  of  them  feel  that  too  much  effort  is  devoted  to 
constraining it. This may be normal, since the business community is now dominated by generations 
who do not know inflation at first hand and perhaps therefore fail to realise the great problems that 
accompany it. I would caution against such views and feel that the same principles apply to Iceland as 
to other industrialised countries with which we tend to compare ourselves, namely that a low rate of 
inflation  is  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  economic  growth  and  public  welfare  and  the  Central  Bank 
should therefore continue to have price stability as its main goal, as stipulated in current legislation, 
the Central Bank Act of 2001. 
As I pointed out earlier, the new monetary framework involved abandoning the fixed exchange rate 
regime,  and  instead  the  króna  was  floated  and  determined  by  market  forces.  A  foreign  exchange 
market had been established in Iceland in 1993 and the Central Bank was supposed to maintain the 
exchange  rate  within  a  relatively  narrow  target  band  of    2¼%  in  either  direction  around  the  central 
value of the króna. With increasing exchange rate deregulation the target band was gradually widened 
and  set  at  9%  in  either  direction  in  the  beginning  of  2000.  No  one  doubts  for  a  moment  that  the 
exchange  rate  of  the  króna  is  crucial  for  the  economy,  through  its  major  effect  on  prices  and 
profitability in the traded goods sector. There has been a great deal of discussion this year about the 
exchange rate and the Central Bank has frequently come under fire. A widespread misunderstanding 
seems to prevail that the Central Bank can control the exchange rate. People must realise that the 
Central Bank exerts a limited long-term impact on the exchange rate. The exchange rate depends on 
various  economic  factors,  including  foreign  trade,  foreign  investment  in  Iceland  and  investment  by 
Icelanders  abroad,  and  last  but  not  least  expectations  about  future  economic  developments.  For 
example,  there  is  little  doubt  that  expectations  in  connection  with  power-intensive  industry  have 
already influenced the exchange rate of the króna, which has certainly firmed as a result of decisions 
on large-scale investment in aluminium production. 
Interest rates definitely affect the exchange rate, but experience in Iceland and elsewhere shows that 
in the long run this impact tends to fade out if monetary policy aims for a rate of inflation close to the 
prevailing rate among trading partner countries. Likewise, the Central Bank’s foreign exchange market 
intervention  tends  to  have  only  a  short-lived  effect.  If  the  exchange  rate  is  moving  with  a  strong 
momentum in a certain direction, no central bank can resist this for long. This is a common experience 
of all countries that have liberalised cross-border capital movements, which was also shared by the 
Central Bank of Iceland when it tried to stem the depreciation of the króna from mid 2000 until autumn 
2001. An interesting article on this topic by two Central Bank employees, Gerdur Ísberg and Thórarinn 
G.  Pétursson,  was  published  in  the  February  2003  edition  of  Monetary  Bulletin,  which  traces  the 
history of Central Bank interventions in the foreign exchange market over this period and evaluates 
their impact. The article concludes definitively that at best the intervention had only a short-term effect 
in each case and the market soon returned to its previous situation. In other words, their conclusion is 
that intervention on the foreign exchange market against strong prevailing currents has precious little 
effect. This is in full accord with the experience in other countries. 
Calls for the Central Bank to set an exchange rate target are therefore unrealistic. The only way to fix 
the  exchange  rate  while  still  retaining  an  independent  currency  is  to  return  to  the  old  regime  and 
introduce currency controls, but obviously no one wants to return to such an arrangement. Exchange 
rate volatility is best prevented with economic policies which promote economic stability, but this does 
not only depend on the Central Bank. It is essential to take a long-term perspective. However, it should 
be noted that since September last year the Central Bank has been regularly purchasing currency in 
the foreign exchange market in order to boost its external reserve. Market interventions in 2000 and 
2001  depleted  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  reserves,  creating  a  pressing  need  to  strengthen  it.  The 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2003
in 
in 
for 
fact  also 
import-competing  sectors.  Enterprises 
Central  Bank  has  been  engaged  on  this  task  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  It  had  purchased  foreign 
currency for the equivalent of 30.7 b.kr. since September 2002, which has undoubtedly exerted some 
impact on the króna in the short run, although the long-term effect is negligible, if any at all. 
The  exchange  rate  for  the  króna  plummeted  in  2000  and  2001,  and  for  quite  some  time  was 
substantially below a level reconcilable with long-term equilibrium. This occurred at a time when the 
price  of  key  exports  was  very  high,  making  the  years  2000  and  2001  especially  favourable  for  the 
export  sector  and 
these  sectors 
understandably felt the effects of the rise in the exchange rate in the first half of this year. It is not to be 
expected, however, that the same conditions will re-arise in these sectors as prevailed, for example, 
during 2001 and in the early part of 2002. The exchange rate remained very stable from spring to early 
winter  2002,  when  the  króna  entered  a  strengthening  phase  which  continued  until  the  beginning  of 
February. The Central Bank has stated its view that the appreciation over this period was primarily the 
effect  of  planned  aluminium-related  investments  in  East  Iceland.  Operation  of  a  new  aluminium 
smelter will also lead to a higher equilibrium exchange rate for the króna than would otherwise be the 
case. A sizeable currency inflow will obviously take place in connection with the aluminium projects 
and  domestic  interest  rates  will  be  higher  than  otherwise.  All  these  factors  have  affected  market 
expectations and caused the króna to strengthen. In effect, the economy has already begun this year 
to accommodate the pending investments. In recent weeks the exchange rate has depreciated once 
more. The króna had clearly overshot, as is common in foreign exchange markets. More factors have 
contributed  to  the  weaker  exchange  rate.  These  include  increasing  uncertainty  about  hydropower 
development in connection with the Norðurál smelter extension, a deficit on the current account, and 
greater  foreign  portfolio  investment  by  Icelanders  which  amounted  to  14.5  b.kr.  during  the  first  six 
months  of  2003  compared  with  6.8  b.kr.  over  the  same  period  the  previous  year.  Central  Bank 
currency purchases have had some effect, as I mentioned earlier. Such fluctuations are always to be 
expected  and  it  should  be  reiterated  that  the  Icelandic  króna  has  by  no  means  shown  any  more 
volatility than we see in other currencies. 
Let us briefly consider what lies ahead. Four times a year the Central Bank produces macroeconomic 
and inflation forecasts which it publishes in its Monetary Bulletin. Inflation forecasting plays a vital role 
for Central Bank policy. Each inflation forecast is projected two years ahead, quarter by quarter. As in 
all  countries,  changes  in  the  central  bank  interest  rate  are  transmitted  to  the  economy  with  a 
considerable  lag.  Monetary  policy  therefore  needs  to  be  forward-looking  and  the  inflation  forecast 
based on the best available methodologies. If the scenario is that inflation will head beyond the Bank’s 
target, the Bank will raise its interest rates, while it will reduce them if inflation is tending below the 
target. 
Let us first look at the macroeconomic forecast, which of course is a major consideration for future 
inflation.  The  main  assumptions are  that  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  interest  rate,  currently  5.3%,  will 
remain unchanged for the forecast period, which is a standard forecasting assumption, and that the 
exchange  rate  will  be  3%  weaker  than  in  the  February  forecast,  with  a  reference  value  of  124. 
However the exchange rate index has continued to rise [i.e. the króna weakens] and currently stands 
at 128. Another assumption is that fiscal policy will not deliver a stronger demand impulse than has 
already  been  decided.  In  other  words,  the  fiscal  stance  will  be  relatively  neutral,  apart  from  a 
considerable increase in public sector investment this year and a contraction next year. This implies 
that  the  Treasury  balance  will  not  be  disrupted  by  discretionary  measures  on  the  expenditure  and 
revenue side. Public consumption is expected to be below the historical average. 
On the basis of current assumptions for the development of external conditions this year and in 2004, 
prices of marine products are now expected to fall by 4% this year and to remain unchanged between 
2003 and 2004. Exports of marine products are expected to grow by 3% this year due to increased 
quotas for the fishing year [beginning September 1] and a larger blue whiting harvest this summer. 
The assumed increase in catch volume for 2004 is 5%. Aluminium prices are expected to rise by 4% 
this  year,  based  on  futures  prices  and  the  pricing  assumptions  of  the  two  aluminium  companies, 
Norðurál and Alcan Iceland. 
Import prices in foreign currency are expected to decrease by ½%. Fuel prices are based on futures. 
These have been on an upward trend in recent weeks and are now expected to rise by 9% this year 
but  fall  by  14%  in  2004.  The  terms  of  trade  for  goods  and  services  are  expected  to  deteriorate  by 
1½ percentage  points  this  year.  In  2004  they  are  expected  to  improve  by  three-quarters  of  a 
percentage point. Assumptions for short-term foreign interest rates are 3% this year and 3½% next 
year. 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 3
According  to  the  Central  Bank’s  macroeconomic  forecast,  output  growth  will  be  2¾%  this  year  and 
3½% in 2004. This forecast assumes that the Norðurál aluminium smelter expansion will go ahead; if 
not, the respective growth figures would be 2¼% and 2¾%. Private consumption growth is forecast at 
2% this year and 3% next year. A 2½% increase in public consumption is expected for both years. 
Gross  fixed  capital  formation,  however,  is  expected  to  grow  by  10¾%,  mainly  as  a  result  of 
investments connected with the aluminium industry. Forecast investment in residential housing is 3%. 
Exports  will  increase  by  2%  this  year  and  4%  next  year,  according  to  the  forecast,  due  to  the 
increased fishing quotas that I mentioned earlier. Growth of imports is expected to be 4½% this year 
and 7% in 2004. 
Despite  higher  forecast  output  growth  this  year,  unemployment  is  expected  to  be  a  quarter  of  a 
percentage point higher than was forecast in May, at 3¼%. Estimated slack in the labour market this 
year  has  been  revised  upwards.  However,  unemployment  is  expected  to  head  down  to  a  figure  of 
2½% next year. 
Although  higher  output  growth  is  expected  this  year  and  next  year,  the  output  gap  is  forecast  to 
become slightly negative. A revised estimate now shows a slightly negative output gap last year, which 
will widen even further in 2003 since output growth is below estimated growth of potential output. The 
output gap is expected to turn marginally positive next year, when output growth will exceed potential. 
However, it is important to bear in mind that the evaluation of the output gap is highly uncertain, due to 
the  non-observable  nature  of  potential  output.  These  data  do  show,  however,  that  good  balance  is 
expected in both 2003 and 2004. 
The Central Bank forecasts inflation up to two years ahead. One year ahead, the forecast is for an 
inflation  rate  of  1.6%,  which  will  accelerate  gradually  until  it  reaches  the  inflation  target  in  the  first 
quarter of 2005 and goes up to 2.8% two years ahead. Subsequently, inflation will continue to gain 
pace if the forecast assumptions hold, including an unchanged monetary stance. Such forecasts are 
inherently  prone  to  uncertainties,  which  in  the  present  forecast  in  the  short  run  largely  involve 
exchange rate developments, as always. In fact the exchange rate has weakened since the forecast 
was  made.  A  delay  in construction work  for  the Norðurál  smelter  expansion could reduce domestic 
demand and thereby dampen domestic inflationary pressures. Offsetting this, the króna could probably 
weaken, as we are seeing now with a partial reversal of expectations about currency inflows for these 
investments. The uncertainty about the global economic outlook and the pessimistic tone in the first 
half of this year appear to be abating, at least in the US, even though the prospects in Europe are not 
promising. 
As I mentioned earlier, the policy interest rate is the Central Bank’s main instrument for attaining its 
inflation  target.  The  Central  Bank  last  changed  its  policy  rate  on  February  10  with  a  reduction  of 
0.5 percentage points to 5.3%. The Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland have not considered that 
there are grounds for altering interest rates now, given the analysis and inflation forecast that I have 
outlined  here.  Regarding  deviations  from  the  inflation  target,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  a 
successful  and  credible  monetary  policy  gives  more  weight  to  long-term  than  to  short-term 
considerations, and that it is neither possible nor optimal to fine-tune the inflation rate with excessively 
volatile interest rates. We still consider the likely outlook that interest rates will remain unchanged for 
the  time  being,  then  rise  as  the  peak  of  aluminium-related  investments  approaches.  However,  the 
point at which it may be necessary to raise interest rates could be further away than was previously 
foreseen, since inflation has been very low recently and will continue to be. As always, the outcome 
will depend on future developments. In light of the present low rate of inflation it cannot be ruled out 
that negative shocks to domestic demand and to imported inflation might call for a temporary reduction 
in  interest  rates  from  their  present  level.  This  could  occur,  for  example,  if  proposed  investments  in 
connection  with  the  Norðurál  smelter  expansion  do  not  go  ahead,  if  domestic  demand  driven  from 
other sources than aluminium industry investments turns out much lower than is currently expected, or 
if deflationary pressures continue to build up in the global economy. Nonetheless, the weakening of 
the króna in recent weeks reduces the likelihood that interest rates will be lowered. Monetary policy 
will be reassessed when the occasion demands, and in particular when the fiscal and housing finance 
policies are made public. 
Broadly speaking, economic and monetary developments and prospects provide growing signs of an 
ongoing recovery, mostly indicating that the upswing will gain momentum during the coming winter. 
Some slack still exists in the economy, however. There are no clear signs of a turnaround in the labour 
market  and  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  has  still  not  decreased.  Leading  indicators  such  as 
credit  growth,  business  surveys  of  labour  demand,  and  growing  turnover  and  imports  nonetheless 
strongly  suggest  that  demand  will  rise  in  the  near  future.  Boosted  by  increased  quotas  during  the 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2003
coming fishing year, more public sector construction projects and aluminium industry investments, a 
reasonable level of output growth can be expected this year. However, since the growth rate is below 
estimated potential, the slack in the economy will increase slightly compared with 2002. The growth 
rate in 2004 is expected to exceed estimated potential at 3½%, meaning that the output gap could turn 
positive  next  year.  Inflation  will  nonetheless  remain  below  the  Central  Bank’s  target  until  the  final 
quarter of 2004, according to the forecast. This is explained by the low current rate of inflation and 
excess output potential. Two years ahead, inflation is forecast to creep above the target. On the whole 
the future looks fairly bright, but as always we should not allow the celebrations to get out of hand. 
BIS Review 45/2003 
 5
