Lars Heikensten: Euro entry before reforms or reforms before euro entry?  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Frankfurt  European 
Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 21 November 2003.  
 The  outcome  of  Sweden’s  referendum  was  an  unambiguous  “no”  to  euro  adoption.  This  means 
business as usual for Swedish monetary policy. Since 1993 we have had an inflation target of 2 per 
cent, which has gained credibility with the public and the markets. Since the introduction of the inflation 
target, inflation has averaged 1.7 per cent while average growth has been 3 per cent. This compares 
well with the Swedish experiences of previous decades. It also compares favourably with the recent 
performance of the euro area. This relative strength of the Swedish economy was in my opinion an 
important factor behind the result in the referendum. 
However, the outcome of the referendum does not mean business as usual in our relations vis-à-vis 
the rest of Europe. We will not have a seat at some of the negotiating tables in Frankfurt and Brussels 
that we could have had. Of course, we will try to compensate for this. To some extent, this can be 
done by keeping our own house in order - by conducting sound economic policies. Also, we will do our 
utmost to contribute to European policy discussions. Being outside the euro certainly doesn’t mean 
that we want to be on the margins of the debate on monetary integration in Europe.  
Sweden remains a ‘pre-in’; we will have to consider euro adoption again at some point in the future. 
Therefore the evolution and enlargement of the euro area concerns us. Secondly, Sweden is probably 
one  of  the  EU  nations  that  will  benefit  most  from  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union.  Our 
economy is one of the EU’s most integrated with acceding countries, with surging East-West trade and 
FDI. Also, should Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania adopt the euro, we would be directly affected because 
Swedish banks own most of the Baltic banking system.  
I would therefore like to share some reflections with you on two subjects of relevance to euro area 
enlargement: the risks associated with ERM II membership and long-term frameworks for fiscal policy. 
However, before doing this let me stress two things:  
First, the long-term advantages of euro area enlargement are evident. I believe the advantages would 
be  roughly  the  same  for  acceding  countries  as  they  would  be  for  Sweden:  integration  of  trade  and 
capital markets stimulates growth for both the euro adopter and the euro area. In the case of acceding 
countries,  there  are  probably  additional  advantages  of  monetary  integration;  it  gives  added  stability 
after the difficult years of transition and is important for their underdeveloped financial sectors. So the 
issue is not really euro area enlargement as such, but rather its timing and preconditions. 
Second, from the perspective of the euro area itself it is hard to see how acceding countries could 
pose any major risks to price stability. The sum of the economies of all the new member states does 
not presently amount to more than the GDP of the Netherlands. Furthermore, historically high inflation 
rates  in  the  acceding  countries  have  been  reduced  through  reinforced  macroeconomic  discipline 
(which in turn owes much to the enlargement process). A simple calculation shows that even if growth 
in  the  acceding  countries  averages  some  4  per  cent  more  than  the  euro  area,  and  this  catch-up, 
according to most estimates, generates Balassa-Samuelson price convergence with 2-3 percentage 
points higher inflation than euro economies, their inclusion in the euro area would still only add some 
0.2  percentage  points  to area-wide  inflation.  Instead,  it  is  the  perspective  of  the  acceding countries 
themselves that is crucial.  
Risks with ERM II 
The one risk with ERM II that has been discussed at length in recent years is the potential conflict 
between a pegged exchange rate and an inflation target. Both exchange rate stability and low inflation 
are necessary to fulfil the conversion criteria, but in some cases it may be difficult for monetary policy 
alone to meet two targets at the same time.  
One  possible  situation  is  that  the  central  parity  has  been  set  too  low  and  that  real  appreciation 
pressures, due to catching up, are so strong that the upper band comes into question. This can result 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 1
in large-scale speculative currency flows and unnecessary turbulence, as demonstrated by the attack 
on the forint at the beginning of this year.  
The  obvious  solution  to  speculation  against  the  upper  band  is  to  reach  an  agreement  in  ERM  II  to 
revalue.  But  this  is  often  difficult  in  practice.  When  political  decision-makers  are  forced  to  choose 
between the inflation and exchange rate targets, it takes courage - and good analyses - to give priority 
to  low  inflation  and  opt  for  revaluation.  As  the  case  of  Ireland  has  demonstrated,  this  does  not 
exclusively apply to acceding countries. In the end, the result can be inflationary pressures once inside 
the euro area.  
However, the most acute risk with ERM II is probably when the exchange rate is in the lower part of 
the band. Virtually all the currency crises that we have experienced in recent decades have been due 
to  speculation  against  weak  currencies.  ERM  II,  of  course,  is  different  from  these  previous  failed 
regimes of pegged exchange rates in the sense that it has a clear exit strategy with regard to euro 
adoption. But this does not mean that ERM II is immune to large fluctuations in short-term financial 
flows. 
I do not think this should be a big problem for the currency board regimes or the so-called hard pegs in 
the new Baltic member states. In their case, ERM II membership would merely be confirmation of a 
credible regime that has been successfully maintained for nearly a decade, even when confronted with 
severe shocks such as the Russian crisis. This has been possible thanks to a high degree of wage 
flexibility as well as serious efforts to achieve fiscal consolidation. 
There is more reason for concern over some of the presently floating regimes as they move towards 
ERM II. Substantial fiscal slippages have occurred in some of these countries, bringing them far from 
the  3  per  cent  deficit  requirement.  In  most  cases  the  deterioration  has  not  been  a  consequence  of 
additional costs related to accession; neither has it mainly been the result of automatic stabilisers - 
these are considerably smaller in acceding countries than in present EU members. Instead, the large - 
cyclically adjusted - deficits reflect increases in public wages and so-called mandatory social spending, 
combined with a lack of expenditure cuts in other fields. Consolidation is planned to take place mainly 
in  the  medium  to  long  term,  and  deficits  are  only  set  to  be  reduced  to  levels  compatible  with  the 
convergence criteria towards the end of the decade (Fig. 1).  
Some of my central bank colleagues from the new member states argue that rapid entry into ERM II 
and  the  target  of  an  early  euro  adoption  is  precisely  what  will  force  politicians  in  their  respective 
countries to improve fiscal policy. In the words of one of my most eminent colleagues: “delay in entry 
equals delay in reforms”. Of course, I can understand this argument, and in the end it hinges on the 
political economy of each country. But using ERM II as a straightjacket is a risky strategy. It is all too 
reminiscent  of  the  period  1990-92  in  Sweden  when  the  “nominal  anchor”  of  the  ECU  peg  was 
supposed  to  “bind  us  to  the  mast”  but  ended  in  a  macroeconomic  shipwreck.  A  botched  entry  into 
ERM II, with increasing public deficits, will be prone to economic and political instability. Furthermore, 
if  meeting  the  convergence  criteria  is  viewed  as  the  main  leverage  for  fiscal  reform,  it  is  worth 
remembering that this particular leverage disappears on EMU entry. 
A framework for fiscal policy  
This brings me to my next topic: fiscal policy frameworks for countries in the currency union. This is an 
important issue, partly for the stability of the union as a whole. It was also the perspective behind the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  But  strong  frameworks  for  public  finances  are  also  important  for  each 
individual country when they no longer have an independent monetary policy. Only if fiscal policy is in 
order can asymmetric shocks be dealt with in a reasonable way. 
The risk of asymmetric chocks is not necessarily higher in the acceding countries than in many of the 
present  member  states;  in  some  cases  it  might  even  be  smaller.  A  number  of  studies  point  to  a 
relatively strong correlation in acceding countries with the business cycle of the euro area. However, it 
would be unwise to assume that no important asymmetric shocks relative to the rest of the euro area 
cycle will ever occur. Also, there  are risks of domestically generated “political” shocks due to policy 
mistakes. We have had examples of this in Sweden and it could also happen in some other countries.  
How can euro adopters prepare public finances for asymmetric shocks? This was a major issue in the 
Swedish debate ahead of the euro referendum. Despite the fact that there had been reforms in the 
public-finance framework in Sweden in the 1990s, the Riksbank and others argued that more should 
be done before joining the euro area.  
2 
 BIS Review 53/2003
Essentially two things are required: 
First,  there  is  a  need  for  sufficient  margins  in  the  public  finances.  In  practice,  this  means  that  debt 
levels should not be too high. If the economy enters a downturn that does not affect the rest of the 
euro area to the same extent, it is important that there is scope to conduct more expansionary policy. If 
the scope is there, one can be reasonably sure that it will be used.  
It  is  more  difficult  to  handle  the  second,  opposite  situation  -  upturns  and  over-heating  tendencies. 
What is then required is a framework that stimulates or even forces political decision-makers to act in 
time  and  to  take  decisions  that  might  be  difficult  in  the  short  run  but  that  are  correct  in  a  longer 
perspective. Here we drew some inspiration from our monetary policy set-up. Fiscal policy could be 
guided  by  clear  targets  that  are  defined  in  terms  of  countries’  output  gaps.  Alternatively,  national 
inflation  targets  could  be  introduced.  In  combination  with  transparent  processes,  including recurrent 
evaluations by national parliaments or in other arenas, this could put pressure on politicians to act.  
Is the Stability and Growth Pact not sufficient in itself? After all, it is designed to ensure fiscal discipline 
in  the  member  countries.  The  answer  here  is  clear;  it  could  have  been  had  the  Pact  only  been 
followed.  But  now  the  situation  is  different.  As  the  Pact  has  not  been  followed  by  the  larger  euro 
countries,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  newcomers  will  take  the  same  attitude.  However,  this  could  be  a 
dangerous conclusion. It would be wiser to look at the issue the other way round. Both Germany and 
France attained the 3 per cent mark for the public deficit criterion by the narrowest of margins despite 
what  was  a  global  upturn.  But  they  clearly  did  not  do  enough  afterwards  in  terms  of  consolidation, 
despite intense pressure from many of the smaller countries. Today, this is a significant problem not 
only for the euro area as a whole; the countries themselves are also paying the price in terms of a 
deeper and longer downturn. This, if anything, is a warning to new euro adopters. 
Conclusions 
Having raised these complex issues, let me be very clear about my sentiments. I do not wish to see 
any new obstacles or separate rules for the new member states; equal treatment is essential. No other 
rules for convergence should apply to the new euro adopters than those that have applied to present 
euro area  participants  or  that  would  have  applied  to  Sweden  if  we  had  voted “yes”  to  adopting  the 
euro. Indeed, early euro adoption may be entirely beneficial for those new member states that have 
sufficiently stable and flexible economies and that have followed a course of fiscal prudence for a long 
time, just as I personally would have considered it beneficial for Sweden had we joined in 2006. 
Rather,  it  is  in  the  euro  adopters’  own  interests  to  independently  consider  the  risks.  Countries  that 
have used exchange rate flexibility should not rush into a system of fixed exchange rates before the 
conditions are right. If you have not already achieved fiscal discipline, do not enter ERM II nor opt for 
early euro adoption as leverage on the politicians to bring about such discipline. It is not only a matter 
of  meeting  the  3  per  cent  convergence  criterion  but  also  of  reaching  a  maturity  in  fiscal  policy  that 
includes  a  transparent  and  predictable  fiscal  framework  with  sufficient  room  for  manoeuvre  for 
stabilisation  policy.  The  road  to  the  euro  may  otherwise  become  very  rocky,  and  if  the  euro  is 
eventually  adopted,  the  trade-off  between  fiscal  rectitude  and  stabilisation  needs  may  become  a 
recurring problem.  
My advice would be to put your house in order first, and only after that enter ERM II and begin a quick 
process of euro adoption. Then you will have the best possible guarantee to reap the full benefits of 
monetary union.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 3
Fig. 1 (forecasts)
selected acceding countries 2002-
2004
0,0
-1,0
-2,0
-3,0
-4,0
-5,0
-6,0
-7,0
-8,0
-9,0
-10,0
2002 2003*2004*
2002 2003 2004
Poland
Czech Republic
2002 2003 2004
Hungary
2002 2003 2004
Slovakia
* according to budget draft for 2004
public sector deficit
cyclically adjusted deficit
Source: Pre-accession Economic Programmes 2003 update
 4 
 BIS Review 53/2003
