Lars Heikensten: The Riksbank’s work on financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Göteborgs  University, 
Göteborg, 25 November 2003. 
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to address you today. I feel privileged to be speaking at a Felix 
Neubergh lecture.  
In autumn 1992 a decision at very short notice was required of Sweden’s government and parliament: 
should  they  choose  to  support  Swedish  banks  without  really  knowing  how  large  the  support  might 
have to be, or risk a financial crisis with unforeseeable consequences for the Swedish economy? All 
the Swedish banks had incurred large loan losses. And regardless of how much a particular bank had 
lost, the international credit market had little confidence in the Swedish banking system. The banks 
faced severe financing problems that might ultimately have led to their failure and could have made it 
difficult in the shorter run for Swedish companies to cover their funding requirements. 
The  decision  was  the  only  reasonable  alternative  -  to  rescue  the  Swedish  banks.  The  government 
issued  a  general  guarantee  for  the  banks’  liabilities  and  set  up  an  authority,  Bankstödsnämnden, 
specifically  to  cope  with  the  banks  that  were  in  serious  difficulties.  The  government,  explicitly 
supported by the opposition, acted just as vigorously and promptly as the situation required. But this 
did entail making a decision - on the basis of insufficient information about the causes and depth of the 
crisis - that could have burdened the government budget with at least a hundred billion kronor. That is 
an experience we do not wish to repeat. 
Sweden recovered from the crisis on that occasion and in many instances our way of resolving it has 
served  as  a  model  for  other  countries.  The  crisis  also  focused  attention  on  the  work  for  financial 
stability.  With  the  growing  complexity  of  payment  systems  and  the  financial  sector’s  expansion, 
financial  stability  has  become  an  increasingly  important  issue  for  the  Riksbank,  as  it  has  for  other 
central banks around the world.  
A review 
The bank crisis spawned a certain amount of self-criticism, not least in the Riksbank. In practice, the 
Bank  had  not  backed  up  its  function  of  promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system  with  any 
systematic analytical work. The problems that arose had taken the Riksbank, along with many others, 
by surprise. So we started to build up knowledge and an analytical capability in the field of stability. 
The work was initiated on a modest scale with just a handful of staff. It had a narrow focus on the early 
detection of weaknesses in the banking system that might lead to another bank crisis.  
The Riksbank also decided to publish a report that would discuss the situation for bank sector stability. 
Internal reports  had  been produced  earlier.  In autumn  1997  the  Riksbank  accordingly  presented  its 
first  more  cohesive  public  analysis  of  financial  stability.  The  new  report  was  intended  to  signal  the 
importance  the  Riksbank  attached  to  work  on  stability  and  it  also  helped  to  focus  and  develop  the 
internal efforts. The experience of work on the Inflation Report had been encouraging, so it seemed 
natural to build up the work on and communication about issues to do with stability in the same way. 
By launching the Financial Stability Report or, as it was called initially, the Financial Market Report, the 
Riksbank  was  the  first  central  bank  to  issue  a  public  account  of  its  appraisal  of  financial  system 
stability.  Its  example  has  been  followed  to  date  by  about  thirty  other  countries.  Recurrent  financial 
crises  have  made  it  clear  that  there  will  always  be  problems  which  the  authorities  are  obliged  to 
address  in  some  way  and  it  may  therefore  be  of  some  assistance  to  have  a  clear,  structured 
presentation of the approach to financial stability. This has led the International Monetary Fund, for 
example,  to  pay  growing  attention  to  these  issues.  Since  1999  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  are 
engaged  in  joint  evaluations  of  national  financial  systems  in  what  is  called  a  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program. Matters to do with stability are also on the agenda almost every time I meet my 
colleagues from other countries. 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 1
Principles for financial system oversight 
First I should perhaps reiterate what we mean by the financial system. It is the system that provides 
payment  services,  converts  savings  into  financial  resources  for  investment  and  consumption,  and 
contributes  facilities  for  managing  risk.  In  other  words,  the  financial  system  performs  a  number  of 
important social functions. If any of these functions were to be disrupted, the social costs could be very 
high.  
The  damage  inflicted  by  a  disruption  would  probably  be  particularly  great  if  it  involved  a  vital 
component of the payment system. This is readily understood when one considers the enormous flow 
of payments. In Sweden, for instance, the payment system has a daily turnover of around SEK 500 
billion, which means that the equivalent of our annual gross domestic product has to be handled in 
less than a week. Studies show, moreover, that in the past fifteen years there have been more than a 
dozen crises which cost the countries concerned at least 10 per cent of their GDP.  
So there are good reasons for state supervision of the financial system. The Riksbank has a function 
here in that the Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) has made us accountable for promoting a safe and 
efficient payment system. A major ground for making us responsible for efficiency and stability is that, 
along with the banks, the Riksbank is a central player in the payment system and provides means of 
payments. The banks distribute notes and coins, keep transaction accounts linked to giro systems and 
operate credit card systems. The Riksbank in turn provides accounts in the payment system, RIX, that 
is available for large-value interbank payments.  
The  work  on  financial  stability  is  undertaken  in  three  main  ways.  One  concerns  the  rules  and 
regulations that set the bounds for the operations of financial companies. Another is the continuous 
surveillance of the system that is performed by Finansinspektionen (Sweden’s Financial Supervisory 
Authority) as well as by the Riksbank. Thirdly, the state needs to be able to manage any crises that 
nevertheless occur. The work on stability calls for highly developed cooperation between the Finance 
Ministry, Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank. 
The laws governing financial operations are enacted by the Riksdag, with the finance ministry as an 
important  agent.  More  detailed  regulations  are  issued  by  Finansinspektionen,  which  also  monitors 
their observance. The Riksbank’s contribution to the work on rules and regulations consists in the first 
place of submitting opinions; in addition, the Bank participates in international efforts to develop the 
regulatory framework.  
The role of the Riksbank in surveillance work is central and focuses on the functioning of the financial 
system as a whole and the risks that may arise. The identification of risks in the system as a whole 
means, moreover, that the individual institutions and the financial infrastructure have to be scrutinised.  
It is primarily Finansinspektionen but to some extent also the Riksbank that need to keep a continuous 
eye on the individual banks. Due to the central functions of the banks, a crisis in the banking system 
might swiftly have serious consequences for the payment system as well as for the supply of credit.  
But it is not just the significance of the banks in the payment system and as a source of credit that 
warrants  their  supervision.  As  The  Economist  wrote  last  spring,  banks  are  “the  most  hazardous 
economic institutions known to man”. That may sound rather drastic but there is some truth to it. It is 
not  that  bankers  are  a  tribe  of  irresponsible  gamblers  but  that  their  much-needed  function  in  the 
economy requires them to act in certain ways. Banking is essentially a matter of taking risks. A bank’s 
funds (its deposits or its loans from other banks) are liable to disappear at short notice, while realising 
assets takes longer.  
Moreover, problems in one bank are liable to spread to other banks. This systemic risk exists because 
the banks have liabilities with each other in the form of loans or securities transactions and because 
they participate in the payment system. The similarity of their operations also means that problems 
elsewhere may hit the banks as a group. Contagious effects may occur, moreover, simply because 
people suspect that the banks are inter-connected.  
To a growing extent, oversight of system stability calls for oversight of the financial infrastructure in the 
sense of the systems that are needed to effect payments and to trade in and deliver financial products. 
Bankgirocentralen  is  a  case  in  point.  If  these  systems  function  properly,  there  will  be  less  risk  of 
problems either spreading between the participants and from the financial markets, or arising because 
the system as such is disrupted.  
The third aspect of surveillance work - crisis management - has to do with the possibility that the state 
needs to act to prevent a crisis from jeopardising system stability. In order to manage a crisis, the state 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2003
must be able to judge what the consequences will be if a distressed institution were to fail and, if these 
consequences are likely to be serious, what measures can be taken to mitigate them. The solution in 
some cases may be to contribute to an orderly closure, while in others it may be to provide financial 
support. An example of the latter is the general bank guarantee the state provided during Sweden’s 
bank crisis. 
In certain cases it may be up to the Riksbank to provide assistance with liquidity. If a bank’s problems 
were to be so serious that stability is threatened - and the bank is considered to be viable in the longer 
run - the Riksbank can grant credit on special terms and act as what is usually known as the lender of 
last resort.  
The continuous surveillance and crisis management are closely connected with each other. Oversight 
is essential for the Riksbank’s ability to judge whether or not a crisis constitutes a threat to financial 
stability. Without a continuous analysis of the banks, it would be difficult to determine whether and how 
any support should be provided in a crisis.  
The work on oversight and crisis management 
The  Riksbank  presents  its  analysis  of  system  stability  every  six  months  in  the  Financial  Stability 
Report. The Report basically aims to provide a picture of the Swedish banks’ ability to stand up to any 
disruptions. The purpose is to identify conceivable risks and present a sound analysis that influences 
the  market’s participants.  The  task  of  the  Riksbank  can  perhaps  be  described  as  to  keep cool  and 
restrain undue optimism when there seem to be no problems in an upward phase, and to fill in the 
picture, if necessary, in a downward phase to allay concern about serious loan losses.  
The  analysis  concentrates  on  the  four  major  Swedish  banks  because  their  size  makes  it  likely  that 
they  are  relevant  for  system  stability.  The  failure  of  one  of  these  banks  might  jeopardise  stability, 
though this is by no means certain. 
The  durability  of  the  banks  is  dependent  on  a  number  of  factors.  The  Riksbank  analyses  the  main 
categories of borrower, developments in the bank groups and the financial infrastructure.  
Borrowers  are  analysed  in  terms  of  the  corporate  and  household  sectors  in  general,  with  particular 
reference to levels of debt and the future ability to pay. The real-estate sector is considered separately 
because the companies here account for as much as one-third of the banks’ corporate lending. The 
prices of commercial properties and private housing are also analysed because they reflect the value 
of the collateral that is pledged for loans from banks and mortgage institutions. In that Swedish banks 
are expanding their operations in the other Nordic countries and the Baltic region, developments in 
those  countries  are  becoming  increasingly  important  for  them.  Borrowers  abroad  now  account  for 
approximately  half  of  the  banks’  total  loan  stock.  The  analysis  of  borrowers  has  therefore  been 
extended abroad. 
The major bank groups are analysed in various respects. Profitability trends illustrate the ability of the 
banks to build up reserves for unexpected losses. Moreover, there is always the strategic risk that a 
bank with weak profitability will be tempted to try out new, bold lines of business in order to generate a 
higher return on equity.  
The analysis of the banks’ credit portfolios can provide an indication of how loan losses are likely to 
develop in the coming year or two. Another aspect of the analysis is the banks’ liabilities. Traditional 
banking  involves  accepting  deposits  and  using  the  funds  for  making  loans.  People’s  growing 
propensity to save in other instruments than bank accounts has forced the banks to finance the growth 
of credit by borrowing in the capital market. The structure of bank funding provides an indication of the 
risks in bank liquidity. Monitoring this is perhaps the most difficult part in that the liquidity situation is 
liable to change very rapidly. 
If  problems  in  one  bank  group  spread  to  other  players  in  the  system  via  the  banks’  mutual 
commitments,  the  payment  system  may  be  affected  immediately.  The Riksbank  therefore keeps an 
eye on interbank exposures. 
Oversight  of  the  infrastructure  concentrates  on  the  systems  that  are  vital  for  the  functioning  of  the 
financial  market  in  Sweden.  Besides  RIX,  the  system  for  large-value  payments  provided  by  the 
Riksbank, these are primarily the central securities register (VPC), the Stockholm Stock Exchange and 
the clearing system for retail payments (Bakgirocentralen or BGC).  
BIS Review 53/2003 
 3
The Riksbank has also chosen to work on practical matters to do with risk management. These issues 
are  invariably  complex.  Financial  crises  can  arise  at  very  short  notice,  not  least  on  account  of  the 
massive payment flows and because banks tend to have a large element of short-term funding. The 
ongoing integration may have made things even more difficult.  
The Riksbank has therefore built up an internal crisis organisation and clearly documented who does 
what in the event of a crisis, including those who are to be contacted and put in the picture, how the 
press is to be informed, and the legal consequences of various measures. Another important element 
in the work on readiness is regular crisis exercises.  
Crisis management has also come to feature prominently in Sweden’s international profile. This has to 
do with our experiences as well as our basic stand on the importance of transparency. The Riksbank 
is leading Nordic and European working groups in this field. One of the articles in the latest Financial 
Stability  Report  that  was  published  yesterday  deals  with  the  role  of  the  Riksbank  as  lender  of  last 
resort.  It  discusses  the  principles  that  determine  the  situations  in  which  the  Riksbank  can  consider 
providing  support  for  distressed  banks  and  the  terms  for  the  support.  Many  other  countries  are 
reluctant to talk about these matters openly for fear that banks will be tempted to take greater risks. 
The Riksbank, on the other hand, sees openness as a means of deterring greater risk-taking. Clear 
game rules mean that the banks know more about what to expect.  
Future stability work 
Much has been done with the Riksbank’s work on stability in the past seven years but it is not hard to 
pick  out  fields  where  there  is  room  for  improvement.  The  analysis  of  borrowers  abroad  will  be 
enhanced.  The  Riksbank  needs  to  acquire  a  better  understanding  of  how  the  banks  manage  their 
liquidity, select sources of funding and the effects of this on their durability. The analysis of stability 
also needs to be supplemented with methods for stress tests, that is, ways of analysing the sensitivity 
of bank durability. 
To obtain further inspiration for the work of improving the analysis, the Riksbank has commissioned an 
external  evaluation  of  the  work  on  financial  stability.  This  evaluation  is  in  the  hands  of  a  trio 
representing the international research frontier, the central bank world and the Swedish bank sector. 
They will be bringing their individual perspectives to bear in a joint effort to evaluate the quality and 
focus of the work we have built up. We intend to publish their report and then issue invitations to a 
broad discussion on our work’s future direction.  
In conclusion I would like to say something - without prejudicing the trio’s findings - about the issues 
that I believe will have growing importance in the future. A natural starting-point for such a discussion 
is to identify forces that will be driving future financial developments. Three of the main forces are: 
– 
– 
– 
growing cross-border integration in Europe, 
more advanced risk management by the banks, and 
more and more of a focus on aspects of efficiency. 
Consequences of European integration 
It is perhaps the increased international dependence that affects us most clearly. While the banking 
systems  in  Europe  are  still  largely  national,  integrated  systems  have  started  to  appear  in  certain 
regions. This trend seems to have come furthest in the Nordic-Baltic region but there are grounds for 
expecting  greater  integration  elsewhere,  too.  As  a  result,  national  banking  systems  will  become 
increasingly interdependent. 
This has a number of dimensions for the Riksbank’s work on stability. One component of our work 
consists in promoting integration by influencing the construction of rule systems. We do so out of a 
conviction that integration as such favours economic growth.  
The current rule systems were not designed for an integrated European bank market that transcends 
national  borders.  Moreover,  the  common  legislation  takes  integration  into  account  to  only  a  limited 
extent.  In  order  to  achieve  an  inner  market  for  financial  services,  the  EU  is  striving  to  produce  as 
uniform  a  set  of  rules  as  possible  for  financial  companies  throughout  the  Union.  Banks  can  then 
compete on equal terms and give rise to a common market with the most competitive enterprises.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2003
The Riksbank supports this admirable ambition. But it is also important to avoid conceivable pitfalls 
that may hamper this development. One danger is that the rule system becomes excessively detailed, 
that harmonisation starts from the strictest existing system instead of proceeding from an entirely open 
discussion.  
Integration also affects the regular supervision and oversight. The current principle is home-country 
supervision. In other words, a bank’s legal country of domicile is responsible for the supervision of the 
bank’s branch offices; a banking subsidiary, on the other hand, is supervised by the country in which 
the subsidiary is legally domiciled. But it is still the legal country of domicile of the parent bank that is 
responsible for supervision of the bank group as a whole.  
This solution ought to work as long as the foreign operations of the banks are fairly modest. But what 
will  happen  when  the  banks’  foreign  branches  become  systemically  important?  How  much 
responsibility are the home countries willing to take for financial stability in the countries where foreign 
branches  are  located?  And  are  the  authorities  in  the  latter  countries  prepared  to  relinquish  the 
responsibility for an essential part of their financial system to the home country of the parent bank? 
These are not just abstract issues, as can be seen from the fact that Nordea, domiciled in Sweden, is 
now the largest bank in Finland and that Swedish banks own the major part of the banking systems in 
the Baltic states. 
Thus, it seems that the supervision of international bank groups could lead to problems of coordination 
and  duplication.  On  the  whole,  there  appears  to  be  no  lack  of  incentives  to  supervise  cross-border 
banking  operations.  The  problem  is  rather  that  in  certain  cases  the  rule  system  prevents  the  most 
active countries for exercising supervision, so that this is liable to fall between two stools. On the other 
hand, an excessively generous right to supervise can lead to the burden of supervision being unduly 
heavy for individual banks. That could hamper integration as well as efficiency. 
Formalising crisis management is more difficult than other parts of the work on stability. Discussing 
crisis  management  can  be  perceived  as  sensitive  and  troublesome  because  to  some  extent  it 
concerns the state’s willingness to assist the financial sector with liquidity. The dividing line between 
whether or not this should be discussed openly often runs between countries that have experienced a 
financial crisis and those that have not. Those which have lived through a crisis are generally in favour 
of  a  transparent  process.  A  clear-cut  arrangement  for  the  management  of  crises  can  be  difficult  to 
construct in advance.  
It  is  hard  to  tell  at  present  how  these  problems  should  be  resolved.  In  principle  there  are  two 
conceivable  approaches.  One  involves  continued  cooperation  on  agreements,  joint  principles  and 
regulatory  frameworks.  The  other  is  to  have  more  supranational  management.  It  is  probably  a 
combination of the two that will be needed. The important thing today, however, is that a debate on 
these complex issues gets under way before we find  ourselves in a situation where it is necessary 
instead to deal with them in an emergency. 
More advanced risk management 
Another factor that will probably affect future work on the supervision and oversight of stability is the 
banks’ increased possibilities of managing risks. 
The assessment of risks is one of banking’s traditional functions. Things have changed markedly in 
this  respect  since  the  mid  1990s.  Technical  progress  and  new  financial  theories  have  led  to  a 
refinement of the methods for and possibilities of measuring credit risks. This has been accompanied 
by facilities for trading risks with additional financial instruments in increasingly international markets. 
All this has enhanced the ability of the banks to manage risks. 
Banks  in  general  -  not  just  the  largest  international groups -  have  invested  in  new  systems  for  risk 
management.  The  trend,  which  began  earlier,  has  been  accelerated  by  the  new  capital  adequacy 
rules, Basel II, that have just been produced.  
All the major banks in Sweden are working actively on these issues, partly because they are expected 
to  result  in  a  smaller  capital  requirement.  For  the  Riksbank,  it  is  of  course  not  a  decreased  capital 
requirement as such that is relevant so much as the fact that the new rules make better allowance for 
the actual risk in different credits. Finansinspektionen has a central role here in ensuring that financial 
companies honour not just the letter but the spirit of the Basel rules. This in turn should lead to a more 
adequate pricing of risk and thereby a more efficient financial system. 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 5
A problem that is being discussed in connection with recent methods for risk management and Basel II 
is  the  possibility  of  this  development  accentuating  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  economy.  In  that  the 
basic  idea  behind  Basel  II  is  for  the  size  of  a  bank’s  capital  to  be  dictated  by  the  credit  risk  in  its 
lending, it is possible that bank capital requirements and thereby the cost of credit will co-vary with the 
business  cycle.  The  increased  credit  risk  associated  with  an  economic  slowdown  means  that  the 
banks need more capital. This, it is feared, might lead to a contraction of credit in downturns and an 
expansion in upward phases and thereby make cyclical fluctuations more pronounced.  
There are some grounds for this criticism. Experience of business cycles has taught us that the large 
credit risks tend to be taken as the business cycle approaches a peak. However, the solution to such 
problems does not lie in opposing the new risk management techniques or Basel II. They will help to 
promote financial stability. But there is a need for the banks to find ways of handling any effects that 
arise from an accentuation of cyclical fluctuations. It is important for economic development that credit 
and venture capital are available even when business activity is cyclically low - and perhaps somewhat 
less so when activity is peaking.  
Besides  influencing  how  the  banks  handle  their  capital,  the  more  advanced  methods  for  risk 
management have led to the creation of new financial instruments. Two examples are securitisation 
and credit derivatives. This enables the banks to divest themselves of the credit risk in their loans by 
hedging in the credit derivatives market or by simply selling the risk through securitisation of the loans. 
The  credit  risks  in  the  economy  can  then  be  spread  over  more  agents.  That  is  fundamentally 
favourable for financial stability and market efficiency. 
At the same time, the authorities must follow developments closely in order to understand where these 
credit risks end up. Their departure from the bank sector does not mean that they disappear from the 
economy;  they  turn  up  instead  in  a  different  form  somewhere  else,  for  instance  in  insurance 
companies or mutual funds. 
Do  the  new  risk  management  facilities  also  mean  that  banking  operations  will  take  a  different 
direction? Will banks try to slim their large illiquid balance sheets by selling off loans or securitising 
assets? And will that mean that they can no longer be described as the most hazardous economic 
institutions known to man?  
This development has come further in the United States, where market financing is considerably more 
important  than  in  Sweden  or  the  rest  of  Europe.  So  what  would  a  similar  trend,  where  the  current 
predominantly  relation-based  lending  is  replaced  by  market  funding,  imply  for  the  cyclical  supply  of 
credit in Sweden? 
Stronger focus on aspects of efficiency 
A third driving-force that most clearly affects the financial system is the stronger focus on aspects of 
efficiency. Permit me to touch on this briefly. 
Improvements to the financial infrastructure in recent years have made this safer and more robust in 
various  ways.  For  example,  the  settlement  routines  used  by  both  BGC  and  VPC  are  considerably 
more secure that before. Every component of the infrastructure now has better solutions for continuity, 
which means that operations can be ensured even in connection with more extreme events.  
Now  that  the  most  serious  shortcomings  have  been  rectified,  the  focus  has  shifted  to  enhancing 
efficiency in the given framework for safety. Considerable social gains are to be had by making the 
infrastructure more efficient. This applies to the central settlement systems and perhaps even more to 
the  different  payment  instruments.  Increased  automation  and  a  greater  use  of  electronic  payments 
instead  of  paper-based  instruments  and  cash  can  generate  large  savings  for  society  in  general. 
Although they may amount to just a single krona or even less per transaction, the savings add up to a 
large amount because of all the payments that are required in a modern economy. 
Economies and greater efficiency have featured prominently in the banks’ activities in recent years. 
For the authorities it is always important to consider the conditions for competition and balance them 
against  the  forces  for  efficiency,  such  as  economies  of  scale.  It  is  also  important  to  monitor 
developments to ensure that levels of risk do not rise again. Moreover, the Riksbank has been and is a 
major player in the payment system. We must also scrutinise this activity continuously to ensure that 
our approach does not impair economic efficiency in general. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2003
From  what  I  have  said  about  the  future  work  it  is  hopefully  clear  that  the  financial  markets  are 
changing rapidly and present a development that is exciting in many ways. The Riksbank will continue 
to be a central player in this work. Talking about such issues feels natural at a university. Perhaps I 
have even succeeded in inspiring some of you to become involved in questions such as these and 
contribute to future developments. Thank you. 
BIS Review 53/2003 
 7
