Vítor Constâncio: The performance of monetary policy during the past five 
years 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  dinner  in  honour  of  the 
Governing Council of the European Central Bank, Queluz, 2 October 2003. 
 Prime Minister, 
Minister of State and Finance, 
President of the European Central Bank, 
Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all in this place full of history on the occasion of a meeting 
of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank. We meet twice a year outside Frankfurt and 
this  constitutes  an  important  expression  of  the  decentralized  nature  of  the  Eurosystem.  It  also 
underlines the accountability of the ECB to all national constituencies and the importance we attach to 
the need that our activity should be understood and supported by public opinion in all member states. 
The decentralized system that we operate has worked well and it is therefore fortunate that the draft 
Constitutional  Treaty  about  to  be  discussed  in  the  coming  Inter-Governmental  Conference,  has  left 
untouched the basic principles and organization of the Eurosystem. I think this is wise in view of the 
delicate balance that a major sharing of sovereignty among nations always requires and the need for 
stability that monetary institutions always deserve. 
European  Monetary  Union  has  been  a  great  historical  achievement  and  the  past  five  years  were 
marked by several accomplishments: the smooth efficiency of its beginning, the building-up of a new 
international  institution,  the  successful  introduction  of  euro  notes  and  coins  and,  in  particular,  the 
delivery of sound monetary policy. Many have contributed to make this possible but it is justifiable to 
stress the importance of good leadership for the whole endeavour. So, I think it is appropriate to take 
this  opportunity  to  pay  tribute  and  express  our gratitude  to  Wim Duisenberg  for  his role  as  the  first 
President of the ECB. I am sure that time can only enhance the assessment of his contributions to 
European monetary history. We were fortunate to have him as our leader but, at the same time, we 
feel secure regarding the future as the Presidency passes into the experienced and competent hands 
of Jean-Claude Trichet. 
This is then a good moment to briefly take stock of the performance of monetary policy during the past 
five years, both from a general perspective and from the point of view of a country such as Portugal. 
With  time  and  after  the  correction  of  an  early  depreciation  of  the  euro  with  no  basis  in  the 
fundamentals, the public assessment of our monetary policy has become positive, both in the markets 
and by academics. In fact, it has been impossible to ignore the good performance indicators. In the 
first place, the overriding objective of price stability has been ensured with an average inflation for the 
whole period of two per cent. This was accomplished in spite of supply shocks that negatively affected 
the inflation rate, such as the sudden increase of oil prices from 1999 to 2001. 
As important as the actual inflation rate achieved, stands the fact that we have managed to stabilize 
the medium term expectations of markets regarding future inflation, at a value slightly below 2%. This 
is a very important result as it means that the Eurosystem is seen as credible enough to deliver long 
term price stability. This increases our margin of manoeuvre to reduce economic volatility and to better 
ensure  the  overall  objective  of  non  inflationary  growth.  The  Eurosystem,  as  the  central  bank  of  the 
euro area, is now recognised as a credible institution and the euro as a robust and reliable currency. 
Markets and economic agents in general have learned to understand the underlying framework of our 
monetary  policy  with  the  important  result  that  we  have  become  a  more  predictable  institution.  This 
implies  that  we  can  better  manage  expectations  and  implement  monetary  policy  while  maintaining 
smooth functioning of money markets. At the same time, throughout this period, monetary policy has 
been  supportive  of  economic  activity.  Liquidity  has  been  appropriate,  as  money  supply  and  credit 
growth were clearly favourable to economic expansion. Monetary policy cannot be made responsible 
for  the  present  weak  economic  conditions  when  the  level  of  interest  rates  has  been  the  lowest  for 
decades. In our case, we have to go back 45 years to find interbank market rates similar to the ones 
now prevailing. 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
I stress this point not to contradict the idea that the best way for monetary policy to contribute to long-
term growth is by ensuring an economic climate of price stability. It is well known that monetary policy 
is not able to directly affect the level or growth of potential output. The clear hierarchical mandate we 
have to give priority to price stability, does not exclude the flexibility and pragmatism essential in the 
implementation of policy in order to reduce short term volatility in an uncertain environment. Let me 
recall  just  two  examples.  In  April  of  1999  our  main  refinancing  rate  was  lowered  to  the  then 
unprecedented  level  of  2.5  per  cent,  when  inflation  was  around  1  per  cent  and  the  economy  was 
showing signs of weakness. Focussed on avoiding possible deflationary risks, that decision meant that 
the Governing Council was taking insurance against more negative developments which, although not 
the  most  likely  to  occur,  were  nevertheless  possible.  The  other  example  refers  to  the  cut  in  rates 
decided in May 2001 when headline inflation was above 3 per cent but the world economy seemed to 
be on the brink of recession and there were no risks for medium term inflation. 
This  flexible  approach  was  appropriate  in  both  cases  and  was  validated  by  subsequent  events. 
Monetary policy cannot be transformed into a dogmatic and mechanical science and it will always be 
necessary  to  use  good  judgement  to  properly  assess  the  balance  of  the  risks  regarding  inflation 
prospects. The same assessment of risks that is also essential to good communication with markets 
which has become such a crucial part of the activity of central banks. The recent clarification of our 
monetary  strategy,  in  particular  concerning  the  goal  of  price  stability  now  defined  as  implying  an 
inflation rate «below but close to two per cent», was thus important to improve communication and to 
ensure the continuation of good monetary policy for the euro area. 
Turning now to our own national perspective, it is clear that Portugal has been a net beneficiary as a 
participant  in  the  European  economic  and  monetary  union.  Among  other  things,  we  have  taken 
advantage  of  our  trade  interdependence  with  Europe  through  currency  stability;  we  imported  a  low 
inflation regime that is good for long-term growth and we have benefited from financial integration that 
granted us lower bond rates and a lower cost of capital. There are obviously risks involved and the 
need to adopt new and rigorous discipline concerning public finance and flexibility of markets in order 
to achieve timely adjustment of wages and prices. In view of a past history of high inflation, Portugal 
could be considered a good candidate to illustrate what some critics underline as the great difficulty of 
a single monetary policy in dealing with a group of heterogeneous economies. In our case, however, 
the  performance  of  the  economy  throughout  this  period  does  not  confirm  these  possible  causes  of 
concern. Since 1999 Portugal has had an average positive inflation differential with the euro area of 
only  1.2  per  cent  and  an  average  annual  output  growth  of  0.5  per  cent  higher  than  the  one  of  our 
partners.  Considering  the  overall  picture,  the  dispersion  of  inflation  in  the  euro  area,  after  only  four 
years, is remarkably similar to the one verified in much older monetary unions like the USA or Canada. 
What  some  critics  seem  to  forget  is  that  monetary  union  itself  contributes  to  the  deepening  of 
economic and financial integration, by promoting the medium term convergence of inflation and the 
synchronization  of  the  business  cycle.  These  developments  contribute  to  dispel  the  risks  of 
asymmetric shocks in the future. What does not disappear is the risk of an initial period of excessive 
expansion  of  expenditure  and  debt  after  joining  a  monetary  union  that  guarantees  a  regime  of  low 
inflation and low interest rates. We have felt the consequences of this hazardous development. The 
economy,  however,  has  automatic  correcting  mechanisms  as  economic  agents  soon  have  to  begin 
restraining  their  indebtedness  and  adjusting  their  spending.  In  spite  of  the  restrictive  nature  of  this 
mechanism we could have achieved a gradual soft landing of the economy if two new factors had not 
made  their  appearance:  the  strong  deceleration  of  the  world  economy  and  the  budget  crisis  that 
emerged in 2001. The Government had to adopt difficult measures of budget consolidation to reduce 
the structural deficit from –4.6 per cent of GDP to –2.5 per cent last year. The recession we are now 
going  through,  with  annual  growth  this  year  around  –1  per  cent,  is  making  things  more  difficult  for 
fiscal policy. More than others, we would have justification not to comply exactly with the present fiscal 
rules. However, as small nations always have to try harder, we still hope to be able to cope with the 
situation, in spite of being very much dependent on developments of the world economy. 
An economic recovery is definitely coming, even if some doubts remain about its intensity or duration. 
In fact, uncertainties remain in connection to the large unbalances existing in some economies. It is 
deceptive to think that everything can be solved by exchange rate adjustments. The problem is one of 
saving rate insufficiency and will require internal financial adjustments. 
In the process of global economic adjustment Europe should not bear the main burden of exchange 
rate  corrections.  The  responsibility  of  Europe  is  to  implement  the  necessary  reforms  in  order  to 
increase its rate of potential growth. We need to deal with the very serious consequences of negative 
demographic developments, of technological shortfalls and the requirements to flexibly adjust markets 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
to  the  demands  of  the  new  international  environment.  We  need  good  structural  policies  to  restore 
confidence in the future. These reforms are a condition to preserve the basic features of the European 
model,  that  particular  combination  of  stability,  growth  and  social  cohesion  that  has  made  Europe  a 
beacon  of  civilization.  It  is  indeed  in  Europe  that  one  can  find  the  most  humane  and  progressive 
societies  compatible  with  the  human  condition.  But,  in  the  present  world  environment,  like  in  the 
hegelian “aufhebung”, we have to transform in order to maintain. What we have to preserve comes 
from our common cultural heritage. If by society we mean a community of men living under a system 
of «opinions, norms, desires and beliefs», then Ortega y Gasset was right to say that «the European 
society has historically preceded all European nations». The reality of nations cannot, of course, be 
ignored as they are our main form of socialization and the place where predominantly we exercise our 
rights. But they are now part of a wider community. The euro is the more important manifestation of 
our common bond and a great rampart that defends our economic and social autonomy. But more is 
needed. A recent large inquiry organized by the German Marshall Fund showed that 71 per cent of 
Europeans want the European Union to become an international power. The new Constitution, now in 
preparation, is an opportunity to give form to what the present european consciousness expects of our 
Union. Let us hope that, as a result of our endeavours, we will be able to say about the near future of 
Europe what Ortega said about the role of culture: «a moment of clarity in the confusion of the world». 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 3
