Jarle Bergo: Crisis resolution and financial stability in Norway 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
50th Anniversary of Bank Indonesia, Jakarta, 10 December, 2003. 
The references and the Charts in pdf can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 Yours excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.  
It is a great pleasure to attend this important conference in conjunction with the 50th anniversary of 
Bank Indonesia, and have the opportunity to share our experience of handling a banking crisis with 
colleagues from South East Asia.  
The banking crisis in Norway in the early 1990s was not as severe as the banking crises some of the 
Asian countries faced in the late 1990s or the one our neighbouring countries Sweden and Finland 
experienced. In 1991 - at the peak of our crisis - bank loan losses amounted to 2.8 per cent of GDP. In 
the  same  year  non-performing  loans  accounted  for  9  per  cent  of  loans  outstanding  for  the  entire 
banking industry1. The corresponding figure for Indonesia was as high as 70 per cent, 33 per cent in 
Thailand, and 18 per cent in Sweden2.  
Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that the Norwegian crisis was systemic; in 1991 three of the four 
largest banks and a number of smaller ones had failed or were in deep financial trouble.  
In this relatively short presentation, I will concentrate on the main issues of the crisis and its resolution. 
Thus, not every stage in the development of the crisis will be recapitulated, or every step and detail in 
its  resolution.  Nor  have  I  tried  to  reflect  every  nuance  in  the  public  debate,  in  the  reports  from 
parliamentary commissions and in research papers on the subject3. The views I put forward are my 
own and have been deliberately sharpened to promote discussion.  
The  most  important  characteristics of  the  resolution  of  the  Norwegian  crisis  can  be  summarized  as 
follows:  
• 
The  banks’  own  collective  guarantee  funds  handled  the  problems  in  the  banking  sector 
before the crisis became systemic.  
No blanket guarantee for the banks’ debts was provided by the government.  
No regulatory forebearance.  
No liquidity support to banks whose solvency was in doubt.  
A  clear  and  transparent  division  of  responsibility  between  the  political  authorities,  the 
supervisory authority and the central bank was established early on.  
Government  support  was  contingent  on  strict  requirements  being  met,  e.g.  existing 
shareholders accepting a write-down to cover losses to the extent possible.  
No micro-management of the banks.  
Measures taken to prevent supported banks exploiting the situation vis-à-vis non-supported 
banks.  
No asset management companies or “bad banks”.  
• 
I shall comment on each of these issues, but before doing this let me briefly mention the background 
for the crisis:  
                                                         
1   Source: Sandal (2004). 
2   Source: Kane and Klingebiel (2002) and Norges Bank. 
3  
Interested  readers  are  referred  to  Moe,  Solheim  and  Vale  (2004),  Norwegian  Official  Reports  (1992),  Wilse  (1995),  and 
Stortinget (1998). Steigum (2004) sets out the macroeconomic background and implications of the banking crisis. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 1
During  1984  and  1985,  the  Norwegian  banking  system  was  deregulated.  In  this  new  environment, 
banks started to compete for market shares. We saw a huge increase in bank lending which, coupled 
with  general  optimism  (oil!)  and  interest  rates  that  were  kept  artificially  low,  created  an  economic 
boom. However, neither bank managers nor supervisors had much experience of banks operating in a 
competitive credit market, and did not pay sufficient attention to banks’ risk exposure.  
A sharp fall in prices for our main export commodities, oil and gas, and the need to consolidate the 
economy after the boom and bring down rampant inflation, led to a recession in the late 1980s.  
In short, deregulation, a lending boom, and an ensuing recession set the stage for increasing bank 
losses.  
The Norwegian banking crisis evolved in two stages:  
In the first stage from 1988 till 1990, several small and some medium banks failed.  
From 1990 - 1991, the crisis became systemic. The three largest commercial banks, accounting for 
half of the market for credit to the domestic non-financial sector, were in deep trouble.  
During the first stage of the crisis, the problems were mostly handled by the banks’ own guarantee 
funds. Membership  in  the funds  is  mandatory  and  the  funds are  financed  ex  ante  by  fees  from  the 
member banks.  
These funds had a wider mandate than just paying out depositors at the closure of a failed bank. If 
liquidating the failed bank and paying out the depositors was considered a more costly alternative than 
recapitalizing the bank or providing guarantees or financial support to facilitate a take-over, the funds 
were free to do so.  
However, by the end of 1990, bank-owned funds had effectively depleted almost all of their capital and 
it became apparent that the larger banks might also face problems. To make sure that there would still 
be a safety net present, the government established the Government Bank Insurance Fund - or GBIF - 
in early 1991. At the same time it was made clear that it was through this fund only that public money 
might  be  injected  into  failing  banks.  The  central  bank  might  provide  liquidity  support  only  once 
solvency was assured. The GBIF was given a specific grant by the Storting (parliament). The new fund 
could  lend  money  to  the  banks’  own  guarantee  funds  to  enable  them  to  recapitalize  failing  banks. 
Later, as the crisis escalated, the GBIF was permitted to recapitalize the banks directly.  
In both cases, strict conditions were attached.  
Most often these included:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
An example of the conditions that were imposed can be found in chart 8. These conditions were of 
course rather unattractive to bank managers, board members and shareholders. And that was part of 
the objective; the management of a troubled bank should have a strong incentive to try other solutions 
before approaching the GBIF. For those that had to resort to the GBIF, an important aim was to force 
them onto a sounder track of business.  
Curbing  the  activities  of  banks  receiving  capital  from  the  GBIF  also  implied  that  there  was  no 
competitive advantage for these banks over rival banks that were not receiving this kind of support.  
In addition, the value of the existing share capital in the bank would be written down according to the 
bank’s losses. In cases where the losses exceeded the existing share capital, the entire capital would 
be  written  down  to  zero.  Such  decisions  would  normally  have  to  be  made  by  the  banks’  General 
Meetings.  In  order  to  avoid  a  stalemate  if  a  majority  at  the  meeting  objected  to  the  decision,  the 
Storting had one month earlier made an amendment to the Commercial Bank Act. This amendment 
entitled the government by Royal Decree to write down the share capital of a bank against losses in 
the audited interim accounts, if the shareholders’ General Meeting did not do so. This authority was 
used in two instances where shareholders refused to write down a bank’s shares as required by GBIF. 
Shareholders in one bank brought the case to the courts, but lost.  
the management and board of directors of the bank were replaced  
the existing share capital was written down to cover losses to the fullest extent possible  
the bank’s operating costs were reduced and some of its activities downsized  
measures were taken to restrain growth in the bank’s total assets.  
2 
 BIS Review 58/2003
That shareholders in this way were forced to take a bank’s losses before tax payers’ money was put 
on  the  table,  was  to  my  mind  imperative  in  order  to  muster  the  necessary  political  support  and 
acceptance among the electorate for the rescue operations. It is hard to imagine that it would at all 
have  been  possible  to  support  the  banks  if  the  old  managers  and  shareholders  were  allowed  to 
maintain their stakes in a failed bank.  
The  conditions  attached  to  the  capital  injections  from  the  Government  Bank  Insurance  Fund  were 
explicitly set out in a written agreement between the bank and the GBIF. This agreement was made 
public.  The  bank  was  required  to  report  regularly  to  the  fund  on  the  fulfilment  of  the  terms  of  the 
agreement.  
The GBIF was headed by a decision-making board of experts and its operations were carried out at a 
distance  from  the  political  authorities.  However,  the  GBIF  kept  in  close  contact  with  the  financial 
supervisors and the central bank. The central bank also played a part as lender of last resort once the 
banks  had  been  recapitalized.  General  assurances  were  given  that  the  central  bank  would  provide 
liquidity  support  to  sound  financial  institutions  (including  non-banks).  However,  the  banks  generally 
managed  to keep  their  funding,  and  did  not  have  to  resort  to  the  central  bank  to  any  extraordinary 
extent.  
Before GBIF injected capital into crisis-stricken banks, efforts were made to attract private investors. 
However,  these  efforts  did  not  succeed.  Experience  shows  that  in  times  of  recession  and  high 
uncertainty  investors  will  be  extremely  reluctant  to  take  on  risk.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
government was the only source available to support the financial system. In a way, the government 
became the “owner of last resort”.  
In light of the high level of uncertainty, the funding of the GBIF was regarded as expenses in the fiscal 
accounts,  not  as  an  investment.  In  retrospect,  however,  capital  supplied  by  the  government  to  the 
problem banks  proved  to yield  a reasonable  positive  return.  Hence,  it  might have  been a profitable 
investment for private investors, although with a huge risk ex ante.  
To  counteract  the  generally  low  supply  of  equity  capital  during  the  banking  crisis,  a  separate 
Government  Bank  Investment  Fund  was  set  up.  The  Fund  was  intended  to  take  part  in  equity 
emissions at (non-problem) banks on commercial terms. Certain other forms of general support to the 
banking industry were also provided.  
At its peak, the share of state ownership in the banking sector was close to 60 percent.  
Unlike  many  other  countries  dealing  with  a  banking  crisis,  Norway  did  not  set  up  a  separate  asset 
management company - or “bad bank” - to handle problem loans. There were several reasons why we 
chose not to do this:  
• 
In none of the problem banks in Norway was the ratio of non-performing loans considered to 
be of such magnitude that it would require so much attention from the management of the 
bank that it would distract them from their main goal - to bring the bank back to profitability.  
The  banks  themselves  knew  their  borrowers  best  and  had  experience  in  working  out 
defaulted  loans.  Handling  such  loans  will  always  be  part  of  a  large  bank’s  business,  and 
transferring employees with this expertise to a separate company might have left the banks 
more vulnerable when they encountered new problem loans.  
Setting up an asset management company and transferring bad loans from the banks would 
have required complicated accounting and legal work. In particular it would have been very 
difficult to find a fair price at which the loans should be transferred.  
The responsibility of handling the problem loans should remain with those who had the most 
to gain from a successful handling - the banks.  
Last but not the least; such an asset management company would have had to be financed 
by government money. Thus, more taxpayers’ money would have been put at risk.  
    However,  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  banks  themselves,  alone  or  jointly,  establishing 
subsidiaries to handle the bad loans. None chose to do so.  
BIS Review 58/2003 
 3
this  difference  can  probably  be 
Nor  did  the  Norwegian  authorities  issue  a  blanket  guarantee  for  the  banks’  liabilities.  Such  a 
guarantee can create moral hazard problems and actually lead to more bank problems in the future4. 
In  addition,  it  was  not  considered  proper  for  the  government  to  take  on  an  open-ended  and  not 
budgeted liability. Nevertheless, when the crisis emerged, it was made clear both by the Minister of 
Finance and by Norges Bank that measures necessary to bolster confidence in our financial system 
would be taken. No assurances were given that individual banks would be rescued. In this respect, it 
was  probably  a  blessing  that  there  was  no  government  ownership  in  commercial  banks  before  the 
crisis. In the end however, only two small banks were shut down and depositors paid back through the 
banks’ guarantee funds.  
By late 1993 - one year after Norway left the peg to the ECU and started to lower the interest rate - the 
crisis was effectively over and banks had started to earn normal profits. Banks in general came out of 
the crisis much leaner and more efficient than before.  
The discounted value of the gross fiscal costs of the resolution of the Norwegian crisis resolution is 
estimated at 2.9 per cent of GDP as of year end 1993. At the same time, the net fiscal costs - adjusted 
for the value of the government’s shares in the banks - were estimated at 0.8 per cent of GDP5. As 
referred to above, for the whole period up to the present a positive return was achieved on the capital 
invested.  
It might be interesting to compare fiscal costs in Norway to fiscal costs in Sweden which had a crisis of 
similar size relative to the size of the economy. Looking at simple non-discounted sums, gross fiscal 
costs  for  Sweden  were  3.6  per  cent  of  GDP  in  1997.  For  Norway,  the  comparable  figure  was  only 
2 per  cent6.  Part  of 
to  Sweden’s  use  of 
government-financed asset management companies as part of their crisis resolution.  
However,  during  a  banking  crisis  there  are  important  costs  to  society  in  addition  to  the  pure  fiscal 
costs.  Some  attempts  have  been  made  to  estimate  the  cumulative  effects  of  the  banking  crisis  on 
Norway’s  GDP.  These  estimates  vary  considerably  from  a  low  of  9.8  per  cent  of  GDP  to  a  high  of 
27.1 per  cent7.  This  wide  variation  illustrates  the  methodological  difficulties  involved  in  isolating  the 
effects of the banking crisis per se.  
No  doubt  the  economic  costs  of  the  crisis  -  however  measured  -  would  have  been  far  larger  if  the 
problem banks had been forced to close. Insured depositors might not have lost that much - although 
this is questionable - but the situation for borrowers might have been serious if they had been forced to 
repay their loans early. Given the state of the Norwegian economy at that time, finding a new bank 
willing to extend sufficient credit would no doubt have been difficult - we would most probably have 
experienced a severe credit crunch that deepened the recession8. The main purpose of the rescue 
operations was to prevent such a scenario from becoming reality.  
Banks  receiving  a  capital  injection  from  the  government  were  able  to  continue  their  normal  bank 
lending  and  other  banking  operations.  Empirical  studies  indicate  that  the  credit  conditions  of  firms 
borrowing from these troubled banks were no worse than for borrowers at non-crisis banks.9  
In  1994,  the  government  started  to  sell  its  shares  in  the  banks.  At  present  the  government  has  a 
substantial share in only one of the three banks it took over during the crisis. The two others are now 
subsidiaries of a Danish and a Nordic banking group respectively. Fears of a foreign take-over, also of 
the  largest  commercial  bank,  has  -  at  least  so  far  -  led  the  government  to  opt  for  remaining  an 
important owner.  
When the government as part of a crisis resolution steps in as an owner of last resort, the intention is 
usually to get out of this position once the bank has proved to be profitable again. This is probably 
traced  back 
                                                      
4   Cf. Kane and Klingebiel (2002). 
5   Source: St.meld. 39 (1993-94). 
6   Source: For Sweden: Jennergren and Näslund (1998). For Norway: Norges Bank, Moen (2003). 
7   See Hoggarth, Reis and Saporta (2002). 
8   Peek  and  Rosengren  (2000)  look  at  the  loan  supply  shock  facing  U.S.  firms  borrowing  from  Japanese  banks  during  the 
banking crisis in Japan. They identify a substantial impact on U.S. real estate activity from this supply shock. 
9   See Ongena, Smith and Michalsen (2003) and Vale (2002). 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2003
good advice, but there is a delicate balance between restoring private ownership quickly and trying to 
recover as much as possible of the government’s fiscal costs.  
The Norwegian banking crisis was handled swiftly and transparently and at relatively low cost to the 
taxpayers. Furthermore, the banks that came out of the crisis had trimmed their operating costs and 
established much better systems to evaluate credit risks.  
In one respect, we were rather lucky compared to others. The crisis built up gradually, so there was 
time  to  assess  the  situation  and  strengthen  the  defences  of  the  financial  system  before  the  crisis 
became systemic. The banks’ equity capital provided the first line of defence and the banks’ collective 
guarantee  funds  the  second  when  bank  losses  started  to  soar.  The  third  line  of  defence  -  the 
Government Bank Insurance Fund - was only established when it was evident that the first and second 
lines of defence did not hold, but it was nevertheless established in time.  
By  and  large  most  scholars  seem  to  agree  that  the  resolution  of  the  crisis  in  Norway  was  fairly 
successful. But even if it was, right there and then, there is no guarantee that the same recipe will be 
successful  in  future  or  in  other  countries.  In  recognition  of  this  and  to  avoid  moral  hazard,  the  law 
establishing the Government Bank Insurance Fund has now been repealed and the Fund has ceased 
its  operations.  Even  if  government  capital  injections  in  the  large  problem  banks  were  the  right 
resolution method in the early 1990s, it is far from evident that such a rescue operation would be the 
right  method  should  a  large  bank  fail  in  the  future.  However,  I  think  it  is  possible  to  identify  some 
principles that should be adhered to in order to increase the chances of success. The focus must be 
on  saving  the  financial  system,  not  the  individual  bank.  With  regard  to  the  way  failed  banks  are 
handled, the division of responsibilities between various parts of government must be clear, as it was 
ten years ago. As then, owners should be the first in line to shoulder losses. Similarly, the board and 
top management responsible for the failure of a bank should not be allowed to continue.  
Hopefully  we  have  all,  bankers  and  authorities  alike,  learnt  from  the  crisis.  At  the  central  bank,  we 
have  strengthened  our  surveillance  of  the  soundness  of  our  financial  system  (macro-prudential 
supervision). There is also an extensive exchange of information with the supervisors in the Banking 
Insurance  and  Securities  Commission.  Twice  a  year,  Norges  Bank  publishes  its  financial  stability 
report  where  the  risks  to  the  present  and  future  solvency  of  financial  institutions  in  Norway  are 
assessed. The aim is to detect the first signs of banking problems more quickly and possibly prevent 
them  from  escalating  into  a  crisis.  However,  the  financial  system  is  evolving  rapidly.  Tomorrow’s 
problems could easily be different from the past.  
Today, a large part of our banking industry is part of Nordic banking groups. This raises the question 
of whether a model for crisis resolution only based on national considerations would work. In light of 
this  challenge,  Nordic  central  banks  have  issued  a  memorandum  of  understanding  setting  out 
principles for the establishment of a structure for crisis management and the handling of information if 
a  pan-Nordic  bank  should  have  problems.  Nevertheless,  the  emergence  of  multinational  banking 
groups raises the question of whether some banks may be “too big to save”.  
Another difference from the early 1990s is the government’s one-third ownership in the largest bank. 
In terms of crisis resolution, this is most probably a further complication.  
Banking crises have occurred at irregular intervals as long as banks have existed. And it could happen 
again. We need to be vigilant and alert in our macro prudential supervision, and willing to consider 
new approaches in crisis resolution to lessen the impact of any new financial crisis.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 58/2003 
 5
