Rakesh Mohan: Challenges to monetary policy in a global context 
Speech by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 22nd Anniversary 
Lecture  of  the  Central  Banking  Studies  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  Colombo,  21  November 
2003. 
Dr Rakesh Mohan is grateful to Dr Michael Patra, Dr A Prasad and Shri Muneesh Kapur of the Reserve Bank of India for their 
assistance. The references can be found on the Bank of India’s website. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Recent global developments have significantly transformed the environment in which monetary policy 
operates.  This  has  thrown  up  opportunities  as  well  as  challenges.  Globalisation  has  expanded 
economic interdependence and interaction of countries greatly. This has created the need for greater 
coordination in terms of the design of appropriate institutional architecture as well as standardisation 
reflected  in  the  adoption of  similar  monetary  policy  approaches.  It  has  also been  associated  with  a 
dramatic lowering of inflation worldwide. Central banks have seized these opportunities to bring about 
institutional reforms to enhance accountability, and hence, credibility of monetary policy making. They 
have had to hone their technical and specialist management skills to acquire adequate competence to 
deal with the emerging complexities of financial markets. 
The more recent evolution of the global economy has accentuated the challenges that face monetary 
authorities. Increasingly, monetary policy decisions have to be made in an environment of heightened 
uncertainty.  Structural  changes  associated  with  globalisation  have  increased  the  uncertainty  in 
interpreting macroeconomic indicators regarding the state of the economy. Another form of uncertainty 
stems  from  the  strategic  interaction  between  private  agents and monetary  policy  authorities  and,  in 
particular, the role of expectations in the monetary transmission mechanism. Financial markets, driven 
by massive cross-border capital flows and the information technology revolution, immediately transfer 
the  valuation  of  risks  associated  with  uncertainty  across  the  globe  and  this  can  lead  to  contagion. 
Indeed,  global  interdependence  is  marked  by  common  shocks  and  a  “confidence  channel”  rapidly 
transmits these shocks to various parts of the world. 
All  this  has rendered  the conduct  of  monetary  policy  extremely  complex  in  such  an  environment  of 
interdependent  risks.  Therefore,  even  though  monetary  policy  is  conducted  towards  achieving 
domestic objectives, central banks have to follow developments carefully across the world. More than 
ever before, the choice of monetary arrangements depends on the choices that other countries 
make (Meltzer, 1997). 
In my lecture today, I propose to dwell upon the uncertainties that characterise the monetary policy 
environment,  the  underlying  macroeconomic conditions  in which  monetary  policy  has  to  be  set,  the 
process of inflation and the changing institutional response to the commitment to price stability, the 
role of capital flows and what the future holds in store. Against this backdrop, I hope to shed some 
light on the emerging discussion among central bankers about the course of monetary policy that is of 
greater relevance to developing countries such as ours. 
The setting: global economic situation 
II. 
The  growing  internationalisation  of  monetary  policy  has  been  brought  into  sharp  focus  by  the 
synchronised  global  downturn  since  the  late  1990s.  In  response,  monetary  authorities  all  over  the 
world have made concerted efforts to ease their policy stance significantly. The US has powered the 
world  economy  during  the  last  7-8  years  and  has  been  responsible  for  about  60  per  cent  of  world 
growth. Despite bursting of the stock market bubble, a rash of corporate governance problems and the 
IT  bubble,  US  has  been  the  main  engine  of  world  growth  in  recent  years  and  has  been  partly 
responsible  for  the  recovery  of  Asian  countries  after  the  1997  crisis.  In  the  bargain,  the  US 
accumulated twin deficits - current account deficit (CAD) of five per cent, and fiscal deficit of six per 
cent  (a  sharp  turnaround  from  a  surplus  of  1.2  per  cent  in  2000).  With  the  emergence  of  such  an 
imbalance in the US, other regions in the world have to exhibit an equal and opposite imbalance of 
their  own.  Ironically,  it  is  the  developing  countries  of  Asia  who  are  funding  the  CAD  of  the  US  and 
exhibiting surplus. The central banks of Asia are financing roughly 3-3.5 per cent of the CAD of the US 
and most of its fiscal deficit, as compared to the earlier situation where it was private sector flows that 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 1
were  funding  these  deficits.  In  view  of  the  difficulties  in  monetary  management  that  the  situation 
entails, this situation is clearly not sustainable indefinitely. There are no short-cut solutions since the 
problems  are  deep,  structural  and  inter-dependent:  hence  these  cannot  be  solved  through 
independent  or  unilateral  action.  For  example,  difficult  structural  reforms  are  necessary  in  the  Euro 
area; much more structural reforms are required in Japan, particularly in the financial sector; India has 
a  large  fiscal  deficit  problem,  and  China  cannot  afford  a  major  appreciation.  Hence,  relatively 
coordinated  medium  term  action  is  called  for  among  the  major  economies  of  the  world.  Unilateral 
action by any country is unlikely to solve its own problems. 
Recent months have seen the emerging signs of a recovery in economic activity, particularly in the 
US, Japan and emerging Asia. In the US, the pace of growth has picked up, assisted by expansionary 
macroeconomic policies and supportive financial conditions. Equity and bond markets have responded 
with  optimism  to  prospects  of  recovery  with  investor  interest  returning  to  technology  stocks  more 
rapidly  than  to  other  sectors.  In  Japan,  there  are  stronger  signs  in  the  third  quarter  that  a  cyclical 
upswing is underway, led by industrial activity and exports. In the UK and Australia, signs of recovery 
are clearly evident with rising household spending reflected in retail price inflation, prompting monetary 
authorities in these two countries to raise key policy interest rates against inflation surprises. China 
continues to grow at a remarkably strong pace while activity in other parts of Asia is bouncing back 
from the effects of SARS. There is nevertheless considerable uncertainty regarding the durability of 
the  pick-up.  In  the  US,  labour  markets  remain  sluggish  and  significant  excess  capacity  persists. 
Moreover,  the  substantial  support  provided  to  consumption  by  tax  cuts  is  unlikely  to  be  sustained. 
Despite  the  prospects  of  stronger  growth,  Japan  continues  to  experience  deflation.  The  ongoing 
concerns relating to structural weaknesses in the financial system remain. In contrast to the rest of the 
world,  the  euro  area  remains  conspicuously  weak  although  there  are  tentative  signs  of  a  modest 
recovery in recent months. Household demand remains sluggish and the unemployment rate for the 
area as a whole has risen. 
The burden of adjustment to the global slowdown has been highly asymmetric and this raises the risks 
associated with sustaining the recovery. The US has been virtually alone among the OECD countries 
in  pursuing  an  aggressive  and  flexible  countercyclical  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  -  cuts  in  policy 
interest rates have been the largest and the swing in structural government balance from a surplus of 
0.6 per cent of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 5.1 per cent in 2003 is the largest in three decades. Global 
growth  will  continue  to  be  led  by  the  US,  but  significant  downside  risks  could  emanate  from  the 
emergence of the record current account and fiscal deficits of the US. While the depreciation of the 
US dollar has so far been relatively orderly, further and substantial depreciation remains a danger to 
global recovery in the shadow of the twin deficits. History suggests that even an orderly adjustment in 
key exchange rates is likely to be associated with a slowdown in US growth - and, if growth in the rest 
of the world remains weak, in global growth as well (IMF, 2003). The continuing dependence of the 
world  on  the  US  heightens  the  risks  of  disorderly  adjustment,  particularly  if  it  translates  into  an 
off-setting  appreciation of  the  euro.  In  contrast  to  the  mid-1980s,  when  the  US  ran  current  account 
deficits of similar order as in 2003, neither Europe nor Japan is in a position today to pick up the slack. 
Looking ahead, it is unlikely that the US can provide the degree of support to the global economy that 
it has in the past. In particular, high fiscal deficits would offset the longer-term benefits of tax cuts and 
rising debt service burdens in the household sector will curb future consumption spending. 
In the euro area, whereas monetary policy can be adjudged to have been successful in an inflation 
targeting framework, the economic slowdown has been deep and prolonged, with GDP declining in the 
second quarter of 2003. The largest economies - Germany, France, the Netherlands and Italy - are in 
recession with high levels of unemployment. The unemployment rate is 8.8 per cent for the euro area 
as a whole and even higher in some individual countries: 13.2 per cent in Belgium, 9.7 per cent in 
France,  10.5  per  cent  in  Germany,  8.5  per  cent  in  Italy  and  11.4  per  cent  in  Spain.  Despite  some 
recent  improvement  in  expectations,  household  and  business  confidence  remains  depressed.  The 
poor performance of Germany, in particular, threatens to hold back the region’s recovery. Corporate 
balance sheets are still adjusting to the bursting of the asset price bubble of the late 1990s and this is 
holding down investment spending. Exports have been adversely affected by weak external demand 
as well as the substantial appreciation of the euro over the past two years. Monetary policy has been 
accommodative  but  different  inflation  and  unemployment  rates  in  different  countries  blur  the 
effectiveness of the common monetary policy. A more activist approach is warranted especially when 
downside  risks  to  individual  countries  have  potentially  area-wide  spillovers.  Although  Germany  and 
France  are  expected  to  post  fiscal  deficits  above  4  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2003,  the  scope  for 
countercyclical fiscal policy is limited by the Stability and Growth Pact. Structural reforms hold the key 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2003
to  improving  Europe’s  economic  performance,  including  further  liberalisation  of  labour  and  product 
markets, pension reforms and offsetting measures to deal with the aging population. 
In  Japan,  macroeconomic  performance  during  2003  has  exceeded  expectations  alongside  an 
improved  external  environment  and  upturn  in  equity  markets.  The  outlook  remains  overcast  with 
deflationary pressures and persistent weakness in the financial sector. The possibility of declines in 
equity or bond prices, a sustained appreciation of the Yen and rising public debt remain dangers to a 
durable  recovery.  More  rapid  and  bolder  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  are  needed  to  address  the 
large overhang of non-performing loans and the poor quality of capital in the banking sector. Financial 
sector  measures  need  to  be  complemented  by  corporate  restructuring.  Quantitative  easing  of 
monetary policy has kept short-term interest rates at zero, but has not been aggressive enough to end 
deflation. The build-up of public debt and pressures from population aging necessitate a medium-term 
strategy to impart sustainability to fiscal policy. 
Overall,  global  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  associated  misalignment  of  the  G-3  currencies 
remain the most serious threat to a broad-based and robust recovery. This has implications for the 
pattern  of  capital  flows.  In  contrast  to  preceding  years,  the  US  current  account  deficit  has  been 
financed primarily by sale of government and corporate paper rather than equity inflows. The bulk of 
these investments has been by central banks, particularly those in Asia. This is clearly unsustainable 
and  adjustments  will  be  needed  to  achieve  medium-term  stability.  An  eventual  narrowing  of  the 
US current account deficit will require emerging economies to share in the adjustment to prevent an 
undue burden on the euro area. A current issue of concern is the practice of greater flexibility in the 
exchange rate regimes of these countries, and the resulting efforts on the real economy. Studies have 
shown  that  greater  volatility  in  developing  countries’  real  exchange  rates  has  been  associated  with 
greater misalignment in G-3 countries with disruptive effect on both trade and finance channels. This 
emerges as a major source of uncertainty for the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  current  imbalances  in  the  world  where  Asian  countries  are  financing  Western  countries, 
particularly,  the  US  could  have  their  roots  in  longer  term  demographic  imbalances.  The  long-term 
demographics facing the world, which have an effect on the savings rate are not encouraging. The 
demographics in Europe, Japan and the US are against high saving rates. The median ages in Japan, 
Europe and the US are 4l, 40 and 35 years, respectively. Current trends indicate that the median age 
in Japan will increase to 50 by 2025. The situation in the US may not turn adverse due to their flexible 
immigration policies. Within Asia, India and China can  expect their savings rate to increase further, 
given that the private savings of these two countries are among the highest in the world, and in view of 
their favourable demographics over the next 20 years. Countries like India and China, which account 
for a large proportion of world population, also have low urbanisation levels of 30 to 35 per cent and 
will  be  moving  to  50  to  55  per  cent  in  the  next  20  to  30  years.  This  would  necessitate  higher 
infrastructure investment requiring higher capital inflows and a higher current account deficit. Thus, if 
the  Asian  countries  are  to  run  large  capital  account  surpluses  and  current  account  deficits,  the 
situation in the US and Europe would meet reversal. The issue is to try to comprehend what would be 
required for this macro reversal to occur. The current demographic trends in Europe and Japan are not 
sustainable. In the future, they may not be able to afford the pension system and social security as 
they  exist  now.  The  only  solution  in  Europe  seems  to  be  US  type  of  immigration  policies  towards 
labour market reforms. Currently, this is not possible because of high unemployment. 
Inflation: what is going on 
III. 
In  this  brief  overview  of  the  global  economic  situation  today,  I  have  tried  to  indicate  that  global 
imbalances are inter-related and how monetary policy making in countries like ours has become that 
much more difficult on a day-to-day basis. The most notable achievement in recent years has been the 
substantial success in almost all countries in reducing inflation to the lowest level in several decades. 
Sustained inflation is a relatively modern phenomenon. Until World War I, the international experience 
was one of long-run price stability. Following the turbulence of the inter-war period, the Second World 
War and the Korean War of the early 1950s, the Vietnam war of the 1960s and early 1970s, inflation 
gradually increased from the late 1960s, party as a result of expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. 
The massive oil price hike of 1973 stepped up global inflation to double-digits in the US and Western 
Europe. There was a huge transfer of resources to the Middle East from the rest of the world including 
Asia. The lasting consequence of this development of the 1970s has been the migration of workers 
from  countries  like  ours  who  are  now  remitting  back  large  sums  of  money  on  a  sustained  basis. 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 3
through  contractual 
transparency,  greater  accountability 
Although inflation abated in 1978, it rose to double-digit levels again by the end of 1979 following the 
second oil shock. Inflation finally broke in 1982, under the impact of aggressive disinflationary policies. 
The 1980s were marked by strong and widespread efforts to restore reasonable price stability through 
a  combination  of  tight  monetary  policy,  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  The  reduction  in 
inflation, facilitated by a significant decline in oil prices, set the stage for a robust economic recovery 
that continued till the end of the 1980s. Another inflation episode in 1989-90 due to the hardening of oil 
prices was met with aggressive monetary policy action which enabled a cooling-off by 1991 at the cost 
of a much shallower recession than the early 1980s. 
Since then, the world has been going through one of the longest phases of low inflation in post-World 
War II history. The decline in inflation is evident across countries at different stages of development. It 
has been most spectacular in developing countries where inflation fell from 31 per cent in early 1980s 
to  under  6  per  cent  in  2000-03.  In  Latin  America  and  the  countries  in  transition  where  inflation 
averaged 230 per cent and 360 per cent, respectively, during 1990-94, it is projected at around 10 per 
cent in 2003. Out of 184 members of the IMF, 44 countries had inflation greater than 40 per cent in 
1992. In 2003, this number has fallen to 3. For industrial countries, inflation, currently at around 2 per 
cent, has fallen below the lows of the 1950s. Arguably, deflation threatens more countries today than 
does high inflation. 
What has brought about this significant decline in inflation globally? A significant strand in the literature 
points  to  institutional  changes  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  -  independent  central  banks, 
increased 
frameworks,  and  greater 
coordination between monetary and fiscal authorities - which has enhanced the reputation of monetary 
authorities and increased public credibility in their ability to deliver low inflation. An equally influential 
body  of  work,  however, suggests  that monetary  authorities have  just  been  lucky and  that there  are 
other  factors  at  work  such  as  increased  level  of  competition  due  to  the  forces  of  globalisation, 
successful  fiscal  consolidation  in  developed  countries,  particularly  in  the  context  of  the  Maastricht 
Treaty, and structural changes in the global economy in which productivity has a major role to play and 
the rising prominence of the new economy. Have central banks been lucky or good? Perhaps a bit of 
both (Rogoff, 2003). While the evidence on either side is still evolving, the current assessment is that it 
is  unlikely  that  there  will  be  a  reversal  of  the  current  trend  in  inflation.  It  is  important,  however,  to 
introspect a little further in order to understand the dynamics of low inflation and its future compatibility 
with monetary policy in an international setting. 
An  important  factor  that  might  have  contributed  to  the  lowering  of  inflation  is  productivity  growth. 
Although productivity growth in Europe may not have been as high as it has been in the United States, 
the  disinflationary  effects  of  such  productivity  growth  in  one  region  get  transmitted  across  borders 
through increased competition in a globalised world, operating through lowering of price mark-ups and 
erosion of monopoly pricing power through the expansion of cross border trade. Increased competition 
has  made  prices  more  flexible  in  their  response  to  real  activity,  thereby  reducing  the  incentive  for 
monetary  policy  to  be  expansionary.  This  has  reinforced  credibility  in  the  commitment  of  monetary 
policy’s containing inflation (Rogoff, op cit). 
Despite growing globalisation and synchronisation of business cycles, the most striking change over 
the past three decades has been the moderation of volatility in GDP growth in most G-7 countries and 
this could also have contributed to lowering inflation (Stock and Watson, 2003). A number of factors 
are at work. First, the services sector, which is less susceptible to volatility than manufacturing, has 
increased its share in output. Second, inventory management has improved. Third, financial markets 
have provided households with easier access to credit. In the US, the sector that witnessed greatest 
reduction in volatility is housing. Moreover, there have been fewer oil supply and price disruptions as 
well  as  smaller  productivity  shocks  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  than  during  the  1960s  and  1970s. 
Although only a small part of the moderation in output volatility is attributed to monetary policy, this is 
hotly debated. For instance, it is widely believed that monetary policy in the US has been successful in 
implementing anticipatory non-inflationary policies and has focused on sustainable long-term real rates 
of interest (De Long, 2003). A significant increase in the flexibility of the US  economy to smoothen 
shocks  as  a  result  of  deregulation,  technology,  better  inventory  management  and  flexible  labour 
markets  has  enabled  it  to  absorb  shocks.  The  manner  in  which  a  shock  is  defined  is  critical.  The 
perception of a smaller shock is really ‘net shock’ i.e. gross shock minus what has been absorbed. 
Thus,  events  like  September  11  can  be  measured  only  in  a  net  sense.  Moreover,  in  an  integrated 
world, it would be difficult to distinguish between exogenity and endogeneity; for instance, an increase 
in oil prices could very well be treated as endogenous. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2003
Yet  another  set  of  forces  operating  on  inflation  emanates  from  technological  change.  Advances  in 
architecture and engineering as well as development of lighter but stronger materials has resulted in 
“downsized”  output,  requiring  more  technology  sophisticated  input.  This  process  has  accelerated  in 
the  recent  decades  with  the  advent  of  the  semi-conductor,  the  micro-processor,  the  computer  and 
satellite. The impact of technological change is evident in the huge expansion of the money value of 
output and trade but not in tonnage. As a consequence, material intensity of production has declined 
reflecting,  as  Fed  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  (1998)  noted,  “the  substitution,  in  effect,  of  ideas  for 
physical  matter  in  the  creation  of  economic  value”.  This  has  contributed  to  the  secular  decline  in 
commodity prices. In fact, a long-run trend decline in commodity prices over the last 140 years shows 
little  evidence  of  reversal.  Concerns over  increasing  commodity  price  volatility  around  this  declining 
trend have, however, increasingly engaged monetary policy attention in the short-run. 
A  significant  strand  in  the  literature  credits  changes  in  the  institutional  and  operating  framework  of 
monetary policy with the success in achieving low inflation. After the experience of sustained inflation 
of  the  1960s  and  1970s,  the  objective  of  inflation  control  became  stronger,  and  the  movement  of 
inflation targeting emerged. Massive cross-border capital flows, globalisation of financial markets and 
the information technology revolution have combined to alter significantly the choice of instruments of 
monetary policy, operational settings, lag structures and transmission mechanisms. In particular, these 
forces have led to the progressive erosion of the traditional anchors of monetary policy. In general, 
there has been a waning of the importance of intermediate targets. Even as monetary authorities deal 
with  this  difficult  transition,  several  countries  have  radically  altered  the  institutional  architecture  of 
monetary  policy,  including  increased  independence  of  the  monetary  authority,  clarity  of  rules  and 
responsibilities  and  constrained  discretion.  About  22  countries  have  adopted  policy  regimes  with 
inflation  as  the  single  target  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  inflation  targeting  is  quickly  emerging  as 
orthodoxy in the design of monetary policy. The ongoing slowdown in global economic activity and the 
threat  of  deflation  has,  however,  weakened  its  analytical  edifice.  Although  the  practice  of  inflation 
targeting is associated with a lowering of inflation, the jury is still out on the extent to which inflation 
targeting policies have actually contributed to the reductions in inflation that has occurred. Moreover, 
too low inflation, which is being observed today, is not just a disincentive for production decisions; it 
also delays consumer spending at a time when it could have been critical for triggering the upturn. It 
imparts inflexibility to labour markets, causing unemployment and deepening the slowdown. Signals 
from financial prices get blurred and this leads to misallocation of resources. In this context, the recent 
experience  with  inflation  targeting  as  a  framework  for  monetary  policy  warrants  a  close  and  hard 
scrutiny. 
The  fixation  with  short-run  price  stability  or  ‘inflation  nutting’,  to  borrow  a  term  from  Mervyn  King, 
Governor,  Bank  of  England  can  easily  lead  to  neglect  of  important  signs  of  macroeconomic  and 
financial  imbalances.  Moreover,  there  is  no  available  empirical  evidence  to  suggest  that  inflation 
targeting improves economic performance. In the euro area, for instance, setting the inflation target at 
close to 2 per cent is associated with weakening economic activity. This got pronounced in the second 
quarter of 2003 when real GDP declined, accompanied by large scale unemployment and the threat of 
deflation in the larger constituents. Furthermore, the relevance of a single inflation target for a large 
economy, in particular, can be debated. The inflation target for the euro area suffers from the problems 
of a ‘one size fits all’ monetary policy. Regional disparities warrant different short-run monetary policy 
approaches  to  its  objectives.  A  certain  amount  of  target  flexibility  and  balancing  of  conflicting 
objectives  are  unavoidable  in  the  real  world,  particularly  that  of  emerging  market  economies 
(Eichengreen, 2002). Indeed, there is a growing sense that by the time the current phase of global 
business cycle has run itself out, inflation targeting may not have stood the test of time. 
High and sustained growth of the economy in conjunction with low inflation is the central concern of 
monetary  policy.  The  rate  of  inflation  chosen  as  the  policy  objective  has  to  be  consistent  with  the 
desired  rate  of  output  and  employment  growth.  An  inappropriate  choice  can  lead  to  losses  of 
macroeconomic welfare. Monetary authorities have to continually contend with the short-run trade-off 
between growth and inflation. The problem is compounded by the fact that the association between 
growth and inflation is non-linear. At some low rates, inflation could operate in a manner that assists in 
bringing  back  unemployed  resources  into  the  economy  and  be  beneficial  or,  at  worst,  neutral  to 
growth. At higher levels, inflation is inimical to growth. There are also very low levels of inflation that 
are associated with no growth or even deflation. How low should the policy choice of inflation be or 
what is the threshold rate of inflation, if there is one, which is associated with the absence of harmful 
effects  of  growth,  therefore,  becomes  a  key  question.  There  have  been  various  studies  that  have 
attempted to estimate threshold inflation rates. They suggest that the threshold inflation rate depends 
upon a number of factors such as the structure of the economy, past inflation history, the degree of 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 5
indexation, and inflation expectations. Some studies suggest that the threshold inflation for developed 
and developing countries fall in the ranges of 1-3 per cent and 7-11 per cent, respectively (Khan and 
Senhadji,  2000).  An  abiding  problem  with  cross-country  studies,  however,  is  the  risk  of  being 
influenced by extreme values since samples include countries with inflation as low as one per cent and 
as high as 200 per cent and even higher. The estimation of such inflation threshold rates, therefore, 
needs  to  be  done  for  each  country  separately  (Rangarajan,  1998),  in  order  to  understand  the 
behaviour of the economy in relation to inflation. 
A major source of uncertainty in conducting monetary policy is the lack of a clear understanding of the 
inflationary process as it has unfolded in recent years. This has obscured a proper assessment of the 
nature of shocks impacting on the economy and the resulting risks to price stability. Variations in the 
timeliness  and  reliability  of  inflation  indicators,  uncertainty  surrounding  unobservable  indicators  like 
potential  output  and  gaps  in  the  intrinsic  knowledge  of  the  central  banks  about  the  state  of  the 
economy complicate the making of monetary policy. Knowledge of the relationship between inflation 
and  its  determinants  remains  limited  (ECB,  2001).  Even  if  there  were  a  consensus  on  a  suitable 
model,  considerable  uncertainty  would  remain  regarding  the  strength  of  the  structural  relationships 
within  the  model.  An  even  more  fundamental  problem  is  that  parameters  may  vary  over  time  as  a 
result  of  structural changes  in  the  economy.  This  presumably  explains  why  no  central  bank  uses a 
formal model to derive its actual policies; for the foreseeable future, models will be an aid to judgement 
rather than a substitute for judgement (Feldstein, 2003). The simple principle of inflation targeting thus 
is also not so simple and, poses problems for monetary policy making in developing countries. 
The prime mover: international capital flows 
IV. 
Global capital flows impact the conduct of monetary policy on a daily basis. The problem, however, is 
that capital flows have followed a boom-bust pattern. Net capital flows are currently limping back from 
the  severe  retrenchment  imposed  by  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  which  brought  to  an  end  the  most 
dramatic surge of capital flows in post-World War II history. It is only in the recent period, particularly in 
2003, that conditions for rejuvenation of capital flows are improving. 
Large swings in capital flows are observed not only in the short term but there have been long term 
patterns as well. A major surge in capital flows started around the 1870s and continued till the first 
World  War.  The  flows  were  mainly  between  the  so-called  developed  countries  -  from  the  core 
countries of Western Europe to peripheral Europe and overseas European settlements - and in the 
form  of  foreign  investment,  with  more  than  two-thirds  comprising  portfolio  inflows.  This  era,  which 
coincided with the operation of the classical gold standard, is widely regarded as the high watermark 
of capital mobility. The boom ended with the first World War. A brief restoration of the gold standard 
was  shattered  by  the  Great  Depression  and  the  ensuing  period  up  to  the  early  1940s  was 
characterised  by  modest  flows  to  the  then  emerging  market  economies  for  development  finance. 
Capital  controls  were  widespread  in  the  attempt  to  maintain  gold  parities  and  international  finance 
became fragmented by bilateral trade agreements. In the post-World War II period up to the 1970s, 
controls spread and intensified. International capital flows were primarily among industrial economies. 
The  US  removed  restrictions  on  capital  outflows  in  1974-75  while  Germany  retained  controls  over 
inflows until the late 1970s. The UK maintained controls until 1979 and Japan completed liberalisation 
of  the  capital  account  in  1980.  Developing  countries  persevered  with  controls  with  some  Latin 
American  countries  embarking  on  flawed  liberalisation  as  part  of  exchange  rate-based  stabilisation 
programmes in the mid-1970s. 
In the period since 1973, dramatic changes set in. Private capital flows to developing countries were 
renewed as commercial banks furiously recycled oil surpluses. Asia and Latin America received the 
maximum share. Developing country debt exploded, rising at a compound annual rate of 24 per cent 
(World Bank, 2003) until the debt crisis of 1982 burst the bubble. Capital flows to developing countries 
slowed down substantially but did not dry up. Between 1983 and 1989, they fell to less than a third of 
their level in 1977-82. A generalised risk aversion to developing country debt dominated international 
financial markets and developed countries turned into attractive destinations. By the end of the 1980s, 
direct investment inflows to developing countries were only one-eighth of flows to developed countries; 
portfolio  flows  to  developing  countries were  virtually  non-existent.  During  the  1980s  and  the  1990s, 
several  developing  countries  in  Asia  undertook  capital  account  liberalisation  as  part  of  unilateral 
financial  deregulation,  often  in  the  face  of  large  external  surpluses.  In  general,  the  period  from  the 
mid-1980s to mid-1990s was characterised by removal of official restrictions on financial markets and 
wider  market-oriented  reforms  in  both  mature  and  emerging  market  economies.  The  most  dramatic 
6 
 BIS Review 54/2003
move towards capital account liberalisation occurred among the continental members of the European 
Union. 
Investor confidence returned to the developing world in the early 1990s in the aftermath of the Brady 
Plan. Net capital flows surged to pre-1914 levels by 1996, temporarily slowed by the EMS  crisis of 
1992.  The  impact  of  the  Mexican  crisis  of  1994  was  absorbed  by  the  large  mobilisation  of  official 
financing  which  acted  as  a  buffer.  The  composition  of  flows  altered  significantly,  with  private  flows 
exceeding  the  official  flows  by  the  end  of  the  1980s.  Whereas  in  the  1970s  bank  lending  was  the 
dominant component of capital flows to emerging markets, starting in the early 1990s, equity and bond 
investors became dominant. Over the last decade, portfolio investment exceeded bank lending in eight 
years.  The  range  of  investors  purchasing  emerging  market  securities  broadened.  Specialised 
investors  such  as  hedge  funds  and  mutual  funds  accounted  for  the  bulk  of  portfolio  inflows  up  to 
mid-1990s.  In  the  subsequent  years,  pension  funds,  insurance  companies  and  other  institutional 
investors increased their presence in emerging markets. Although portfolio flows became important, it 
was FDI which accounted for the bulk of private capital flows to emerging market economies, going 
through  a  6-fold  jump  between  1990  and  1997.  International  bank  lending  to  developing  countries 
increased sharply in this period, and was most pronounced in Asia, followed by Eastern Europe and 
Latin America. Much of the increase in bank lending was in the form of short-term claims, particularly 
on Asia. 
In the late 1990s, capital flows to developing countries received severe shocks - first from the Asian 
crisis of 1997-98, then by the turmoil in global fixed income markets, and more recently by the collapse 
of  the  Argentine  currency  board  peg  in  2001  and  the  spate  of  corporate  failures  and  accounting 
irregularities in 2002. Net flows to developing countries declined almost continuously after 1997. The 
fall  was  particularly  sharp  in  the  form  of  bank  lending  and  bonds,  reflecting  uncertainty  and  risk 
aversion.  In  2002,  net  capital  flows  fell  again,  remaining  far  below  the  1997  peak.  Flows  to  Latin 
America  reached  their  lowest  level  in  a  decade.  Flows  to  Asia  began  a  hesitant  recovery  with  new 
bank lending exceeding repayments for the first time in five years. Global FDI inflows, down by 41 per 
cent in 2001, fell by another 21 per cent in 2002, attributable to weak economic growth, large sell-offs 
in  equity  markets,  and  a  plunge  in  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions.  The  USA  and  the  UK 
accounted for more than half of the fall. Flows to Asia were held up by China. 
Despite  the  global  uncertainties,  conditions  for  capital  flows  have  improved  in  2003.  Sell-offs  in 
international  bond  markets  in  June  and  July  reflected  upward  revisions  in  investors’  expectations 
about  growth  prospects.  Spillovers  to  credit  and  equity  markets  were  limited.  Emerging  markets,  in 
general,  outperformed  the  mature  markets.  Some  positive  aspects  of  the  roller-coaster  of  the  last 
decade  are:  a  steady  consolidation  of  external  debt  by  developing  countries  cushioned  by  the 
resilience of FDI, and the growth of local-currency bond markets as an innovation to manage credit 
risk. 
The experience of living with capital flows since the 1970s has fundamentally altered the context of 
development finance.  It  has  also  brought  about  a  drastic revision  in  the  manner  in  which monetary 
policy  is  conducted.  In  particular,  there  is  a  dramatic  shift  in  the  still  unsettled  debate  on  the 
determinants of the exchange rate and the choice of the appropriate exchange rate regime, although 
the weight of opinion is clearly in favour of a flexible regime. According to conventional wisdom, it was 
trade flows which were the key determinants of exchange rate movements. Consequently, the degree 
of openness to international trade, price and non-price competitiveness and factors which determined 
market shares abroad were thought to have a crucial bearing on the level and the movement of the 
exchange rate. In more recent times, with the tail of mobile capital accounts wagging the dog of the 
balance  of  payments,  the  importance  of  capital  flows  in  determining  the  exchange  rate  movements 
has increased considerably, rendering some of the earlier guideposts of monetary policy formulation 
possibly anachronistic. On a day-to-day basis, it is capital flows which influence the exchange rate and 
interest  rate  arithmetic  of  the  financial  markets.  Instead  of  the  real  factors  underlying  trade 
competitiveness,  it  is  expectations  and  reactions  to  news  which  drive  capital  flows  and  exchange 
rates,  often  out  of  alignment  with  fundamentals.  Capital  flows  have  been  observed  to  cause 
overshooting of exchange rates as market participants act in concert while pricing information. Foreign 
exchange markets are prone to bandwagon effects. The effects of capital flows on the exchange rate 
are amplified by the fact that capital flows in ‘gross’ terms can be several times higher than the ‘net’ 
capital flows. 
The experience with capital flows has important lessons for the choice of the exchange rate regime. 
The  advocacy  for  corner  solutions  -  a  fixed  peg  a  la  currency  board  without  monetary  policy 
independence or a freely floating exchange rate retaining discretionary conduct of monetary policy - is 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 7
foreign  exchange  reserves  as  a  circuit-breaker 
distinctly  on  the  decline.  The  weight  of  experience  seems  to  clearly  be  in  favour  of  intermediate 
regimes with country-specific features, no targets for the level of the exchange rate, exchange market 
interventions to ensure orderly rate movements, and a combination of interest rates and exchange rate 
interventions  to  fight  extreme  market  turbulence.  In  general,  emerging  market  economies  have 
accumulated  massive 
for  situations  where 
unidirectional  expectations  become  self-fulfilling.  It  is  a  combination  of  these  strategies  which  will 
guide  monetary  authorities  through  the  impossible  trinity  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  open  capital 
account and an independent monetary policy. 
Capital  movements  have  rendered  exchange  rates  significantly  more  volatile  than  before.  For  the 
majority  of  developing  countries  which  continue  to  depend  on  export  performance  as  a  key  to  the 
health of the balance of payments, exchange rate volatility has had significant real effects in terms of 
fluctuations  in  employment  and  output  and  the  distribution  of  activity  between  tradables  and 
non-tradables. In the fiercely competitive trading environment where countries seek to expand market 
shares aggressively by paring down margins, even a small change in exchange rates can develop into 
significant and persistent real effects. For labour intensive export producers, volatility in exchange rate 
movements  can  easily  translate  into  large  losses  of  economic  welfare.  In  the  final  analysis,  the 
heightened  exchange  rate  volatility  of  the  era  of  capital  flows  has  had  adverse  implications  for  all 
countries except the reserve currency economies. The latter have been experiencing exchange rate 
movements  which  are  not  in  alignment  with  their  macro  imbalances  and  the  danger  of  persisting 
currency misalignments looms large over all non-reserve currency economies. 
The issue dominating the conduct of monetary policy and exchange rate policy today in countries such 
as India and China is that of excess of capital inflows. Are these flows resulting from temporary global 
imbalances emanating from current economic policies and problems of the G-3 countries? Or do they 
reflect global changes of a more lasting nature. It is to the consideration of this issue that I now turn. 
Looking ahead: economic demographics 
V. 
Some  recent  research  has  focussed  on  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  demographic  patterns  (Joshi 
and Sanyal, 2003; UN, 2003). Over the next half-century, the population of the world will age faster 
than during the past half-century as fertility rates decline and life expectancy rises. The proportion of 
children (0-14 years) is expected to decline from 30 per cent in 2000 to 20 per cent in 2050 whereas 
the  proportion  of  the  aged  (60+  years)  will  double,  reaching  21  per  cent  of  the  total  population  by 
2050. The phenomenon of global ageing is likely to be associated with a progressive decline in saving 
rates and growth. In the interregnum, regional patterns of global population ageing are expected to 
bring  about  fundamental  alterations  in  saving-investment  balances  which  would  be  reflected  in  the 
magnitude  and  direction  of  international  capital  flows  with  implications  for  the  conduct  of  future 
monetary policy. 
In  general,  economies  pass  through  three  stages  of  demographic  transition  -  (i)  high  youth 
dependency (large proportion of population in the 0-14 years group), (ii) rise in working age population 
(15-59 years) relative to youth dependency and (iii) rise in elderly dependency (60+ years) relative to 
working age population. The second stage is regarded as the most productive from the point of view of 
secular growth since it is associated with the highest rate of saving and work force growth relative to 
the  other  stages.  So  far,  the  more  developed  regions  have  been  leading  the  process  of  population 
ageing and are likely to be deep into the third stage of demographic transition. In Europe, population 
ageing is most advanced and by 2050, this is projected to accelerate. Japan is currently the country 
with  the  oldest  population;  by  2050,  it  is  expected  to  have  the  highest  proportion  of  elderly  people 
among  industrialised  nations  (Government  of  Japan,  2003).  Projections  suggest  a  turning  point 
between  2010  and  2030  when  the  European  Union,  North  America  and  Japan  will  experience  a 
substantial decline in saving rate relative to investment which would be reflected in current account 
deficits. These regions will switch to importing capital. 
Most of the high performers of East Asia and China are in the second stage of the demographic cycle. 
Elderly  dependency  is  expected  to  double  by  2025.  Their  working  age  populations  will  increase 
modestly  and  then  shrink.  These  projections  suggest  that  East  Asia  could  increasingly  become  an 
important  supplier  of  global  savings  up  to  2025;  however,  rapid  population  ageing  thereafter  would 
reinforce  rather  than  mitigate  the  inexorable  decline  of  global  saving.  Increasingly  it  would  be  the 
moderate and the low performers among the developing countries which would emerge as exporters 
of international capital. India is entering the second stage of demographic transition and over the next 
half-century,  a  significant  increase  in  both  saving  rates  and  share  of  working  age  population  is 
8 
 BIS Review 54/2003
expected.  The  share  of  the  labour  force  in  population  is  expected  to  overtake  the  rest  of  Asia, 
including China, by 2030. 
In this scenario, the current phenomenon of overall surpluses in the balance of payments being run by 
several emerging market economies, including India, may not be a temporary one. The largest reserve 
holding countries (excluding gold) in the world are emerging market economies. Monetary authorities 
in  these  countries  are  grappling  with  the  expansionary  effects  of  net  foreign  assets  on  domestic 
monetary conditions. Faced with the loss of control over the monetary aggregates, interest rates and 
exchange  rates,  almost  all  of  these  countries  are  engaged  in  devising  innovative  methods  of 
sterilisation  to  delay  the  inevitable  sacrifice  of  discretion  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  its 
globalisation.  The  emerging  patterns  of  demography  indicate  that  this  source  of  uncertainty  for 
monetary authorities could become more significant than before. 
The key challenge for macroeconomic policies would be to ensure that the anticipated expansion in 
saving in developing countries is productively utilised within the economy and not exported abroad. 
Accordingly, it is vital to ensure that the investment rate rises in close co-movement with the saving 
rate.  Sustainable  growth  hinges  around  the  existence  of  a  critical  minimum  in  terms  of  physical 
infrastructure. The acceleration of growth in the future requires massive investments to close the gaps 
between demand and supply in key infrastructural areas such as power, roads and highways, ports 
and telecommunication, cities and urban utilities. India, China and Indonesia, which account for more 
than  a  third  of  the  world’s  population  can  be  expected  to  continue  urbanising  over  the  next  20  to 
40 years.  During  this  period,  the  investment  demand  for  resources  emanating  from  these  countries 
related  to  urbanisation  will  assume  larger  magnitudes.  The  history  of  urbanization  has  been  that 
countries that undergo such growth in levels of urbanization - from around 25 to 30 per cent to around 
50  to  60  per  cent  -  typically  have  to  attract  external  savings  to  supplement  their  own  to  satisfy  the 
massive  financing  needs for  infrastructure  investment  during  this  period.  If  the  conjecture regarding 
the  course  of  demography  and  associated  savings  pattern  that  I  have  just  posited  are  correct,  it  is 
unlikely that the current low inflationary scenario will continue in the medium term to long term. It is 
also  possible  that  the  current  phenomenon  of  increasing  savings  rates  in  Asian  countries  like  India 
and China does not continue to be valid over the next medium to long term. If that happens, there 
could again be a reversal of capital flows. There would then be tightening of liquidity in world capital 
markets with increased competition for resources. Thus, there is no assurance that the current trends 
of  excess  liquidity  accompanied  by  low  inflation  will  necessarily  continue  in  the  world.  Recent 
experience tells us that such reversals can occur very rapidly. 
This will pose significant problems in the conduct of monetary policy for our countries in the years to 
come.  The  future  growth  strategy  will  also  need  to  be  more  labour  absorbing  to  accommodate  the 
projected expansion in the work force. Reforms in the labour market, educational systems, pensions 
and  medical  care  would  gather  importance  within  the  overall  intensification  of  structural  reforms. 
Monetary  policy  would  have  to play  an important  role  in  bringing these  forces together  by ensuring 
appropriate real interest rates and low and stable inflation. 
The emerging challenges to monetary policy 
VI. 
There are many issues that are of relevance to emerging economies like India and Sri Lanka that are 
opening up. It would be useful to summarise some of these here. 
In  a  world  of  generalised  uncertainty,  monetary  policy  has  lost  its  traditional  moorings.  As  a 
consequence, the conduct of monetary policy has become increasingly complex. The determinants of 
exchange rate behaviour have altered dramatically. Earlier, factors affecting merchandise trade flows 
and the behaviour of goods market provided proximate guides for operating monetary policy. In this 
environment,  a  monetary  policy  principally  targeting  low  inflation  was  relevant  and  commodity 
purchasing power parities seemed to offer a satisfactory explanation of exchange rate changes. Since 
the 1980s, vicissitudes of capital movements have shown up in volatility in exchange rate movements 
with  major  currencies  moving  far  out  of  alignment  of  underlying  purchasing  power  parities.  On  a 
day-to-day basis, it is capital flows which move exchange rates and account for much of their volatility. 
The  impact  of  greater  exchange  rate  volatility  has  been  significantly  different  for  reserve  currency 
countries and for developing countries. For the former, mature and well-developed financial markets 
have absorbed the risks associated with large exchange rate fluctuations with negligible spillover on to 
real  activity.  Consequently,  the  central  bank  does  not  have  to  take  care  of  these  risks  through  its 
monetary  policy  operations.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  majority  of  developing  countries,  which  are 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 9
labour-intensive  exporters,  exchange  rate  volatility  has  had  significant  employment,  output  and 
distributional consequences, which can be large and persistent. 
All  this  has  made  the  operation  of  monetary  policy  more  difficult  and  complicated.  For  developing 
countries,  in  particular,  considerations  relating  to  maximising  output  and  employment  weigh  equally 
upon  monetary  authorities  as  price  stability.  A  crucial  objective  of  the  development  strategy  is  to 
stabilise the fluctuations of output and employment. Accordingly, in developing countries, it is difficult 
to design future monetary policy frameworks with only inflation as a single-minded objective. Thus the 
operation of monetary policy has to take into account the risks that greater interest rate or exchange 
rate  volatility  entails  for  a  wide  range  of  participants  in  the  economy.  Both  the  fiscal  and  monetary 
authorities  inevitably  bear  these  risks.  The  choice  of  the  exchange  rate  regimes  in  developing 
countries,  therefore,  reveals  a  preference  for  flexible  exchange  rates  along  with  interventions  to 
ensure orderly market activity, but without targeting any level of the exchange rate. There is interest in 
maintaining  adequate  international  reserves  and  a  readiness  to  move  interest  rates  flexibly  in  the 
event of disorderly market conditions. It needs to be recognised that most developing countries are 
engaged  in  the  process  of  development  and  integration  of  financial  markets.  Consequently,  signals 
from the market get blurred by the degree of management which is unavoidable in this transition. 
The  actual  experience  over  the  last  two  decades  has  been  that  with  greater  liberalization  of  the 
financial system, inflation has fallen and output volatility has moderated. Monetary policy has played 
an important role in taming inflation in the last two decades. A valuable lesson for an economy in the 
process of opening up is that increased globalization and competition has contributed predominantly 
towards  containment  of  inflation.  Thus  countries’  perspective  on  inflation  needs  to  be  informed 
increasingly  by  world  price  trends,  particularly  in  commodities  of  interest  to  them.  With  continued 
deregulation  and  globalisation,  it  is  unlikely  that  there  will  be  a  reversal  of  the  current  trends  in 
inflation.  However,  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  globalization  is  a  solution  for  all  problems.  Any 
widespread relapses in the relatively favourable trends in globalization and deregulation, or relatively 
benign fiscal policies could reverse the achievement of recent years. An important consideration for 
reining  inflationary  expectations  relates  to  the  need  to  have  clarity  on  price  stability,  effective 
communication, consistency in conduct of policy and transparency in explaining actions. Central banks 
should speak clearly to markets and listen to markets more carefully to ensure the intended objectives 
of policy. 
There have been some negatives from the process of globalization in the form of greater prominence 
of  credit  and  asset  price  booms  and  increasing  incidence  of  financial  crisis.  The  wave  of  financial 
liberalization has  raised  the  risks  in  the  financial system.  The  key  policy  challenge  for an emerging 
economy  would  be  to  put  in  place  mutually  supportive  safeguards  to  ensure  both  monetary  and 
financial  stability.  The  most  important  lesson  for  us  is  that  financial  imbalances  can  build  up  even 
when inflation is low and hence monetary policy should have a slightly longer time horizon in terms of 
inflation.  Apart  from  the  above,  there  are  merits  to  all  countries  in  greater  transparency,  combining 
simple  rules  with  discretion  and  effective  communication.  Orderly  development  of  financial  markets 
can make a big difference regarding the manner in which risks and shocks make an impact on the 
economy.  A  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  imparts  greater  flexibility  in  monetary  policy  to  deal  with 
shocks  more  efficiently.  On  the  prudential  side,  it  would  imply  strengthening  further  the  macro-
prudential  orientation.  Monetary  policy  and  prudential  regulation  should,  therefore,  co-exist.  Greater 
transparency  and  cooperation  between  monetary  policy  and  supervision  has  been  increasingly 
recognised the world over and has resulted in many central banks publishing financial stability reports. 
Although  there  is  uncertainty  about  how  economies  operate  and  about  monetary  policy  itself, 
uncertainty  is  no  excuse  for  not  pursuing  price stability.  In  the  pursuit  of  monetary  goals,  monetary 
policy authorities could adopt formal models and policy rules; informal target rules; or case-by-case 
decision making. In practice, no central bank relies exclusively on formal models to derive final policy. 
Models assist central banks to take judgments. Furthermore, as Greenspan recently commented, most 
of the formal models are vastly simplistic and despite efforts to quantify and capture more variables, 
they are inadequate. Their knowledge base is barely able to keep pace with the complexities of the 
world.  The  problem  is  not  of  the  models  but  of  the  complexities  of  the  world  economy.  An  explicit 
numerical  target  is  good  for  anchoring  inflation  but  it  comes  at  a  cost.  If  the  explicit  inflation  target 
cannot be achieved it weakens the credibility of the central bank. Thus it may not be appropriate to 
formulate monetary policy based on a simplistic inflation target or a single point inflexible point target 
as  argued  by  many.  The  risks  to  the  system  can  emanate  from  any  variable,  both  exogenous  and 
endogenous  and  policy  makers  response  should  be  dynamic  and  contextual.  Rules  can,  therefore, 
only be viewed as thoughtful adjuncts of policy but cannot be a substitute for risk paradigms. A case-
10 
 BIS Review 54/2003
by-case approach provides a simplistic framework for analysis. Ultimately, a central bank has to judge 
the  outcome  of  the  policy  choice  and  also  take  account  of  market  expectations.  A  prudent  central 
banker should expect a high probability of a small outcome in order to avoid a smaller probability of a 
high adverse outcome. 
To  conclude,  in  a  globalised  world,  it  is  not  possible  to  formulate  monetary  policy  independent  of 
international  developments.  Monetary  policy 
formulation  has  become  more  complex  and 
interdependent.  Continuous  monitoring  of  financial  markets,  upgradation  of  technical  skills  at  the 
central bank, flexibility and eternal watchfulness hold the key to making monetary policy matter in the 
evolving global environment. A key factor that guides the conduct of monetary policy is how to achieve 
the  benefits  of  market  integration  while  minimizing  the  risks  of  market  instability.  An  integral 
component of central bank work is the development of financial markets that can increasingly shift the 
burden of  risk  mitigation and costs  from  the authorities  to  the  markets.  The adverse  implications  of 
excess  volatility  leading  to  financial  crises  are  more  severe  for  low-income  countries.  They  can 
ill-afford  the  downside  risks  inherent  in  a  financial  sector  collapse.  Central  banks  need  to  take  into 
account, among others, developments in the global economic situation, the international inflationary 
situation, interest rate situation, exchange rate movements and capital movements while formulating 
monetary policy. 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 11
