Jaime Caruana: The New Basel Capital Accord: why we need it and where 
we're at 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Fifth  Meeting  of  the  Asian  Program  of  the  Institute  of  International 
Finance, Beijing, 17 November 2003. 
 I’d like to thank the Institute of International Finance and the Bank of China for hosting this discussion 
on the outlook for banking and finance in Asia. For many reasons, it seems especially appropriate to 
discuss this topic here in Beijing. The tremendous growth of China’s economy, its recent accession to 
the World Trade Organisation, and the wide scope of change that is occurring here has made China a 
reference for the world. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  discuss  with  you  some  of  the  efforts  of  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  to  promote  financial  systems  better  able  to  sustain  growth  and 
more resilient during periods of distress. It is an honour to address this forum, but I must confess that I 
have come to listen and to learn. 
The message I am consistently hearing is on the one hand one of strong support for the principles of 
the New Capital Accord and on the other a desire for the best standard for financial systems in each 
country.  Too  many  examples  have  illustrated  the  economic  costs  and  social  unrest  that  weakly 
capitalised and poorly managed banks can inflict on an economy. It seems to me that we all recognize 
the importance of a sound banking system to our economic well-being. 
In recent years, central bankers and supervisors around the world have been working hard on the new 
requirements for bank capital. I think you are familiar with the idea that, “he who asks is a fool for five 
minutes,  but  he  who  does  not  ask  remains  a  fool  forever.”  For  the  last  five  years,  we  in  the  Basel 
Committee  have  asked  for  comments  and  ideas  from  the  industry,  from  academia,  and  from  the 
community of supervisors on how to improve the international capital standards. The wealth of ideas 
and  views  that  so  many  shared  with  us  has  made  the  process  longer  than  we  expected,  but  the 
benefit of this open and honest dialogue is that we are better able to achieve a sound and balanced 
accord. I think that we are very close to meeting our objective. 
Today  I  would  like  to  emphasise,  perhaps  even  over-emphasize,  three  words  that  have  guided  our 
work  on  the  New  Accord,  namely  balance,  consistency  and  cooperation.  We  seek  a  balanced 
approach so that the new capital guidelines can be applied around the world. A balanced approach 
that can be both meaningful to global organisations and yet flexible enough to be applied to smaller, 
more regionally focused banks. We have worked hard to strike a right balance between many other 
competing objectives, such as finding the balance between introducing incentives for banks to improve 
their risk management and implementing a system of prescriptive rules. We have sought a balance 
between complexity and risk sensitivity; between complexity and comparability; between soundness 
and conservatism; and between flexibility and consistency, and so on. Even the structure of the accord 
can be regarded as a balance among three different policy approaches: rules, discretion and market 
discipline. 
In addition to seeking a balance in the New Accord, the Committee’s work has also been guided by 
two other words, namely consistency and cooperation. I will have more to say about both later, but I 
would like to emphasize the word “consistency” now. We will achieve the full potential of a prudential 
standard  such  as  the  New  Capital  Accord  only  when  we  support  it  with  other  financial  economic 
policies and regulations that share a consistent set of goals. Policy makers have long understood the 
value  of  monetary  stability,  and  in  recent  years  we  have  learned  much  about  the  importance  of 
financial  stability  and  how  it  interacts  with  our  monetary  policies.  Interactions  between  the  real 
economy and financial markets are becoming more intricate on a domestic level and more relevant to 
the  global  economy.  Indeed,  sound  fiscal  policies,  combined  with  monetary  stability  aims  based  on 
strong  financial  institutions,  and  prudent  regulations  in  technical  areas  such  as  accounting, 
provisioning and bankruptcy are valued and necessary companions to financial regulations such as 
the New Capital Accord. 
In my remarks today, I’d like to begin with a brief reminder of why bank supervisors and banks around 
the world believe that we need a “New Basel Accord.” Then, I’ll discuss the New Accord’s structure 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 1
and share some of the latest news on what the Committee is doing to finishing the framework so that 
banks will be ready to implement it in the coming years. Finally, I’ll conclude with some thoughts on 
the transition to the New Capital Accord. 
Why we need a New Accord 
We might begin by recalling why we care so much about capital - and why we felt that we needed a 
new capital accord, which is the first topic I will address today. 
In many ways, supervisors view capital as the last line of defence in a bank. When risk management is 
insufficient, when reserves are exhausted, capital absorbs losses to prevent a bank’s failure. But when 
capital runs out, the bank may become insolvent, leaving public authorities and taxpayers responsible 
for restoring depositors’ savings. 
The  challenge  is  determining  how  much  capital  is  sufficient.  As  you  know,  one  of  the  Basel 
Committee’s best-known achievements was the release in 1988 of an agreement on how to define and 
measure the adequacy of a bank’s capital. The 1988 Basel Capital Accord was a milestone. For the 
first  time,  supervisors  agreed  on  a  definition  of  capital  and  a  minimum  requirement  that  has  been 
adopted  in  over  100  countries.  More  importantly,  the  Accord  reversed  a  downward  trend  in 
internationally active banks’ capitalisation, thereby strengthening the health and stability of the global 
banking system. 
In the years since 1988, the drawbacks of a simple approach to capital regulation have become more 
apparent.  Advances  in  technology  and  telecommunications,  innovation  in  banking  products  and 
services, and the increasing globalisation of financial markets have changed the way that many banks 
measure  and  manage  risk.  Today,  the  1988  Accord  no  longer  provides  these  banks  -  and  their 
supervisors - with reliable measures of the actual risks they face. 
The structure of the New Accord 
In  response,  the  Committee  decided  in  the  late  1990’s  to  refine  the  measures  for  assessing  and 
managing risk in the Basel Accord. But we wanted to achieve more than a simple update of the rules. 
Instead,  we  wanted  to  incorporate  the  best  practices  used  by  leading  organisations  across  the 
industry. By doing so, we hope to strengthen the stability of the global financial system, something that 
would benefit not just banks but the society at large. 
In undertaking this challenge, banks and supervisors recognise that having adequate levels of capital 
is not enough to ensure success in banking - or even long-term survival. A bank’s long-term success is 
determined chiefly by the quality of its management and controls, which together make up its first line 
of defence. The New Basel Accord seeks to capture the relationship between the adequacy of capital 
and  the  quality  of  risk  management  by  relying  on  three  important  and  mutually  reinforcing  “pillars”. 
These  consist  of,  first,  the  minimum  capital  requirements;  second,  supervisory  review;  and  third, 
market discipline. The three pillars themselves reflect the trend among bank supervisors to embrace a 
balanced  philosophy  of  regulation  that  provides  incentives  to  banks  to  manage  their  risks 
appropriately. 
The first pillar, for example, seeks to align capital requirements more closely to the actual risks that 
banks face. But the minimum requirements provide economic incentives - in the form of lower capital 
charges  -  for  those  banks  that  develop  better  measures  for  their  exposures  to  risk  and  better 
techniques  for  managing  their  risks.  Banks  with  more  traditional  exposures  and  less  complex 
operations will be better able to ensure that the their capital base is sufficient for the level of credit risk 
they  face  by  aligning  their  capital  requirements  with  external  measures  of  their  borrowers’ 
creditworthiness. 
The most sophisticated approaches to credit or operational risk will allow banks to rely increasingly on 
their own assessments of risk to determine how much capital to hold. This puts the responsibility for 
assessing and responding to risk in the most appropriate place, namely in a bank’s own management 
and directors. They are in the best position to know their customers and their risks, and it is therefore 
most appropriate - and critically important - that they understand their responsibility for administering 
the bank’s assets and its activities in a responsible manner 
The second pillar highlights the important role that supervisors play in ensuring that each individual 
bank is holding adequate capital. Under the New Accord, supervisors will be responsible for evaluating 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2003
the  internal  processes  banks  use  to  determine  their  need  for  capital  to  ensure  that  managers  are 
exercising an appropriate degree of judgement. 
The responsibility of a supervisor is to ensure that the banking system operates in a safe and sound 
manner and that individual banks are run by capable and competent leaders. But supervisors are not 
the managers of the banks. The decision on how each bank should best respond to different risks: that 
job should always rest with senior managers and a bank’s board of directors. Instead, by engaging 
managers in a dialogue about the risks they face and the controls they have adopted to address them 
under the second pillar, supervisors create incentives for managers to behave prudently and find ways 
to improve their performance. 
The third pillar seeks to leverage the ability of markets to provide discipline to banks to ensure that 
they  are  not  holding  unrealistically  low  levels  of  capital.  By  improving  the  quality  of  banks’  public 
reporting of their risks and the measures they take to control them, we intend to strengthen the ability 
of other market participants to understand a bank’s risk profile. When investors, customers, and even 
other banks have access to better information on how well a bank is managing its risks, they are better 
able  to  make  business  and  investing  decisions  relevant  to  that  bank,  which  can  create  a  powerful 
incentive for bank management to improve their handling of those risks. 
Together,  the  three  pillars  of  minimum  requirements,  supervisory  review,  and  market  discipline  are 
intended  to  ensure  that  banks  understand  their  risks  and  take  adequate  precautions  to  protect 
themselves against those risks through their control structures and their holdings of capital. But most 
importantly,  banks  will  have  incentives  to  find  better  ways  to  identify,  measure,  and  manage  their 
exposures. 
Current status of New Accord 
This past summer, we concluded our third round of public consultations on the proposals, and I’d like 
now  to  give  you  a  sense  of  the  current  status  of  the  New  Accord,  which  is  the  second  topic  I  will 
address today. 
By now you may have read that the Basel Committee reached an agreement last month to address 
the  final  issues  raised  in  public  consultations  over  the  summer  and  to  complete  the  new  rules  by 
mid-year 2004. This was no easy task, as the Committee received over 200 comment letters on the 
Third Consultative Paper, or “CP3”. While we might have been somewhat surprised by the number of 
responses that we received, we were not surprised by the hard work that was evident in the letters. 
On  this note,  I  would  like to  offer  the Committee’s appreciation  to  the  banks, banking  associations, 
including  the  members  of  the  IIF,  and  public  agencies  in  Asia  and  elsewhere  that  devoted 
considerable time and resources to the consultations. If you’ve been following our work since the first 
consultative  paper  was  released  in  1999,  you  know  that  the  proposals  have  evolved  and  improved 
considerably thanks to the honest responses and letters that you and others shared with us. 
At  the  Committee’s  meeting  last  month,  all  members  acknowledged  our  responsibility  to  consider 
carefully  all  comments.  At  the  same  time,  we  recognised  the  need  to  resolve  the  open  issues  and 
release the New Accord as soon as possible so that banks can continue to prepare for the new rules. 
In a statement to the press after our meeting, the members of the Committee noted that we expect to 
take account of the remaining issues and complete the text of the New Accord in the coming months 
and not later than mid-year 2004. 
Let me briefly mention some of the issues present in the comment letters. 
Complexity and the balance with risk sensitivity and comparability 
Certainly a key issue that we are addressing is balancing the complexity of the agreement with the 
need to be sensitive to risk and to offer different kinds of banks comparable approaches. It is true that 
the New Accord offers a far more sophisticated view of risk than the far simpler 1988 Accord does. But 
that is our intent. We seek to adopt the best measures of credit and operational risk. In the field of 
credit  risk,  for  example,  loan  officers  and  risk  managers  in  leading  banks  worldwide  have  at  their 
disposal  a  constantly  evolving  array  of  databases,  software,  credit  risk  models,  and  risk  rating 
systems, all of which provide supplemental empirical insight into a risk once not readily quantified. And 
all  of  these  new  tools  were  initially  developed  or  refined  to  promote  a  bank’s  competitiveness  and 
protect it against loss - and not just to respond to a regulatory mandate. 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 3
Nonetheless,  the  Committee  is  seeking  a  balance  between  complexity  and  risk-sensitivity.  When  a 
complex rule fails to add much to the New Accord’s measures of risk, the Committee has worked to 
remove it. Most recently, for example, we announced in our Madrid press release that we will simplify 
the proposals for securitisation exposures. 
At  the  same  time,  the  industry  has  asked  that  the  Committee  not  sacrifice  risk  sensitivity  where  it 
makes sense. The New Accord is a complex document partly because some banks felt disadvantaged 
under a simpler rule and wanted rules that were more comparable to their situations. They asked us to 
adopt more options for addressing the risks unique to a particular business or activity which, in some 
cases, required some complicated considerations. If you read just a few of the comment letters on our 
website, you will see that many of the latest suggestions from the industry would tend to increase the 
complexity of the New Accord even further. 
Still, we know that it is easier to enforce a simpler rule than a complicated one. As we complete the 
text of the new rules, we will continue to simplify and streamline the framework. 
Conservatism and the balance between soundness and conservatism 
A second issue that respondents to the proposals have raised is the sense that the New Accord may 
be highly conservative in its assumptions about how much risk exists in certain exposures. Questions 
about conservatism matter to us because we are trying to align capital more closely to risk and in a 
way that is conceptually sound. 
A  good  example  would  be  the  treatment  of  retail  exposures,  including  the  small  and  medium 
enterprises that fall into this category, where the Committee found persuasive economic evidence to 
support a significantly lower requirement compared to earlier drafts of the new rules. 
Another  example  we  are  evaluating  currently  concerns  the  treatment  of  credit  losses  for  banks 
adopting one of the more sophisticated approaches to credit risk, the “internal ratings-based” or “IRB” 
approach. Our current rules for the IRB approach derived capital charges on mathematical estimates 
of  a  bank’s  credit  losses  -  both  those  that  could  be  anticipated  versus  those  that  could  not.  Banks 
have  criticised  these  proposals,  since  traditionally  capital  exists  to  protect  a  bank  against  only 
unexpected losses, while reserves are held when bank expects to experience credit losses. We are 
now  seeking  to  revise  the  treatment  of  credit  losses  to  calibrate  capital  only  to  losses  that  are  not 
anticipated - or “unexpected losses” - and we have issued a proposal for comment on how to do so on 
our website. 
We will continue to evaluate the soundness of our assumptions in the New Accord and their relative 
degrees of conservatism in the final months ahead. 
Competition and the balance between flexibility and consistency 
Applying  the  New  Accord  consistently  across  countries  is  an  essential  goal  for  the  Committee.  By 
incorporating minimum standards in the New Accord, we want global competition in banking markets 
to be driven by each bank’s strengths, rather than by differences in each country’s rules. Moreover, 
Pillars  Two  and  Three  were  created  to  a  great  degree  to  level  the  playing  field  for  banks  by 
encouraging more consistent supervisory approaches and public reporting. 
To advocate greater consistency in the application of the new rules, the Committee created the Accord 
Implementation  Group  to  share  experiences  and  encourage  shared  approaches.  We  expect  these 
discussions  to  help  supervisors  apply  the  New  Accord  more  consistently  and  to  encourage  greater 
cooperation  among  supervisors,  which  was  one  of  the  three  words  -  together  with  balance  and 
consistency - that I mentioned at the beginning as guiding the Committee’s work on the New Accord. 
Based on the Implementation Group’s work to date, the Committee published a paper last August on 
the “high level principles for the cross-border implementation of the New Accord”. In this paper, we 
reiterate  our  view  that  the  traditional  allocation  of  responsibilities  to  home  and  host  supervisors  will 
continue.  Cooperation  will  be  critical  for  effective  supervision  under  the  New  Accord,  especially 
considering  the  need  for  an  internationally  active  bank  to  receive  the  approval  to  adopt,  and  then 
validate,  advanced  approaches  to  credit  and  operational  risk  at  home  and  in  host  jurisdictions. 
Similarly,  supervisors  will  need  to  find  practical  ways  to  cooperate  in  the  evaluations  of  capital 
adequacy under the second pillar and ongoing reviews of compliance with the minimum operational 
requirements of the New Accord. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2003
The  Implementation  Group  and  the  Core  Principles  Working  Group,  which  is  made  up  of  senior 
regulators  from  a  variety  of  countries  plus  representatives  of  the  World  Bank  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund will meet for a second time in December to continue the discussions on issues related 
especially  to  the  responsibilities  and  cooperation  of  home  and  host  supervisors  and  issues  that 
significant or systemically important foreign subsidiaries may pose for different jurisdictions. 
Based  on  the  progress  that  leading  banks  worldwide  have  made  in  adopting  more  sophisticated 
approaches to risk management, many countries have indicated that they are planning to implement 
the  New  Accord,  whether  in  the  short  or  long  run.  This  leads  to  the  final  topic  I’d  like  to  discuss, 
namely the issues related with the transition to the New Accord across the world. 
Broad application of the New Accord around the world, transition to Basel II 
In drafting a replacement for the 1988 Accord, the members of the Committee sought to ensure that 
the capital guidelines could be applied around the world to many kinds of banks. This means that our 
rules must build on the best practices, yet remain relevant to conventional banks in more traditional 
markets. The New Accord provides a “menu” of options for measuring risk, thereby offering the degree 
of  flexibility  necessary  for  banks  of  various  sizes  and  strategic  orientiations  to  adopt  the  new 
framework. 
Now  that  the  New  Basel  Accord  is  moving  away  from  a  “one-size-fits-all”  approach  to  capital, 
supervisors in every jurisdictions have the opportunity to evaluate what would be most appropriate for 
banks that are not large, complex, or internationally active. At the same time, we could say that Basel 
has moved away from a “one-schedule-fits-all” approach to implementing the new rules worldwide. Or, 
if you prefer, the Committee is saying to each country, “pick flowers when flowers bloom”. 
This suggestion is particularly crucial for supervisors who have adopted the 1988 Accord only recently. 
Some  supervisors  believe  that  their  banks  may  still  be  strengthening  their  credit  risk  management 
functions and consequently would not benefit substantially from the New Accord at the moment. For 
these situations, the members of the Committee have long expressed their views that those banks and 
supervisors should concentrate on the fundamentals first. 
Banks in those countries should work toward developing an adequate understanding of the risks they 
face  and  a  sense  of  the  best  practices  in  use  worldwide.  For  example,  banks  should  develop  their 
understanding  of  the  credit  underwriting  cycle,  skill  at  credit  analysis,  and  insight  into  the  dangers 
posed by operational risks. They should nurture a healthy environment for corporate governance, such 
as by strengthening their systems of internal controls, by promoting robust internal and external audit 
processes,  and  by  adopting  sound  standards  for  accounting,  loan  analysis  and  classification, 
provisioning and reporting. 
In  turn,  supervisors  who  are  still  fortifying  the  foundation  of  their  banking  systems  may  consider  a 
variety  of  approaches  to  capital  regulation.  For  some  countries,  the  application  of  the  simplest 
approaches from the New Accord may be appropriate. But others may feel that their banks are not yet 
ready and may decide, after careful review, that it would continue to apply the 1988 Basel Accord for 
several more years as banks continue to strengthen their risk management capabilities. 
I  want  to  emphasise  that  the  Basel  Committee  supports  the  decisions  of  those  supervisors  who 
believe that their markets may not yet be ready. We would encourage those countries that choose to 
remain on the 1988 Accord to look to the principles of the New Accord, and especially to strengthen 
the second and third pillars. Moreover, whether a country intends to implement the New Accord by the 
end  of  2006  or  perhaps  later,  the  Basel  Committee  recommends  that  supervisors  everywhere 
encourage their banks to strengthen their abilities to identify, measure, and manage the full range of 
risks they face through internal processes. 
At the same time, I am very encouraged to hear that banks and supervisors share the notion that none 
of our countries, regardless of our stage of development, can foster our own economic growth unless 
our banks are adequately capitalised and well managed, our financial systems stable, and our markets 
transparent  and  open.  I  believe  that  the  New  Basel  Accord  goes  a  long  way  toward  achieving  and 
strengthening those three objectives. 
Certainly  we  hope  that,  over  time,  more  banks  and  more  banking  systems  will  adopt  the  more 
advanced approaches to risk measurement and management laid out in the New Accord. When banks 
are  adequately  capitalised  and  well-managed,  they  are  better  able  to  promote  growth  by  providing 
credit  to  consumers  and businesses  alike.  But  more  broadly,  when  banking systems  worldwide  are 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 5
adequately  capitalised  and  well-managed,  the  international  financial  system  becomes  more  stable, 
better able to promote sustainable growth, and more resilient during periods of distress. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2003
