I J Macfarlane: Overview of the Australian economy  
Opening  statement  by  Mr  I  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  House  of 
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  Brisbane, 
8 December 2003. 
 Mr Chairman, it is a pleasure to be here today in front of your Committee again, and I am very pleased 
that we have been able to meet in Brisbane for the first time. As you know, we take these hearings 
very  seriously  because  they  enable  Parliament,  through  its  representatives  on  the  Committee,  to 
question the Reserve Bank in depth and in public. 
As usual I will make some introductory remarks in which I will focus on three subjects: 
• 
• 
• 
how the situation has changed since the statement I gave to this Committee in June;  
how our forecasts have evolved;  
the background to our monetary policy actions.  
June and Now 
1.  
Calendar year 2003 was an unusual one for the world economy. In the first half, prospects for world 
growth  looked  doubtful,  with  the  most  extreme  uncertainty  being  concentrated  in  mid-year.  If  you 
remember, this is when talk of possible deflation in the United States reached its peak, and the US 
authorities gave the impression that they needed lower interest rates and a lower US dollar to help 
them  through.  In  Europe,  economic  activity  was  weakening,  and  Asia  received  a  temporary 
knock-back from the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak. At that time, virtually all 
the central banks of note - the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (the Fed), the Bank of England, the 
European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of Canada, etc. - reduced interest rates, and I indicated to 
this Committee that if things did not improve, we might also have to do so. 
In  the  event,  we  did  not  because  we  witnessed  one  of  the  sharpest  turnarounds  in  economic 
prospects any of us has seen. While in the June quarter most major countries, including many in Asia, 
saw  declines  in  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP),  by  the  September  quarter  they  were  all  growing 
strongly. The weakness we had seen in the June quarter turned out to be a ‘false signal’. In financial 
markets, bond yields rose sharply, share prices continued to rise, and various prices connected with 
international trade, such as commodity prices and transport prices, also rose. Talk of deflation ceased 
and the short-lived bout of monetary easing stopped. Business and consumer confidence indicators 
around the world rose back to levels consistent with reasonable economic growth. 
At the same time as perceptions of the world economy were being raised, the general run of economic 
indicators in Australia continued to improve, particularly employment, retail sales, construction activity 
and  business  and  consumer  confidence.  Prospects  for  farm  production  also  picked  up  sharply 
following  widespread  rain,  even  though  it  was  not  uniform  across  the  country.  Economic conditions 
here and abroad had returned to something relatively normal and, as a consequence, we judged that 
we  no  longer  needed  such  an  expansionary  setting  of  monetary  policy:  interest  rates  were  raised 
accordingly in November and December. 
Forecasts 
2.  
At  this  point,  I  will  follow  my  usual  practice  by  discussing  the  forecasts  I  gave  you  at  the  previous 
meeting, then adding some new ones for the coming calendar year. When we last met in June, I said 
that we expected GDP to grow by 3 per cent in real terms over the course of 2003. With three quarters 
of the year behind us, we now expect that the figure will come in a little higher, at about 3½ per cent. 
The thing to notice, however, is the big difference between the two halves of the year, with growth in 
the first half being at an annual rate of 2 per cent, and growth in the second half expected to be at an 
annual rate of around 5 per cent. The other thing to notice is that growth of domestic demand (Gross 
National Expenditure - GNE) through 2003, at 5 per cent, is again expected to be well above the figure 
of 3½ per cent for GDP. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 1
Over the course of 2004, we expect GDP to grow by 4 per cent. The profile of growth, however, is 
unlikely to be smooth. It would not surprise us if the four-quarter-ended growth rate of GDP reached 
4½ per cent in mid 2004 due to the effects of the sharp rise in farm GDP, before returning to 4 per cent 
by end year. If the world economy continues to surprise on the strong side, as it has in recent months, 
our GDP growth could be even higher. 
On  inflation,  we  said  last  time  that  we  expected  the  CPI  to  increase  by  2½  per  cent  over  calendar 
2003.  We  now  think  it  will  be  a  little  lower  at  2¼  per  cent,  largely  due  to  the  exchange  rate  being 
higher than assumed in our earlier forecast. Over the course of 2004, we expect the CPI to increase 
by 2 per cent, but in mid 2004 it could well be below that because the maximum effects of the higher 
Australian  dollar  could  be  being  felt  then.  As  we  stated  in  our  quarterly  statement,  this  expectation 
implies that the profile of inflation will exhibit a shallow U-shape - falling from its present 2½ per cent to 
below 2 per cent in mid 2004, but then rising back to 2 per cent by end 2004, 2½ per cent by mid 
2005, and continuing under upward pressure thereafter. Of course, it is difficult to be precise about 
these things, especially since future levels of the exchange rate will play a major role. I will say more 
about this later. 
Monetary Policy 
3. 
As I outlined at the start of these remarks, with growth in the world economy getting back to normal, 
and growth in the Australian economy also getting back to normal, or slightly above it, we could no 
longer see  a  justification  for  Australian  interest rates  being  clearly  below  normal.  That  is, the  major 
reason  for  the  two  increases  in  interest  rates  this  quarter  is  the  same  as  I  gave  to  this  Committee 
18 months ago in late May 2002 when talking about the tightening then. Another way of putting this is 
to say that if we had maintained the low level of interest rates we had at the beginning of 2002, there 
would  have  been  a  gradual  build-up  in  inflationary  pressures  as  the  growth  rates  of  the  world  and 
Australian  economies  rose  through  2003,  2004  and  beyond.  Interest  rates  were  just  too  low  for  an 
economy that was growing that well. As it turned out, this process of returning interest rates to more 
normal levels has been a gradual one. Two increases in interest rates were made in mid-2002, then 
there was a 16-month gap to the next two increases. I have explained in the previous two meetings of 
this Committee why that long gap occurred. 
It is clear that, despite our best endeavours to explain ourselves, a number of people think that the 
Bank tightened to cool down the property market. In fact, I have more than once received unsolicited 
advice that it would be better for us to explain our action in this way because people could more easily 
identify with it. The overheated property market is something that people can see around them; it is 
much more concrete than such concepts as inflation-targeting or returning interest rates to normal. 
However, such an approach would not be consistent with the truth. For a start, signs of overheating in 
the housing market were clearly evident through the second half of 2002 and all through 2003, yet the 
Bank did not change monetary policy. It was only when it became clear that good economic growth 
had  returned  both  globally  and  domestically  that  rates  were  raised.  I  have  often  stressed  that 
monetary policy has to be set taking into account the average of all the parts of the economy, not to 
what is happening in one sector. Of course, if a sector is overheated, it may push up the average for 
the  economy,  and  in  that  way  exert  a  disproportionate  influence.  It  is  also  true  that,  historically, 
borrowing for housing purposes has been one of the more interest-sensitive sectors, and so it may 
have  been  more  affected  than  other  sectors  by  the  previous  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  it  may 
respond more than other sectors to the recent increases. But that does not mean we singled it out. 
We  have  also  been  accused  of  setting  monetary  policy  in  relation  to  the  Sydney  and  Melbourne 
housing markets, and ignoring the rest of the country. This clearly cannot be true in the case of the 
recent tightenings, as house prices in Sydney and Melbourne are growing less quickly than in other 
states; in fact, housing prices in some parts of these cities are already falling. 
In  Australia  we  have  conducted  monetary  policy  by  using  an  inflation-targeting  regime  for  about  a 
decade now. It has been a very successful regime in that it has delivered (along with various other 
reforms) the longest period of uninterrupted good economic growth in the post war period, at a rate 
exceeding  that  of  all  other  significant  developed  economies.  It  has  concentrated  our  minds  at  the 
Reserve Bank in that we have been very conscious of our need to deliver the results to which we have 
committed. Over the 10-year period, inflation has averaged 2.4 per cent. By acting early on monetary 
policy to keep inflation in check, we have avoided large swings in interest rates and thereby allowed 
the economy to prosper.  
2 
 BIS Review 56/2003
As you are aware, our target is a relatively flexible one in that we aim to achieve an average rate of 
somewhere  between  2  and  3  per  cent.  It  is  that  average  by  which  we  should  be  judged,  or  made 
accountable.  But  there  are  some  observers  who  think  that  the  system  should  be  more  prescriptive 
than this and there should be some strict rule which should determine our actions. 
For example, a few people still think we should aim to keep inflation between 2 and 3 per cent at all 
times. This is a clear misinterpretation of our system because it fails to realise that it is the average we 
are  interested  in.  On  a  number  of  occasions,  inflation  has  been  above  3 per  cent  and  below  2 per 
cent. In fact, about 45 per cent of the time it has been outside the 2 to 3 per cent range, and we have 
not regarded this as a failure of policy. 
Since our objective is to achieve an average inflation rate, there are multiple paths for inflation which 
are  consistent  with  meeting  our  medium-term  objective.  We  wish  to  choose  the  one  which  best 
satisfies the other obligations contained in our Act, which I summarise as achieving sustainable growth 
in income and employment. We are not simplistically committed to achieving the minimum possible 
variability in the inflation rate, or even hitting the target at some fixed period ahead, such as two years. 
Another approach sometimes put to us is to say that we should raise interest rates if, and only if, our 
forecast for inflation is above 3 per cent, and lower them if, and only if, it is below 2 per cent. Again, 
this is a misinterpretation of how the system works. It also ignores the complications and uncertainties 
involved in economic forecasting. The forecast horizon relevant for policy today is at least two, or even 
three, years. We can be relatively confident about forecasts for the first half of that horizon, as much of 
what is going to happen over that period is already set in place. But we can be less confident about 
the forecasts for the second half. The situation is particularly uncertain when, as is the case at present, 
the direction of inflation is expected to change during the forecast period. 
Since this type of forecast is so hard to make, we, like a number of other central banks, do not wish to 
lead the public to believe we can do this with much precision. In fact, we tend to appeal to the balance 
of  risks  around  the  central  forecast  in  order  to  convey  our  message.  In  last  month’s  quarterly 
statement we said that the balance of risks was shifting to the upside, which was meant to indicate 
that  inflation  was  on  an  upward  trajectory  through  the  course  of  the  second  year.  We  also  drew 
attention to the fact that domestic price pressures were increasing, as shown by the fact that the rate 
of increase in the prices of ‘non-internationally traded goods and services’ had increased from 2 per 
cent to 4 per cent over the past few years. That does not mean that inflation will rise to 4 per cent once 
the  exchange  rate  effects  have  worn  off,  but  at  least  a  significant  part  of  the  economy  will  be 
influenced by this figure. 
In summary, I want to assure the Committee that the Bank remains committed to the inflation targeting 
framework and that the decisions taken over the past 18 months have been fully consistent with that 
framework.  It  does  not  seem  plausible  to  us  to  argue  that  the  Bank  could  have  been  confident  of 
meeting its inflation commitments if interest rates had been held at 30-year lows in the face of the pick 
up in the international and domestic economies that is currently under way. 
Finally, let me end by updating you on a few developments in the payments policy reforms. Since we 
last  met,  the  challenges  brought  against  the  Reserve  Bank’s  reforms  to  credit  card  schemes  by 
MasterCard and Visa were dismissed by the Federal Court. Both schemes subsequently appealed, but 
Visa has withdrawn its appeal. The new interchange fees for Bankcard, MasterCard and Visa came 
into effect at the end of October, almost halving the fees. The Reserve Bank is monitoring the flow 
through  of  this  to  merchant  service  fees.  The  data  are  still  being  gathered,  but  anecdotal  evidence 
suggests  that  merchants  are  starting  to  see  a  reduction  in  the  merchant  service  fees  they  pay  to 
banks. 
There  have  been  several  developments  in  other  payments  streams,  and  I  will  be  happy  to  answer 
questions on those when they arise, but I am aware that I have already taken a fair amount of your 
time, so I will finish at this point. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 3
