Mr Erçel reviews the monetary side of
Turkey’s ambitious three-year disinflation program
Speech given by Mr Gazi Erçel, Governor of the Central Bank of Turkey, at the Merchant Taylor’s
Hall, in London on 25 January 2000.
 Turkey’s disinflation program: what we are doing and why
Starting this year, Turkey has embarked on an ambitious three-year program to disinflate its economy.
I call it ambitious because Turkey has suffered from a high and persistent inflation for the past quarter
of  a  century,  and  any  program  that  hopes  to  correct  such  a  long-standing  problem  needs  to  be
ambitious. I will begin by reviewing this new program, especially the monetary side of it.
But first I will give you some snapshots, from the past, of the Turkish economy, which I think will
give a clear idea why this was the right time to take action.
The  history  of Turkish  inflation  shows  that  for  the  last  quarter  century  inflation  has  been  gradually
increasing, never falling below two digits. The average inflation rate for the whole period was 55%.
During the last decade inflation has averaged 72%.
Reflecting  the  uncertainties  inflicted  on  the  economy  by  this  chronic  inflation,  growth  has  been
volatile and at the low end of the range of comparable emerging market economies. Turkey’s average
growth rate over the last two decades was 4.2%. Average growth for the emerging markets of Asia,
where inflation is not a problem, has been much higher.
It is well known that the cause of Turkey’s inflation is fiscal in nature. The last year in which Turkey
had  a  budget  surplus  was  1970.  The  budget  deficit  increased  steadily  throughout  the  last  decade,
finally reaching double-digits in 1999.
The  fiscal  imbalances  have  also  caused  difficulties  in  financing  the  deficit.  Over  the  last  couple  of
years the amount of external financing available for the budget deficit has declined, causing increased
pressure  on  the  domestic  financial  sector  and  an  increase  in  the  domestic  debt.  The  ratio  of  cash
domestic debt to GNP grew rapidly during the 1990s, finally reaching 24% of GNP in 1999.
The increases in the deficit and in the level of domestic debt during recent years are mirrored in the
levels of domestic interest rates. The increasing pressure on domestic borrowing has kept real interest
rates at high levels, hovering around the mid-20s during the 1990s and rising to over 50% at frequent
intervals.
 I think this brief recital of facts should be more than sufficient to explain why it is high time to face
the predicament of the Turkish economy. A radical program is urgently needed to address Turkey’s
deep-rooted problems, and it is my wish today to convince you that the program we have delivered to
deal with them is well prepared and comprehensive.
to eliminate inflation,
Let me summarise our goals and the overall strategy by which this program aims to achieve them. The
fundamental goals of the program are:
• 
• 
• 
• 
to establish a more equitable and efficient distribution of resources,
and to increase the growth potential of the economy.
to achieve a sustainable fiscal position,
1
BIS Review 9/2000
The  program  will  accomplish  these  goals  through  a  number  of  policy  reorientations.  The  primary
fiscal balance will shift, in the first year, from deficit to a surplus position consistent with long-term
fiscal sustainability, and will remain high until the price stability has been established in the economy.
To  reinforce  program  credibility  and  support  the  fiscal  stabilisation,  the  program’s  design  is  front
loaded, with most of the required structural measures being taken at the outset.
A first priority will be to diversify the financing of the deficit. Net external financing for the public
sector  will  increase,  and  this,  together  with  the  primary  surplus  and  other  measures,  will  make  it
possible to lower the level of real domestic interest rates.
A strong and credible exchange rate policy, established at the beginning of the program, will break the
cycle  of  the  public’s  inflationary  expectations  based  on  past  experience.  Both  monetary  policy  and
public sector wage policy are being subordinated to the exchange rate target.
Now let me go into some details of this strategy.
Action to eliminate, quickly and permanently, the high public sector deficit is among the priorities of
the program. Specifically, the primary balance of the public sector is targeted to shift from a deficit of
2.75%  of  GNP  in  1999  to  a  surplus  of  2.25%  of  GNP  in  2000.  This  primary  surplus  will  increase
further to 3.7% of GNP in 2001, and will remain around that level in 2002 as well.
Most  of  the  measures  needed  to  achieve  an  improvement  of  over  5%  in  the  public  sector  primary
balance  in  the  year  2000  have  already  been  taken.  It  will  be  recalled  that  these  measures  included
increasing the rates of the VAT and of the withholding tax on bank deposits and repo transactions by
two  percentage  points;  increasing  the  rate  of  withheld  taxes  on  income  from  fixed  assets  and  self
employment  by  5  percentage  points;  imposing  a  windfall  tax  on  interest  earned  on  government
securities;  and  various  one-off  measures,  including  raising  the  rates  of  personal  income  taxes,
corporate taxes, and property and motor vehicle taxes. These revenue measures were accompanied by
spending cuts as well. For example, the social security reform law passed by the parliament last fall is
expected to save 0.5% of GNP in social security expenditures in 2000.
As a result of the improvement in the primary balance, and the increase in privatization receipts, some
of which can be used to retire public debt, the cash debt-to-GNP ratio is expected to level off at around
24% this year and to begin a gradual decline in coming years.
Privatization proceeds are expected to reach US$ 17.7 billion over the program period. A number of
important  measures  have  been  taken  to  ensure  that  this  ambitious  goal  is  met.  The  constitution  has
been amended to allow for international arbitration between the Turkish State and foreign investors. A
streamlining of the regulations governing operations in the energy and telecommunications sectors is
expected  to  attract  privatization,  and  Parliament  is  even  now  considering  the  necessary  enabling
legislation, which will be enacted very soon.
These  actions  in  the  fiscal,  privatization  and  structural  reform  areas  are  a  part  of  the  front-loading
mentioned above, and the authorities have already taken most of the measures.
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  program’s  nominal  strategies,  most  of  which  are  the  responsibility  of  the
Central Bank.
In  an  economy  like  Turkey’s,  where  inflation  has  a  long  history,  expectations  and  inertia  play
important roles in the inflationary dynamics. This represents a major problem for the program, which
needs to be addressed thoroughly.
Since exchange rates have high public visibility, there was a broad consensus in Turkey that using the
exchange rate as a nominal anchor would be an effective tool for interrupting the public’s inflationary
expectations  based  on  the  past.  In  addition,  the  openness  of  the  Turkish  economy  to  capital
movements  makes  the  commitment  to  an  exchange  rate  anchor  particularly  effective  in  affecting
nominal  interest  rates.  Accordingly,  the  exchange  rate  regime  has  been  designed  to  provide  clear
signals as a basis for price and interest rate expectations, while avoiding the medium-term drawbacks
experienced  in  the  medium  term  by  some  of  the  other  countries  pursuing  exchange  rate  based
stabilization.
BIS Review 9/2000
2
Here  is  how  exchange  rate  policy  will  be  conducted  during  the  program  period.  We  are  already
announcing to the public the daily value of an exchange rate basket consisting of US$ 1 and Euro 0.77
for  the  coming  12  months.  The  monthly  depreciation  rate  of  the  basket  adds  up  to  a  12-month
depreciation rate of 20%, in line with the WPI target for the period. At the end of each quarter, we will
pre-announce  a  depreciation  rate  for  the  quarter  beginning  nine  months  later,  and  leaving  the
pre-announced  rates  for  the  intermediate  quarters  unchanged.  This  means  that  at  the  end  of  every
three-month  period, the  rate  of  increase  in  the  exchange  rate  basket  for  the  next  12 months  will  be
publicly known.
The  system  will  function  in  this  manner  for  the  first  18  months  of  the  program.  Then,  starting  in
July 2001, a gradually widening symmetrical band will be introduced for the pre-announce exchange
basket.  From  this  point  on,  the  total  width  of  the  band  will  be  7.5%  by  end-2001,  15%  by
end-June 2002, and 22.5% by end-December 2002.
It will be noted that while we are making strong commitment to a pre-announced exchange rate path,
we are simultaneously announcing our exit strategy, which should allay concerns about the difficulty
of making a smooth exit from such systems.
Of course, there are also some risks created by pre-announcing the path of the exchange rate. But the
strength  of  the  fiscal  policies  implemented  so  far,  and  the  structural  reforms  undertaken  by  the
political  authorities,  should  substantially  reinforce  the  chances  that  our  exchange  rate  policy  will
succeed.
Our exchange rate policy will receive further support from monetary policy. To promote this, we are
moving  to  a  more  rule-based  monetary  policy  and  away  from  one  based  on  discretion,  especially
during the first 18 months. During this period, the Central Bank of Turkey will not increase its stock of
net  domestic  assets.  All  fluctuations  in  base  money  will  come  from  balance-of-payments  flows.
Accordingly, the ceiling on net domestic assets at the end of each quarter is fixed at TL –1,200 trillion
(excluding the change in the revaluation account, which is part of the net domestic assets definition).
In addition, during this period, net domestic assets will fluctuate within a parallel band whose upper
and  lower  limits  will  be  determined  as  plus-or-minus  5%  of  previous  end-of-quarter  base  money
figures.
In recent years, we have been limiting net domestic assets by decreasing credits to the public sector.
This  policy  will  be  continued  in  coming  years.  In  addition,  we  will  also  stop  sterilising  the  capital
inflows and outflows. This policy of no sterilisation will permit rapid, market-determined changes in
money  market  interest  rates,  and  will  create  an  automatic  mechanism  for  determining  Turkey’s
international reserves, and hence base money.
When there is  an  excess of  demand  for  foreign  exchange,  the  withdrawal  of  Turkish  Lira  from  the
market will not be offset by increasing net domestic assets. This in turn will increase the demand for
Turkish Lira, while decreasing the demand for foreign exchange.
Provided there are no major exogenous shocks to the system during the program period, we expect the
Central Bank’s net international reserves to remain at comfortable levels. The floors established for net
international  reserves  for  the  four  quarters  of  2000  are  US$ 12  billion,  US$ 12.5  billion,
US$ 12.5 billion and US$ 13 billion respectively. If for any reason net international reserves threaten
to fall below these levels, the Central Bank will take measures needed to counter these trends.
The  exchange  rate  band  mechanism  will  provide  greater  flexibility  for  net  domestic  assets  after the
second half of 2001. And as a result of this greater flexibility, the contribution of monetary policy to
the attainment of the inflation target will grow as the influence of monetary policy on interest rates
increases.
Finally,  I  should  explain  the  changes  we  are  making  in  the  reserve  requirement  system.  We  are
beginning to implement reserve requirements more flexibly in order to make it easier to meet banks’
temporary liquidity needs and enable them to manage their liquidity more efficiently in the course of
their operations.
3
BIS Review 9/2000
A  sound  banking  system  is  an  essential  prerequisite  for  the  efficient  implementation  of  monetary
policy. This is all the more true under a rule-based monetary policy regime. We announce the rules of
the game clearly to the players in the expectation that they will follow them efficiently and fairly. The
Banking  Law  that  was  enacted  by  Parliament  in  the  summer  of  1999,  and  the  amendments  made
during  the  last  month,  were  aimed  at  giving  the  banking  system  the  necessary  efficiency  and
soundness.
In conclusion, let me summarise recent history.
We  have  been  working  on  this  program  for  the  past  two  years.  Its  technical  excellence  accurately
reflects  well  the  effort  that  has  gone  into  it.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the  program  is
“comprehensive”, “strong”, “ambitious”, “bold” and “imaginative”, and most of all “achievable”.
The willingness of the political authorities to execute  this  program  is  clear  from  the  way  they  have
taken the necessary but politically difficult economic decisions: quickly, without hesitation or second
thoughts.
The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have  strongly  endorsed  the  program,  the  former  by  approving  for
Turkey a three-year standby arrangement, and the latter by extending project credit.
The prospect of membership negotiations with the European Union pursuant to the Helsinki decision
provides  an  additional  strong  incentive  to  implement  the  program  forcefully.  There  is  a  strong
autonomous ownership of the program. The Government, the Parliament, policymakers, and the social
partners  all  understand  the  great  rewards,  particularly  in  terms  of  reduced  interest  costs  and  stable
growth, that will follow the program’s successful implementation.
The markets’ reactions to the program have also been very positive. Interest rate declined from 100%
last October to the 30s recently.
I expect that these positive attitudes on the part of all participants in the program will continue until
Turkey has achieved the long-sought and much desired goal of durable price stability.
BIS Review 9/2000
4
