Mr Remsperger: Is there a New Economy in Germany?
Lecture  held  by  Prof  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  American  Institute  for  Contemporary  German  Studies,  in  New  York,  on
20 March 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
perhaps I have gone a step too far in asking the question I am putting today: How can one dare to ask
whether there is a New Economy in Germany if economists are still debating whether the notion of
New  Economy  fits  to  the  US  economy?  Besides,  I  have  been  warned  against  using  the  label  New
Economy  in  the  first  place  since,  especially  with  a  view  to  the  rapid  spread  of  computer-aided
technologies, the paradigm of interpretation used by the advocates of the “New Economy” is not so
very new at all.
And  indeed,  it  is  quite  appropriate  in  this  context  to  recall  the  economic  writings  of  Joseph
A Schumpeter. As early as 1911, in his Theory of Economic Development, he highlighted the role of
technological innovation. Following Kondratieff, Schumpeter established that long-term developments
are  initiated  by  basic  technological  innovations.  He  also  pointed  out  two  characteristics:  They  are
produced from within the economy and generate long waves.
Schumpeter, who completed his academic work in the United States, furthermore held the view that
these new combinations of production factors are not evenly distributed through time “but appear, if at
all,  discontinuously  in  groups  or  swarms”.1  In  another  passage  he  wrote:  “What  we  are  about  to
consider is that kind of change arising from within the system which so displaces its equilibrium point
that the new one cannot be reached from the old one by infinitesimal steps. Add successively as many
mail coaches as you please, you will never get a railway thereby.”2
With these quotations from Schumpeter in mind, it is now easier for me to state what my comments
today here in New York do and do not aim to achieve.  It  is  not  my  intention to  present a  series  of
academic exercises on defining the New Economy. Instead, I aim to look at the German economy and
economic policy from a perspective that has been created, as it were, in the “New Economy” of the
United States. In doing so, I shall concentrate on four aspects: first, the labour market and inflation;
second, growth and productivity; third, fiscal policy; and fourth, the financial markets.
Before I continue with these topics in detail please let me emphasise how closely the subject of the
New Economy is linked to monetary policy. This applies not only to US monetary policy but also to
the  two  pillar  approach  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  Regarding  the  first  pillar  -  which  is  the
reference value for money supply - the Governing Council of the ECB has pointed out that the trend
growth of the economy could be enhanced by structural reforms on the labour and product markets.
The  European  Central  Bank  would  take  such  improvements  into  account  in  calculating  the  M3
reference  value.  At  the  same  time,  the  second  pillar  of  the  monetary  policy  approach  -  that  is  the
broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments - would have to pay heed to traces of
a New Economy. However, it goes without saying that a conservative central banker cannot rely on
hopes and expectations but only on reliable facts and established findings. To make it absolutely clear:
My thoughts on some trace elements of a New Economy in Germany do not imply that I disregard the
importance of the money supply for the medium-term price development in the euro area.
1
2
Schumpeter, The Theory of Economic Development, (1911), Transactions Publishers, 1993, p. 223.
Schumpeter, loc. cit., p. 64.
1
BIS Review 25/2000
But now let me get back to the four topics I have just mentioned. With regard to the labour market and
inflation it is initially striking that the development of inflation in Germany over the last decade has
been fairly similar to that in the United States. However, there was a certain time lag in Germany.
In the early 1990s, the German inflation rate was still around 5% owing to tight capacity utilisation.
Since then it has fallen continuously. Since 1995 the inflation rate has been well below 2%. It is thus
within a range that is consistent with price stability according to the ECB’s definition.
In contrast to inflation, labour market trends in Germany during the 1990s have been fundamentally
different  from  those  in  the  United  States.  Whereas  the  US  unemployment  rate  has  continued  to
decline,  the  unemployment  rate  in  Germany  has  been  rising  significantly  for  a  long  time  since  the
cyclical  slump  in  1992-93.  And  this  has  been  accompanied  by  a  continued  decline  in  employment
despite  an  active  labour  market  policy  and  the  creation  of  early  retirement  schemes.  The  German
labour market is, if you like, a classic element of an “old economy”. It is only recently that the dent in
growth  caused  by  the  Asian  crisis  has  been  overcome,  that  an improvement  can  be  detected  on  the
labour market.
The causes of the German labour market problems are primarily structural. This can also be seen by
the  comparatively  large  number  of long-term  unemployed.  Wage  formation  is  mainly  geared  to  the
interests of “insiders” who already have a job and not to those “outsiders” who would prefer moderate
wage settlements. The accelerated adjustment of east German wages to the west German standards is
one example of insufficient wage differentiation. It is precisely in the lower wage groups that it would
be important to structure wage substitutes in a more incentive-friendly way.
From  a  current  perspective  it  remains  an  open  question  whether  the  establishment  of  European
monetary union will ultimately also lead to a reduction in labour market rigidities. However, I should
add  that  we  are  witnessing  a  gradual  erosion  of  industry-wide  pay  bargaining  at  least  in  eastern
Germany. And we also observe working hours becoming  more flexible. However, further steps will
have to follow so that a wage policy which is in line with market requirements can help to stimulate
employment friendly growth.
Furthermore, the non-accelerating rate of unemployment, or NAIRU, could also fall in Germany.  In
the United States all the signs indicate that the NAIRU declined significantly during the long boom.
According to the Bundesbank’s calculations, which may like other calculations be regarded with some
degree of uncertainty, NAIRU has risen in Germany almost throughout the entire period since the end
of the seventies. In western Germany, it is likely to have been above 8% towards the end of the 1990s.
When I now come to the second area of my comments, “Growth and Productivity”, I do not have to
tell you about the US economy’s success story in the 1990s. It is well-known to you. In short: Output
and productivity growth has been very buoyant especially since the mid-1990s - that is in an advanced
phase of the upturn. The scale and the timing of these productivity increases can scarcely be explained
in terms of the normal cyclical pattern. I wonder whether Schumpeter would have already interpreted
the available evidence as a long wave.
In  Germany,  the  GDP  growth  rate  in  the  1990s  was  almost  1½ percentage  points  below  the
corresponding  US  figure.  Currently,  the  difference in the  trend  growth  is  likely  to  be  slightly  more
than  one  percentage  point.3  When  considering  the  individual  components  of  demand,  the  different
momentum  of  capital  spending  is  particularly  striking.  Whereas  real  investment  in  machinery  and
equipment in the United States has been growing at an annual average of almost 10% since 1993, it is
3 A precise quantification of this difference is not easily possible, since the forecasts of  future developments are also of
importance for estimates at the end of the series. For example, the OECD currently assumes a potential growth of the US
economy of 3½%, whereas the IMF predicts 2¾%.
BIS Review 25/2000
2
only  in  the  last  two  years  that  Germany  has  seen  a  recovery  of  investment  in  machinery  and
equipment, albeit not with double-digit rates of growth (1998: 9.2%, 1999: 5.1%).4
If the different pace of economic growth is examined more closely, it becomes apparent that US output
growth  is  supported  by  a  sharp  increase  in  both  employment  and  in  labour  productivity.  This  is  a
strong indication that a balanced growth process is existing, in which labour and capital complement
each other in terms of their contribution to output.
With an average growth rate of 2%, labour productivity in Germany was quite close to the US figures
in  the  nineties.5  When  analysing  this  development,  however,  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  the
productivity  gains  in  Germany  are  also  attributable  to  a  fall  in  employment.  The  contrasting
developments in labour productivity and employment point to an extensive substitution of labour by
capital.
It is, of course, not sufficient to look only at the highly aggregated level.6 The OECD comes to the
conclusion that the development towards a services society  has  also  made  considerable advances in
Germany:  In  a  comparative  study,  it  puts  the  share  of  “knowledge-based  industries”  in  the  United
States and in Germany at just over 50% in each case.7 And within the category of investment, as in the
United  States,  investment  in  software  shows  by  far  the  highest  growth  rate  in  Germany.8  The
pioneering  role  which  the  United  States  has  assumed  in  the  development  of  new  technologies  is,
however, likely to be unchallenged. A study by the Munich-based ifo Institute on the spread of new
information  and  communication  technologies,  for  example,  concludes  that  generating  such
technologies has not been a very prominent feature in Germany over the last decade as compared to
the United States or Japan.9
This  finding  is  broadly  consistent  with  OECD  studies  on  investment  in  R&D  activities  in  the
industrialised countries: Whereas the share of these expenditures as a percentage of GDP declined in
Germany  during  the  nineties,  it  has  been  rising  again  in  the  United  States  over  the  past  few  years
following  a  decline  in  the  early  nineties.10  These  facts  are  hardly  surprising  as  the  United  States  is
generally  attested  a  leading  position  in  terms  of  the  factor  human  capital  in  highly  qualified,
research-intensive jobs.  However,  we  should  not lose sight  of  the  fact  that  Germany  is  known  as  a
country with a very good average quality of the factor human capital. This basically favours a broad
application of new technologies and their adoption to particular enterprise-specific conditions.
What  do  all  these  findings  now  imply  for  future  growth  prospects?  Most  of  the  currently  available
forecasts  agree  that  an  economic  recovery  is  to  be  expected  in  Germany  over  the  next  few  years,
whereas the pace of expansion in the United States is likely to decelerate, leading to a soft landing. To
that extent, a certain convergence of cyclical growth can be expected. However, from the perspective
of the debate on the “New Economy”, the key question is whether the anticipated upswing in Germany
will be more than cyclical in character and lead to a trend shift in the path of growth - in much the
4 An  interpretation  of  these  figures  should  take  into  account  the  fact  that  direct  comparisons  are  complicated  by  the
different methods to adjust for price developments, especially in the capital goods sector. The depreciation components,
which might differ for several reasons, should also be taken into account.
5 The figure relates to aggregate hourly labour productivity. The comparative value for the US corporate sector is 2.2%.
6 The term “New Economy” is also used especially “to describe the shift from the industrial production of goods towards
the  provision  of  knowledge-based  services”.  “The  new  economy  has  arrived  in  Euroland”,  Goldman  Sachs,  European
Weekly Analyst, 99/41, 199, S.1.
7
Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 1999. Benchmarking Knowledge-based Economies, OECD (1999).
8 This type of investment grew by an annual average of just over 8% in real terms in Germany in the nineties.
9
See  in  particular:  Tertiarisierung  und  neue  Informations-  und  Kommunikationstechnologien,  ifo-Schnelldienst,  29/99,
p. 23-34.
10 Quoted  from  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Education  and  Research,  Zur  technologischen  Leistungsfähigkeit  Deutschlands,
Endbericht 1999, p. 29.
3
BIS Review 25/2000
same  way  as  in  the  United  States  in  the  nineties.  I  believe  this  is  possible  if  the  willingness  to
undertake reforms is followed by action to match.
What  is  of  main  importance  to  me  in  this  connection  is  to  point  out  that  the  integration  of  the
European goods and factor markets inherent in the EU’s single market programme is being accelerated
by the single monetary policy in the euro area. The resultant intensification of competition combined
with  the  exploitation  of  increasing  returns  to  scale  in  the  enlarged  markets  might  have  a  sustained
boosting  impact  on  productivity.  The  changes  in  the  telecoms  sector  are  an  example  of  how  the
deregulation  of  markets  can  make  further  progress  in  Germany  as  well.  With  the  intensified
competition, especially in an increasingly globalised competitive environment, this development will
not only act as a damper on prices. It is also likely to lead to further surges of modernisation, in which
new globally available technologies will be employed.
Before I come to the third area of my comments, I would like to touch briefly on the healthcare sector.
It  can  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  engines  of  growth,  provided  it  is  not  overly  restricted  by  state
regulations. In Germany, this sleeping giant is still waiting to be unchained. But let me now turn to
fiscal policy.
Although fiscal policy is not at the actual centre of the New Economy controversy, I think it is a very
important player in the macroeconomic setting.
In  the  United  States,  fiscal  policy  in  the  past  decade  has  been  characterised  by  a  marked  course  of
consolidation. For example, the initially quite high government budget deficits of almost 6% of GDP
in 1992 were reduced completely and transformed into a slight surplus (1999: 1.0% of GDP).
In  Germany,  reunification  confronted  fiscal  policy  with  its  most  difficult  task  since  the  period  of
reconstruction following World War II. The restructuring of the corporate sector in eastern Germany
in conformity with the social welfare system, the enormous task to modernise the public infrastructure
and the adoption of  the  west  German  social  security  system  required  huge  transfer  payments  to  the
new Länder, the bulk of which was covered by public borrowing. As it happened, the opportunity of
applying these measures as a tool for fundamental overall reforms was seized rather late and with little
energy.
In the end, there has been a significant increase in the public sector’s recourse to the resources of the
economy  as  a  whole:  The  ratio  of  public  spending  to  GDP  which  had  fallen  to  just  under  46%  in
western Germany in 1989 rose to almost 51% by 1996. The public debt ratio increased from just under
42% to almost 61% in the same period. Moreover, the taxes and social security ratio grew from just
under 42½% to slightly more than 43% owing to the sharp increase in social security contributions.
These  unhealthy  developments  in  public  sector  finances  made  a  reversal  increasingly  inevitable.
Moreover, the convergence criteria of the Maastricht Treaty had to be met. Since 1997, the deficit ratio
has been declining as a result of increased consolidation efforts. However, the fiscal framework at the
beginning of the new century cannot at all be described as optimal in macroeconomic terms.
Nevertheless, the decisions taken since summer 1999 give rise to the hope that important changes in
the economy as a whole will also be supported by fiscal policy. However, the picture is very complex
in this area.
It has to be regarded as positive for the future development of the economy that the German federal
government  is  committed  to  pursuing  a  strict  policy  of  consolidation.  What  is  pleasing  is  that  this
course does not just exist in theory but has already been substantiated by measures which will have a
rapid impact. Certainly, the savings package which envisages savings of DM 30 billion for 2000 and
around  DM 50  billion  for  2003  does  not  correspond  to  effective  savings  of  the  same  level.
Nevertheless, the public sector’s recourse to GDP is likely to fall.
Moreover, there are plans to reduce the public sector deficit ratio to ½% by 2003. At a first glance, this
may not seem particularly ambitious. One might also have doubts as to whether the European Stability
and Growth Pact target of achieving a budget close to balance or in surplus in the medium term can be
met in full. However, it should not be forgotten that the consolidation course is to be accompanied by
BIS Review 25/2000
4
tax  reductions  on  a  quite  impressive  scale.  Hence,  the  planned  reduction  in  public  spending  from
48.5% of GDP in 1999 to 45% in 2003 is much stronger than the lowering of the budget deficit ratio.
The twin-track approach of tax cuts and a restrictive spending policy has paved the way for a sustained
reduction of the public sector burden on the capital markets and hence the creation of greater scope for
private investment.  In  addition,  the  conditions for investment  and  production  in  Germany  are  being
improved through the tax cuts.
It is possible to detect a distinct shift in focus in German fiscal policy. The Tax Relief Act which came
into force at the beginning of 1999 primarily aimed at providing relief to lower-income earners and
households with children. The economy was to be boosted from the demand side. The price paid for
this was a higher burden on enterprises and thus a deterioration in supply and investment conditions.
The government’s plan  for  a reform  of  business taxation  now  aims  to  give  relief  to  enterprises  and
thus  create  conditions  that  are  more  favourable  to  growth  via  the  supply  side.  This  reorientation  is
being accompanied by a further two-stage reduction in income tax in 2003 and 2005 which also covers
the top rates. In 2005, the top rate of income tax would then be 45% compared with 51% at present.
The CDU/CSU parliamentary group in the Bundestag would like to put through a reduction in the top
rate of tax to 35% by 2003.
The government’s planned tax reform will result in a substantial tax relief for enterprises in net terms
as well, especially as a result of the sharp reduction in the corporate tax rate to a uniform level of 25%.
At present, the corporate tax rates are 40% on retained profits and 30% on distributed profits. The tax
cut  will  strengthen  Germany’s  attraction  as  an  industrial  location.  The  planned  tax  exemption  of
corporations’ profits from the sale of equity stakes will facilitate corporate restructuring. Germany is
likely to become more attractive as a location for holding companies.
In  all,  the  tax  plans  are  an  important  and  welcome  beginning  which  should  be  followed  by  further
steps. From the point of view of the tax system and in terms of a consistent and equal taxation of all
types of income, the plans do have some shortcomings. Above all, problems are raised by the marked
preferential  tax  treatment  of  profits  retained  in  enterprises,  which  cannot  be  justified  on
macroeconomic  grounds.  This  preferential  treatment  might  also  result  in  allocation  distortions.
Ultimately, a substantial reduction of all rates and a  comprehensive  widening  of the tax  assessment
basis would be needed.
Whereas approaches to  a solution  are  becoming  evident in  fiscal policy,  this  cannot  be said  for  the
severe  structural  problem  of  the  statutory  system  of  old-age  provision.  Here,  the  ageing  of  the
population has led to an implicit public sector  debt  building  up  on  a  major scale. With the existing
system  of  old-age  provision  this  debt  can  only  be  repaid  by  further  increases  in  employees’  and
employers’  contributions.  Official  projections  assume  that  this  would  result  in  the  contribution  rate
having to rise to 24% by 2030. In addition, there would also be growing burdens in health and nursing
care insurance. The associated obstacles to growth and higher costs would be a severe strain on the
development of the economy. The reform measures proposed so far are not enough to prevent such a
questionable development. Above all, what is needed is a restriction of the pension growth rate. This
would create room for supplementary privately funded pensions. This would also benefit the capital
markets. And mentioning the capital markets I have now arrived at the last topic of my presentation.
Undoubtedly, the “New Economy” is closely connected with developments in the financial markets.
For example, the sharp growth in the supply of venture capital in the United States suggests that the
momentum of the real economy is being underpinned by flexible, innovative forms of financing in the
capital market.
The German financial system has been traditionally characterised by the dominant role of the banks.
Such more “bank-based” structures should by no means be equated with backwardness, however. On
the  contrary,  the  credit  institutions’  intermediation  can  in  some  cases  even  be  superior  to  the
market-based financial system. Just to give a particularly important example: The corporate landscape
in  Germany  has 
traditionally  been  characterised  by  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises.
Long-standing, strong business relationships with specific banks are particularly suited to covering the
financing requirements of such enterprises at reasonable costs even in periods of economic difficulty.
5
BIS Review 25/2000
However, from the perspective of the New Economy, market-based financing is especially important.
It is precisely young, innovative enterprises with uncertain earnings prospects that often have to rely
on financing sources outside the banking system.
In this connection I would like to draw your attention to the rapidly increasing importance of the stock
market  in  Germany.  In  1999  alone,  domestic  enterprises  issued  shares  with  a  market  value  of
 billion. This is an increase of almost 50% compared with 1998 and three times the 1997 figure.
Particularly  noteworthy  is  the  high  share  of  initial  public  offerings  in  what  is  known  as  the  “New
Market”, the market for young and innovative enterprises. More than 200 companies are now listed in
this category which has thus become an engine for financing innovative enterprises in Germany.
However, the New Market is only appropriate for firms which have already established themselves in
the  markets.  Hence,  it  is  of  particular  importance  that,  along  with  the  success  of  the  New  Market,
venture capital business has simultaneously taken a rapid upswing. Venture capital invested rose by
DM 5 billion in Germany in 1999. At the same time, the structure of venture capital investment has
radically changed. Whereas it was more traditional sectors  that attracted  venture  capital  in  the  past,
such investment now focuses on telecommunications, biotechnology and computing.
The growth of both the New Market and venture capital are interdependent. The New Market offers
ideal  conditions  for  transforming  venture  capital  into  risk  capital  traded  on  the  stock  exchange
following the phase of venture financing. In the past, the lack of such an “exit” option was one of the
obstacles to the development of a broader venture capital market in Germany. The rapid growth of the
stock  market  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  general  public  becoming  increasingly
interested  in  share  investments.  Much  use  is  being  made  of  indirect  stock  market  activity  through
investment funds.
Complementing the provision of risk capital via the stock market, there has been a sharp rise in the
issue volume of corporate bonds. This instrument was also used in the past year to finance mergers
and acquisitions - in other words, the restructuring of the corporate sector. However, this increase is
also  due  to  growing  investor  demand  for  higher-risk  paper,  since  the  scope  of  diversification  has
become much smaller through the elimination of exchange rate risks following the introduction of the
euro. The German corporate bond market is still less developed than in the United States. However,
there  are  indications  that  the  emergence  of  corporate  bonds  as  a  means  of  long-term  financing  has
become increasingly prominent in supplementing the use of bank loans. The momentum and strength
of such an underlying trend seem to be influenced to  a large  degree  by  technological  advances,  the
pace of structural change in the corporate sector and economic policy reforms, such as in tax law or
old-age pension provisions. Additional impetus is being provided by European monetary union.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  finally  return  to  my  initial  question:  “Is  there  a  New  Economy  in
Germany?” This question cannot be answered with a sweeping yes or no. But it can probably be stated
firstly that there are movements in Germany which are simultaneously beneficial to growth and price
stability. I see traces of such a New Economy, above all, in areas of the economy which for a long
time were subject only to limited competition, but which are now being deregulated. More growth in
those areas may even be accompanied by falling prices. Second, the new technologies are available
globally.  They  are  also  available  as  growth  potential  outside  the  United  States.  Third,  the  German
financial system seems well equipped not only to accommodate the changes in the real sector but also
to  support  them.  In  Germany,  we  need  and  have  both  market-oriented  and  bank-oriented  financial
services. I cannot and do not want to comment on the development of share prices in the New Market
in Germany. But I do believe that traces of a New Economy can also be found in this market segment.
On top of that, ever-increasing competition and technological progress  are leading  to  a  far-reaching
renewal in the financial sector.
Fourth,  the  economic  policy  decisions  taken  since  summer  1999  suggest  that  an  upswing  in  the
economy  as  a  whole  is  supported  by  the  fiscal  framework.  What  is  especially  positive  is  the
commitment to a strict consolidation course which is being reinforced by concrete savings measures.
And, in line with Professor Issing, I would finally like to emphasise that monetary union in Europe
and the completion of the single market are promoting corporate restructuring, which is improving the
efficiency of the economy.
BIS Review 25/2000
6
Let me conclude by saying that computers and the Internet alone will not create a New Economy in
Germany  by  themselves.  Only  structural  reforms  will  reduce  the  impediments  to  growth.  A
combination of technological change and structural reforms would make possible not only a better use
but also a widening of the potential for growth in Germany.
7
BIS Review 25/2000
