Christian Noyer: The development of financial markets in the euro area
Speech delivered by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Royal
Institute of International Affairs, London, on 26 June 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very pleased to be here at Chatham House today to address such a distinguished audience.
Over  recent  years,  the  economic  and  financial  structure  of  the  euro  area  has  undergone  sweeping
changes.  Overall, these  changes  have  led  to  the  rapid  development  of  financial  markets  in  the  euro
area. This trend seems to have been reinforced since the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999.
Over a period of a few years, financial markets in the euro area have grown in size and have come to
play a more important role in the economy.
The development of financial markets in the euro area is shaped by a set of broad economic trends, all
of  which  are  conducive  to  the  development  of  deeper,  more  liquid  and  more  efficient  financial
markets.
One of these broad trends is the programme of Economic and Monetary Union, which has contributed
to further economic integration and convergence of the economies of the European Union over most of
the  past  decade.  As  the  processes  of  economic  activity  became  more  intertwined  in  the  European
Union, this naturally  led  to  the  development  of  more  cross-border  financial interconnections.  In  the
countries  which  adopted  the  euro,  the  evidence  available  so  far  suggests  that  the  single  currency
facilitated  this  process.  The  euro  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  area-wide  financial
markets, although this process is still far from complete.
Another  trend  is  the  solid  establishment  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  followed  the
considerable progress made in the run-up to EMU. During the second half of the 1990s, the rate of
increase in consumer prices at the level of the euro area declined steadily to reach values in line with
price stability. Even more importantly, during this period the citizens, firms and other organisations of
the euro area progressively came to consider it credible that price stability would henceforth continue
to be firmly maintained. This confidence on the part of the public is of the utmost importance for the
continued  success  of  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem.  As  we  all  know,  price  stability  is
beneficial  in  numerous  ways,  not  only  in  creating  a  climate  for  higher  economic  activity  over  the
medium  term,  but  also  in  reducing  the  economic  and  social  inequalities  caused  by  the  asymmetric
distribution of the costs of inflation on the various economic agents. In addition, when inflation is low
and  expected  to  remain  low  and  subject  to  limited  variations  over  the  medium  term,  the  prices  of
financial  assets  incorporate  lower  inflation  risk  premia,  by  contrast  with  a  situation  of  high  or
uncertain inflation. As the inflation risk premium becomes relatively less important as a determinant
of  financial  prices, other factors  such  as  credit  risk  can  take  on  a  larger  role  in  the  price  formation
mechanism. Ultimately, this results in a more efficient allocation of financial resources.
In the run-up to Stage Three of EMU, the governments of the European Union also, where necessary,
made efforts to reduce their deficits and their debt so as to bring them into line with the requirements
specified by the Maastricht Treaty. As was intended by the drafters of the Treaty, this development
contributed to achieving sounder fiscal policies, which would be more conducive to economic growth
over the medium term and which would make it possible for automatic fiscal stabilisers to work more
effectively when needed. A further effect of the reduction in public deficits and debt, all other things
being equal, is the freeing of financial resources for use by the private sector. This reduces hindrances
to the development of financial markets for private borrowers such as the corporate bond market.
A final item in this short list of the broad economic trends shaping the future of financial markets in
the  euro  area  is  the  phenomenon  of  population  ageing.  Taken  together  with  the  liberalisation  of
financial markets, over the coming years population ageing will lead to further demand for long-term
1
BIS Review 54/2000
investment instruments on the part of rapidly developing pension funds, along the lines, for instance,
of  what  we  are  already  beginning  to  see  in  the  United  Kingdom.  As  borrowers  strive  to  meet  the
increased  demand  for  investment  instruments,  this  is  likely  to  provide  a  further  impetus  to  the
development  of  a  wide  range  of  suited  financial  instruments  available  to  pension  funds,  and  more
generally to savers at the end of the intermediation chain.
Having identified broad economic trends, which all seem to point in the direction of a wider role for
financial  markets  in  the  euro  area  over  the  coming  years,  I  should  like  today  to  discuss  what  has
actually happened so far and consider what challenges lie ahead. I shall first consider the degree of
development of the various segments of financial markets in the euro area, so as to assess whether and,
if so, why some segments are less developed than others, at area-wide level. I will then move on to
consider,  more  generally,  the  progress  made  in  the  efficiency  of  the  functioning  of  the  financial
markets of the euro area.
Are certain segments of euro area financial markets less developed than others and, if so, why?
The discussion of this issue should be precursored with the observation that, in the euro area, financial
markets rely more on bank credit than in the United States or the United Kingdom. By contrast, debt
securities and shares represent a considerably smaller proportion of GDP in the euro area than they do
in  the  United  States  or  the  United  Kingdom.  Hence,  and  notwithstanding  the  processes  of
disintermediation and securitisation currently under way, the financial structure of the euro area can be
characterised  as  being  more  bank-oriented  than  security  or  market-oriented.  Starting  from  this
situation,  many  commentators  have  correctly  observed  that  the  euro  area  is  currently  engaged  in  a
process  of  structural  change  towards  more  market-based  finance.  As  Alan  Greenspan  put  it,  recent
“changes appear to be moving continental Europe’s financial system closer to the structure evident in
Great Britain and the United States”.
With regard to debt securities, outstanding amounts in euro-denominated instruments increased in all
issuing sectors in 1999. However, the increase was more pronounced in the private than in the public
sector. At end-1999, with a share of 52% the public sector still accounted for a considerable proportion
of total debt securities denominated in euro, but this had declined compared with the 55% witnessed at
end-1998. At the same time, the share of the financial sector had increased from 38% to 40% and the
share of the non-financial private sector had increased from 5% to 6%. Obviously, significant changes
in the relative share of the various sectors occur only gradually over time. However, the developments
seen  in  1999  received  a  large  amount  of  attention  on  the  part  of  market  commentators,  for  several
reasons.
First, there was a considerable increase in private issuance in the euro area between 1998 and 1999.
This continued broadly unabated at the beginning of 2000. It should be recognised that temporary or
exceptional  factors  may  have  played  a  role  in  1999.  For  example,  some  borrowers  may  have
frontloaded issuance activity in 1999, so as to benefit from a possible enhanced attractiveness of new
issues in the aftermath of the introduction of the euro. In addition, issuers may have wished to avoid
placing  new  issues  around  the  century  date  change  for  fear  of  possible  liquidity  problems,  which
eventually  did  not  occur.  However,  these  explanations  are  not  sufficient  to  account  in  full  for  the
increase in private issuance activity seen in 1999, all the more so since the trend has continued at the
beginning of 2000.
Second, the available data showed not only an increase in private issuance, but also a series of changes
in the various characteristics of the newly issued debt securities. For example, the average size of new
bond issues increased considerably in 1999, as the number of very large issues, of EUR 1 billion or
more,  increased  significantly.  It  should  be  recognised  that  this  development  partly  reflected  the
increased preference of investors for  deep and liquid instruments  following  the episode  of  financial
turmoil  in  the  autumn  of  1998.  However,  another  reason  for  this  change,  which  was  particularly
notable in the euro area, was the fact that borrowers were able to take advantage of the newly created
euro-denominated  bond  market.  By  virtue  of  its  size  and  high  degree  of  openness,  the
euro-denominated  bond  market  is  more  able  to  absorb  very  large  issues  than  the  individual  bond
markets of the predecessor currencies of the euro.
BIS Review 54/2000
2
Looking in more detail at the components of the increase in private euro-denominated bond issuance,
it  is  noteworthy  that  issuance  by  non-residents,  although  small  relative  to  the  total,  increased
particularly rapidly in 1999. Standing at around EUR 630 billion at the end of 1999, the outstanding
amount  of  euro-denominated  debt  securities  issued  by  non-residents  represented  slightly  less  than
one-tenth  of  the  total  outstanding  amount  of  euro-denominated  debt  securities.  However,  this
constituted an increase of more than 40% compared with end-1998. In 1999, the amount of new issues
of  euro-denominated  debt  securities  by  non-residents  came  very  close 
that  of  new
dollar-denominated  issues  by  non-residents.  Hence,  in  the  course  of  1999  the  euro-denominated
component of international bond markets played a far larger role than the predecessor currencies of the
euro  had  hitherto.  This  development  was  in  line  with  the  predictions  made  by  some  commentators
before  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  However,  the  speed  of  the  increase  in  euro-denominated
international bond issuance during 1999 was remarkable.
to 
In 1999 the main investors active in the euro-denominated segment of the international bond market
were,  as  in  previous  years,  investors  located  in  the  euro  area.  Hence,  as  shown  in  a  recent  ECB
working  paper,  although  the  euro  became  an  important  placement  currency  for  international  bonds
virtually from the beginning, the use of the euro as an international investment currency is likely to
develop more gradually over time. From the point of view of monetary policy, let me recall that the
internationalisation of the euro is not a policy objective as such and that, therefore, it will be neither
fostered nor hindered by the Eurosystem.
Turning  to  securities  in  the  form  of  shares,  close  to  900  companies  were  newly  listed  on  stock
exchanges in the euro area in the course of 1999. This represented an increase of some 40% compared
with 1998. In the United States, there were close to 800 new stock listings in 1999, a slight decline
compared with 1998, and in the United Kingdom new stock listings also declined from 1998 to 1999.
These changes may obviously have reflected circumstantial factors, such as differing positions in the
business cycle, for example. These circumstantial factors notwithstanding, the increase in new listings
also  seems  to  have  reflected  the  enhanced  attractiveness  of  stock  market  listing  in  the  euro  area.
Following the introduction of the euro, a number of firms found it more attractive to issue stocks in the
euro area, as these stocks could be marketed to a wider array of investors than had been possible in the
stock markets of the predecessor currencies of the euro.
Furthermore, in 1999 and in the first half of 2000, there was an exceptional array of initiatives taken
by stock exchanges with a view to forming alliances or merging activities, both within the euro area
and  beyond,  involving  exchanges  located  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States.  These
initiatives clearly reflected not only factors specific to the euro area, but also other factors, such as the
impact of new information and telecommunications technology. These new technologies seem to have
led to a marked increase in the economies of scope and scale that can be achieved by stock exchanges
through  alliances  or  mergers.  At  the  level  of  the  euro  area,  the  process  of  consolidation  of  stock
exchanges is taking place in the context of the integration of stock markets at area-wide level.
In  summary,  both  corporate  bond  markets  and  equity  markets  in  the  euro  area,  while  remaining
somewhat  less  developed  than  their  US  counterparts,  developed  rapidly  in  1999.  This  development
seems, in particular, to have brought benefits to the less well-rated borrowers, as the amount of bonds
issued by this category of borrowers increased most rapidly in 1999.
It cannot be denied that the process of Economic and Monetary Union has contributed positively to
this development.
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  financial  prices  are  no  longer  affected  by  intra-area  foreign
exchange risk premia. Furthermore, as I mentioned earlier, financial prices generally incorporate much
lower inflation risk premia. As a result of lower foreign exchange and inflation risk premia, credit risk
has gained more importance, in relative terms, in the pricing of financial instruments. In order to deal
with  this  evolution,  financial  market  participants  active  in  the  euro  area  have  stepped  up  their
assessment  of  the  credit  quality  of  the  security  issuers.  This  development  may  be  described  as  the
development of a “credit risk culture”. In the course of 1999, the development of a “credit risk culture”
amongst investors active in the euro area led borrowers to seek more ratings for their securities. This
explains why the number of new ratings provided by ratings agencies to borrowers located in the euro
3
BIS Review 54/2000
area  increased  very  substantially  in  the  course  of  1999,  also  for  borrowers  with  ratings  somewhat
below the best levels.
Second, with the creation of the euro, investors and borrowers active in the financial markets of the
euro area have de facto been granted access to the euro-denominated market. This market, even if it is
not  yet  fully  integrated  at  the  area-wide  level,  is  larger  and  more  open  than  any  of  the  markets
denominated  in  the  predecessor  currencies  of  the  euro.  As  the  remaining  barriers  to  the  efficient
functioning of financial markets at the area-wide level are progressively removed, borrowers will have
easier access to financial resources and investors will enjoy more varied opportunities for investment.
Obviously, this development will not necessarily provide benefits only for large borrowers and large
investors. For example, as large borrowers are able to obtain more funds directly from the financial
markets,  some  bank  resources  will  be  freed  and  thus  become  available  for  smaller  borrowers
particularly suited to the kind of credit monitoring relationship that can be established with a bank. In
addition, smaller investors will clearly be able to reap the full benefits of the establishment of large
financial markets in the euro area, either through the use of retail brokerage services or, more often,
through  the  purchase  of  mutual  fund  shares.  In  this  respect,  it  is  also  noteworthy  that  the  amounts
invested in mutual funds located in the euro area continued to increase, by 6% in 1999, following a
considerable increase of 34% in 1998.
Although considerable progress has been made so far, there appear nonetheless to be some areas in
euro  area  financial  markets  which  are  lagging  behind  in  terms  of  development.  Let  us  take,  for
example,  the  case  of  the  repo  market.  The  unsecured  money  market  became  fully  integrated  at  the
level  of  the  euro  area  soon  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  However,  it  is  striking  that,  although
some progress has also been made in the secured money market, the repo market has not yet become
integrated  to  anything  like  the  same  extent  as  its  unsecured  counterpart.  In  particular,  turnover  in
cross-border  repo transactions, although  it  increased,  did  not  do  so  very  considerably.  Furthermore,
market  liquidity,  as  measured,  for  example,  by  bid-ask  spreads  on  repo  transactions,  still  varies
significantly across countries. Several technical factors seem to have prevented the full development
of  an  area-wide  repo  market  so  far.  First,  the  market  infrastructure  currently  available  for  repo
transactions is not conducive to cross-border trades. Trading and clearing platforms are not sufficiently
integrated.  In  addition,  securities  settlement  systems  do  not  always  make  it  possible  to  transfer
efficiently  the  ownership  of  securities  on  a  short-term  basis,  as  is  needed  in  repo  transactions.  A
second set of factors hindering the development of the repo market at the area-wide level seems to be
related to country differences in the tax regimes applicable to repo transactions. Furthermore, there are
also  legal  differences  across  countries,  in  particular  relating  to  the  possibility  of  netting  financial
obligations.  These  problems  have  been  posing  considerable  challenges  to  the  preparation  of  the
contractual documentation underlying repo transactions.
With regard  to  market  infrastructure, the  Eurosystem  believes  that it is  up  to  market  participants to
deal with the problems and find the best market-oriented solutions. In its own repo operations, in order
to ensure a level playing-field, the Eurosystem has put in place a system whereby its counterparties
can  use  any  eligible  asset,  irrespective  of  its  location,  as  collateral  against  credit  received  from  the
Eurosystem. At the risk of treading on rather technical ground, let me recall that this system consists
of  two  parts.  First,  the  national  central  banks  act  as  correspondent  banks  for  one  another,  and  take
eligible  assets  in  custody  for  one  another’s  account.  Second,  when  there  are  links  between  the
securities settlement systems, assets may be transferred using such links, provided that the links have
been reviewed by the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and judged to comply with ESCB
standards. In fact, thanks to these facilities, the counterparties of the Eurosystem make extensive use
of collateral on a cross-border basis.
Are the financial markets of the euro area becoming more efficient?
I should now like to reflect upon the question of the efficiency of financial markets in the euro area. I
will first briefly touch upon retail financial markets. I shall then address wholesale financial markets in
greater detail.
BIS Review 54/2000
4
One particular development can illustrate the progress recently made in retail banking markets. In the
euro area the dispersion of interest rates on loans for house purchase declined noticeably in the course
of  1999,  continuing  a  trend  which  had  been  apparent  since  1996.  Between  1996  and  1998,  the
convergence of interest rates on loans for house purchase had been in parallel with the convergence of
market interest rates across those countries which would later form the euro area. By 1999 differentials
between market interest rates had reached stable levels across the euro area. However, cross-country
differentials  between  interest rates  on  loans for  house  purchase  continued to  narrow  sizeably.  More
specifically,  in  countries  where  they  used  to  be  particularly  high,  interest  rates  on  loans  for  house
purchase came closer to the euro area average in 1999. Hence, despite the fact that banks do not yet, in
many cases, directly compete with each other on a cross-border basis in the granting of loans for house
purchase,  customers  have  already  been  able  to  benefit  from  more  competitive  loan  prices.  This
development was particularly interesting as interest rates rose during 1999 from the exceptionally low
levels recorded at the beginning of that year.
Although  considerable  progress  has  already  been  made,  there  clearly  remain  obstacles  to  the
development of more competitive markets for banking products and services at the level of the euro
area. For example, there is a need to improve cross-border retail payment services in the euro area. In
order to encourage the development of cross-border payment systems enabling the public to  benefit
more fully from the single  currency,  the  Eurosystem  has  drawn up  a list  of  desirable  objectives  for
cross-border  retail  payments  in the euro  area.  It  stands  ready  to  play  a  coordinating  and  supportive
role. In particular, the Eurosystem considers it highly desirable that the prices and settlement lags of
cross-border transfers be similar to those of national transfers, whenever the applicable standards and
procedures permit.
Turning  to  the  wholesale  financial  markets,  progress  has  clearly  been  more  rapid  than  for  retail
financial markets. Already in the run-up to the introduction of the euro, but especially since 1 January
1999, there has been a large decline in transaction costs in many areas. In foreign exchange, interest
rate and equity markets, bid-ask spreads often declined in 1999 compared with 1998, sometimes very
significantly.  Furthermore,  trading  activity  expanded,  particularly  in  some  segments  such  as  the
private bond markets. As a result of the increase in trading activity, market participants were able to
carry out large transactions within a short period of time more easily and with lower costs. Hence, in
1999 not only bid-ask spreads but also other indicators pointed towards an increase in the depth and
liquidity of financial markets in the euro area.
The  changes  in  transaction  costs  are  particularly  notable  on  the  unsecured  money  market.  In  the
context of the conduct of monetary policy, the creation of an area-wide operational framework for the
refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  has  modified  the  micro-structure  of  the  money  market
considerably. Despite the continued use of different trading systems, the money market of the euro has
gained a clear  cross-border  orientation, largely  thanks  to the establishment  of TARGET.  Very  soon
after the introduction of the euro, typical bid-ask spreads quoted on the unsecured money market of
the  euro  became  as  narrow  as  in  the  most  liquid  money  markets  at  the  global  level.  Furthermore,
swaps indexed on the overnight reference rate, as measured by the EONIA, which have become a very
widely  used  instrument,  also  offer  particularly  small  bid-ask  spreads.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  the
unsecured money market of the euro has become fully integrated and is functioning well. However, as
already mentioned, there is still some scope for further development in the repo market.
In other segments of the euro-denominated interest rate markets and in the equity market, the range of
financial instruments available to market participants expanded markedly in 1999.  For  example,  the
most widely traded short-term interest rate futures denominated in euro are contracts indexed on the
three-month EURIBOR. For these instruments, the range of available delivery dates currently goes up
to  five  years.  This  is  less  than  the  ten  years  available  for  three-month  Libor  futures  traded  for  the
United States. However, this is wider than the range of maturities which used to be available in the
predecessor currencies of the euro. From the point of view of monetary policy, the market prices of
such products provide information of interest about market expectations.
The development of the mortgage bond market constitutes another example. In several countries of the
euro area, legal texts were recently enacted which permitted the development of a market for mortgage
5
BIS Review 54/2000
bonds  similar  to  the  German  Pfandbriefe.  New  issues  of  non-German  Pfandbriefe  have  been  very
successful, as there was a strong demand on the part of investors for this type of instrument.
In 1999 a number of financial market institutions created a wide array of stock price indices and bond
indices covering the euro area as a whole. This development has contributed to extending the range of
trading and position-taking opportunities available for investors.
Stock  price  indices  are  available  mainly  in  two  forms:  broad  and  narrow.  Broad  indices  provide  a
precise  measure  of  stock  price  developments  in  the  euro  area  stock  market.  The  narrower  indices,
which by nature cannot be considered representative for the euro area as a whole, are useful because
they are easier for investors to track through the purchase and sale of a limited number of stocks. For
this reason, narrow indices have been instrumental in the development of equity derivatives contracts.
Overall, turnover on area-wide stock index  derivatives  has  grown  steadily  over  the  past  18  months,
increasingly taking up a larger share of total turnover on stock index derivatives in the euro area. With
the  progress  of  economic  integration  in  the  context  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  over  recent
years stock market investors have increased the share of their stock portfolios which is managed with
reference to area-wide risk factors. This process accelerated in 1999, as the introduction of the euro
seemed to act as a catalyst for the creation of area-wide stock price indices.
In the course of this process, investors have also taken advantage of sectoral stock price indices. In
particular,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  exchanges  have  created  futures  and  options  contracts
indexed on certain sectoral stock price indices, such as the technology sector, the telecommunications
sector  or  the  bank  sector, to  take  a  few  examples.  Not  only  does  the  introduction  of  such  financial
products respond to the demand of investors, but it also makes it possible to process more information
and  circulate  it  across  the  market  through  the  price  formation  mechanism.  This  information  on
area-wide  sectoral  developments  is  clearly  beneficial  for  investors  managing  large  area-wide
portfolios. It is also useful for smaller investors, whom it can help to form judgements about the taking
of positions in certain specific stocks. At the global  level,  it  is  noteworthy  that,  at  the  beginning  of
2000,  the  various  financial  market  institutions  publishing  sectoral  stock  price  indices  took  steps
towards  a  better  harmonisation  of  sector  classifications.  These  changes,  which  can  be  expected  to
bring benefits to the users of such data, were obviously also applied to the stock price indices available
for the euro area.
For bond indices, much the same observations can be made as for stock price indices. The available
bond price indices include area-wide indices which are split according to the various maturity buckets
along the yield curve and further broken down according to whether the issuers are governments or
from the private sector. In turn, private sector indices are often available in sectoral breakdowns, for
example  financial  sector  versus  non-financial  sector,  and  in  credit  ratings  breakdowns,  for  example
triple A versus double A versus single A and so forth going further down the credit curve. It cannot be
denied that such benchmark indices for bonds can play a useful role in the course of the development
of bond markets in the euro area.
In  sum,  wholesale  financial  markets  of  the  euro  area  are  currently  benefiting  strongly  from  the
continued  reduction  in  transaction  costs,  the  development  and  spreading  of  new  financial  products
such  as  Pfandbriefe,  and  the  introduction  of  a  wide  set  of  area-wide  and  sectoral  indices  for  stock
prices and bonds.
Looking forward, there are a number of challenges to be met. In this regard, without aiming at being
exhaustive,  I  should  like  to  address  three  topics:  the  question  of  benchmarking  in  euro  area  bond
markets;  the  challenges  posed  by  the electronification  of  trading  systems;  and  the  need to  take  into
account the risk of extreme events when modernising market infrastructure in the euro area.
Over recent weeks, there have been episodes when, in those countries, such as the United States and
the United Kingdom, where the process of reducing public debt is more advanced, government bond
yields have been subject to very strong and unexpected downward pressures. Some of the downward
pressures on yields reflected sudden increases in liquidity premia. Investors seemed to be concerned
that the future pace of reduction of government debt would become so high as to create an imbalance
between high demand and low supply of government bonds. On the heels of these developments, the
question of benchmarking instruments in bond markets was naturally considered to be quite acute.
BIS Review 54/2000
6
Prior to the introduction of the euro, in euro area countries with a non-negligible private bond market,
government  bonds  were  generally  used  as  a  benchmark  for  the  pricing  of  corporate  bonds.
Furthermore, government bonds were also generally used as conduits for position-taking and hedging
on interest rate markets. In this respect, futures and options contracts using the national government
bonds  as  underlying  references  were  widely  used,  in  conjunction  with  position-taking  on  both
government and private bond markets. Since the introduction of the euro, a certain limited number of
government bonds have played the role of benchmarks at the level of the euro area as a whole. This
mainly includes German government bonds and, at the shorter end of the maturity spectrum, French
government bonds. Furthermore, total turnover on government bond futures and options has become
very  concentrated  on  the  contracts  indexed  on  German  government  bonds,  although  there  has  been
renewed  competition  from  other  contracts  over  recent  months.  The  risks  associated  with  having  an
open position on a single contract which is larger than the underlying bonds available for delivery may
have played a role.
In this context, the question has arisen of whether the amount outstanding of benchmark government
bonds  will  remain  sufficient  to  cover  benchmarking  needs,  particularly  as  public  deficits  and  debts
should be reduced further in the euro area. Already quite some time ago, some commentators had put
forward  the  idea  that  the  interest  rate  swap  market,  which,  by  international  standards,  is  very  well
developed in the euro area, could at least partly play the role of benchmark. In fact, it is clear that the
swap curve constitutes a  widely  used reference for  the  pricing  of  private sector  debt  instruments  as
well as the measurement of market risk on these instruments. With regard to derivatives instruments, I
am confident that financial market institutions will come up with solutions to any possible shortage of
the underlying government bonds. This development, in itself, would be welcome, as it would reflect a
decline  in  government  deficits  and  debt  to  levels  in  line  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  For
example,  other  instruments  or  pools  of  instruments  may  be  used  to  provide  the  underlying  price
references for exchange-traded derivatives instruments. All in all, there are two main conditions to be
fulfilled  by  instruments to serve  as  a  reference in interest rate  derivatives  contracts.  First, reference
instruments should be traded in a market which is sufficiently deep and liquid to constitute a reliable
and efficient price source. Second, the requisite legal and institutional conditions should be in place to
ensure that positions on derivatives  may  easily  be  either reversed  prior  to expiry,  rolled  over  at  the
time of expiry or settled at the time of expiry by way of a cash payment.
Moving on to the second item in my short list of issues, let me now consider the challenges posed by
the  electronification of trading  systems.  This  development  has  been  most  remarkable  in  the  foreign
exchange  markets.  Automatic  trading  systems  have  very  rapidly,  over  the  course  of  the  past  three
years,  become  the  most  widely  used  way  of  matching  buy  and  sell  orders.  In  the  course  of  this
development, a large part of the voice-based trading process has disappeared. In this context, certain
observers regarded it as symptomatic of possible problems that, on particular days in 1998 and 1999,
foreign exchange rates fluctuated by unusually large amounts within very short periods of time. These
observers argued that the changing role of market makers in the price formation mechanism, as a result
of market electronification, was the cause underlying some of the unusual gapping behaviour seen in
foreign exchange rates on these particular days. If this hypothesis proves correct, then it is likely that
any gapping phenomenon would disappear once the transition to the new framework is complete and
the new market infrastructure has become well established.
Meanwhile, the electronification of markets has also made progress in interest rate and equity markets.
Over  recent  months,  certain  institutions  have  made  available,  particularly  on  the  internet,  relatively
cheap  automatised  trading  systems.  These  systems  carry  out  the  matching  of  orders  as  well  as  the
settlement of transactions, sometimes on a net basis, with the stock exchanges. The shift of a portion
of trading activity away from stock exchanges and onto electronic trading systems may result in more
pronounced  risks  of  gridlocks,  if  the  electronic  trading  platforms  do  not  adopt  sufficiently  safe
procedures.  Furthermore,  the  quality  of  the  price  discovery  process  on  electronic  trading  platforms
may not always be sufficient, at least during a transition period. This could, for example, be the case
when there are several systems which cover identical instruments but function independently of each
other. The resulting risk of fragmentation of certain markets prompted Arthur Levitt, the head of the
US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  to  call  for  the  rapid  generalisation  of  “open  books”
7
BIS Review 54/2000
showing, in real time, limit orders collected by the major market makers operating in the US securities
markets.  This  proposal  encountered  some  opposition,  however,  as  it  was  considered  likely  to  put
excessive  strains  on  the  free  development  of  competition.  For  my  part,  I  should  like  principally  to
recall the suggestion made by some that we should foster the use amongst market service providers of
safe and secure procedures which are able to limit the risks of gridlocks in financial markets.
This  brings  me  to  the  final  item  in  my  short  list  of  issues.  Over  recent  months,  there  has  been  an
acceleration  of  the  pace  of  change  in  the  infrastructure  of  financial  markets  in  the  euro  area.  As  I
mentioned  earlier,  these  changes  have  brought  about  a  number  of  benefits  for  market  participants.
However,  in  a newly  built infrastructure  there  is a  need  to  ensure  that  all  requisite  mechanisms  are
there for the markets to be able to function, as it were, under bad weather conditions. In the same way
as  market  participants  extensively  tested  the  ability  of  their  information  technology  systems  to
withstand the century date change, there is a need for market service providers to carry out some stress
testing of the new financial market infrastructure in the euro area as it has developed. The questions to
raise in this area are quite well known. For example, one should ask whether trading systems are able
to withstand without friction the failure of a market participant to fulfil its obligations or whether this
could lead to a major disruption in trading activity. By entertaining such questions early on, market
service providers will be in a good position to contribute to the development of the financial markets
of the euro area in the best possible manner, for the benefit of the economy of the euro area in general.
In order to conclude my remarks for today, let me come back to where I began.
The financial system of the euro area is currently experiencing a series of profound changes. These
changes concern all financial markets, from the foreign exchange market to the bond market and the
equity  market.  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  fostered  changes  in  two  ways.  First,
closer economic integration has created more financial interconnections across country borders in the
euro area. Second, the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 has acted as a catalyst for market
participants to switch to new systems and to foster the development of hitherto underdeveloped market
segments such as the corporate bond market. In this regard, the contribution made by price stability
and  public  confidence  in  the  Eurosystem  should  be  mentioned.  This  led  to  the  development  of  a
“credit risk culture” fostering more efficiency in the financial markets of the euro area. In this context
of change, there are great opportunities for financial markets in the euro area to become even more
efficient and more  open,  a  development  which  will  support  economic  growth  over  the  medium  and
long term. At the same time, there are certain market segments still lagging behind, for example the
repo market or the market for cross-border retail payments. In addition, I have highlighted the fact that
there  are  some  risks  which  naturally  arise  in  a  period  of  accelerated  change.  If,  however,  the
challenges ahead are appropriately addressed, I am confident that we are looking towards a continued
period of exciting and eventually very beneficial changes in the financial systems of the euro area.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
BIS Review 54/2000
8
