European Central Bank’s Annual Report 1999 to the European Parliament
Willem F Duisenberg: Presentation of the
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in
Strasbourg, on 5 July 2000.
 One  and  a  half  years  have  passed  since  the  euro  came  into  existence  and  the  ECB  took  over
responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy. During this period, the Eurosystem, i.e. the ECB and
the 11 national central banks participating in the euro area, has had to prove its ability to implement
the conceptual framework that was thoroughly prepared during the previous years. It has also had to
prove  its  ability  to  achieve  the  goals  conferred  upon  it  by  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European
Community  (EC  Treaty).  Looking  back,  I  believe  that  these  challenges,  from  both  a  policy  and  an
operational point of view, have been met.
Therefore, I have great pleasure in presenting to you today the second Annual Report of the ECB. It
gives  account  of  the  activities  of  the  Eurosystem  during  1999  and  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  I
consider today’s presentation as an important demonstration of the ECB’s accountability vis-à-vis the
European  Parliament,  supplementing  the  exchanges  of  views  held  in  your  Committee  on  Economic
and Monetary Affairs, in which I participate on a quarterly basis. In addition to this regular dialogue,
other  Members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  have  attended  Committee  meetings,  on  several
occasions, in order to present reports drawn up under the responsibility of the ECB and to participate
in exchanges of views on various issues.
In  view  of  the  large  range  of  topics  included  in  the  Annual  Report  it  will  clearly  be  impossible  to
address all of them at our meeting today. Therefore, I shall concentrate on some of the most pertinent
issues, which have also been raised in the draft resolution prepared by your Committee on Economic
and Monetary Affairs.
Monetary policy issues
1.
Reviewing the first year of the existence of the single currency, I should like to start by reporting that
the primary objective of the ECB, the maintenance of price stability, has been achieved. Indeed, with
consumer  prices  in  the  euro  area  increasing  by  just  1.1%  in  1999,  inflation  has  reached  one  of  the
lowest levels in the past 50 years.
In line with its mandate, the ECB remains vigilant regarding risks to price stability, as evidenced by its
monetary  policy  decisions  in  order  to  nip  inflationary  pressures  in  the  bud  before  they  materialise,
rather than to react once price stability is already in jeopardy. The Eurosystem will continue to pursue
this  forward-looking  strategy  in  order  to  maintain  an  environment  of  stable  prices,  which  is  also
conducive to sustained economic growth and job creation in the euro area.
I share the analysis of your draft resolution that governments should take advantage of the favourable
economic  environment  in  order  to  step  up  the  efforts  directed  towards  consolidating  budgets  and
reducing public debt and go beyond the objectives laid down in the stability programmes. At the same
time, structural reforms in the labour, product and capital markets should be pursued vigorously. The
comprehensive implementation of this policy agenda will contribute to subduing inflationary pressures
and thereby support the ECB in accomplishing its tasks.
In your draft resolution you also briefly address the potential implications of a “new economy”. Thus,
I should like to comment on the possible emergence of a new economy in the euro area. Let me start
by noting that various definitions of the new economy exist. In my view, the most useful definition is
that  which  characterises  the  new  economy  as  a  phenomenon  which  increases  the  growth  rate  of
productivity over an extended period of time.
1
BIS Review 56/2000
There is some evidence - although not uncontroversial itself - of the emergence of a new economy in
the United States. By contrast, it is difficult as yet to find clear evidence of a new economy in the euro
area. Of course there is a need to monitor developments further, with the emphasis on identifying new
economic  trends  and  potential  structural  breaks  in  traditional  economic  relationships  as  early  as
possible. In any case, it is important to stress that for the euro area the achievement of more flexible
markets is a prerequisite if the potential gains from new technologies are to be realised in the form of
substantially higher productivity growth.
We  recognise  that  a  crucial  feature  of  the  potential  emergence  of  a  new  economy  is  increased
uncertainty. This concerns, in particular, the evolution of the production potential and the reliability of
indicators  which  are  derived  from  it,  such  as  estimates  of  the  output  gap.  In  this  respect,  the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework is well equipped to cope with such uncertainties. It provides
the  flexibility  necessary  to  address  changes  in  the  economic  structure  with  the  aim  of  maintaining
price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  By  relying  on  two  pillars,  the  ECB’s  strategy  explicitly
acknowledges  uncertainty  regarding  the structure  of  the  economy  and  the  transmission  of  monetary
policy within it.
In the context of this discussion, some observers have urged the ECB to keep interest rates low in view
of  the  new  economy.  In  response,  let  me  emphasise  the  following  point.  The  new  economy  is
primarily  a  supply-side  story.  An  inappropriately  lax  monetary  policy  would  not  create  better
conditions for the emergence of a new economy. On the contrary - by jeopardising the maintenance of
price stability - such a policy could seriously endanger the credibility of the ECB. It would thereby
undermine  confidence,  raise  risk  premia  in  interest  rates  and  damage  the  prospects  for  economic
growth  and  job  creation.  It  is  for  precisely  this  reason  that  the  ECB  will,  in  line  with  its  mandate,
continue to preserve price stability in the euro area. This ensures that monetary policy makes its full
contribution  to  overall  economic  welfare,  while  also  providing  an  environment  in  which  the  new
economy - should one emerge - will be able to flourish.
Transparency and communication policy
2.
I should now like to turn to another issue which has been frequently discussed within the framework
of  our  regular  dialogue,  namely  the  issue  of  transparency.  I  have  already  referred  to  the  regular
dialogue between the European Parliament and the ECB, the transcripts of which are published on the
websites  of  our  institutions.  Moreover,  at  the  press  conferences  held  after  the  first  meeting  of  the
Governing  Council  every  month  I  present  the  ECB’s  assessment  of  the  economic  environment
underpinning  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  You  will  also  be  aware  of  the  broad  variety  of  ECB
publications,  in  particular  the  Monthly  Bulletin,  and  of  the  numerous  press  releases  issued  and
speeches held by the members of  the  Executive  Board  of the  ECB. These, as  a  rule,  are also  made
available to the public via the ECB’s website.
Therefore, I can only confirm my conviction that this wide range of communication tools, in which not
only  the  considerations  in  favour,  but  also  the  arguments  that  were  raised  against  a  decision  are
presented, resemble in substance “summary minutes”. It should also be borne in mind that, by virtue
of  the  regular  press  conferences  and  the  rapid  publication  of  the  transcripts  of  the  questions  and
answers on the ECB website, detailed information about the Governing Council’s reasoning is made
available  very  shortly  after  the  meetings.  We  thereby  avoid  the  delays  that  are  inherent  in  the
publication of all forms of official minutes.
Let me also seize this opportunity to recall that we always take our decisions from a euro area-wide
perspective. This is fundamental to the conduct of a truly single monetary policy. The publication of
ECB reports on the economic developments of individual euro area Member States, as suggested in
your draft resolution, has to be considered against this background. We clearly do not want to blur the
ECB’s focus on the euro area as a whole.
The  draft  resolution  also  calls  for  the  publication  of  macroeconomic  forecasts  by  the  ECB.  In  this
context, let me reassure you that preparations for publication continue in earnest. I still envisage that
BIS Review 56/2000
2
publication of forecasts will commence towards the end of 2000, in line with the statement I made last
September at the European Parliament’s plenary session on the previous ECB Annual Report.
I should like, however, to sound a note of caution. Forecasts are only one input into the decisions of
the Governing  Council.  Forecast publication  by  the  ECB  should  not  be  viewed  as  a  panacea  which
will  meet  all  the  communication  challenges  faced  by  the  ECB  as  a  new  institution  in  a  testing
multilingual and multinational environment. Forecasts themselves have important shortcomings - for
example,  they  are  surrounded  by  considerable  uncertainty  and  may  quickly  become  outdated  if  the
external environment changes.
We  are  aware  of  these  shortcomings.  Therefore,  as  is  made  clear  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy
strategy, monetary policy decisions cannot be made only on the basis of a central inflation forecast.
Rather,  it  is  the  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  monetary  and  macroeconomic  situation  and  of  the
economic disturbances affecting the euro area economy which is the relevant input to forward-looking
policy decisions.
The ECB’s approach to communication has always placed a premium on honesty. To continue in this
vein, it is my view that we must publish forecasts in a manner which accurately reflects their limited
role  in  policy  decisions  and  the  uncertainties  inherent  in  them.  Any  other  approach  would  not  be
transparent and would therefore be potentially misleading.
Let me now turn to a related issue, namely the publication of the ECB’s economic and econometric
models. I should make clear that the ECB does not rely on a single econometric model, but rather uses
an extensive set of models. The results obtained from the models are critically evaluated using expert
judgement. Policy-makers use analysis undertaken using models developed by the ECB staff, in some
cases  with  input  from  staff  of  national  central  banks,  as  one  input,  among  others,  into  their  policy
assessments and decisions.
The ECB has established a working paper series where technical economic research produced, inter
alia, under the responsibility of ECB staff can be reviewed  and assessed  by  the  public  and  external
professional experts. The respective authors are responsible for the content of these papers. Therefore,
they  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  view  of  the  ECB  or  the  Eurosystem.  Through  this  and  other
channels, there is a professional dialogue and exchange of views between ECB staff and many outside
experts, which is of mutual benefit.
Several econometric models have already been published in the working paper series of the ECB. For
example,  an  econometric  study  of  the  demand  for  M3  in  the  euro  area  conducted  by  ECB  staff
members  was  published in  September  1999.  Other  models  will  be  published  in  the  near  future.  An
“area-wide model” used at the ECB, which models the aggregate behaviour of the euro area economy,
will be published in this working paper series by ECB staff, probably at the end of this year or in the
course of next year.
Issues related to banking supervision and payment systems
3.
I should now like to turn to the contribution of the ESCB to the maintenance of financial stability and
to prudential supervision. In this regard I should like to mention the Banking Supervision Committee
(BSC),  which  is  promoting  cooperation  between  the  ECB,  the  national  central  banks  and  the
supervisory authorities of the 15 Member States. The main focus of activity of the BSC is the analysis
of structural developments and the monitoring of potential vulnerabilities in the banking sector. The
BSC also provides the forum for the exchange of relevant information between the Eurosystem and
the supervisory authorities. Finally, the BSC may also act as a forum for supervisory cooperation not
related to the  tasks  of the  Eurosystem.  In  the  latter  respect,  I  should  like  to  stress that the  need for
multilateral  cooperation  among  banking  supervisors  has  increased  since  the  establishment  of
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) for two reasons. First, EMU has introduced an unprecedented
geographical  separation  between  the  area  of  jurisdiction  of  monetary  policy  and  that  of  prudential
supervision. Second, the introduction of the euro has fostered further integration of the banking and
financial sector. Against this background, I perceive the BSC as the main forum in which multilateral
cooperation among banking supervisors can be enhanced.
3
BIS Review 56/2000
Regarding  the  issue  of  cross-border  retail  payments,  which  has  been  raised  by  the  European
Parliament on various occasions, I should like to recall that, in September 1999, the ECB published a
report entitled “Improving retail cross-border payment systems - the Eurosystem’s view”. The report
called on the banking sector to provide substantially improved services by 2002. Since the publication
of  the  report,  the  banking  sector  has  subscribed  to  the  Eurosystem’s  objectives  in  principle.  It  has
begun to cooperate closely with the Eurosystem in order to identify the practical impediments to the
achievement  of  these  objectives,  and  in  order  to  investigate  and,  where  possible,  agree  on  effective
solutions.
I fully share the European Parliament’s concern that very little progress has been visible to customers.
However, there are rather strong indications that banks are making considerable efforts to prepare the
ground for a more efficient handling of cross-border credit transfers. In particular, progress is under
way  in  the  areas  of  standardisation  and  simplification  of  the  balance  of  payments  reporting
requirements.
The ECB will prepare a progress report by autumn 2000 in which it will update its assessment. The
Eurosystem would prefer to maintain its present stance of cooperation but, if necessary, will step up
the  pressure  on the  banking  sector.  However, it  would  be  unrealistic to  expect  the  service  level  for
cross-border payments to reach that of domestic payments in all respects by 2002.
Let me close by emphasising again that the introduction of the euro has indeed been a milestone in the
ongoing  process  of  European  integration.  The  ECB,  as  the  guardian  of  the  single  currency,  shall
continue to pursue its stability-oriented monetary policy in order to fulfil its mandate and to deliver the
policy results that European citizens rightly expect.
BIS Review 56/2000
4
