Masaru Hayami: The US and Japanese economies -
reflections of a central banker
Speech  given  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  32nd  Annual  Joint
Meeting  of  Japan-Midwest  US  Association  and  Midwest  US-Japan  Association,  held  in  Tokyo,  on
11 September 2000.
 I am honored to be invited today to the 32nd Annual Joint Meeting of Japan-Midwest US Association.
As some of you may know, after having worked at the Bank of Japan from 1947 through 1981, I then
entered  the  private  sector  where  I  spent  about  17  years,  during  which  time  I  often  participated  in
meetings of business leaders from both the United States and Japan. At this Annual Joint Meeting, I
am told that political and business leaders from both countries are going to discuss the problems that
the world economy faces, including the IT revolution and globalization. Needless to say, I am looking
forward to learning the results of the discussions.
Some ten to fifteen years ago, that is, in the late 1980s, one of the main topics at such conferences was
economic  and  trade  friction  between  the  United  States  and  Japan.  Indeed,  I  chaired  a  small  group
established under the Japan-US Business Conference that discussed the resolution of disputes, which I
found an important, but not an easy job. One of the advantages of serving as chairman was that I had
the opportunity to visit a number of US cities, including Cleveland in the Midwest.
Fortunately,  the  economic  and  trade  friction  hotly  debated  at  that  time  has  been  greatly  alleviated,
partly because the cause has been removed and also partly because misunderstanding on both sides has
been  resolved,  which  largely  owes  to  the  strenuous  efforts  made  by  those  involved  in  solving  the
problems underlying the friction. However, I think it also reflects the fact that over the past ten years
Japan’s economy has stagnated while the US economy has revived.
Japan’s economy saw the peak of  the  bubble about  ten  years ago.  At  that time, Japanese  firms  and
financial institutions were expanding their global market share and were full of confidence. Many of
you  will  remember  a  book  entitled  “Japan  as  Number  One”  written  by  a  professor  of  Harvard
University which was published immediately before the bubble hit the peak. In contrast, ten years ago
the  United  States  was  suffering  from  twin  deficits,  a  combination  of  huge  budget  deficits  and  the
expansion of current account deficits.
But  that  was  ten  years  ago.  Now,  the  US  economy  has  been  enjoying  its  longest  ever  period  of
economic expansion. The unemployment rate has come down dramatically from 7.5% in 1992 to 4.1%
recently. On the other hand, Japan’s economy has experienced severe trials since the bursting of the
bubble.  Such  contrasting  development  between  the  United  States  and  Japan  is  most  typically
witnessed  in the  movement  of stock  prices. The  current  Nikkei  Stock  Average  is  a  little  more  than
40% of what it was at the end of 1989, which happened to be its peak, while the New York Dow-Jones
Industrial Average has risen four-fold during the same period.
Against  this  background,  we Japanese have  recently  tended  to  become  overly  pessimistic  about  the
medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy. However, I believe that Japan’s economy
will  be  able  to  regain  vitality  if  it  firmly  pursues  economic  reforms  needed  from  a  medium-  to
long-term viewpoint, as witnessed by the revitalization of the US economy since the 1990s.
To  that  end,  we  should  learn  lessons  from  past  mistakes.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  crucial  that  we
steadfastly  implement  concrete  reform  measures  while  earnestly  discussing  how  to  revive  Japan’s
economy. In view of the current boom of the US economy, it may be useful for US participants in this
meeting to draw possible lessons from Japan’s bitter experience which began when its economy was
still in a good condition.
1
BIS Review 72/2000
Bearing all this in mind, let me talk about two issues. The first issue is, in the context of the US-Japan
economic  relationship  in  the  late  1980s,  why  did  the  bubble  emerge  and  how  did  monetary  policy
affect the emergence of the bubble? The second issue is, though it might sound a little bit vague, to
what  extent  do  differences  in  economic  and  corporate  management  style,  for  example  between  the
United States and Japan, affect economic growth?
Regarding the first  issue,  there are  various  factors behind the  stagnation of Japan’s  economy  in  the
1990s. The emergence of the huge bubble in the late 1980s and its subsequent bursting in the 1990s
was  certainly  one  of  the  major  factors.  Although  why  the  bubble  emerged  has  not  yet  been  fully
analyzed,  we  can  obtain  a  few  common  observations  if  we  look  back  on  the  history  of  bubbles
including the case of Japan.
One  common  observation  is  that  it  is  inevitable  that  a  bubble  will  emerge  if  public  expectations
become  extremely  bullish  for  some  reason.  And,  borrowing  the  expression  of  Fed  Chairman
Greenspan,  “irrational  exuberance”  prevails  nationwide  when  a  bubble  emerges.  However,
intensification of bullish expectations alone is not enough for the emergence of a bubble, for it has to
be financed, which is another common observation. As a matter of fact, during the bubble period in
Japan,  the  activity  of  financial  institutions  had  become  extremely  aggressive  and  interest  rates  had
been kept low for a long period of time.
Now, in the aftermath of the bursting of the bubble, we hear various questions and criticisms such as
“Why did the Bank of Japan  maintain  monetary  easing  for  a  long  period?”  There  were a  couple  of
reasons  behind  the  delay  in  monetary  tightening  at that  time.  Above  anything  else,  prices  had  been
very stable. Furthermore, Japan had a sizable current account surplus, reaching 4.2% of GDP in 1986.
And this strengthened the prevailing argument that Japan should continue monetary easing and expand
domestic  demand  to  reduce  the  external  surplus,  which  was  another  reason  for  the  delay  in  raising
interest  rates.  The  United  States  advocated  that  Japan’s  current  account  surplus  should  be  reduced
through the expansion of domestic demand, but such an argument was widely discussed in Japan as
well.
The basic condition of the current account balance of a country is fundamentally determined by the
trend  of  the  net  balance  between  savings  and  investment  which  reflects  demographic  and  other
underlying  factors.  Economic  theory  tells  us  that  it  is  hardly  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  affect
such a basic condition of the current account balance. Nevertheless, in reality, not a few advocated the
erroneous  argument  which  was  not  warranted  by  economic  theory.  I  think  this  was  partly  because
some support was given to a misconception that microeconomic problems could be solved simply by
macroeconomic policy. In other words, there existed the mistaken notion that such problems as trade
friction between the United States and Japan could be solved by monetary policy.
Looking  at  the  booming  US  economy  while  reviewing  the  experience  of  Japan’s  bubble  period,  I
cannot help but feel some difficulty in judging the arrival of  the  new  economy,  in  other  words,  the
difficulty in differentiating between “irrational exuberance” and “rational exuberance.”
Most  central  banks  would  perhaps  say  “no”  to  the  question  as  to  whether  monetary  policy  could
prevent the emergence of a bubble. But, I think they would say “yes” to the assertion that monetary
policy can play a very important role in maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment. As we have
seen in the discussion based on the misconception about a reduction in the current account surplus, I
strongly believe it is important for both policy makers and business leaders to understand and share
some kind of basic logic in terms of macroeconomic theory for the conduct of sound economic policy.
Let me move on to the second issue I want to address which is to what extent differences in economic
and corporate management style, for example between the United States and Japan, affect economic
growth.
Against  the  backdrop  of  prolonged  economic  stagnation  in  recent  years  in  Japan,  there  has  been
growing  recognition  that  we  should  further  incorporate  into  our  system  the  US  style  management
which  emphasizes  market-oriented  economic  management  and  shareholder-oriented  corporate
management. Simply put, regarding economic management, competition should be further intensified.
The relaxation and lifting of regulations should be promoted. The financial system should be shifted
BIS Review 72/2000
2
from  one  led  by  banks  to  one  led  by  the  capital  market.  And,  on  the  corporate  management  front,
corporate  governance  should  put  more  emphasis  on  shareholders.  Needless  to  say,  employment
adjustment should be more drastic.
From time to time such an argument goes to the extreme that further development of Japan’s economy
cannot be expected unless we completely shift from Japanese style to US style management. I think
this is overly pessimistic because Japanese style management is not something which never changes,
but is rather something which has evolved in response to changes in the economic environment.
Of course,  I  am  not  saying  that  current Japanese  style  economic  and corporate  management  has  no
problems. Indeed, I often mention the importance of structural reform, and am sometimes criticized for
going beyond my position as central bank governor by making too strong a statement on the subject.
Nevertheless, I strongly believe Japan needs structural reform. First of all, let me emphasize that the
growth potential of the economy can be increased largely by improvements on the supply side, that is,
achieving  steady  productivity  gains,  rather  than  the  short-term  boosting  on  the  demand  side.  For
example,  if  we  compare  the  productivity  of  workers  in  1998,  the  figure  for  Japan  was  about  40%
lower than that for the United States based on purchasing power parity in the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook, and about 30% lower when based on the actual exchange rate. Of course, if the sole objective
is  higher  labor  productivity,  it  can  be  achieved  by  investing  a  huge  amount  of  capital  and  raising
capital  per  worker.  But,  in  this  case,  capital  productivity  and  return  on  capital  would  decline.
Furthermore, growth driven only by the huge investment of resources would eventually reach a limit.
For  sustainable  growth,  we  need  to  establish  an  indigenous  mechanism  that  promotes  growth  by
combining labor and capital in an optimal manner under given prices and which generates innovation
in various fields.
Under such circumstances, we have to deal with the following three agendas.
First, the allocation of resources should be reviewed in light of changes in the economic environment
and  resources  should  be  invested  in  more  productive  areas.  In  this  way,  resources  would  be  more
efficiently utilized. For example, labor and capital need to be reallocated from the public to the private
sector, from low growth to high growth industries, and from less efficient to more efficient firms. Such
redistribution  would  certainly  be  accompanied  by  pain,  but  without  it  we  cannot  expect  the  steady
development of Japan’s economy.
Second, the legal, tax and accounting systems, some of which are outmoded and can be an obstacle to
innovation, should be reviewed. While I recognize that it is never easy to review any system, which
inevitably entails conflict of vested interest, we should know that we will not be able to take advantage
of  the  power  of  innovation  unless  systems  are  reviewed  in  response  to  changes  in  the  economic
environment.
Third,  what  we  really  need  to  see  is  the  emergence  of  innovators.  Changes  in  the  economic
environment will create a variety of opportunities for making profits. Transforming such opportunities
into profitable businesses cannot be achieved through a mechanical process. It can only be achieved if
innovators are allowed to pursue their entrepreneurial abilities to the full.
These  three  agendas  boil  down  to  the  problem  of  how  to  improve  the  ability  of  the  economy  and
society  to  cope  with  various  changes.  Such  an  ability  is  always  needed,  but,  when  technological
innovation  and  economic  globalization  are  rapidly  progressing,  economies  and  societies  that  can
respond to such changes have a considerable competitive edge.
I  think  the  fact  that  the  United  States  has  recently  recorded  higher  growth  than  Europe  and  Japan
reflects a greater ability to cope with changes which can be characterized by flexibility and diversity.
At  a  recent  conference  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Fed  Chairman
Greenspan  emphasized  that  the  flexible  US  labor  market  had  contributed  to  recent  high  economic
growth, by noting the seemingly paradoxical situation of low unemployment despite many layoffs.
From  these  viewpoints,  we  definitely  observe  the  seeds  of  changes  in  the  recent  development  of
Japan’s economy. Let me give you some concrete examples of such change.
3
BIS Review 72/2000
First, the reform of systems is proceeding rapidly. For example, a number of changes have been made
in  the  area  of  accounting,  including  mark-to-market  valuation,  more  adequate  pension  liability
accounting, and the review of the relationship between subsidiaries and their parent companies. And,
importantly, the level of disclosure has been greatly improved. By accurately showing the performance
of a firm, these changes put strong pressure on corporate managers to pursue restructuring and higher
profits.
Second, corporate managers have become increasingly aware of return on capital.
Third,  the  mentality  of  employees  has  changed.  Japan’s  labor  market,  which  is  characterized  by
lifetime employment and the seniority-based wage system, used to be perceived by many as lacking
flexibility. However, recently we have seen gradual changes in the market as large-scale employment
adjustment has begun to be observed.
Fourth,  reform  of  the  financial  system  has  been  proceeding.  Since  the  autumn  of  1998,  a  legal
framework for the smooth dissolution of failed financial institutions has been established and public
funds have been injected into major banks to strengthen their capital base. Although there remain a lot
of  things  to  be  solved,  the  condition  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  has  significantly  improved
thanks to the restructuring efforts on the part of financial institutions.
Related  to  these  positive  developments,  direct  investment  into  Japan  has  substantially  increased  in
recent years. In the past, inward direct investment was much smaller than outward direct investment.
In fact, it was only 200 million dollars in 1996. However, it has been on a rising trend, amounting to
12.8 billion dollars last year. I have great expectations for a continuing increase in direct investment
from abroad as it would stimulate Japan’s economy through the transfer of managerial resources and
business expertise.
Before closing, if I may summarize, firstly, a stable macroeconomic environment is a prerequisite for
sustainable growth, and in this regard, monetary policy plays a very important role. Second, to raise
the economic growth rate over the medium to long run, structural reform affecting the supply side of
the economy is indispensable. I think that the contrast between the US and Japanese economies during
the past ten to fifteen years exactly proves this point.
Let me conclude my remarks by quoting the following prayer for “Serenity“ by Dr Reinhold Niebuhr
which I cherish whenever I face challenging issues as Governor of the Bank of Japan:
God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,   The courage to
change the things I can;   And the wisdom to know the difference.
Thank you very much for your kind attention.
BIS Review 72/2000
4
