Urban Bäckström: The Swedish economy -
cyclical upswing or a more fundamental improvement?
Speech held by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board
of  Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  a  meeting  with  Institut
International d’Etudes Bancaires, held in Stockholm, on 19 May 2000.
 The current economic situation in Sweden differs appreciably from the early-1990s, when our country
was on the brink of a serious financial crisis, with a currency and banking crisis, sizeable public sector
deficits and rapidly rising unemployment. Today the picture is considerably brighter.
The question I want to consider here with you is whether the impressive performance in recent years
amounts to a conventional cyclical upswing or has to do with a more fundamental improvement in the
workings of the Swedish economy.
In the three years from 1991 to 1993, the Swedish GDP fell by a total of 5%, employment dropped
more than 10%, unemployment shot up from 3 to 8%, the public sector financial deficit grew to 12%
of GDP and government debt accumulated rapidly. Meanwhile, the stock of non-performing loans in
the banking sector peaked at 10% of GDP or 8% of the total loan portfolio. The fixed exchange rate
was questioned, there were sizeable interventions and for some days in the autumn of 1992 Sweden’s
central bank raised its instrumental rate to 500%.
Various explanations have been put forward for the depth of Sweden’s economic crisis. They range
from  the  loss  of  demand  in  connection  with  the  adjustment  to  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  from  the
late-1980s, to more underlying structural factors. To some extent the explanations overlap and each of
them certainly played a part in the dramatic course of events in the early 1990s.
In order to understand what happened I believe that we have to go back to the beginning of the 1970s
and the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. For it was then that the stability oriented regime  - a
regime  that  had  worked  well  in  the  post-war  era  -  broke  down  in  our  country.  In  the  absence  of  a
global  currency  system,  it  proved  difficult  to  establish  a  regime  in  Sweden  that  would  be  equally
stable.  During  the  1970s  and  1980s  Sweden  had  to  manage  without  a  distinct  anchor  for  either
monetary and exchange rate policy, wage formation or economic policy in general.
We  moved  through  a  series  of  devaluation  cycles,  fiscal  discipline  was  undermined,  structural
problems accumulated and wage formation ceased to function properly. When the financial sector was
deregulated in the mid-1980s, the problems with stabilisation became even more difficult to manage.
Meanwhile,  the  structural  weaknesses  were  being  concealed  by  an  overheated  economy.  Activity
looked strong but the potential growth rate in the Swedish economy had weakened some time before.
As the 1980s drew to a close, however, there was a growing awareness that something would have to
be done. The structural problems, high inflation and speculative behaviour all warranted a realignment
of economic policy. In time, the necessity of a change was supported more and more widely. The tax
system was reformed and so were certain segments of the transfers system. Sweden also applied for
membership  of  the  European  Union.  Our  currency  was  pegged  to  the  ecu  and  during  the  wave  of
international exchange rate speculation in the autumn of 1992 the krona was defended to the bitter end
in order to demonstrate the determination to re-establish a credible low inflation regime.
The economic policy realignment coincided, however, with the setback that followed the bursting of
the bubble from the late-1980s and the Swedish economy descended into a profound crisis. Whether
this  dramatic  downturn  could  have  been  managed  somewhat  differently  is  a  question  that  will  no
doubt  be  analysed in  the future.  Some  things  could  certainly  have  been  done  differently  in  the  late
1980s, as well as in the throes of the crisis.
1
BIS Review 41/2000
However, I believe that the main lesson to draw is that the roots of the deep crisis ran quite a long way
back.  A  realignment  of  economic  policy  was  essential.  The  fact  that  there  had  been  no  credible
stability oriented policy regime in Sweden for almost twenty years had had far-reaching repercussions
that  ultimately  affected  our  material  prosperity.  It  was  high  time  to  establish  a  new  anchor  for
monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy,  wage  formation  and  economic  policy  in  general.  Structural
reforms  were  also  needed  to  correct  earlier  structural  mistakes  and  restore  our  economic  vitality.
Whether the measures that have been taken up to the present are sufficient is a debatable issue; but the
point I want to make is that a change of direction and some political action had already been initiated
in  the  1980s.  The  work  has  continued  since  then  and  been  undertaken  by  governments  of  diverse
political hues and personalities. In other words, something happened to Swedish economic policy in a
wide sense in the late 1980s.
When the immediate crisis had been managed in the early 1990s it was clear that the weak government
finances  would  have  to  be  tackled.  Moreover,  the  independent  status  of  our  central  bank  has  been
formally  confirmed,  accompanied  by  a  clear  mandate.  The  floating  exchange  rate  regime  and  the
explicit target for price stability have worked well. Several segments of the Swedish economy have
been deregulated, though less has been done in this way in the labour market than in markets for goods
and services. But the labour market organisations have been working on their own account to improve
the system for wage formation.
As a result of all this, the Swedish economy is doing better than we have seen for a long time. The
economic upswing has now continued for more than six years, during which annual GDP growth has
averaged around 3%. And notwithstanding the strong growth of demand, inflation has been lower than
one  would  expect  from  earlier  relationships.  Everything  suggests,  moreover,  that  the  economy  will
continue to impress. Last year, GDP growth was 3.8% and the increase in employment was the highest
in the past twenty-five years. Another indication of the good circle in which the Swedish economy is
developing  at  present  is  that  forward-looking  GDP  assessments  have  also  been  revised  upwards,
whereas forecasts of inflation have not been adjusted upwards to the same degree. Financial market
pricing  is  also  a  tribute  to  the  present  credibility  of  Swedish  economic  policy.  Who  would  have
believed a decade ago that the Swedish economy would achieve such a favourable path?
The  successful  combination  of  relatively  high  GDP  growth  and  low  inflation  can  in  principle  be
attributed  to  a  number  of  factors.  One  may  be  the  plentiful  supply  of  unutilised  resources  after  the
crisis in the early 1990s. A change in pricing behaviour may have contributed once the rate of inflation
had  been  brought  down  to  a  low  and  stable  level.  Increased  competition  in  connection  with,  for
example, deregulations, globalisation and IT commerce may also have played a part. But it may also
have to do as well with an upward shift in trend productivity, so that more goods and services can be
produced without an increase in prices, in other words, a higher rate of potential growth.
It can be argued that all these factors have in fact contributed to the favourable development. When the
upswing started there were plenty of unutilised resources. It is highly likely that pricing behaviour in a
low inflation regime differs from that when inflation is high. Another circumstance worth mentioning
is  that  both  external  and  domestic  competitive  pressure  have  increased  and  led  in  many  cases  to
downward price adjustments or just a slow increase. The most recent figures for inflation are one of
several illustrations of this phenomenon. While this is strictly speaking a matter of a series of one-off
effects, the increased competition can continue to leave its mark on the general price level for some
time to come.
Another point worth noting is the prominent part that investment has played in the Swedish economy
over the past six years. Increased investment tends to generate higher productivity growth. That in turn
raises  expectations  of  future  corporate  profits,  which  often  leads  to  higher  share  prices.  Higher
corporate valuations stimulate additional investment by the firms in question and also give enterprises
better access to risk capital for further expansion. Meanwhile, share-owning households perceive an
increase in the net value of their assets. Increased wealth and optimistic expectations lead in turn to a
stronger growth of consumption.
BIS Review 41/2000
2
In this way, a growth process that is driven by investment can create a good circle. The supply side of
the economy generates increased demand and a favourable composition of demand tends to strengthen
the supply side still more.
In the twenty years from 1974 to 1993, the annual growth of labour productivity averaged only 1.4%.
The  rate  since  1994,  however,  has  averaged  1.9%  and  this  cannot  be  attributed  solely  to  cyclical
factors.  Thus  it  may  indicate  an  increase  in  potential  growth.  While  it  is  not  yet  on  a  par  with  the
United States, where productivity growth has been accelerating in recent years, it does constitute an
improvement.
Neither  would  it  be  surprising  if  future  productivity  growth  turns  out  to  be  somewhat  higher  than
observers  have  counted  on  to  date,  though  this  is  not  a  matter  of  any  dramatic  change.  Certain
indicators in the early part of this year, although still somewhat uncertain, may point to some upward
adjustment. It would be interesting if this is confirmed because it would mean that productivity growth
is tending to move up even in such a late phase of the business cycle. At the corresponding stage of the
previous  upswing  in  the  1980s,  productivity  growth  had  already  slowed  down  and  price  and  wage
increases were beginning to accelerate.
From this it can be concluded, at least for the time being, that the economic upswing in Sweden has
not been just a cyclical improvement. It is also a result of factors that are more structural.
The  transformation  of  economic  development  and  its  new  patterns  naturally  face  forecasters  and
macro  economists,  including  the  Riksbank,  with  major  challenges.  From  this  I  conclude  that  when
making  assessments  of  the  future,  we  must  be  highly  alert  to  new  economic  information  and  be
prepared to reassess earlier models, relationships and forecasts as and when the need arises.
The continuation of a strong demand trend can be expected to render resource utilisation in general
and in the labour market in particular increasingly strained. On the other hand, inflation is still low and
the  prospects  to  date  in  this  respect  appear  to  be  balanced.  So  there  are  not  all  that  many  signs  at
present  of  resource  utilisation  becoming  excessively  strained.  Accordingly,  it  seems  that  there  is
ground to believe that the Swedish economy is functioning better than before.
3
BIS Review 41/2000
