Urban Bäckström: Asset markets and monetary policy
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  a  conference  organised  by  the
Riksbank and the Stockholm School of Economics, held in Stockholm, on 16 June 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this conference on Asset Markets
and  Monetary  Policy  that  the  Riksbank  and  the  Stockholm  School  of  Economics  are  jointly
organising. The Riksbank has the ambition to host a conference every other year on a topical subject.
Two years ago we organised a conference jointly with the Institute for International Economic Studies
on  Monetary  Policy  Rules.  This  year  I  am  very  pleased  to  announce  that  we  will  again  be  able  to
present  a  set  of  papers  written  by  scholars  of  the  highest  international  academic  standard  and  on  a
subject matter that is extremely topical: asset markets and monetary policy.
In my opening remarks two years ago I suggested that the question of monetary policy and asset prices
should be a topic for a future conference. The interaction between asset prices, the real economy, and
monetary policy is by no means a new matter for central bankers and economists, but the development
of asset markets in the last few years has brought the question to the forefront of the policy debate.
For a practitioner of monetary policy like myself, this area contains a number of difficult issues. I shall
be raising some of them this morning and they will also be discussed during the conference. By the
end of the conference I hope we will be able to look back on a fruitful discussion and have a better
understanding of the issues and problems involved.
How should monetary policy respond to movements in asset prices? This depends on how the central
bank chooses to use the information contained in asset prices.
In  a  regime  that  explicitly  targets  inflation,  asset  prices  are  taken  into  account  via  the  effects  on
aggregate demand. Rising share prices increase household wealth and that would raise consumption
for a given level of income if these increases in wealth are considered to be of a permanent nature. At
the same time, consumer confidence boosted by higher share prices could potentially make individuals
more prone to spend their increased wealth.
An increase in share prices also makes investment more attractive to firms since it increases collateral
values  and  lowers  the  cost  of  new  capital  relative  to  existing  capital.  If  share  prices  predict  higher
expected output growth, this could also lead to more investment.
If  the  asset  prices  on  which  households  and  firms  base  their  consumption and  investment  decisions
prove  to  be  too  optimistic,  this  would  create  inflationary  pressure  in  the  short  term.  An  important
question  in  this  context  is  how  sensitive  households’  and  firms’  consumption  and  investment
responses are to changes in asset prices.
Via the effects on inflation, asset prices  are  thus taken  into  account in  the  formulation  of  monetary
policy, although they do not feature explicitly in the target variable.
However, the simple use of financial asset prices as indicators is not a panacea for the central banks’
forecasting problems. Asset prices can move for a variety of reasons. Understanding those reasons is
important  in  determining  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response.  For  example,  if  a  rise  in  share
prices  stems  from  increased  productivity  and  thus  from  expectations  of  higher  future  profits,  the
implications for monetary policy would be very different from a case with no such fundamental reason
for the higher share prices.
This raises a number of questions. The first pertains to the relative informativeness of different kinds
of asset prices. The second is how to integrate the information obtained from asset prices with other
macroeconomic  information.  Notwithstanding  the  empirical  evidence  of  the  indicator  properties  of
asset  prices,  the  causal  relationships  between  asset  prices  and  real  macroeconomic  variables  have
1
BIS Review 51/2000
proved  to  be  more  difficult  to  understand  and  model.  But,  as  I  have  just  illustrated,  the  answers  to
these  questions  can  be  very  important  for  monetary  policy.  It  seems  quite  clear  that  central  banks
cannot afford to adopt a view of asset markets as merely “side-shows”.
There can be  other,  sometimes  less  straightforward,  situations  where  monetary  policy  has  reason to
react to movements in asset prices even though the effect on inflation is negligible. One such reason is
the central bank’s responsibility for the stability of the financial system.
If asset prices have been driven up to unsustainable levels that do  not  correspond to the  underlying
fundamentals, we are faced with a special kind of problem. We know from experience that speculative
asset  price  bubbles  eventually  burst.  When  they  do,  collateral  values  will  fall  and  balance  sheets
deteriorate,  potentially  threatening  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  To  avoid  this  kind  of
development, the central bank needs to closely monitor the potential for excessive credit growth and
the possibility of asset price bubbles building up.
It  seems  that  historically  the  forming  of  speculative  price  bubbles  has  been  closely  linked  to  an
excessive  expansion  of  credit.  But  we  need  to  operationalise  both  the  concept  “excessive”  and  the
difficult concept of an asset’s “fundamental value”. As history has shown us, judging to what extent
rising asset prices reflect strong fundamentals, rather than the “irrational exuberance” of investors, is
easier said than done. How does a speculative asset price bubble get started and how do we spot it?
And if we spot it, what do we do about it?
In most countries the risks associated with a property price bubble would probably be considered to be
greater than in the case of an equity price bubble. This is because in most countries banks are more
exposed to risks in the property market, since real estate is used as collateral for a considerable amount
of  bank  loans.  The  bursting  of  a  large  property  price  bubble  can  have  serious  effects  on  financial
intermediation. This could motivate an early monetary policy response.
The cost of this pre-emptive strike strategy would have to be weighed against the fact that inflation
and real activity will be lower than desired in the short term. Is this a price worth paying to maintain
stability in the financial system? In order to answer that question, we need to know how sensitive the
financial  system  is  to  a  severe  fall  in  property  prices?  Another  problem  with  trying  to  act
pre-emptively  is,  how  do  we  spot  the  price  bubble  in  time?  So  even  though  in  a  conflict  between
short-un  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  the  latter  were  to  be  viewed  as  the  more  important,
implementing such a policy could be fraught with substantial practical problems.
The grounds for a pre-emptive strike against an equity price bubble are perhaps less compelling than
for a property price bubble. The US experience from the 1987 stock market crash seems to be that,
with an appropriately conducted monetary policy, the effects on real activity can be relatively small.
With  New  York  Stock  Exchange  order  flows  grossly  out  of  balance  on  19  October  1987,  with  the
solvency  of  brokerages  and  clearing  houses in  doubt,  banks  were  growing  nervous  and  reluctant  to
lend.  This  was  a  clear  case  of  systemic  risk  and  before  the  market  opened  on  20  October  the  Fed
affirmed its responsibilities to  serve  as  a lender  of last  resort and  also  substantially  eased  monetary
policy.  A  financial  meltdown  was  avoided  and  the  effects  on  the  real  economy  seem  to  have  been
negligible.
In the 1990s, the global monetary policy picture has in many countries been very different compared
to  the  1980s.  Low inflation  seems  to  have  become  the norm  rather than  the  exception.  If  monetary
policy is successful in providing price stability, does that mean that the risk of financial instability will
be  smaller?  In  order  for  a  financial  crisis  to  have  severe  effects  on  the  real  economy,  substantial
financial imbalances must have been allowed to build up during the preceding period. In other words,
monetary policy makers must have seen no reason or been unable to prevent these imbalances from
building up.
Thus,  an  important  question  is  whether  a  monetary  policy  for  price  stability  will  indirectly  prevent
excessive debt accumulation in the economy?  In other words, how likely is it that large imbalances
will  have  time  to  build  up  before  the  central  bank  judges  that  its  inflation  target  is  threatened  and
therefore raises interest rates? Can large imbalances materialise without inflationary pressure building
up?
BIS Review 50/2000
2
A  related  question  is  whether  the  choice  of  monetary  policy  strategy  has  a  bearing  on  the  risk  of
financial  imbalances  and  financial  crises?  For  example,  will  a  monetary  policy  based  on  a  simple
policy  rule  lead  to  a  lower  or  higher  risk  of  financial  imbalances  building  up  compared  to  a  more
discretionary policy? Will an inflation targeting regime lead to a larger or smaller risk of imbalances
building up compared to a monetary targeting regime? These highly relevant questions are being asked
by a number of central banks in emerging markets that have recently been forced to abandon a fixed
exchange rate policy that was no longer sustainable.
The  papers  to  be  presented  at  this  conference  will  hopefully  throw  some  light  on  a  number  of  the
questions  I  have  raised  here  this  morning.  I  look  forward  to learning  what  our  distinguished  guests
have to say on these matters.
3
BIS Review 51/2000
