Mr Welteke’s following address on
Europe and the euro: the view from Asia
Co-speaker’s  address  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  following  the
lecture  held  by  Joseph  C  K  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the
XII International Frankfurt Banking Evening, held on 14 March 2000.
 I
Mr Yam,
First  of  all  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  coming  here  and  for  giving  us  a  very  interesting  Asian
viewpoint of Europe and the euro.
As Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, you have successfully steered your way
through some turbulent times in the financial markets since the Authority was set up in April 1993.
We Europeans also need a perspective from outside so that we can objectively assess our ambitious
historic project of monetary union. For that reason alone, I feel it would be arrogant of me to offer a
“reply” to your evaluation because the very concept of  a  “reply”  implicitly  suggests  disagreement  -
even if that is not intended. And so the organisers of this event and I have agreed that, in future, the
reply from the Bundesbank President will be dropped from the agenda.
In the field of economic and financial policy there is no “ideal path” which should be followed by all
countries in all circumstances. The economic and political settings in individual countries are simply
too diverse. The cultural and social conditions also often differ widely.
That is why it is so important to compare notes and to learn from one another.
II
The  respective  economic  developments  in  Europe  and  in  Asia  have  likewise  been  characterised  by
very different conditions in the past few years.
Whereas  in  Europe  various  national  currencies,  supported  by  convergent  economic  and  monetary
policies, were increasingly harmonised and finally moulded together in a monetary union, some of the
exchange rate pegs in Asia were strained to breaking point.
Hong Kong was and remains one of the exceptions. Even during the financial and economic crises in
South-East Asia in 1997/98, it managed to maintain its exchange rate peg to the US dollar.
Hong  Kong  was  like  a  rock  in  a  stormy  sea.  For  many  foreign  investors  at  the  time  it  was  -  and
remains - a firm anchor in the Asian markets.
But in fact, defending the currency board regime was by no means an easy task. In mid-1998 many
investors  were  wondering  whether  Hong  Kong  really  would  defend  its  exchange  rate  come  hell  or
high water. For many this was the key question during the Asian currency crises.
Mr  Yam,  the  successful  defence  of  your  currency  succeeded  not  least  because  of  your  partly
unconventional  policy.  This  entailed  breaking  the  golden  rule  that  a  monetary  authority  should  not
intervene in the equity market.
You successfully intervened in the equity and futures markets with large official purchases amounting
to about 15 billion US dollars, or 6% of market capitalisation at the time, in order to put an end to the
speculative “double market play” in the equity and foreign exchange markets.
1
BIS Review 23/2000
In the process Hong Kong put its free-market reputation on the line. But the intervention achieved its
aim. It resulted in an easing of interest rates and a levelling-off of the drop in equity prices. The dollar
peg was maintained. And Hong Kong remains a liberal and open market economy.
This monetary policy success also had, I believe, an important psychological impact: the “small” Hong
Kong Monetary Authority showed the global financial markets that speculating against the monetary
authorities can be unsuccessful.
Central  banks  are  not  a  helpless  prisoner  of  global  financial  markets  -  even  if  they  have  tied  their
hands through a commitment to an exchange rate target. The initiative - in the monetary field as in
other areas - remains with the policymakers.
Naturally, the respective situations in Hong Kong and in Euroland are not directly comparable. Hong
Kong  is  a  small  open  economy  for  which  the  existing  exchange  rate  regime  is  the  sole  option  “to
counteract large, unexpected shocks from the global capital movement”, as you, Mr Yam, constantly
point out.
By contrast, the euro area is one of the largest currency areas in the world. Together, the participating
countries account for more than 15% of global GDP.
This aggregate volume has given the European countries a new responsibility for the stability of the
global  economic  and  financial  system.  They  can  and  should  face  up  to  this  challenge  with  self-
confidence - including when it comes to occupying top posts in international organisations such as the
IMF.
Obviously,  the  question  of  the  appropriate  exchange  rate  regime  for  the  euro  area  is  posed  in  a
completely different context.
The idea of establishing a system of fixed exchange rates between the major currencies - the dollar, the
euro and the yen - is a non-starter under present circumstances. Economic and cyclical developments
in the various currency areas are too diverse, but so, too, are the political priorities. None of the three
regions I just mentioned is willing to subjugate its domestic policy to a fixed exchange rate.
Exchange  rates  need  a  certain  room  to  manoeuvre  so  that  they  can  equalise  differences  between
different economies.
The  ESCB  therefore  does  not  pursue  an  exchange  rate  target.  Its  monetary  policy  is  oriented
exclusively to the risks to internal price stability. The exchange rate does play a certain role, however,
because key import goods - such as raw materials and energy - are invoiced in dollars.
The decisive factor, however, is always the overall monetary policy setting. This is something which
the Governing Council of the ECB will analyse thoroughly at its next meeting on Thursday.
III
Mr  Yam,  another  factor  which  has  doubtless  contributed  to  your  successful  monetary  policy  track
record is the proximity to the market of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, which is also responsible
for supervising the financial markets and the banking sector.
Monetary authorities must have their finger on the pulse of the financial markets. After all, monetary
policy  decisions  have  direct  implications  not  only  for  the  money  market  but  also  for  the  foreign
exchange and capital markets - both nationally and globally.
Today,  given  interlinked  markets  and  internationally  active  credit institutions,  instability  can  spread
more easily. This tendency is being reinforced by the fact that some credit institutions are acquiring
new,  truly  global  dimensions  -  as  is  illustrated  by  the  announced  merger  of  Deutsche  Bank  and
Dresdner Bank here in Germany.
Hence there is a much greater onus on central banks than in the past to take on responsibility for the
financial stability of the financial markets, too. They have to focus their efforts in this context on crisis
prevention.
BIS Review 23/2000
2
Central banks need to monitor the markets constantly so that they can detect crisis signals at an early
stage.  For  this  they  require  prudential  supervisory  information  on  system-relevant  individual
institutions at first hand. This is why they also have an oversight function for the payment system, for
that  could  pose  substantial  systemic  risks  to  the  banking  sector  if  major  market  players  were  to
experience disruptions in their payment operations.
In Germany it is the Bundesbank which, by virtue of its involvement in banking supervision or as the
government’s  fiscal  agent,  is  able  to  inject  the  necessary  market  competence  and  market  proximity
into the monetary policy decision-making process.
In  all  the  discussion  about  the  tasks  and  future  structure  of  the  Bundesbank,  therefore,  it  must  be
assured that the German central bank remains anchored in the financial markets.
The reform of the Bundesbank must lead to more streamlined structures and to a strengthening of the
Bundesbank within the ESCB. Germany, as one of the major industrial nations in the world and the
largest economy in Europe, has a vested interest in having a potent and efficient central bank which is
able to represent German interests effectively, both within the ESCB and internationally.
A  reorganisation  of  the  Bundesbank  must  not  fritter  away  the  high  esteem  and  trust  in  which  this
institution  has  been  held by  the  general  public for  many  decades. The  Bundesbank  must  remain  an
anchor of stability and trust for the German public - particularly during the period of changeover to a
new  currency.  Its  effectiveness  depends  on  the  quality  of  its  arguments  and  on  having  a  strong
organisation that carries a great weight.
I assume that these aspects will be given due consideration by the politicians. One thing is certain, at
any rate: the Bundesbank’s work in the fields of banking supervision and debt management stands up
well to international comparison.
I believe that proposals to outsource functions from the Bundesbank fail to take  due account  of the
expertise and considerable synergies that exist within the Bundesbank.
In banking supervision, for example, we are closer to the market, we have a nationwide network of
branches and we have the experts needed - not to mention an ideal location in the banking centre of
Frankfurt.
The tasks of exercising microprudential oversight of banks and ensuring the stability of the banking
system are ideally combined if the central bank is also involved in supervisory activities. So there are
many good reasons for concentrating banking supervision operations within the Bundesbank.
Regarding a cross-sector coordination between banking supervisors, securities trading supervisors and
insurance  supervisors,  I  think  that  a  national  “Joint  Forum”  is  a  solution  that  would  be  both  cost-
effective and capable of being rapidly implemented.
In the field of debt management, too, the Bundesbank has a rationally structured system of interlinked
functions.
Like  every  fiscal  agent,  we  currently  advise  the  issuer,  manage  new  issues,  carry  out  market
smoothing and price management operations on all German stock exchanges and oversee both the cash
and securities legs of securities settlements. A debt agency, however, would have to be supplemented -
over and above the new department at the Federal Ministry of Finance - by a body that performs the
banking functions.
IV
Mr Yam, the introduction of the euro just over a year ago truly marked an historic turning point, both
for the global financial markets and for Europe.
The  euro  has  rightly  triggered  a  debate  on  the  future  responsibilities  and  structures  of  the  national
central banks in the Eurosystem.
3
BIS Review 23/2000
But  the  policymakers  responsible  for  those  areas  of  policy  which  remain  in  national  hands  must
likewise adapt to the new setting.
Competitive  pressures  are  being  intensified  by  the  growing  transparency  on  the  goods  and  labour
markets in the euro area. This is turning an even brighter spotlight on differences in the government-
defined operating framework and on national structural problems.
Divergent economic and employment trends now have to be accommodated primarily by the national
economic, financial, wage and social policies. That requires greater overall flexibility on the respective
goods and labour markets.
And in view of the fact that government debt remains high, all levels of government should continue
to step up their efforts aimed at reducing their deficits. Not least, that will enable them to enlarge their
freedom of action in fiscal matters. The Stability and Growth Pact is the yardstick for the euro-area
countries in this respect.
These  are  not  monetary  policy  tasks  -  they  have  to  be  tackled  by  the  other  policymakers  in  their
respective fields.
By pursuing its goal of ensuring internal price stability, European monetary policy is supporting the
other  policy  fields  and,  in  the  process,  is  laying  the  basis  for  sustained  economic  growth  and
employment.
The  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  is  pursuing  a  quite  different  aim,  namely  safeguarding  the
external value of the currency, that is the stability of the exchange rate, in which you, Mr Yam, have a
successful track record over a number of years.
The Eurosystem has completed its first successful year. The inflation rate was well below 2%.
And I hope that the Hong Kong Monetary Authority will likewise continue its successful performance
in the years to come.
I  would  like  to  close  by  thanking  you  once  again, Mr  Yam,  for  attending  the  Twelfth  International
Frankfurt Banking Evening and for delivering your interesting speech.
BIS Review 23/2000
4
