Mr Noyer considers the international impact of the euro
Speech delivered by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the World
Trade Centre, Plimsoll Club, in New Orleans on 13 January 2000.
 Introduction
First of all, I should like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to address such a distinguished
audience.
The topic I shall address today - the international impact of the euro - cannot be fully grasped without
considering the particular, and to a large extent unprecedented, nature of this currency. By severing the
traditional link between money and state sovereignty, the euro has become one currency issued by one
central bank in an area of - for the time being at least - 11 states which, in this respect, have become
one economy - the euro area. Although the largest single country in the euro area accounts for slightly
more than 4% of world GDP, the euro area as a whole accounts for 15%. This is less than the share of
the United States, at 20.5% of world GDP, but around twice that of Japan, at 7.8%. Moreover, the euro
area has the highest share of world trade, with a ratio of area-wide exports to total world exports of
19.5%, well ahead of the shares of both the United States and Japan, at 15% and 8.5% respectively.
Given  the  weight  of  the  euro  area  in  the  world  economy  and  the  legacy  of  the  former  national
currencies  which have  been replaced  by  the  euro,  it  is  no  surprise  that  the  euro  is  the  second  most
widely used currency at the international level. In this respect, the stance of the Eurosystem, consisting
of the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro area, is based on two basic
principles.  First,  since  the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  is  mainly  a  market-driven  process,  the
Eurosystem  adopts  a  neutral  stance,  neither  fostering  nor  hindering  the  international  use  of  its
currency. Second, the implications of the international role of the euro for domestic monetary policy
will  not  prevent  the  Eurosystem  from  maintaining  price  stability  as  its  primary  objective.  Price
stability  is  also  a  key  precondition  for  a currency  to  develop  an international  role.  It  is  a  necessary
requirement  for  investors  outside  the  euro  area  to  be  confident  that  their  purchasing  power  will  be
preserved over time, since price instability constitutes one of the main factors which cause exchange
rate and asset price volatility.
In the future, the international role of the euro will eventually hinge on the validity of the fundamental
idea underlying its creation, namely the idea that important components of sovereignty can be pooled
and shared among nations in the pursuit of common economic and political objectives. Such a belief,
of course, lends itself to being challenged, as do all innovative concepts. Money has indeed been the
most  typical  expression  of  state  sovereignty  for  centuries,  so  why  should  this  not  continue  in  the
future?  Moreover,  although  the  link  between  state  and  money  was  no  longer  seen  as  an  intrinsic
necessity, does Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) really work?
Today I shall first try to answer these fundamental questions relating to the “domestic foundations” of
the euro. This will be helpful in providing a better comprehension of the international impact of the
euro in three specific areas which, in my opinion, are crucial:
• 
the  use  of  the  euro  by  the  business  community  as  an  investment  and  financing  currency  in  the
global financial system (market impact);
  the  new  role  played  by  the  euro  area  in  the  process  of  international  cooperation  (first  policy
impact); and
the importance of the euro for the process of regional integration in Europe and Africa, and the
role that this process may play with regard to possible integration in other regions of the  world
(second policy impact).
1
BIS Review 4/2000
The implications of severing the link between state and money
1.
The link between state and money can no longer be considered to be self-evident. Indeed, there are
three plausible alternative options.
A  first,  nevertheless  still  hypothetical,  option  is  the  privatisation  of  money.  This  solution,  the  most
radical, is now becoming conceivable - although admittedly still a remote possibility - as a result of
technological  innovation.  As  Mervyn  King,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  recently
pointed  out,  electronic  transactions  in  real  time  among  individuals  may  someday  replace  central
banks’ monopoly over cash and bank reserves. This means that all economic agents would carry out
final  settlements  without  the  need  for  clearing  by  the  central  bank.  However,  if  such  a  new  system
were  to  develop,  this  would  take  some  time,  since  the  existing  technology  is  far  from  being  in  a
position to allow the real-time transfer of e-money from one individual electronic account to another.
Moreover,  a  development  of  this  kind  would  not  only  mean  the  end  of  the  link  between  state  and
money;  it  would  also  mean  the  end  of  money  as  we  understand  it  today.  The  fundamental  issue  is
whether it would also mean the end of inflation. I have my doubts. However, I shall not embark upon a
discussion of that issue today.
A second option is currency substitution, namely the unilateral adoption, either de jure or de facto, of a
typical anchor currency, such as the US dollar or the euro, as legal tender. “Dollarisation”, as well as
“euroisation”, is a policy option open to a wide number of open economies with a high degree of trade
and financial integration with the anchor currency. I shall take a closer look at this option in the final
part of my speech.
Finally, the third option is super-nationalisation of money  à la Mundell. This is the path which was
followed by 11 Member States of the European Union (EU) when they adopted the euro one year ago.
But why the citizens of the European Union, and why only at the end of the 1990s?
The main argument is that the more a process of regional integration moves beyond a free trade area
towards a single market, or even an economic union, the stronger the need for intra-area exchange rate
stability and, eventually, irrevocably fixed exchange rates. This causes a conflict with the autonomy of
monetary policy at the national level, thus creating the need for monetary union. This is exactly the
situation that characterised the EU at the end of the 1990s, as a result of the long process of integration
initiated more than 40 years previously. The EU is indeed an area where there is not only full mobility
of goods but also of capital and, at least in principle, labour; subsidies and regulations which favour
domestic  producers  are  not  permitted;  there  are  common  or  coordinated  policies  governing  several
fields.  In  an  area  with  these  characteristics,  cross-border  demand  for  similar  products  produced  in
different  member  countries  is  sensitive  to  price  changes.  This  implies  that  a  major  change  in  the
exchange  rate  would  shift  competitive  advantages  within  the  area,  thus  having  an  impact  on
profitability and triggering political reactions.
In addition, a number of specific economic features of the euro area strengthen the case for intra-area
exchange rate stability and, ultimately, monetary union. First of all, most of the trade carried out by
individual euro area countries takes place with other euro area countries. All these countries present a
rather homogeneous commodity composition of production and trade, unlike the North American Free
Trade Area (NAFTA), where Mexico and Canada are relatively heavily dependent on the production
and export of primary commodities. In the euro area, therefore, the first effect of intra-area exchange
rate  fluctuations  would  be  to  distort  competition  across  firms  located  in  different  countries  and
producing similar products, rather than to adjust shifts in the demand and supply of different products
through changes in their relative prices. In addition, individual countries in the euro area are very open
to international trade. The degree of openness, as measured by the average of exports and imports of
goods and services as a percentage of country GDP, is around 30% on average and exceeds 60% in
smaller countries such as Belgium and Ireland. The more a country is open to international trade, the
more likely it is that a depreciation of its exchange rate will lead to inflation over the medium term,
without any significant improvement in its competitive position.
These arguments are, in my opinion, useful in explaining why, just one year ago, the citizens of the
EU initiated the so-called “Stage Three” of EMU.
BIS Review 4/2000
2
Stage  Three  does  not  only  entail  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  but  also  the  adoption  of  a  new
institutional and operational framework for economic policies in the euro area. According to this new
“balance of powers”, monetary and exchange rate policies are conducted at the area-wide level. In this
context, the primary objective of the Eurosystem is to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to
this  objective,  monetary  policy  also  supports  the  general  economic  policies  in  the  euro  area.  The
monetary policy stance is decided by the Governing Council of the ECB. This Council comprises the
six members of the Executive Board of the ECB and the 11 governors of the national central banks
which  have  introduced  the  euro.  The  members  of  the  Governing  Council  do  not  represent  their
respective country or national central bank, but act in a personal capacity with responsibility for the
euro  area  as  a  whole.  By  contrast,  certain  other  economic  policies  continue  to  be  set  in  a  national
context. Fiscal policies, however, must be formulated in accordance with the so-called Stability and
Growth Pact. By signing this Pact, the Member States which make up the euro area agreed to reduce
their general government deficits to close to balance or even to create a surplus in the medium term.
This  is  intended  to  enable  automatic  stabilisers  to  work  throughout  the  economic  cycle,  while
simultaneously  observing  the  limit  of  3%  on  the  public  deficit/GDP  ratio,  as  laid  down  in  the
Maastricht  Treaty.  Structural  policies  remain  the  main  instrument  available  at  the  national  level;
however, certain forms of multilateral surveillance are being promoted even in this field, although in a
less defined form than that adopted for fiscal policies.
In  his  famous  article  of  1961,  Nobel  Prize  winner  Robert  Mundell  not  only  provided  the  economic
rationale underlying EMU, but also provided the criteria  to  assess,  subsequent to the start  of  EMU,
what types of behaviour and economic developments are needed to allow it to function properly.  In
particular, as we well know, the euro area needs more flexible labour, product and services markets,
which  in  turn  means  more  active  structural  policies.  What  does  this  imply  for  the  functioning  of
EMU? Three considerations apply in this respect. First, neither the euro area as a whole, nor any major
country in this area, nor larger economies such as the United States fully meet the Mundell criteria. In
practice, it is almost impossible to find an optimal currency area - rather, this is a benchmark to be
observed by the policymakers of each currency area. Second, shocks tend to be asymmetric between
regions and sectors much more frequently than across nations. When shocks occur at the international
level, this typically stems from divergence in economic policies, but this is becoming less likely in the
euro area thanks to the aforementioned forms of policy coordination. Third, by eliminating intra-area
exchange rate risk and boosting price transparency, the introduction of the euro is likely to enhance
market  competition,  thereby  adding  to  pressure  for  labour  market  and  other  necessary  structural
reforms. This means that EMU fosters the development of the euro area in line with the model of an
optimal currency area.
Against this background, I believe that the euro can rely on very solid domestic foundations. This is
likely  to  encourage  its  further  internationalisation.  With  regard  to  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro,  I
should like to say the following: at the moment the European economy is clearly recovering and the
outlook is favourable. As a consequence, the euro has great potential for appreciation. This potential is
also firmly based on internal price stability and a sound current account position.
The international use of the euro as an investment and financing currency
2.
Although  the  international  community  makes  use  of  the  euro  for  several  other  reasons  (such  as
payment, pegging, etc.), the  utilisation  of this  currency  in the  global financial  market  is the  driving
force behind its internationalisation. In particular, the advent of the euro is speeding up the process of
integration and innovation in the euro area domestic financial market, which may in turn influence its
international use. This means that the euro has not simply replaced the various national denominations
within  the  given  market  structure.  Its  introduction  may  determine  a  “shift  of  regime”  in  financial
markets,  which  would  imply  that  market  participants  may  fundamentally  revise  their  strategies  in
response.
Although only a very preliminary assessment is possible at this stage, figures currently available on
the  international  use  of  the  euro  as  an  investment  and  financing  currency  seem  to  confirm  this
impression.
3
BIS Review 4/2000
With regard to the field of international debt securities issuance, in 1999 the euro was more widely
used than its legacy currencies had been before 1998. This fact has emerged from the data published
by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  which  single  out  the  truly  international  component  of
euro-denominated  issues.  According  to  this  statistical  source,  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  1999,
euro-denominated gross international issues of money market instruments, bonds and notes accounted
for 38% cent of total issues, just slightly below the share of the US dollar (41%). By comparison, in
the first nine months of 1998 the combined share of the former euro area national currencies and the
ECU  was  only  24%  of  total  gross  issuance.  Of  course,  one-off  factors  may  partly  explain  the
development of the euro: issuers may have deliberately postponed deals arranged in 1998 until after
the  “changeover  weekend”  and  increased  issuance  activity  in  order  to  create  liquid  benchmarks.
However, issues in euro have been growing continuously over the whole year, so other factors are also
likely to have played a role.
In my opinion, one of these factors may be market expectations concerning the future development of
the domestic euro area financial markets. The introduction of the euro, in fact, involves a process of
integration of national financial markets of the euro area into an area-wide single market, the size and
liquidity of which will exceed that of the constituent markets. This implies a reduction in transaction
costs  and  greater  choice  of  financial  instruments,  which  make  the  euro  attractive  as  a  vehicle  for
portfolio diversification. A virtuous circle may therefore develop - the increasing international use of
the  euro  as  an  investment  and  financing  currency  may  feed  back  into  the  depth  and  breadth  of
Europe’s domestic financial markets, thus encouraging further restructuring of the euro area financial
system.
Evidence shows that the euro area money market is already highly integrated and liquid. Significantly
higher trading volumes in this market have already led to lower bid-ask spreads for very short-term
maturities. Efforts to integrate national securities markets and settlement systems are under way. The
euro is also increasing competition in the banking sector, thus strengthening existing trends towards
securitisation,  as  well  as  consolidation  and/or  disintermediation  in  this  sector.  Securitised  financial
instruments  are  easier  to  trade  internationally.  Furthermore,  the  unprecedented  size  of  mergers  and
acquisitions  within  the  euro  area  is  encouraging  the  development  of  a  large  domestic  market  for
corporate bonds. Even a high-risk market segment comparable to the US “junk” bond market is likely
to emerge within the euro area over time.
It should be acknowledged, however, that a number of obstacles to the full  integration  of  euro  area
financial  markets  still  remain.  Separate  national  fiscal  policies  lead  to  discrepancies  in  credit  and
liquidity  risk  premia  across  the  area.  Equity  markets  and  securities  settlement  systems  are  still
segmented.  Differences  in  financial  market  conventions  persist.  Hence,  the  short-term  liquidity  and
efficiency gains are smaller than a simple aggregation of national markets would suggest. Most of the
potential gains will only materialise fully over time.
The impact on cooperation at the global level
3.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  also  has  implications  for  the  international  cooperation  process.  By
reducing  the  number  of  key  global  players,  the  emergence  of  the  euro  area  in  principle  simplifies
international  cooperation,  as  it  facilitates  the  exchange  of  views  and  the  formulation  of  common
understandings  on  economic  and  financial  issues.  A  more  balanced  relationship  between  the  three
major players - the United States, the euro area and Japan - is helping to encourage each of these to
take responsibility for contributing to a stable global environment.
The European single currency may also foster the emergence of a tripolar monetary framework based
on the US dollar, the euro and the Japanese yen. Policy coordination at the global level, however, is
likely to continue to be of a non-binding nature in the future. Following the collapse of the Bretton
Woods  system,  larger  countries  have  always  refrained  from  committing  themselves  to  formal
exchange rate arrangements or other pre-defined rules. In this respect, the introduction of the euro has
not changed the current picture.
BIS Review 4/2000
4
This does not mean that exchange rate stability is not desirable worldwide. In my view it is, not least
because abrupt changes in exchange rates may generate calls for protectionism and for restrictions on
capital flows, which eventually erode free trade and capital mobility. Stable exchange rates, however,
cannot be achieved by setting ranges of fluctuation for the major currencies (target zones). The key to
sound international  monetary  relationships  has to  be  found,  instead, in  sound  domestic  policies  and
institutions.
Efficient and effective international cooperation means that the euro area needs to be able to take a
single  position  when  appropriate.  In  line  with  the  present  allocation  of  responsibilities  among  euro
area Member States, the Eurosystem and European Community institutions, pragmatic arrangements
for the external representation of the euro area in international organisations (IMF, OECD, BIS, etc.)
and forums (G7, G20, etc.) have been already implemented. Of course, the euro area is not always able
to speak with a single voice as in the case of the United States. However, given that the allocation of
responsibilities  within  the  euro  area  and the scope  of  Community  policies are  likely  to  evolve  over
time, the external representation of the euro area will probably make progress in the future and this
should therefore be considered to be an ongoing process.
4.
The process of regional integration in the euro time zone and its implications for other
regions in the world
A  further  policy  implication  of  the  advent  of  the  euro  concerns  the  process  of  regional  integration
within the so-called “euro time zone”, which, roughly speaking, comprises 100 countries in Europe,
the Mediterranean area and Africa.
The degree of economic and institutional integration of the euro area with this zone is relatively high.
There is highly developed integration with the four EU Member States which have not yet adopted the
euro as their currency, i.e. the United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark and Greece. Relations with these
countries  are  organised  within  the  framework  of  the  EU.  The  EU’s  past  experience  shows  that
economic and institutional integration in a region can successfully go beyond the establishment of a
free trade area, as in the case of NAFTA, or a customs union, as in the case of Mercosur. It also a way
in which regional integration can be achieved.
Moreover, the European Union is the relevant counterpart for institutional relations with other country
groupings  within  the  euro  time  zone:  the  European  Free  Trade  Association  (EFTA);  Central  and
Eastern Europe including the Balkans; the Mediterranean area; and the African, Caribbean and Pacific
(ACP)  countries.  For  each  of  these  groupings  an  ad  hoc  arrangement  has  been  put  in  place,  which
often goes well beyond trade liberalisation and covers final objectives such as the free movement of
capital,  services  and labour,  cooperation  on issues such  as  social  policy  and  environmental  matters,
and EU accession.
While many of these arrangements have a long-standing history, the introduction of the euro implies
new monetary relations, which, however, benefit from the heritage of former national currencies such
as the French franc and the Deutsche Mark. In this respect, 34 countries in the euro time zone have an
exchange  regime  involving  the  euro  or  its  national  denominations.  The  solutions  adopted  are  very
different and range from the use of Deutsche Mark banknotes as a parallel currency to pegging against
either the euro or a basket of currencies which comprise the euro, and from the adoption of currency
boards to managed floating using the euro as an informal anchor. In particular, the 13 EU accession
countries are among those countries for which pegging vis-à-vis the euro is an issue. Having started
from  a  variety  of  exchange  rate  regimes,  usually  already  involving  the  euro,  these  countries  are
currently  building  the  policy  frameworks  and  institutions  that  may  one  day  allow  them  to  sustain
exchange rate pegs against the euro.
The experience of monetary integration in the euro area indicates that the choice of an exchange rate
regime  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  medium  and  long-term  perspectives  for  economic  and
institutional integration in a given region. As I have already pointed out with regard to the euro area,
the  more  advanced  regional integration,  the  higher  the  need  for  exchange  rate  stability.  This  shows
that, to a certain extent, the need for stable exchange rates not only depends on a number of objective
5
BIS Review 4/2000
parameters  which  are  exogenous  for  policymakers,  but  also  largely  depends  on  the  political
willingness and ability to carry out such a process of regional integration. This explains why, from the
point of view of the EU accession countries, the desirability of exchange rates anchored to the euro
should not be considered from a merely static point of view (its present desirability), but also from a
dynamic  point  of  view  (its  prospective  desirability,  in  view  of  the  process  of  integration).  In  this
respect, there is no doubt that, following the fall of the Berlin Wall, the process of integration between
the EU and the accession countries has been proceeding rapidly in such crucial areas as trade policy,
current account convertibility, capital flows and political dialogue.
In this context, let me digress to the current debate on dollarisation in Latin America and, in particular,
Argentina. As a response to the severe recession in the wake of the emerging market crises in 1997-98,
the possibility of an official dollarisation of the Argentine economy has been discussed intensively in
both political and academic circles. Such a solution would imply the removal of the US dollar-based
currency board arrangement which was adopted in 1991 and which has served Argentina well over the
past few years.
If  a  country  wishes  to  adopt  unilaterally  a  stable  foreign  currency  as  legal  tender,  several  factors
should  first  be  taken into  consideration.  On  the  real  side,  the  small  size  of  an  economy  and  a  high
degree  of  openness  combined  with  predominant  trade  and  financial  links  to  the  country  issuing  the
anchor currency are factors in favour of the adoption of a foreign currency. On the monetary side, a
history  of  high  inflation  and  a  high  level  of  currency  substitution,  i.e.  a  high  level  of  unofficial
dollarisation, could become an additional incentive for governments to move to official dollarisation.
This  in  turn  would  eliminate  the  exchange  rate  risk  and  reduce  the  corresponding  risk  premium  in
domestic interest rates to the extent that it is not related to non-devaluation sovereign risk. Finally, on
the financial side, the  existence  of  a  sound  domestic  banking  system  and  the  extensive  presence  of
foreign competitors in this sector could also be regarded as preconditions for the move to dollarisation.
The de facto “unilateral monetary union” which official dollarisation in Argentina would imply would
be different to the process which led to EMU and the present negotiations for EU accession.
For the Argentine authorities, the potential benefits of dollarisation are mainly related to the one-off
gain  in  anti-inflationary  credibility.  In  the  short  term,  official  dollarisation  would  eliminate  the
exchange rate risk and thus reduce the currently high domestic interest rates to levels closer to those of
the  US.  This  would  help  break  the  vicious  circle  of  high  real  interest  rates  and  the  increasing
borrowing requirements which are causing larger fiscal and external imbalances.
In  the  long  term,  however,  the  objective  of  closer  regional  integration  has  to  be  taken  into
consideration. Given the country’s trade policy which is geared towards Mercosur, notably Brazil, and
Europe,  the  decision  to  move  towards  official  dollarisation  would  have  to  be  consistent  with  the
medium  and  long-term  prospects  for  enhancing  regional  integration.  At  present,  coherent
intra-regional exchange rates for the Latin American region as a whole depend, inter alia, on whether
the inflation target strategy recently adopted by Brazil will contribute to realistic and stable exchange
rates of the Brazilian real vis-à-vis the US dollar.
Conclusions
I shall bring this talk to a close by drawing three main conclusions.
First, although it is not the end of the process, the introduction of the euro can be considered to be a
major milestone in the long process of integration initiated by the European Community more than 40
years ago. Moreover, the euro can be confident that it rests on extremely solid foundations.
Second, the international use of the euro and the role of the euro area in international cooperation are
likely to develop further, in line with the relative position of the euro area in the world economy and
the institutional and political integration of EU Member States.
Finally,  the  original  formula  as  a  result  of  which  Europe  operates  as  a  regional  organisation  may
become a point of reference with regard to possible integration in other regions of the world, although
BIS Review 4/2000
6
it has to acknowledged that specific historic and cultural factors determine the European integration
process.
7
BIS Review 4/2000
