Klaus Liebscher: The euro - one year on
Address  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  at  the  European
Banking & Financial Forum 2000, held in Prague on 28-30 March 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
More than one year has passed since the start of the European Monetary Union. The introduction of
the  euro  has  certainly  been  a  historic  step  in  the  process  of  European  integration;  moreover,  it  has
substantially changed the international monetary system. The euro was launched as the new common
currency of 11 participating EU Member States and, undoubtedly, the newly created currency area has
a considerable weight in the world economy: it accounts for a 22% share of world GDP, 20% of world
exports and hosts the world’s largest banking sector.
One  year  on,  the  euro  has  successfully  stood  its  test,  so  well  that  we  have  gladly  forgotten  how
difficult the process was that Europe had to undergo before the single currency saw the light of day.
The experience of the first year shows that a fully functional money market developed quickly after
the very successful conversion on 1 January 1999 - a market which has been much less volatile than
the 11 money markets which merged into the euro market, even though the Eurosystem, consisting of
the  ECB  and  the  11 participating  national  central  banks  (NCBs),  has  in  essence  used  only  two
operation techniques: open market operations and minimum reserve operations. Since its inception, the
single monetary policy has successfully guaranteed a stable price level, despite soaring oil prices in
recent months, and at the same time it has notably contributed to non-inflationary growth in the euro
area. Already during the first year of its existence, the Eurosystem has proved its determination and
has  shown  itself  to  be  an  institution  that  is  unerringly  and  consistently  committed  to  its  primary
objective, price stability.
Given  the  size  and  the  economic  clout  of  the  single  currency  area  in  Europe,  the  stability-oriented
institutional framework of EMU and the growing integration of the financial markets of the participant
countries, the euro stands every chance of becoming a currency of global importance. And in fact, the
euro rapidly  established itself  as  one  of the leading  investment,  trading  and  issuing  currencies.  The
euro is one of the principal currencies on the forex markets, and euro/US dollar trade is by far the most
active trading segment. In addition, the euro has become a premier issuing currency.
According to preliminary statistics, euro-denominated bonds accounted for some 45% of new issues in
the year 1999, which is roughly the same market share as that of new USD-denominated bonds.
All in all, the first year of the euro’s operation has indisputably been a success. Of course, one year is
too short a period to allow a final judgement. Economic and Monetary Union and the single European
currency are meant to last - they are long-term endeavours.
Ladies and gentlemen, this conference is about the new and increasingly integrated Europe which has
begun to emerge gradually over the last decade, and it is also very much about the future prospects of
our continent. Let me therefore look beyond the confines of the Eurosystem and the European Union -
and develop some thoughts about the role of the euro in the context of Europe as a whole. I would like
to reflect on two connected issues that have to do with the approaching enlargement of the European
Union, undoubtedly the crucial challenge to Europe in the course of the next years. The first issue is
the role the euro plays in Central and Eastern Europe today, and will play in the future; the second
issue is the nature of the link between EMU and enlargement.
In  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  several  currencies  which  were  replaced  by  the  euro,  above  all  the
Deutsche mark, traditionally played a key role. The euro has assumed this role since the beginning of
last year. The single currency has become particularly important as a unit of account in international
goods and service trade in Central and Eastern Europe.  Moreover, the euro is likely to play an ever
1
BIS Review 30/2000
larger role as an investment and issuing currency for private users in the Central and Eastern Europe
and, in the longer term, for pricing of goods and on the stock exchange.
For  the  monetary  policies  of  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries,  the  euro  is  a  key  currency
already today. In most of the monetary policy strategies of Central and Eastern Europe, exchange rates
play a vital role and, wherever they are not a formal or informal intermediate target, they are at least a
key monetary policy indicator. In nearly all cases it is the euro upon which the Central and Eastern
European  currencies are oriented,  or to  which  they  are formally  linked.  In  the  case  of  the  managed
float countries, among them the Czech Republic, this is reflected by the fact that since the beginning
of 1999 all these countries have been using the euro as a reference currency.
The countries which avail themselves of an exchange rate peg - be it a standard fixed peg, a crawling
peg or an exchange rate managed by a currency board - mostly peg their currency to the euro only or
to  a  basket  in  which  the  euro  predominates.1  The  trend  to  use  the  euro  as  an  anchor  currency  is
becoming ever stronger, as Hungary’s recent move from a euro/US-dollar basket to a clean euro link
within  the  framework  of  the  country’s  crawling  peg  regime  shows,  and  will  continue  to  strengthen
further in the upcoming years. As a result, the euro will also gain importance as an intervention and
reserve currency in the region.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  which  are involved  in  accession
negotiations with the European Union are confronted with the basic question of how Economic and
Monetary Union features in the overall context of enlargement.
As far as we can judge today, we see the economic and monetary policy integration of the candidate
countries proceeding in three steps. In a first step, the candidates will accede to the European Union,
then they will participate in the ERM II, the exchange rate mechanism of the Union, and finally, they
will introduce the euro as their national currency. Let me concentrate primarily upon the first of these
three steps, thereby focusing upon those tasks the candidate countries are facing today and will face in
the near future.
In the period leading up to accession, the applicant countries will be confronted with two challenges.
First,  the  accession  candidates  will  have  to  fulfill  the  economic  conditions  for  membership  in  the
European Union, as defined by the European Council in Copenhagen back in 1993. These conditions
consist  in  establishing  a  functioning  market  economy  and  attaining  sufficient  competitiveness  to
participate in the single market. Fulfillment of these conditions will allow the accession countries to
integrate successfully  into  the  economic  and  monetary  cooperation  within  the  Union  just  like  those
incumbent EU Member States which have not yet entered the euro area for the time being.
Let me make very clear that fulfillment of the Maastricht convergence criteria is not a prerequisite for
membership in the European Union.
Still, a reasonable degree of macroeconomic prudence is essential in the run-up to EU accession, as
stability-oriented policies facilitate structural change and foster the catching-up process in Central and
Eastern Europe. In this context, it is important to underline that there are no institutional constraints on
exchange rate policies during the preaccession period. Any exchange rate regime is feasible during this
stage, provided that it contributes to and is embedded in an overall set of policies that is sound and
effectively geared toward stability.
Coming  from  Austria,  I  clearly  have  an  affinity  to  pegged  exchange  rates,  as  my  country  acquired
excellent  experience  with  a  tight  link  of  its  currency  to  the  Deutsche  mark  for  a  very  long  time.
Nevertheless, I acknowledge that alternative  monetary  strategies, as for example  the  direct inflation
targeting/floating  exchange  rate  framework  the  Czech  National  Bank  has  adopted,  can  be  equally
suitable  and  appropriate  during  the  preaccession  period.  In  fact,  it  cannot  be  emphasized  strongly
1 Only  two  small  Baltic  Republics,  Lithuania  (which  pegs  its  currency  to  the  US  dollar  under  a  currency  board
arrangement) and Latvia (which pegs to the SDR) are exceptions. Both countries plan to switch to a euro peg, Lithuania
in the second half of 2001 and Latvia once it joins the EU.
BIS Review 30/2000
2
enough  that  a  rigidly  fixed  peg  can  only  be  successful  under  very  strict  conditions  -  and  this  is
particularly true in today’s world of high capital mobility. What really matters is not the exchange rate
regime as such, but the consistency and soundness of the policy mix as a whole. Experience shows
that stability-oriented policies underpinned by wide-ranging structural reforms contribute substantially
to limiting exchange rate variability.
The second challenge in the run-up to EU accession is to meet those legal standards of Economic and
Monetary Union that are applicable to all EU Member States. This means that applicants will have to
create  the  legal  preconditions  for  central  bank  independence,  prohibit  direct  financing  of  budget
deficits by the central bank and end public authorities’ preferential access to financial institutions. A
further prerequisite for EU membership is full liberalization of capital transactions.
Among these legal standards, let me explore the issue of central bank independence in a little more
detail, as this is one of the basic building blocks any country that intends to join the European Union
has to put in place. What does the European Union mean by “central bank independence”? Basically,
it is independence from other authorities, in particular political authorities, in the conduct of monetary
policy  and,  more  broadly,  in  the  performance  of  all  the  tasks  that  are  related  to  the  ESCB,  the
European System of Central Banks, in which the central banks of all EU Member States participate.
Central bank independence is essential for  the  credibility  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks
and  for  the  effective  conduct  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  Independence  has  three  main
dimensions - the institutional, the personal and the financial dimension.
Institutional independence primarily means  that  central  banks  are  prohibited  from  seeking  or  taking
instructions from Community institutions or bodies, from any government of a Member State or from
any  other  body.  Likewise,  rights  of  third  parties  to  approve,  suspend,  annul  or  defer  central  bank
decisions on ESCB-related tasks are incompatible with the EU Treaty. The same is true of any rights
to censor such decisions on legal grounds.
Personal independence is about ensuring tenure for members of the ESCB’s decision-making bodies
by  minimum  terms  of  office  and  giving  protection  against  arbitrary  dismissal.  To  make  this  latter
aspect more concrete, a central bank governor may be relieved from office only if he or she no longer
fulfills the conditions required for the performance of his or her duties or if he or she has been guilty
of serious misconduct, with the possibility of appeal to the European Court of Justice.
Financial  independence,  in  essence,  denotes  that  central  banks  have  to  be  in  a  position  to  avail
themselves of the appropriate means to ensure that they can properly fulfill their ESCB-related tasks.
Those applicant countries which engaged in accession talks with the European Union in 1998 - among
them the Czech Republic - already dealt, in detail, with the issue of central bank independence during
the membership negotiations last fall, when the chapter “Economic and Monetary Union” was on the
agenda.  Progress  in  the  candidate  countries  on  this  issue  is  being  monitored  very  closely  by  the
European Union at large and by the European System of Central Banks in particular.
Let me now shortly sketch the second and the third step of the prospective monetary integration of the
Central and Eastern European applicant countries. Upon joining the European Union, the new Member
States are bound to the fulfillment of a number of EMU-specific obligations: they obligate themselves
to  orient  their  overall  policies,  and  specifically  their  economic  and  monetary  policies,  toward  the
objectives  of  EMU,  and  they  must  endeavour  to  make  progress  toward  meeting  the  convergence
criteria  stipulated  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  They  participate  in  the  economic  policy  coordination
process within the EU, are compelled to avoid excessive budget deficits, and commit themselves to
present convergence  programs  on  a  regular basis. With  a  view to their  eventual  participation  in the
euro area, these new members are expected to  gradually  adapt  their  monetary  policy  instruments  to
ESCB standards. EU membership also includes the obligation to treat exchange rate policy as a matter
of common interest.
Among other things, this means that the newly acceding countries are expected to join the Exchange
Rate  Mechanism  of  the  EU.  They  need  not  necessarily  participate  in  this  exchange  rate  system
immediately  upon joining  the  European  Union,  but,  depending  on  the  specific  circumstances  in  the
individual candidate countries, this  step  may  also  be  taken later. The  prerequisite for  the  last step  -
3
BIS Review 30/2000
adopting  the  euro  and  thus  participating  fully  in  EMU  -  requires  sustainable  fulfillment  of  the
Maastricht convergence criteria. Fulfillment of the criteria is ascertained using a procedure set out in
detail in the Treaty on European Union. One aspect of fulfillment is the maintenance of price stability
as the primary objective of central banks.
Not only institutional and legal aspects as well as the principle of equal treatment, but also economic
considerations strongly suggest the step-by-step procedure I have sketched out. Adopting the euro too
early could place severe strains on such countries’ economies, and perhaps even trigger substantial and
lasting disturbances. Such a course of action would be in the interest neither of the current euro area
members, nor of future members of the euro area.
Still, an early introduction of the euro is sometimes presented as a panacea to all the economic ills and
in particular to the still existing structural weaknesses in Central and Eastern Europe. In my view, this
is a grave delusion. Structural problems can simply not be solved by monetary policy measures, they
have  to  be  corrected  by  creating  proper  incentive  structures,  transparent  rules  and  functioning
institutions. All this takes time. Simplistic quick fixes or “shortcuts” will certainly not do the job, but
will instead significantly add to existing difficulties.
Therefore,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  key  challenge  facing  the
applicant countries in the next few years, consists in strengthening their market economies and their
competitiveness  by  firmly  pushing  ahead  with  structural  reform  and  by  subsequently  adopting  the
Community acquis in the process. Only on this basis will the EU candidate countries from Central and
Eastern Europe be able to attain durable and sustainable macroeconomic stability, and only by taking
these steps will they ultimately be able to fulfill, in a lasting manner, the prerequisites for participation
in the euro area.
BIS Review 30/2000
4
