Gordon Thiesssen: The outlook for the Canadian economy
and the conduct of monetary policy
Remarks  by  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Calgary  Chamber  of
Commerce, Calgary, on 14 September 2000.
 Today, I would like to bring you up to date on the Bank of Canada’s views about the outlook for the
Canadian economy. Prospects for the period ahead are generally very favourable. But, as is often the
case,  there  are  also  uncertainties  that  the  Bank  will  have  to  deal  with  as  it  pursues  its  objective  of
keeping the economy on a sustainable, non-inflationary track. Dealing with such uncertainties presents
a constant challenge for the Bank in its job of conducting monetary policy.
Another part of our job involves always looking at ways to enhance the effectiveness of policy - by
reducing  uncertainty  about  our  actions,  by  increasing  transparency  and  accountability,  and  by
broadening  public  awareness  of  how  monetary  policy  works.  Today,  I  want  to  outline  some  new
procedures for announcing changes in official interest rates that we plan to introduce later this autumn.
We believe that these procedures should help improve the effectiveness of monetary policy in Canada.
But first let me give you an update on the current economic situation.
Economic update
The  Canadian  economy  has  been  expanding  strongly  for  some  time  now,  and  particularly  since
mid-1999. Indeed, between mid-1999 and mid-2000, it grew by about 5¼%.
Through much of that 12-month period, economic growth outstripped expectations. In part, this can be
attributed to the spillover of greater-than-anticipated demand from the United States.
The rapid growth of the American economy has been confounding observers for quite some time now.
And, as might be expected, buoyant US demand has been pressing against that economy’s capacity to
produce. One safety valve that has helped to relieve the pressures on US capacity has been the inflow
of goods and services from abroad.
Canada’s  export  industries  have  benefited  greatly  from  this  spillover  of  excess  demand  from  the
United  States.  Not  only  have  these  exports  contributed  directly  to  the  rapid  economic  expansion  in
Canada,  they  have  been  a  source  of  encouragement  that  has  added  to  the  surge  in  purchases  of
machinery  and  equipment  by  Canadian  businesses.  And,  of  course,  the  recent  gains  in  employment
and  incomes  in  the  export  sector  have  strengthened  the  momentum  of  spending  by  Canadian
households.
Together, buoyant exports, strong investment by domestic businesses, and robust household spending
have led to a surprisingly strong demand for Canadian goods and services.
What is remarkable under the circumstances is that pressures on the basic trend of inflation in Canada
have been minimal.
Now, I know that the 12-month rate of increase in the total consumer price index has risen to around
3% because of the sharp rise in energy prices. Although these higher prices have boosted activity for
Canada’s energy producers, they are also raising living costs for most Canadians.
The  Bank  remains  fully  committed  to  preserving  an  environment  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  But
monetary  policy  can  control  only  the  future  trend  of  inflation  -  not  the  temporary  ups  and  downs
caused by movements in the prices of very volatile items such as energy and food. Of course, if there
was evidence that higher energy prices were beginning to feed into prices of other goods and services,
1
BIS Review 74/2000
or into expectations about the future trend of inflation, that would be different. But so far, this has not
been the case.
In  order  to  get  a  better  fix  on  the  underlying  trend  of  inflation,  we  should  look  at  the  Bank’s  core
measure of inflation - the measure that excludes fluctuations in energy and food prices and the effects
of changes in indirect taxes. This core measure has remained in the bottom half of the 1 to 3% target
range we have set for controlling inflation.
This is somewhat lower than we had expected. It suggests that total demand, although stronger than
anticipated, may not have been putting as much pressure on our economy’s production capacity as we
had thought at the beginning of the year.
The economic outlook
Let me now shift to the Bank’s view on the outlook for the economy.
When it comes to monetary policy, “looking ahead” is very important. Why? Because the actions that
your central bank takes today will not have their full effect on the economy and on prices for another
18  to  24  months. That  is  why  the  Bank  must  always  base its  decisions  on  a  judgment  about  future
economic growth and future inflation.
The Bank’s latest projection for economic growth in 2000 (published in the August Monetary Policy
Report Update) is within a range of 4¼ to 4¾% - somewhat higher than we had expected in the spring.
This projection assumes a slowing through the balance of the year from the very rapid pace of the first
half. But, even then, output will probably be growing faster than production capacity; and so pressures
on capacity are likely to increase. Because of this, we are predicting that the core measure of inflation
will move up to 2% - the centre of the Bank’s 1 to 3% target range - by early next year. At the same
time,  if  world  crude  oil  prices  stabilize,  we  expect  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  total  CPI  will
gradually come down and eventually converge with our core measure of inflation.
But,  as  I  said  before,  there  are  a  number  of  uncertainties  attached  to  this  projection.  The  most
important uncertainties revolve around future  developments in  the  US  economy.  Will that  economy
slow to a more sustainable pace? Or will there be another surprising spillover of US demand into our
exports? Right now, it looks as if the growth of spending by US households is moderating.
What if the American economy does not slow fast enough to prevent a rise in US inflation? Will that
have  a  significant  adverse  effect  on  expectations  of  inflation  in  Canada?  This  is  where  the  Bank’s
commitment to keeping the trend of inflation within the target range really comes into play. Our role is
to reassure Canadians, by seeing to it that inflation here remains low and stable even if US inflation
rises.
Another major area of uncertainty has to do with our economy’s capacity to produce. As I said earlier,
our remarkable inflation record to date suggests that there was probably still some excess capacity in
the economy in the early part of this year. Although our projection assumes that pressures on capacity
will contribute to an increase in the underlying trend of inflation - from around 1½% now to 2% next
year - there is, in fact, a significant margin of uncertainty around these numbers.
It  is  possible  that  the  investment  boom  we  have  witnessed  in  Canada  since  1996  will  increase
productivity  growth  and  capacity  more  quickly  than  we  are  allowing  for.  There  is  a  good  deal  of
anecdotal  evidence  that  some  of  the  American  experience  (burgeoning  investments  in  technology
leading to robust productivity gains) is being replicated in Canada. Until recently, there had been little
evidence of this in our official, economy-wide productivity statistics. But there was a significant gain
in productivity in the data for the second quarter of this year that were released recently. Of course, it
remains to be seen whether this will continue.
BIS Review 74/2000
2
Monetary policy response
How  has  monetary  policy  responded  to  all  this?  Because  of  the  surprisingly  strong  momentum  of
demand  in  Canada  since  mid-1999,  and  because  of  the  likelihood  that  this  could  lead  to  inflation
pressures  in  the  future,  the  Bank  of  Canada  raised  interest  rates  four  times  -  by  a  total  of
1¼ percentage points - between November 1999 and May 2000.
These  four  interest  rate  increases  followed  similar  actions  by  the  US  central  bank.  The  Federal
Reserve’s assessment that interest rate increases were necessary because the growth of demand in that
country continued to outstrip the growth of supply, was an important factor in our decision to match
those moves. The reason was that this implied a continued spillover of US demand into Canada, which
would add to the already buoyant growth in spending by Canadian households and businesses.
This additional external demand for our products, at a time when domestic demand here was already
brisk,  essentially  increased  the  risks  that  we  would  run  into  capacity  constraints  and  pressures  on
inflation.
Clearly, US economic and financial developments will always be relevant for Canada. After all, we do
over  80%  of  our  foreign  trade  with  that  country.  And  US  financial  markets  have  an  important
influence on interest rates worldwide, including ours. But that does not mean that the Bank of Canada
must always follow the Federal Reserve, or that interest rate levels here and in the United States must
be the same.
The job of Canadian monetary policy is to respond to trends in our own economy. Naturally, because
of the close ties between Canada and the United States, economic trends in the two countries are often
similar, and may require similar policy responses. But this is not always the case. Since mid-1999, the
Americans have raised their interest rates on six occasions. We have raised ours four times. Moreover,
Canadian interest rates continue to be below US rates because inflation here has been lower and our
economy has not been growing as quickly, or for as long, as theirs (so that the risks of pressures on
capacity and inflation in Canada are not as intense).
Still, I can appreciate that, when our economies move together, people may find Canadian monetary
policy difficult to interpret - particularly when the Bank has moved immediately to match increases in
US policy rates. On those occasions, there has been a tendency to conclude that either the Bank does
not have much choice but to follow, or that it must have targets for the Canadian dollar that require
interest rates here to move in lock-step with US rates.
Neither of these assumptions is correct. When US monetary authorities take a policy action, the Bank
looks carefully at the reasons behind the move and at what it all means for our ongoing assessment of
the outlook for total demand and inflation in Canada. Our job is to do what we think is necessary to
keep our economy on a non-inflationary, and thus more sustainable, growth path.
New procedures for announcing monetary policy actions
I would now like to turn to another aspect of the way we conduct monetary policy in this country.
As  I  said  at  the  outset,  the  Bank  is  constantly  searching  for  ways  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of
monetary policy.
Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  we  have  been  looking  at  how  other  major  central  banks  go  about
announcing  changes  in  official  interest  rates,  and  we  have  been  assessing  whether  our  current
arrangements  could  be  improved.  We  have  noted  that  most  foreign  central  banks  announce  their
decisions on interest rates only on certain dates that are set well in advance. In the United States, this
has  been  the  practice  for  some  time.  And  now  it  is  also  the  case  in  the  other  major  economies
(Japan, the euro zone and the United Kingdom) as well as in a number of smaller industrial countries
(eg Sweden, Australia and New Zealand).
After carefully considering all the relevant issues, we have concluded that pre-set dates for announcing
interest  rate  actions  would  improve  the  implementation  and  effectiveness  of  Canadian  monetary
policy.
3
BIS Review 74/2000
We have decided that eight specified dates per year would be appropriate in the Canadian context. The
scheduling of these eight dates would be based on the timing of the flows of economic information
that the Bank relies on to gauge the economic situation in Canada, to make projections, and to assess
the  need  for  monetary  policy  action.  Each  of  these  eight  dates  would  be  separated  from  US  policy
action  dates  by  a  week  or  more.  In  preparing  to  move  to  this  new  system,  we  will  be  consulting
interested parties on the most appropriate day of the week and time of day for announcing interest rate
changes.
The  way  we  see  it,  this  new  approach  has  several  advantages  over  the  existing  arrangements,
advantages that should contribute to a more effective monetary policy. I would like to briefly highlight
some of these benefits.
To begin with, the new arrangements should reduce uncertainty in financial markets about the timing
of  policy  actions.  Under  the  current  system,  the  Bank  can  move  interest  rates  on  any  business  day
(Monday to Friday), at 9 am because market participants are not sure exactly which day a change in
interest rates may be announced, trading can slow in the early morning, for several days, when there is
an expectation that the Bank may move. Removing this uncertainty should improve market efficiency
and liquidity.
We  also  believe  that  the  new  system  will  help  to  focus  public  attention  more  closely  on  economic
trends here in Canada, and on the appropriate monetary policy response based on those critical trends.
Let me explain.
On each of the eight pre-set dates for interest rate action, the Bank would issue a press release that
would give a brief assessment of the economic situation in Canada and explain why we chose either to
change interest rates or to leave them unchanged. This would also give us an opportunity to link the
latest  developments  more  directly  to  the  underlying  economic  trends  in  the  medium  term  -  the
18 to 24 months  over  which  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  actions  are  spread.  Integrating  the
information in these eight press releases with our other key monetary policy statements throughout the
year would provide a more regular, frequent, and continuous account of our views on the Canadian
economy.
In the end, if the Bank does its job of keeping people well informed, we expect that economic analysts,
market participants, and the public generally will be clearer about the factors that influence monetary
policy and will be in a better position to anticipate the direction of policy. This has certainly proven to
be the case in the United States, the euro zone, and the United Kingdom.
There could, of course, be extreme cases that might call for an immediate policy response from the
Bank rather than waiting for the next scheduled announcement date. The new arrangements would not
preclude such an option. It would be used very infrequently, however, and only under extraordinary
circumstances.
Details of this new approach to announcing interest rate changes will be issued next Tuesday and will
be posted on the Bank’s Web site, along with an invitation for comments from the public. We plan to
implement this system in the autumn, with the first date for interest rate action set for November 2000.
Concluding remarks
To conclude, let me return to my main points regarding our economic situation.
The Canadian economy has been performing very well in recent years and the Bank expects that it will
continue to do so. The task for monetary policy is to ensure that the economy stays on an expanding
but non-inflationary path.
Monetary  policy  faces  some  challenges  in  the  period  ahead  -  challenges  arising  from  several
uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook. The key uncertainty is the future performance of the
US  economy  and  the  implications  for  Canada.  From  this  perspective,  what  matters  most  is  that  the
US monetary authorities succeed in bringing their high-flying economy onto a more sustainable track.
BIS Review 74/2000
4
Another important challenge for monetary policy will be to keep demand and supply here at home in
balance  at  a  time  when  the  application  of  new  technology  may  well  be  transforming  Canada’s
economy and moving it onto a higher growth path. But we are not sure of that yet. While the recent
productivity  gains  are  encouraging,  it  is  too  early  to  tell  if  this  is  the  beginning  of  a  sustained
improved performance on this front.
Because of this, the Bank will be closely watching all indicators that could provide early signs of such
an occurrence. But we must be careful not to let our hopes run ahead of reality and take risks with
inflation. A flare-up in inflation and the higher interest rates that would go with it would discourage
investments, especially those in high-tech equipment and software, that enhance productivity and are
so crucial to improved economic performance in the future.
The outlook for the Canadian economy is very promising. The best contribution the Bank can make to
realizing this economic potential is to preserve the present environment of low and stable inflation. For
this is what fosters sustained solid economic growth and improved standards of living over time. I can
assure you that the Bank of Canada remains fully committed to the task.
5
BIS Review 74/2000
