Mr George identifies two distinct issues
relating to monetary policy in the United Kingdom
Speech by The Rt Hon Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, to the CBI Annual Luncheon
at the Guildhall in London on 25 February 2000.
 Thank you Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would normally open my remarks on occasions such as this by saying what a pleasure it is to be here.
But central bankers need to time their appearances before CBI audiences with  very  great  care.  And
I’ve clearly failed on this occasion. The exchange rate is strong - many would say excessively strong -
and the latest movements in interest rates have been upwards. Typically that is likely to mean that I’ve
entered a lion’s den! Well I hope you’ve all enjoyed your lunch as much as I have - because I once
dreamt  that  Daniel,  who  must  have  been  one  of  my  ancient  forebears,  and  who  knew  a  bit  about
entering a lion’s den, gave me some very good advice. He said to me in my dream, “If you really must
do  it  then  make  sure  that  the  lions  have  been  well  fed  first  -  they  might  just  drop  off  to  sleep!”
Looking around, I see there is something in what he said!
Daniel also said, “Whatever you do, don’t provoke them!” Well at the risk of ignoring this advice I
should like to establish just what sort of lions you all are! So I’d like to begin by taking an opinion
poll!
I’d like to put to you two questions.
The first is how many of you agree that monetary  policy  should have  the  control  of  inflation as  its
overriding objective?
May  I  ask  all  those  of  you  who  agree  that  monetary  policy  should  have  control  of  inflation  as  its
overriding objective, please, to raise a hand.
Now  please  would  those  who  disagree  that  monetary  policy  should  have  control  of  inflation  as  its
overriding objective please raise a hand.
Now let me ask you a second question - and I’m afraid that only those who voted in favour in response
to the first question are entitled to vote this time - I don’t want a biased result.
Given the objective of control of inflation - the 2½% inflation target - please would those of you who
think interest rates should be higher than they are at present raise a hand?
Please raise a hand now if you think interest rates are at the right level?
And will those of you who think that interest rates should be lower than they are at present now please
raise a hand - but remember you can only vote if you agreed that monetary policy should be directed to
controlling inflation!
Welcome to your first meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee! Your votes will all be individually
recorded by the Chairman and published with the minutes in a fortnight’s time!
Now the point of all that was not just to help me decide how I should vote in the MPC next month! It
was to distinguish two distinct issues relating to monetary policy that I want to discuss over the next
few minutes.
The first is the objective of monetary policy - what it is that we, in the MPC should actually be trying
to do. And that objective couldn’t be clearer. It is to achieve - on average and over time - a target rate
of retail price inflation, of 2½% on the RPIX measure (i.e. excluding MIPS), as set by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer.
1
BIS Review 18/2000
I  suppose  it  might just  be  coincidence,  but  since  we  adopted  inflation targetting  as  the  objective  of
monetary policy, towards the end of 1992, our economy has performed remarkably well.
In  fact  over  the  past  7  years  we  have  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of  sustained  low  inflation  we’ve
known for a generation. Retail price inflation  -  on  the  Government’s  target  measure  -  has  averaged
2.7% over that time. That’s just about 2% on the European standardised HICP measure of inflation -
and on that measure our inflation rate is currently the lowest in Europe at 0.8%.
Alongside  low  inflation  we’ve  also  had  the  lowest  nominal  interest  rates  that  most  of  us  can
remember.  Short-term  rates  have  averaged  some  6¼%,  (fluctuating  between  5  and  7½%  over  the
period) compared with some 11¼%, (fluctuating between 7 and 15%) over the previous decade. And
ten-year government bond yields have fallen from nearly 9% on average in 1992 to below 5½% at the
present time. They were trading at one point this morning below 10-year German Government bonds
for the first  time  for  nearly  30  years  -  and  they’ve  been  trading  well  below  US Treasuries  now  for
some considerable time.
But  more  than  that,  we  have  also  over  the  past  seven  years  or  so  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of
uninterrupted,  quarter-by-quarter,  economic  growth  in  the  UK  as  a  whole  since  quarterly  records
began in 1955. Annual growth since 1992 has in fact  averaged  2.8%,  which  is  between ¼  and ½%
above most estimates of our long-term underlying trend rate.
We have also enjoyed an almost continuous month-by-month fall in the rate of unemployment, on a
claimant count basis, from a peak of some 10½% at the end of 1992 to the present rate of just over 4%
(or a little below 6% on the LFS measure). That is the lowest rate of unemployment since early 1980.
And, finally, the number of people in employment is currently around the highest number on record.
I  know  that  initially  there  were  those  who  feared  that  low  inflation  could  only  be  achieved  at  the
expense of slow growth and high unemployment - and that may still be why some of you rejected low
inflation as the overriding objective of monetary policy on the first vote. I think the facts demonstrate
that this certainly need not be true. Low inflation is not simply an end in itself. What we are really
seeking  to  do  in  pursuing  low  inflation  is  to  keep  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  more  or  less
continuously in line with the underlying capacity of the economy to meet that demand as a means to
the end of sustainable growth. And I think that the facts that I have quoted are more consistent with the
view that monetary stability - low inflation - can indeed contribute to sustainable growth.
But it may be that some of you voted no on the first ballot for the rather different reason - that with the
monetary  policy  focus  so  clearly  on  low  inflation  we  appear  to  ignore  the  strength  of  the  pound  -
especially against the euro, which is seriously damaging many of the internationally-exposed sectors
of  our  economy,  including  most  of  agriculture,  much  of  the  manufacturing  industry  and  also  some
services sectors, with differential regional effects. No doubt some of you are suffering from the strong
exchange rate in your own businesses even here in London.
The  question is  what  can  we  do about  it. The problem  -  and  it  is  our  biggest  problem  in  operating
monetary policy at present - is not so much the strength of sterling - we have after all been remarkably
stable against the dollar for most of the past five years - it is rather the surprising weakness of the euro.
And  while  no  one  I  think  clearly  understands  just  why  the  euro  has  been  as  weak  as  it  has  -
particularly  once  the  Eurozone  economy  began  to  pick  up  from  about  the  middle  of  last  year  -  the
evidence is that it has not had as much to do with a change in relative monetary conditions as between
the UK, and the US, on the one hand and the Eurozone on the other as is popularly supposed. It is in
fact much more difficult to affect the exchange rate - directly through our domestic monetary policy -
than you might imagine.
Of course we do take full account, in our forecasts and in our policy judgements, of the implications of
the exchange rate, and of the international environment more generally, for our own economy. That
was why we moved aggressively to cut interest rates a year or so ago. Sterling did not then fall against
the  euro  as  you  might  have  expected  -  it  actually  rose.  Even  though  we  could  not  change  the
international environment, we were able to cushion its negative effect on the economy as a whole by
providing an offsetting stimulus to the domestic economy. Had we not done so, we might well have
suffered recession in the UK.
BIS Review 18/2000
2
But the situation now is very different with the economy as a whole has strongly recovered and is now
once  again,  operating  close  to  capacity  and  apparently  continuing  to  grow  at  above  trend.  So,  even
supposing we could influence the exchange rate in the direction we would no doubt all like to see - the
hard question for us in current circumstances is could we - and should we - attempt to do so, in order
to  try  to  shelter  internationally-exposed  businesses,  if  that  were  to  mean  putting  our  objective  of
sustained low inflation at risk. In fact I’ve not heard anyone argue openly for that - and I would be
surprised if they did. The reality is that if we were to put the economy as a whole at any significant
risk of accelerating inflation - notwithstanding our mandate - we would not succeed in providing the
intended protection even to the internationally-exposed sectors, except possibly in the very short term;
and we would jeopardise the prospect of sustained growth in the economy as a whole further ahead.
That very clearly was what happened when we sought to hold the exchange rate down against the DM
for a time in the 1980s.
There is no simple solution to this very real dilemma. And while I really do understand the pain that
many  internationally-exposed  businesses  are  suffering,  I’m  afraid  my  vote  must  go  with  those  who
voted yes on the first ballot.
Now let me turn to the second - and quite distinct question - which relates to the practical operation of
monetary  policy.  Even  if  we  could  agree  on  the  consistently  low  inflation  objective  of  monetary
policy,  we  can  all  perfectly  well  nevertheless  disagree  about  the  appropriate  stance  of  policy  -  the
appropriate level of interest rates - to deliver that objective. You may just have noticed that the MPC
members themselves differ more often than not on the policy judgement, though usually at the margin.
And you clearly disagreed among yourselves, in our second vote just now. That’s not at all surprising.
I’ve often said that the people to be wary of - when it comes to views about interest rates - are those
pundits  who  purport  to  know  with  great  confidence  that  they  are  right.  The  operation  of  monetary
policy is an art rather than a precise science, though art is often all the better for being informed by at
least a little science!
We start from a position where inflation is running - and has been running for some months - slightly
below the Government’s 2½%. The January figure was 2.1%.
Looking ahead - as we must, because monetary policy takes a while before it has its full effect - there
is  the  continuing  uncertainty  about  the  strength  of  the  exchange  rate,  which  has  of  course  had  an
important dampening effect on the rate of inflation. But beyond this, there are a number of unusual
factors that might help to hold the rate of inflation down, at least in the short term. Some of these are
one-off  administrative  measures  rather  than  broader  economic  influences:  they  include  the  usually
large price reductions imposed by utilities regulators to come into effect in the spring as well as the
Chancellor’s decision to end automatic over-indexation of excise duties on fuel and tobacco. But there
is  also  evidence,  which  is  harder  to  evaluate,  of  more  intensive  retail  price  competition,  squeezing
retail margins across the board, and that also could hold down prices at least for a time. Indeed this last
effect could intensify and extend further into the future as a result of the spread of e-commerce.
Meanwhile  we  are faced  with  all the  usual  uncertainties  about  the  prospective  strength  of  domestic
demand and about overall demand pressure - uncertainties which are currently increased by possible
distortions of underlying trends associated with the millennium - the Y2K fog. Final domestic demand
growth, including the growth of consumer spending, did apparently moderate in the middle of last year
- as it needed, and certainly still needs to do. But there is plenty of evidence to suggest that underlying
consumption growth will in fact remain quite buoyant: the strength of the equity market - or at least
the  “new  economy”  stocks;  rising  house  prices  -  and  not  just  in  the  South  East;  strong  borrowing,
including mortgage equity withdrawal, by the household sector; and rising incomes from employment.
Meanwhile, on the supply-side of the economy, there is little evidence as yet in the productivity data
that would suggest an acceleration in the underlying rate of capacity output growth such as we have
seen in the US, and which, while it lasted, would allow the economy to grow correspondingly faster
without necessarily generating inflationary pressure. We might all fervently hope to become infected
by that particular disease - but the actual evidence so far suggests that up to now we have remained
immune. That does not necessarily mean that we will not see accelerating productivity growth. But we
can’t afford to gamble on that happening either. When people approach me with the sound-bite “give
3
BIS Review 18/2000
growth a chance”, what I hear them saying is “take a risk with inflation”. But equally when they say
“you must take no risks with inflation”, I hear them saying “the world will never change”. The truth is
that nobody knows with any  great  confidence. The  important thing  is  to  keep  an  open  mind  and to
monitor intensively all of the data as they becomes available to us, and then draw what inferences we
can as to how those data affect the balance of risks around the inflation target looking ahead. And that
of course is precisely what we do in the Monetary Policy Committee.
Our latest Inflation Report forecast published last week - based on constant 6% interest rates, and on
reasonable central assumptions about certain other key elements in the forecast - projects continuing
overall output growth - of around 3% initially, moderating to around 2½% from around the end of this
year - with continuing low inflation - at a rate of around 2% this year but rising back to around the
2½% target in the course of next year, with the risks - on these assumptions - modestly on the upside.
But, given the current uncertainties, individual members of the Committee quite naturally prefer their
own alternative assumptions about some of the key variables - most notably the likely future path of
the exchange rate and the size and duration of the effect of the downward pressure on margins. And
these varying assumptions could either raise or lower the rate of inflation two years ahead by up to
½ percentage point.
That, Mr Chairman, is all fairly technical stuff. The point to hold on to is that, on a reasonable range of
assumptions, the prospect for the economy as a whole over the next couple of years is for continuing
steady growth with low inflation, and most of us would happily settle for that. The debate is about just
how strong the growth and just how low the rate of inflation. But we will be keeping  that  prospect
under continuous review and be ready to respond to the evidence that emerges in the real world - in
either direction.
You will have noticed that, although I disclosed my hand on the first ballot, I have not done so on the
second.  I  will  leave  you  to  discover  from  the  minutes  of  our  future  Monetary  Policy  Committee
meetings how I vote in the real thing! And that, Mr Chairman, is as clear a steer as you are ever likely
to get from a central banker on the likely future interest rate path!
BIS Review 18/2000
4
