Lee Hsien Loong: Capital markets in the new economy
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Chairman of the Board of Directors of The Monetary Authority of
Singapore and Deputy Prime Minister, at the 25th Anniversary Celebration Dinner of the Singapore
Investment Banking Association, held in Singapore, on 6 September 2000.
Chairman, SIBA, Mr Koh Kah Yeok, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 Introduction
I  am  happy  to  celebrate  with  the  Singapore  Investment  Banking  Association  (SIBA)  your
25th anniversary.
For many years, SIBA has actively provided industry feedback on government policies, especially on
capital  market  regulations  and  developments. These  inputs  have  helped  MAS to  create  a  conducive
environment for all financial players.
Last November, your association broadened its charter, reconstituted itself to include a wider spectrum
of activities and financial institutions, and changed its name to SIBA. This was a timely move.
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  you  have  formed  the  SIBA  Debt  Capital  Market  Committee.  As  an  MAS
survey1 shows, corporate debt issuance more than doubled last year to S$ 19.5 billion. In the first half
of this year, corporate debt issuance is already S$ 21.2 billion, exceeding the volume for the whole of
last  year.  More  diverse  issuers  are  tapping  the  debt  market,  and  interest  from  local  investors  has
grown.  An  industry  body  to  champion  the  development  of  the  debt  market,  and  institutionalise  a
feedback channel to MAS, will therefore play a useful role.
Global trends in capital markets
In  the  financial  industry,  globalisation  is  proceeding  apace.  There  has  been  a  worldwide  wave  of
consolidation  among  financial  institutions,  stock  and  derivative  exchanges,  and  even  regulatory
bodies.  In  1999,  there  were  900  merger-and-acquisition  (M&A)  transactions  among  banks,  worth
US$ 300  billion  worldwide.2  The  securities  industry  has  been  no  less  active,  with  exchanges  and
clearinghouses in a flurry of mergers and alliances.
While globalisation and integration are established features of capital markets, two more recent trends
are noteworthy: firstly, stronger linkages between capital market and treasury activities, and secondly,
the impact of technology and the internet on capital markets, particularly in the securities industry.
MAS’ guidelines on treatment of credit derivatives and securitisation
The  links  between  capital  market  and  treasury  activities  reflect  an  increase  in  cross-border
transactions. In the US and Europe, the spate of mergers and acquisitions has boosted the volume of
foreign  exchange  flows.  The  mergers  have  also  led  to  greater  use  of  securitisation  and  credit
derivatives, and caused European credit derivative markets to expand significantly.3
1
2
3
1999 Survey of the Singapore corporate debt market.
“European banking turns decisive corner on road to consolidation”, International Wealth Management, July 2000.
“Use of credit derivatives in bank mergers soars”, International Financing Review, March 2000.
1
BIS Review 69/2000
In Singapore, the burgeoning capital market has similarly benefited our treasury  industry.  Increased
debt issuance has led to more swaps and other money market activities. Participants are using more
sophisticated  treasury  and  capital  market  products.  We  must  keep  our  regulatory  framework
up-to-date, so that it provides clarity, and allows growth and innovation.
Credit  derivatives  form  one  potential  growth  area.  Credit  risk  is  an  important  issue  for  banks,
particularly  in  Asia.  Before  credit  derivatives  were invented,  banks  generally  had  to  stop  extending
new  loans  or  services to customers  to  whom  they  had  excessive  exposure.  This  worked  against  the
banks’ efforts to maintain valued client relationships. Credit derivatives provide banks an alternative.
Banks can now repackage and divest excess credit risk exposures, and continue to service their clients.
MAS  has  studied  how  credit  derivatives  should  be  captured  under  the  existing  capital  adequacy
framework  for  banks.  It  has  circulated  draft  guidelines  to  industry  players  and  associations  for
comments.  MAS  has  now  finalised  the  guidelines,4  which  address  capital  treatment  for  three  main
credit derivative products: the credit default swap, the total rate of return swap and the credit-linked
note.
The guidelines reaffirm the principle of maintaining capital for risk exposure. If banks assume credit
exposure  via  the  use  of  derivatives,  they  will  be  subject  to  capital  charges.  But  if  banks  use  credit
derivatives  to  hedge  their  underlying  risk  exposures,  they  will  be  granted  relief,  depending  on  the
degree of risk transfer. For example, where the hedge is imperfect, because of mismatches in maturity,
asset or currency, regulatory relief will still be available, albeit to a smaller extent.
A second promising area is that of securitisation. Like credit derivatives, securitisation allows banks to
manage their credit risk and capital more effectively. In its basic form, securitisation involves pooling
assets in a special purpose vehicle, which is then funded by issuing securities.
MAS  has  circulated  draft  prudential  guidelines  for  securitisation  to  industry  participants  for
comments. The guidelines for banks have been finalised.5 These take into account feedback from the
industry  and  existing  securitisation  transactions.  They  set  out  the  capital  treatment  of  securitised
assets, as well as disclosure, separation and other requirements for the various roles that banks take on
in a securitisation transaction.
The guidelines seek to define clearly the roles, responsibilities and risks that banks retain or undertake,
when  they  participate  in  a  securitisation  transaction.  They  also  ensure  that  banks  hold  appropriate
capital against the risks they accept. Thus, a bank that has securitised its assets will be granted capital
relief  only  where  the  transfer  of  risks  and  rewards  of  the  securitised  assets  has  been  effective  and
complete.
The internet and its impact on the securities industry
The second major issue is the impact of technology and the internet on capital markets.
In the securities industry, the internet has caused fundamental change, slicing the value chain more and
more finely, and recombining it in novel configurations. Functions previously offered as a package by
brokers,  such  as  analysis  and  advice,  recommendation  and  order  routing,  are  being  separated  and
broken  up.  New  entities,  such  as  aggregators  or  navigators,  have  emerged,  offering  hitherto-unseen
types of services.
These changes will bring major benefits to the industry and investors.
Firstly,  the  internet  has  fostered  a  free  flow  of  investment  information.  With  a  surfeit  of  news,
financial institutions are rethinking their business models. Research and analysis previously available
4 To be published as Notice 627.
5 To be published as Notice 628. Similar guidelines will be issued to finance companies and merchant banks.
BIS Review 69/2000
2
only at substantial fees to institutions and high net worth individuals are gradually becoming available
to online retail investors as well.6
Secondly, the internet offers increased business opportunities and potentially limitless reach.
Thirdly, the internet offers increased scope for cross selling financial products. Successful online firms
like  Charles  Schwab  and  E*Trade  are  leveraging  on  their  huge  customer  base  to  diversify  into
banking, bill payment and other areas of services.7
Lastly,  do-it-yourself  finance  facilitated  by  the  internet  allows  institutions  to  cut  whole  layers  of
customer  administration  costs.  The  internet  is  reducing  the  cost  of  capital,  at  the  expense  of  the
spreads that intermediaries traditionally enjoyed from a proprietary informational edge. This reduction
of what has been called “knowledge float” will benefit both lenders and borrowers.
But  at  the  same  time,  the  internet  means  new  challenges.  The  same  borderless  nature  can  mean
footloose  customers  and  businesses.  Cyberspace  so  blurs  physical  distinctions  and  facilitates
convenient access that financial institutions can uproot themselves, go elsewhere, and yet seamlessly
offer the same services online. Jurisdictional boundaries become harder to enforce, while new business
models potentially raise new operational, strategic and systemic risks.
Evolving the infrastructure for electronic finance in capital markets
MAS  has  been  closely  monitoring  these  developments  and  scrutinising  their  implications  for  our
financial centre.
As  financial  activities  consolidate  globally  into  fewer  centres,  and  services  spill  over  traditional
borders,  we  need  to  constantly  move  up  the  value  chain,  in  order  to  capture  and  root  intellectual
content  creation  in  Singapore.  A  flexible  and  responsive  supervisory  framework  is  critical  to
accommodate rapidly changing business profiles of e-finance.
In prescribing rules to regulate new activities, we are unable to run ahead of innovation, because we
cannot  tell  for  sure  which  way  technology,  or  the  industry,  will  develop.  Instead,  we  will  monitor
technology and market developments closely, and craft and update our rules in step with the market
place.
Securities licensing in the electronic realm
Two  months  ago,8  MAS  announced  its  intention  to  regulate  securities  and  futures  trading  activities
under a single licence, and the provision of personal investment and  financial  planning  advice, also
under a single licence. We shifted toward a unified licensing regime and a more holistic approach to
personal  investment  advisory  services,  because  the  distinction  between  securities  and  derivative
markets  is  blurring.  Financial  products  are  converging,  and  one-stop  distribution  channels  are
emerging.
Those changes were part of a broader framework of review we have undertaken for the securities and
futures  industries.  MAS  has  now  completed  a  study  of  another  facet  of  the  securities  industry.  We
6
For  instance,  Merrill  Lynch  provides  its  online  clients  access  to  some  of  its  research  and  videos  of  analysts’  daily
briefings. From The Economist, 20-26 May 2000.
7 Charles Schwab offers bill payment facilities, while E*Trade has set up an online bank, E*Trade Bank. In May 2000,
E*Trade acquired an ATM network to cross-sell E*Trade bank, brokerage, mutual fund, and asset management products.
8 These announcements were respectively made on 6 July by Minister Lim Hng Kiang at the third annual conference of the
Investment Management Association of Singapore and on 7 July 2000 by DPM Lee Hsien Loong at the first anniversary
dinner of the Securities Investors Association (Singapore).
3
BIS Review 69/2000
have  reviewed  securities  licensing  requirements  in  the  electronic  realm  for  market  intermediaries:
investment advisers and dealers.
Objectives in supervising intermediaries
Our key objectives in supervising intermediaries are:
1. 
2. 
3. 
to reduce systemic risk in the securities market;
to keep markets fair, efficient and transparent; and
to  safeguard  investors’  interests  by  requiring  high  professional  standards  among  financial
service providers and investor disclosure.
These  objectives  are  in  line  with  the  principles  of  the  International  Organization  of  Securities
Commissions, and principles adopted in other developed markets.
Current interpretation of investment advice and dealing in securities
Our current securities legislation relies on broadly worded definitions like “investment adviser” and
“dealing in securities” to bring certain activities under our regulatory ambit.
Under  present laws, “dealing  in  securities”  covers  any  activity  relating  to  transactions  in  securities,
which  contain  an  element  of  inducement.  A  broad  spectrum  of  activities  could  possibly  constitute
“dealing  in  securities”:  broking  in  securities,  referring  customers  to  open  accounts  with  licensed
dealers  for  the  purpose  of  trading  in  securities,  or  providing  prospectuses  and  application  forms  to
prospective customers.
As for “investment advice”, our current interpretation accepts that the provision of factual information
does not constitute investment advice.
What constituted dealing or investment advice used to be fairly clear-cut and well-established. But the
breakdown  of  the  securities  value  chain  has  blurred  the  distinctions  between  fact  and  investment
advice,  and  between  dealing  in  securities  and  merely  providing  information.  We  therefore  need  to
refine  our  interpretation  of  these  terms,  institute  basic  safeguards  and  spell  out  how  to  treat  new
entities.
Licensing approach
In licensing investment advisers and dealers, our approach is to require persons conducting securities
activities  in  Singapore  to  possess  suitable  qualifications,  relevant  professional  experience  and  good
character. This  would  give  comfort  to  investors  that  they  can  expect  competent  advice  and  reliable
execution from investment advisers and dealers.
Our licensing requirements for the new electronic market intermediaries should not be unduly onerous.
They  will  not  impose  heavy  prudential  capital  requirements.  The  main  focus  will  be  on  website
disclosure of credentials, physical addresses and other relevant information. In lieu of a corporate track
record, licensees need only demonstrate individual qualifications and experience.
Bona  fide  intermediaries  who  subscribe  to  the  objective  of  providing  financial  services  of  high
standard should be pleased to come under our licensing ambit. With qualified intermediaries operating
within an environment based on transparency and disclosure, investors would have a suitable basis for
making  well-informed  decisions.  This  is  another  step  towards  realising  the  “caveat  emptor”
philosophy.
BIS Review 69/2000
4
New licensing principles
MAS will therefore adopt the following licensing principles for securities activities conducted through
the internet:
Interpretation of the activities of an investment adviser and a dealer
Context and circumstance
Our  first  principle  is  that  MAS  will  examine  the  context  and  circumstance  in  which  activities  are
conducted,  to  determine  whether  licensing  is  required.  This  applies  to  both  investment  advice  and
dealing in securities.
Suppose, for  example, a  web  page  of  a  business  school  provides  a tool  for  calculating  the  value  of
shares. Should we require the business school to be licensed? In deciding this, MAS would take into
consideration the fact that the business school’s primary mission is education, not investment advice.
In this context, we are unlikely to require the business school to be licensed to provide such a tool on
its web page.
Interpretation of the activities of an investment adviser
Fact versus opinion
Our second principle relates to investment advice. In determining what constitutes investment advice,
MAS will use the “fact versus opinion” test as a general guide, supplemented, where appropriate, by
the context and circumstance principle. The presence of interpretation, selectivity or subjectivity will
require licensing.
Let  me  explain.  A  wealth  of  information  on  securities  is  available  on  the  internet.  It  ranges  on  a
continuum  from  pure  factual  statements,  to  calculated  parameters,  to  outright  buy/sell/hold
recommendations.
While  investors  often  use  factual  information  concerning  securities  to  guide  their  decisions,  MAS
takes the view that factual information itself is not investment advice. Data based on historical time
series are facts, whereas forecasts would be considered subjective. Further, filtering data through the
choice of parameters, for example, to display only shares with favourable financial ratios, would be
considered selective, and would require licensing.
The “fact versus opinion” principle sets out quite clearly what would require licensing as investment
advice. Nonetheless, in this information continuum, there remain some grey areas involving implicit
advice. For instance, where the interpretation and presentation of facts leads to a specific conclusion,
MAS would need to review the context and circumstances, such as other information on the website,
to decide whether licensing is required.
Analytical tools: a common device which challenges our interpretation of “advice” is an analytic tool,
for instance,  computer  software aimed  at  facilitating  investment  decisions.  Such  a  tool  may  require
licensing. In making this judgment, we would consider the output of this tool, subjecting it to the “fact
versus  opinion”  test.  If  the  output  goes  beyond  factual  information,  and  includes  subjective  or
interpretative content, this tool would require licensing.9
Other  securities  regulators  have  adopted  the  same  stance  in  regard  to  the  provision  of  implicit
investment advice.
9 To  avoid  attracting  licensing  requirements,  analytical  tools  should  operate  within  the  following  guidelines:  they
(a) should  not  go  beyond  factual  information;  (b) should  disclose  analytical  processes  transparently  and  (c) provide
sufficient  disclaimers  to  the  effect  that  the  tools  are  for  informational  purposes,  and  should  not  be  relied  upon  as
investment advice concerning securities.
5
BIS Review 69/2000
Interpretation of the activities of a dealer
Referrals for opening of trading accounts
A  third  principle  associated  with  dealing  activity  relates  to  referrals  for  the  opening  of  trading
accounts. MAS will not require the licensing of portals which refer investors to open trading accounts
with stockbrokers, provided the stockbrokers themselves are licensed by MAS. This is so, even if the
websites  offer  incentives  for  account  opening.  The  reason  is  that  trade  orders  will  be  handled  by
licensed dealers supervised by MAS.
Passive distribution conduits for advice and dealing
Our fourth principle relates to websites acting as what we consider to be passive distribution conduits.
Passive conduits, whether for investment advice or for dealing in securities, will not require licensing.
Some examples include the following:
1. 
Hypertext  links  and  reproduction  of  investment  research  reports:  portals  often  provide
hypertext  links  to  websites  of  licensed  or  exempt  financial  institutions,  for  example,  in
advertisements.  Or  they  may  reproduce  investment  research  reports  from  such  institutions
directly on their own websites.10 Such portals would be considered passive conduits, akin to
a newspaper or TV advertisement.
2. 
Investment  advice  by  persons  not  carrying  on  a  business:  a  growing  number  of  online
discussion  fora,  chat-rooms  and  bulletin  boards  allow  persons  to  post  their  opinions
concerning  securities.  An  entity  providing  a  platform  for  public  discussion  of  securities
would not attract licensing.11 Neither would a participant, as long as he is not deemed to be
“carrying on a business” of providing advice.
In  the  context  of  dealing,  we  will  treat  two  common  practices  as  passive  conduits.  First,  websites
providing hypertext links to, or advertisements for, licensed dealers. But websites should not advertise
for,  or  link  users,  to  unlicensed  dealers,  including  overseas  dealers  not  licensed  by  MAS.  Second,
licensing is not necessary for providing prospectuses and application forms passively on websites, or
via  email  upon  the  request  of  investors.  These  merely  improve  on  the  efficiency  of  paper
distribution.12
Websites must not go beyond being passive conduits. MAS will consider portals or websites providing
facilities for accepting or relaying orders to dealers as licensable. This is because such a facility carries
the risk of failure to transmit trade orders in a timely and accurate fashion, potentially to the detriment
of investors.
Overseas websites specifically targeting Singapore residents
Our  final  principle  deals  with  overseas  websites.  MAS  will  apply  the  same  licensing  principles  to
overseas websites which specifically target Singapore residents, as it does to local websites. This is to
ensure that foreign and local internet players are treated on the same regulatory basis.
10 Portals  which  reproduce  investment  research  reports  should  (a) attribute  the  report  sources  accurately,  (b) should  not
exercise  editorial  control  over,  or  modify  contents  of  reproduced  reports,  and  (c) should  not  endorse  or  otherwise
comment on the reports.
11 The  webpages  of  such  entities  should  contain  disclaimers  to  the  effect  that  the  views  expressed  are  not  those  of  the
entities.
12 Websites providing prospectuses and application forms in a passive manner should display disclaimers to the effect that
they do not have the intention of inducing investors to subscribe for securities.
BIS Review 69/2000
6
Going forward
Several of the new licensing principles can be implemented based on the existing Securities Industry
Act and licensing framework. Others will require amendments to the legislation. The new provisions
will be included in the forthcoming Financial Advisers Act and the Omnibus Securities and Futures
Act, and announced in 2001.
MAS  has  already  received  a  number  of  new  applications  which  fall  under  the  proposed  securities
licensing  framework.  These  are  currently  being  evaluated.  As  I  have  just  discussed  the  licensing
principles  broadly,  interested  parties  should  approach  MAS  to  discuss  the  details  of  the  revised
licensing framework in relation to their business models. MAS will also be seeking further comments
from relevant industry players on these changes.
Conclusion
The  vitality  and  dynamism  of  global  capital  markets  have  ushered  in  challenging  times  for  the
financial services industry. With technology breaking down geographic and sectoral boundaries, links
between markets, institutions and instruments will flourish.
Experience  in  developed  economies  show  that  financial  services,  notably  stock  trading,  can  take
rapidly  to the internet. This  should  be  no  surprise.  As  an  Economist  online  finance  survey  recently
described, financial institutions deal in a product - money - that has long been accepted as “virtual”.
Unlike a piece of clothing, account-holders are happy to accept their money represented as figures on
an ATM screen, or by a credit or smart card.13
The new financial landscape calls for a tripartite, complementary response from regulators, industry
and investors. The MAS as regulator will foster healthy market practices, while maintaining a sound
overall investment environment. At the same time, in a democratised environment, investors need to
recognise  that  there  is  little  substitute  for  self-education,  and  thereby  exercise  greater  caution  in
making  individual  investment  decisions.  Finally,  industry  participants  need  to  set  high  professional
standards and observe an exemplary code of conduct, in order to retain their customers and build their
reputations which, in the long term, are their most precious assets.
13 “Online finance: a virtual threat”, The Economist, 20-26 May 2000.
7
BIS Review 69/2000
