Willem F Duisenberg: The euro as a catalyst for legal convergence in Europe
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the
Annual Conference of the International Bar Association, held in Amsterdam, on 17 September 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure to deliver today the opening speech of the Annual Conference of the International
Bar  Association  here  in  Amsterdam.  The  Netherlands  is,  of  course,  well-known  for  its  national
folklore of which you just witnessed an example. However, in legal circles this country is also known
as the birthplace, in the year 1583, of the founding father of the  modern  law  of  nations and  a truly
European citizen: Hugo de Groot or, by his Latin name, Grotius. Interestingly, Grotius already dealt in
his days with the challenging question as to where, on the one hand, unification of law across borders
is desirable and where, on the other hand, national differences, often based on cultural diversity, stand
in the way of such unification. Nowadays, this is still  one  of  the  core  questions  in  the  creation  and
further elaboration of a new corpus iuris monetae for the euro. I shall enter into the details of this new
body of monetary and financial law later. Let me first highlight some historic events for those of you
who have come from afar and may, thus, be less acquainted with the main features of Economic and
Monetary Union.
As  a  crown  on  the  internal  market  of  the  European  Union  (EU),  the  euro  came  into  existence  on
1 January 1999. This occurred through the irrevocable fixing of the exchange rates of the currencies of
those 11 EU Member States which qualified not only economically, but also legally, for the adoption
of  the  euro.  These  Member  States  are:  Austria,  Belgium,  Finland,  France,  Germany,  Ireland,  Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain. Greece will adopt the euro as from 1 January 2001,
while Denmark will hold a referendum on the adoption of the euro on 28 September 2000. Sweden
and the United Kingdom did not introduce the euro in their respective countries, but this may change,
of course, in the future.
The birth of the euro was preceded, on 1 June 1998, by the establishment of the ECB, the European
System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the Eurosystem. The ESCB is composed of the ECB and  the
15 national central banks (NCBs) of all EU Member States. The Eurosystem is composed of the ECB
and the 11 NCBs of those Member States which have adopted the euro. The six members of the ECB’s
Executive Board and the Governors of these 11 NCBs together form the Governing Council. This is
the  Eurosystem’s  highest  decision-making  body,  which,  among  other  things,  has  adopted  the
Eurosystem’s regulatory framework.
In my speech today, I will elaborate upon how the ECB, but also the Community legislator, national
legislators  and  market  participants  have  struggled  with  the  same  question  which  Hugo  de  Groot
already addressed in his days in another context: in view of the introduction of the euro, where is, on
the  one  hand,  unification  of  law  desirable  and  where  may,  on  the  other  hand,  national  differences
continue to exist? Or, to remain closer to the title of my speech: where, and to what extent, has the
euro acted as a catalyst for legal convergence, and where is further convergence appropriate?
As a  preliminary  remark,  the  introduction  of the euro  and the  globalisation  of  the  world’s  financial
markets are clear incentives for a development towards “one market, one currency, one law”. There
are, however, at least two important impediments for such law to emerge in the near future.
First, there are the Community law principles of subsidiarity and proportionality. Subsidiarity requires
that the Community legislator only adopts legislation if this is necessary to achieve the Community’s
objectives. Proportionality requires that the type of legal act to be adopted be proportionate, ie not too
heavy, in relation to the objectives to be achieved.
Second, the EU consists of as many different legal systems as there are Member States, although there
are, of course, similar types of legal systems of common orientation (Roman law, Anglo-Saxon law or
1
BIS Review 77/2000
the Scandinavian systems). Recognition of the peculiarities of such legal systems in accordance with
the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality leads automatically to legal diversity.
In addition, for the Eurosystem it is also important to mention that system-related tasks are executed in
a decentralised fashion through the NCBs in their respective jurisdictions. For example, with regard to
the Eurosystem’s single monetary policy, the ECB’s decision-making bodies decide on such policy,
but the NCBs execute monetary policy operations in their respective jurisdictions.
All  in  all,  a  system  of  Community  law  has  evolved,  also  for  the  euro,  which  is  dominated,  in  a
spectrum  from  high  to  low  legislative  influence,  by  notions  such  as  unification,  harmonisation,
approximation, implementation and self-regulation. The road towards unification, if achievable at all,
is of an evolutionary nature, where each legal action is determined on a case-by-case basis. This is not
a  bad  development.  After  all,  unification  is  not  a  goal  in  itself.  Legal  action  should  have  a
well-balanced  relation  to  the  objectives  to  be  achieved.  Particularly  in  the  area  of  monetary  and
financial law, we have created such a well-balanced legal structure which ensures the fulfilment of the
Monetary Union’s objectives at present.
Let me, without the pretension of being exhaustive, briefly touch on several aspects of this new corpus
iuris  monetae  and  explain  how  we,  at  a  Community  level,  have  tried  to  strike  a  balance  between
unification on the one hand, and differentiation on the other.
Institutionally, legal convergence has taken place with regard to the statutes of the EU NCBs. The EU
Treaty  prescribes  that  the  ESCB  NCBs  are  independent  and  that  the  Eurosystem  NCBs  are  fully
integrated into the Eurosystem. This requires the adaptation of statutes of NCBs. However, the legal
requirements  for  central  bank  independence  and  integration  in  the  Eurosystem  are  not  precisely
defined in the Treaty. Therefore, the ECB and its predecessor, the European Monetary Institute, have
done so themselves in their so-called Convergence Reports. These Reports assess whether a Member
State qualifies for the introduction of the euro and they also contain a chapter on legal convergence.
They develop features of institutional, personal and financial independence. In addition, they identify
areas in which statutes of NCBs are likely to require adaptation in view of the integration of NCBs in
the Eurosystem. These Reports thus gave guidance to national legislators in the process of adapting
such  statutes.  As  a  result,  new  statutes  of  NCBs  have  come  into  existence,  which,  as  far  as
Eurosystem-related tasks are concerned, often contain very similar provisions. Yet, the Treaty does not
prescribe  harmonisation  of  statutes  and  NCBs  may  perform  own,  non-Eurosystem  related  tasks,  as
long as such tasks do not interfere with the objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem. Overall, statutes of
NCBs  therefore  still  differ  considerably  from  one  another.  In  conclusion,  there  has  not  been
harmonisation, but rather an approximation of law in this area.
Operationally, legal convergence has taken place as a result of the adoption of the ESCB’s regulatory
framework. This framework was prepared by the EMI and adopted by the Governing Council of the
ECB shortly before the introduction of the euro.
The  ESCB’s  regulatory  framework  consists  of  a  variety  of  legal  acts.  One  part  is  intended  to  be
generally applicable and binding on market participants across the euro area. Another part is intended
to govern the internal relationships between the components of the Eurosystem or the ESCB, as the
case  may  be.  An  example  of  the  former  are  ECB  Regulations  on  minimum  reserves,  statistical
information and ECB sanctions. They apply to all parties concerned across the euro area. An example
of the latter are ECB Guidelines. These are addressed to, and binding on, Eurosystem NCBs. Usually
they  require  implementation  in  those  legal  acts  which  such  NCBs  apply  to  govern  the  legal
relationship  with  their  counterparties.  These  acts  implementing  the  ECB’s  legal  acts  may  be  of  a
regulatory  or  a  contractual  nature  or  a  mixture  thereof.  This  depends  on  the  legal  traditions  of  the
jurisdictions in which they are adopted. In the former acts, the ECB Regulations, the point of gravity
with  regard  to  their  application  lies  clearly  with  the  ECB.  In  the  latter,  the  acts  implementing  the
ECB’s rules, it lies clearly with the NCBs. In other words, in the first case there is unification of law,
in the latter approximation.
The justification for this balanced approach is the following. Obviously, implementation of a  single
monetary policy for the euro area requires, on the one hand, a single set of rules established at, and
applied  by,  the  centre, the  ECB.  On the  other  hand,  in  view  of  the  decentralised  execution  of  such
BIS Review 77/2000
2
policy,  there  is  a  need  for  rules,  which  are  tailored  towards  each  specific  jurisdiction  in  which  the
actual  operations  with  counterparties  take  place.  Of  course,  the  Eurosystem  has  established
mechanisms  to  ensure  that  a  level  playing-field  across  the  system  for  system-related  tasks  is
maintained in order to avoid regional distortions in the implementation of the single monetary policy.
Clearly, the ECB is not the only party steering towards a level of legal convergence which is needed to
reap the benefits of the introduction of the euro. The Community legislator, and in particular the EU
Council, has also passed legislation in a variety of areas relating to the euro.
For  example,  two  Council  Regulations  have  been  adopted  on  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  These
Council Regulations cover topics which, in view of the introduction of the single currency, need to be
dealt  with  in  a  uniform  manner.  They  cover  issues  such  as  the  continuity  of  contracts,  conversion
rates,  rounding,  the  substitution  of  the  euro  for  the  currencies  of  the  participating  Member  States,
transitional provisions and the introduction of euro banknotes and coins as from 1 January 2002. Since
these Council Regulations are generally applicable, they are an example of a unification of law. They
do not preclude, however, the adoption of auxiliary legislation at a national level.
In addition, the Community legislator has adopted  Directives,  in the  area  of  payment  and  securities
settlement  systems  for  example,  which  apply  to  scriptural  payments  in  euro.  Since  such  Directives
require implementation, this may be regarded as an example of an approximation of law.
Finally,  the  Community  legislator  has  issued  several  Recommendations  on  topics  such  as  banking
charges  for  the  conversion  to  the  euro,  dual  display  of  prices  and  other  monetary  amounts,  and
collector  coins,  medals  and  tokens.  Since  such  Recommendations  are  non-binding,  they  may  be
considered as an incentive for self-regulation, either by national legislators or market participants.
Legal convergence is not the monopoly of legislators. Market participants may contribute as well. In
an  increasingly  globalised  financial  world,  they  do  fortunately  make  a  considerable  contribution.
There  are  various  representative  organisations  of  market  participants  which,  in  view  of  the
introduction of the euro and the resulting integration of financial markets, have adopted, or are in the
process  of  adopting,  standard  market  documentation  for  their  transactions.  A  good  example  is  the
European  Master  Agreement  (EMA)  of  the  European  Banking  Federation.  The  EMA  aims  to
consolidate  into  a  harmonised  standard  various  master  agreements  used  within  the  euro  area  and
several neighbouring countries, in particular for repurchase transactions and securities lending. At the
same  time,  it  allows  that  the  parties’  preferences  with  regard  to  the  applicable  law,  jurisdiction,
contractual  language  and  specific  national  legal  requirements  may  be  taken  into  account.  The  ECB
welcomes such market initiatives of legal convergence.
Legal convergence is spreading throughout Europe, crossing  the  borders  of  the  EU  as they  stand  at
present. Thirteen central and eastern European countries have applied for membership of the EU. They
range, geographically, from the Baltic States in the north to Turkey  in  the  south.  A  precondition  of
membership  is  that  the  accession  countries  implement  the  so-called  acquis  communautaire,  ie the
around  80,000  pages  of  Community  law  provisions  which,  among  many  other  areas,  include
legislation on the euro as well. It will be interesting to see how the accession countries enrich Europe’s
legal landscape. When implementing the Community’s acquis they may, on the one hand, profit from
already well established structures, which could lead to a fairly high level of harmonisation. However,
taking  into  account  the  cultural  diversity  of  the  countries  concerned,  considerable  legal  differences
may, perhaps, not be ruled out.
In any case, the accession countries will have to make their NCBs independent and accommodate the
integration of their NCBs in the Eurosystem. It is important to note that accession to the EU and the
introduction of the euro will, in all likelihood, not coincide.
From the ECB’s perspective, it is furthermore important that the legislation of the accession countries
in  the  areas  of  banking,  securities  markets,  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  collateral  is  made
compatible with EU standards. After all, under the rules of the single financial passport, membership
of the EU implies for financial institutions in the accession countries that they may obtain access to
Eurosystem facilities such as monetary policy operations and payment systems.
3
BIS Review 77/2000
This is a daunting task for the accession countries and the ECB stands ready to assist them, in close
cooperation  of  course  with  all  the  other  EU  authorities  involved  and  in  particular  with  the
Commission.  Indeed,  the  ECB  has  built  up  extensive  experience  in  delivering  opinions  on  draft
legislation in its field of competence where the Community and national legislators have to consult the
ECB. It goes without saying that the accession countries may profit from the ECB’s experience in this
field.
All  in  all,  the  birth  of  the  euro  has  triggered  tremendous  legal  activity,  not  only  for  legislators
specifically, but also for market participants generally. I am happy, and frankly also proud, that such
activity  has  been  successful.  The  ESCB’s  regulatory  framework  is  an  important  step  towards  legal
convergence  in  Europe  and  has  proved  to  function  well.  Moreover,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  legal
derailments resulting  from  the  introduction  of the euro.  An  interesting  example  of  the  lack  of  legal
problems  is  the  continuity  of  those  contracts  in  which  monetary  obligations  are  denominated  in
currencies which are now sub-units of the euro. The continuity of such contracts after the introduction
of the euro inside and outside the EU was the subject of extensive legal studies. However, in the end,
and perhaps also as a result of a provision in the EU Council’s euro Regulation, legal problems did not
arise in this area.
This does not mean that there is no need for further legal convergence. On the contrary, having built a
solid house for the euro, refinements in its furbishment remain, of course, a matter for attention. Such
refinements will no doubt follow the evolutionary path as described earlier, with attempts being made
to strike a balance between the need for unification and the wish to maintain national differences.
As far as the statutes of NCBs are concerned, they may perhaps continue to converge over time, but
there is no urgent need for further adaptations of the statutes of EU NCBs at present. The situation is,
of course, different for those NCBs which are not yet members of the Eurosystem and the NCBs of the
accession countries.
As far as the ESCB’s regulatory framework is concerned, this will be subject to legal fine-tuning as
and when the need arises. Since Guidelines are the backbone of the Eurosystem and may be changed
overnight  without  difficulty,  such  fine-tuning  -  should  it  be  necessary  -  will  be  relatively  straight
forward.  Their  implementation  at  a  national  level  may,  however,  take  more  time  dependent  on  the
national practice of each NCB.
However, in a broader context there is still a lot of legal activity to be accomplished, particularly as far
as the further integration of the financial markets is concerned. In this context, two initiatives merit a
specific mention.
First,  the  EU  Council  has  adopted  a  Financial  Services  Action  Plan.  This  Plan  provides  for  an
ambitious legislative programme, which is envisaged to be completed by the year 2005.
Second,  a  Group  of  Seven  Wise  Men  has  been  established  which,  under  the  chairmanship  of  my
predecessor at the EMI, Alexandre Lamfalussy, has been mandated to develop recommendations on
measures, including legal measures, to foster the further integration of the EU securities markets. As
you can read in the newspapers on an almost daily basis, consolidation of the securities industry gives
rise to a host of challenging questions. In the legal field, it will be particularly interesting to see where
the Lamfalussy Group will recommend legislative action and where it will consider self-regulation by
the securities industry to be an appropriate way forward.
The ECB welcomes such initiatives to take full advantage of the introduction of the euro.
Generally, the opportunities created by the euro in combination with technical developments such as
e-banking and e-commerce will continue to change the landscape of the financial markets inside and
outside the EU and create an incentive for further legal convergence.
Ladies and gentlemen, to conclude, as an economist I am happy to see that the introduction of the euro
has  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  legal  convergence  inside  and  outside  the  EU,  since  legal  convergence
contributes  to  the  smooth  and efficient functioning  of financial  markets.  I  acknowledge,  on  the  one
hand, that national differences, based on cultural diversity, will continue to exist. However, there is no
doubt in my mind that the introduction of the euro, the development of new technologies and natural
BIS Review 77/2000
4
tendencies in market behaviour will continue to be important incentives for further legal convergence.
In my view, the IBA is an excellent forum to contribute to the establishment of the appropriate legal
structures, and I welcome the attention which several IBA Committees pay to this topic. To end with a
metaphor on the waterworks for which your host country is so well-known:  water  will  find  its  way
naturally through paths with the fewest obstacles, but man-made dykes may channel this to the benefit
of mankind.
5
BIS Review 77/2000
