Masaru Hayami: The role of Japan amid the changing
international financial environment
Speech by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Executive Board of Directors’
Meeting of the Japan Foreign Trade Council, held in Tokyo, on 7 June 2000.
 Introduction
1.
Thank you for inviting me to the 263rd Executive Board of Directors’ Meeting. It is a great pleasure to
have this opportunity to address such a distinguished audience. It also brings back memories of my
days as one of the Council’s Executive Directors and Vice Chairman under Chairman Mimura. Your
invitation  today  allows  me  to  be  here  again,  for  the  first  time  in  almost  ten  years  since  I  left  the
Council to become Chairman of the Japan Association of Corporate Executives. Knowing that many
of you come from trading companies which are active globally, today I’d like to share my ideas from
the viewpoint of the role of Japan amid the changing international financial environment.
Tensions generated by globalization
2.
Having  previously  worked  for  the  Bank  of  Japan  for  34  years,  I  had  a  chance  to  work  in  the  then
Foreign  Department,  our  London  Office  and  other  positions  related  to  the  Bank’s  international
activities. It was a great experience for me to attend important international meetings such as the BIS
and the then G5 meetings.
Then, two years ago, I returned to the Bank of Japan as Governor. Now, representing the Bank, I have
a chance to again take part in various international meetings. Attending such meetings, I have noticed
two things. First, the number of international meetings has multiplied over the years. In this context, of
particular  note is that  the  presence  of  emerging-market  countries,  particularly  the  Asian  economies,
has also increased. One reason for this is somewhat paradoxical in that since the Asian currency crises
of 1997, there is a consensus that the economic and financial stability of emerging-market economies
is crucial for global economic and financial stability. Indeed, the rise in the number of international
meetings and participants evidences the extent to which economies are becoming globalized.
The second thing I have noticed is that various kinds of tensions have arisen as the market economy
has  become  more  globalized.  I  clearly  recall  NGO  activists  surrounding  the  WTO’s  Ministerial
Conference in Seattle last December. The IMFC  meeting, which I attended in late April on the day
after the G7 Meeting, was also the target of similar protests.
How  can  it  be  that  the  IMF,  a  pivotal  contributor  to  the  development  of  the  liberalized  market
economy after the Second World War, and the WTO, a legitimate successor to GATT, have become
the targets of such protests? Perhaps the phenomenon can be seen as a typical example of increased
tension between those who have ridden the tide of the market-oriented economy and those who have
grave  concerns  about  global  environmental  issues  and  widening  gaps  among  regions  which  are
possibly caused by rapid global developments.
I  think  many  agree  that  the  world  economy  is  currently  in  the  midst  of  one  of  its  most  important
turning  points  since  the  industrial  revolution  of  the  19th  century.  Ongoing  globalization  and
computerization are mega trends which will continue well into the future. In this context, competition
at the global level is expected to intensify. It is global competition which is the principal driving force
behind economic dynamism. No one can stop this trend and we should react positively. However, we
cannot deny the fact that newly formed tensions and uncertainties have emerged. Therefore, we should
continue to look for ways to promote the sound and stable development of the world economy through
steady efforts to establish appropriate rules and regulations that are compatible with the new trends.
1
BIS Review 49/2000
One thing is certain, such efforts will be accompanied by difficulties, involving some disagreements
on the international front, and it is incumbent upon us to try to find solutions.
Meaning of IMF reform
3.
Against the background of such trends, the international monetary and financial system is burdened
with further responsibilities. In particular, the Asian currency crises brought to the fore various issues
of concern to international financial circles including the prevention and resolution of future currency
crises. And, the outcome of discussions constitutes part of the concept of the so-called “new financial
architecture”. The Financial Stability Forum, which  was inaugurated last  April  at  the  request  of  the
G7,  has  published  recommendations  on  such  issues  as  highly  leveraged  financial  institutions  (for
example,  hedge  funds)  and  international  capital  flows.  This  is  one  example  of  the  fruit  of  work
undertaken by international financial fora.
The reform of the IMF has been a most important issue. And it was also the Asian currency crises that
triggered intense debate about the necessity of such reform. The Asian currency crises that broke out
as the result of the rapid outflow of short-term capital are called “21st century-type crises”. Here, the
IMF  has  come  to  be  the  target  of  criticism  which  holds  that  IMF  should  improve  its  surveillance
ability and increase transparency of its policy-making processes because it has not sufficiently carried
out  its  mission  of  crisis  prevention  and  resolution.  I  personally  think  the  problems  surrounding  the
IMF are deep-rooted and partly reflect its history.
As you well know, the period preceding the Second World War was characterized by such negative
factors as competitive devaluations, restrictions on  current  account transactions,  and the  widespread
use  of  protectionist  measures.  Without  doubt,  these  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  international
economy  and  created  tensions  between  countries,  only  fueling  pro-war  sentiment.  The  IMF  was
established with the aim of avoiding the repetition of such disruption. The primary concern of the time
was  to  create  a  well-structured  and  crisis-proof  international  monetary  system.  For  example,  fixed
parity between the US dollar and gold (with $1 equivalent to 35 ounces), the adoption of the adjustable
peg  system,  and  abolition  of  restrictions  on  current  account  transactions  were  key  elements
underpinning  the  Bretton-Woods  architecture.  Regarding  capital  account  transactions,  member
countries of the IMF were allowed to impose some degree of restrictive measures. Therefore, it is fair
to say that more attention was paid to the stable expansion of current account transactions rather than
capital account transactions.
However, things have dramatically changed since then. With respect to the foreign exchange regime,
the so-called “Nixon shock” in 1971 marked an abrupt end to convertibility between the US dollar and
gold, which eventually led to the arrival of floating exchange regimes on a global scale in 1973. And,
capital  account  liberalization  was  pursued  much  more  vigorously  than  most  architects  of  the
Bretton-Woods system envisioned. As a result, the volume of today’s cross-border capital flows far
exceeds current account transactions. As I noted earlier, the huge increase in cross-border capital flows
seems  to  exert  a  bigger  impact  than  current  account  transactions  on  the  economic  and  financial
conditions of individual countries, and, at times, could trigger serious currency crises.
In brief, present conditions surrounding the international financial system are entirely different from
what they used to be when the IMF was created. Amid accelerating globalization and accompanying
rising  tensions,  what  kind  of  contributions  can  the  IMF  make  to  the  stability  of  the  international
monetary system? What should be the core functions of the IMF in this context? These questions are
prime movers behind recent discussions on IMF reform.
The IMFC meeting I attended this April in Washington was previously called the Interim Committee.
But,  unlike  the  Interim  Committee,  the  IMFC  is  structured  as  a  permanent  forum.  Thus,  the
transformation  of  the  Interim  Committee  into  the  IMFC  comprises  part  of  efforts  to  strengthen  the
IMF, and it can be seen as a symbol of the current challenges facing the international financial system.
At the first IMFC meeting this April, we had lively discussions on how to reform the IMF. Although
further  consideration  is  needed  to  reach  any  realistic  conclusions,  I  believe  that  some  kind  of
consensus was formed regarding the future direction we should take in reforming the IMF.
BIS Review 49/2000
2
First, we agreed to develop rules under the basic concept of utilizing market functions. In this regard,
the latest  G7  and  IMFC  communiques  underscore the importance  of  involving  the  private  sector  in
forestalling and resolving currency and financial crises. At the same time, it was agreed to strengthen
the IMF’s role in making various rules that can be applied to new developments in global markets, and
in  monitoring  the  observance  of  such rules  by  member  countries.  Such  a  role  can  be  considered  as
ensuring conditions for proper market functioning are in place, or to correct market failures.
Second, we agreed to review or redefine IMF operations under the basic concept of utilizing market
functions.  In  this  regard,  it  was  suggested  that,  for  instance,  IMF  lending  operations  be  limited  to
short-term  liquidity  provision  to  members  facing  capital  account  crises.  It  was  also  argued  that
medium and long-term financial support for promoting development be reduced.
Third,  since  the  IMF  has  been  strongly  criticized  for  lack  of  transparency  in  its  decision-making
procedures, its accountability should be enhanced in the interest of better governance.
IMF  reform  has  just  started.  However,  it  is  an  important  challenge  that  may  determine  the  future
course of the international monetary and financial system. Japan is the second largest subscriber to the
IMF, following the US. At the same time, Japan is one of the countries most involved in international
financial markets, as witnessed by the fact that Japan is the world’s largest capital exporter as well as
largest  net  creditor.  Japan  has  made  various  contributions  to  the  formation  of  a  consensus  among
international financial circles regarding the direction of IMF reform and it should continue to do so.
4.
Role of Japan in a changing international financial environment
What is expected of Japan?
(1)
Now, let me clarify Japan’s role in this period of changing international finance. First, Japan should
actively participate in developing international rules. The introduction of international standards and
codes  involves  important  elements  that  determine  not  only  the  future  path  of  global  economic
development, but which may also have a substantial impact on domestic finance and the economy. For
example, this can be seen in Japan by observing how corporate management is being affected by the
introduction of international accounting rules. In practice, however, to take part in international rule
making  is  not  as  easy  as  it  may  sound.  It  requires  an  enormous  amount  of  knowledge  as  well  as
powers of persuasion. And here we should note Japan’s position in the global economy as well as the
role it plays in Asian economies. It is thus desirable that Japan be actively involved in and contribute
to  international  rule-making  efforts  with  a  full  understanding  of  the  situation  in  the  region.  In  this
context,  the  Bank  of  Japan  seeks  to  strengthen  relations  with  colleagues  in  EMEAP  (Executives’
Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks) through more intensive dialogue regarding the regional
economy  and  finance.  Furthermore,  Japan  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the  process  of  implementing
rules in Asia through technical assistance in the field of financial system reform and the establishment
of economic and financial infrastructure such as data collection and dissemination systems.
Japan’s second role is to directly contribute to the stable growth of the global economy by securing its
own  sustainable  growth.  For  this  purpose,  bringing  the  economy  back  to  the  recovery  phase  of  the
business cycle is  an  important challenge.  Furthermore,  it is  more  important  that Japan  goes  beyond
this  by  regaining  economic  dynamism  by  steadily  pursuing  structural  reform.  In  addition,  as  I  will
discuss later, it will be a big challenge for Japan to win global confidence in its economy as a whole.
Japan’s economy and the role of the Yen
(2)
I  do  not  have  enough  time  today  to  discuss  Japan’s  expected  role  in  a  comprehensive  manner.
Therefore,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  thoughts  on  one  of  the  important  issues  regarding  the  role  of
Japan’s economy in the global economy and finance; that is “the role of the yen as an international
currency”.  This  issue  is  also  closely  related  to  the  point  I  have  just  made:  how  to  win  global
confidence in Japan’s overall economy.
3
BIS Review 49/2000
International  currency  can  be  defined  as  “a  currency  actively  used  by  non-residents  as  a  tool  to
measure, to store, and to exchange value”. Although non-residents are using the yen, it is perhaps hard
to say that it is “actively used”. Rather, it is often argued that the yen is not sufficiently used as an
international currency relative to Japan’s status in the global economy. What does this mean?
For currencies to be widely used in a global manner, there are several conditions to be met. First, it is
indispensable to win confidence in the currency internationally. In order to realize this goal, we need a
strong economy supported by a stable currency value.
In  this  connection,  let  me  briefly  describe  the  current  state  of  Japan’s  economy.  It  is  becoming
increasingly clear that the economy is improving with support from decisive macroeconomic policy.
In particular, we are observing welcoming signs in private sector demand as evidenced by a continuing
gradual increase in capital expenditures against the background of improving corporate profits. In the
coming period, we will carefully examine momentum of the recovery, focusing on how such recovery
in the corporate sector will spread to the household sector.
Here,  I  come  back  to  the  issue  of  an  international  currency.  As  the  second  condition  for  the
international  use  of  a  currency,  I  can  point  out  its  “user  friendliness”.  For  a  currency  to  be  user
friendly, the existence of a liberalized and open economic environment, which includes deep financial
and  capital  markets, is necessary.  Third,  the  existence  of  a  mechanism  by  which  the  creation  of  an
international network for a currency is catalyzed and accelerated is significant. For example, the global
activities  of  the  shipping,  finance,  and  insurance  industries  under  the  British  Empire,  and  then
American multinational firms in the finance and IT industries, respectively accelerated global use of
the pound and US dollar. It may be possible that Japan’s contribution to other countries through more
intensive technical assistance will lead to an expanded network for the yen.
In  sum,  to  what  extent  a  nation’s  currency  is  globally  used  depends  on  confidence  in  the  nation’s
economy  as  a  whole.  To  enhance  such  confidence,  every  measure  should  be  taken  with  the  three
aspects I mentioned in mind.
I would like to take up the issue of the Japanese government bond (JGB) market as an example. The
ratio  of  JGBs  owned  by  non-residents  is  currently  only  a  few  percent,  which  is  extremely  low
compared  to  the  US  and  other  G10  countries.  This  is  especially  understandable  when  Japan’s
cumulative  current  account  surplus  and  high  savings  rate  are  taken  into  consideration.  However,  in
terms  of  the  global  bond  index,  which  world  bond  investors  refer  to  when  making  investment
judgments, the share of JGBs is the second largest next to that of US government bonds. If the current
budget situation of the two countries remains unchanged for some time, it is possible that the share of
JGBs  will  become  comparable to that  of  US Treasuries.  If  so,  it  is  imperative  that  the  JGB  market
becomes attractive for international investors.
What  is  necessary  for  the  JGB  market  to  achieve  the  global  standard?  Needless  to  say,  policy
decisions that might impair confidence in JGBs must be avoided. In this regard, budget policy of the
government should be constrained in the long run. It would also be significant to improve the safety
and user friendliness of the JGB market from the viewpoint of such aspects as the usability of futures
and  repo  markets,  the  tax  treatment  of  JGBs,  and  the  standardization  of  trading  and  settlement
customs.
In my speech today, I have touched upon three conditions for a currency to be internationally used,
namely, confidence in the currency, high degree of user friendliness, and an international network. I
believe that these conditions coincide with the direction that Japan should move in the coming century.
Let me add that every time I refer to the “internationalization of the yen”, it carries my strong hope
that Japan will adjust to the new global economic order and contribute to international rule making and
the foundation for sustainable economic and financial development in the Asian region.
BIS Review 49/2000
4
