A H E M Wellink: Heterogeneity in Europe and the role of monetary policy
Opening  address  by  Dr  A H E M  Wellink,  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  at  the
CEPR/European Summer Institute conference, held in Amsterdam, on 15 September 2000.
 Introduction
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  to  give  the  opening  address  to  this  conference  and  to  welcome  you  to
Amsterdam.  After  only  a  couple  of  years,  this  annual  conference  has  established  a  reputation  for
stimulating  discussion  on  economic  policy  issues  in  Europe.  This  year’s  programme  looks  set  to
further enhance your reputation.
Issues of heterogeneity were the subject of much debate and analysis in the run-up to the introduction
of the euro. The debate has continued since then, too, and this conference will no doubt provide fresh
insights  into  the  issue.  Enlargement  is  also  on  the  conference  agenda.  Obviously  enlargement  will
have implications for current EU members, as well as for accession countries. Further, there are links
between enlargement and heterogeneity.
This afternoon I would like to talk a little about heterogeneity in the euro area, and its implications for
policymakers.  I  would  also  like  to  look  forward  and  discuss  these  issues  in  the  context  of  EU  and
EMU enlargement.
Heterogeneity
First, some thoughts about heterogeneity. We are used to thinking about heterogeneity mainly in terms
of nation states. We focus on differences between countries. Of course, it is not only when discussing
economic  policies  that  we  think  about  national  differences.  We  also  highlight  differences  in  other
areas  –  the  Netherlands  was  a  mass  of  colour  from  supporters  of  different  countries  earlier  this
summer  during  the  European  soccer  championships.  And,  the  Sydney  Olympics  provide  an
opportunity to celebrate national achievement, as well as individual sporting excellence.
Traditionally,  monetary  policy  has  also  been  conducted  on  a  national  basis,  although  European
monetary  policy  did  become  more  coordinated  in  the  run-up  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Other
economic policies have generally  continued to  be  set  on a  national basis, although  EU  membership
does  impose  some  degree  of  consistency.  Heterogeneity  also  occurs  on  other  dimensions,  such  as
between sectors of the economy. I will return to that point in a minute, but first want to make a couple
of comments about country differences.
There have been many studies in recent years focussing on differences between euro area countries.
And, while a few studies find evidence to the contrary, there appears to be a general consensus that
business cycles have converged to some extent over the past decade or two. As a central banker, I am
naturally  interested  in  inflation  differentials,  and  these  are  certainly  lower  now  than  they  were
10 or 20 years ago. For example, inflation rates among current euro area members ranged from 21% in
Italy to 5% in Germany in the last quarter of 1980. By the second quarter of this year the range was
only 3½ percentage points.
Naturally, divergences do remain, and these reflect a number of factors. Some divergence is due to a
process  of  convergence  as  countries  catch  up 
the  well-known
Balassa-Samuelson effect. This effect explains how productivity growth during a catch-up process can
result  in  higher  inflation  without  undermining  competitiveness.  Country-specific  policies,  including
fiscal policy and regulation, also result in divergences. Finally, countries have different industrial or
sectoral concentrations. Differences in the economic performance of various sectors will therefore be
reflected in cross-country divergences.
to  euro  area  averages, 
1
BIS Review 74/2000
These factors are not going to disappear immediately, but may diminish as  price  and income  levels
converge and through continued deepening of the internal market. However, we cannot be sure how
rapidly they will diminish, nor can we be certain what level of divergence will be normal in the long
run. In addition, the process of convergence will not necessarily be continuous. For example, inflation
differentials have widened a little over the last year or two, although they remain much smaller than
they were a decade ago.
For  small  areas  within  a  monetary  union,  a  common  monetary  policy  does  have  some  specific
implications. Small countries have little influence on the euro area inflation rate, which is a weighted
average of national inflation rates. If inflation rates in those small countries diverge from the euro area
average,  that  has  relatively  little  impact  on  the  overall  monetary  policy  stance  for  the  euro  area.
Consequently, it is possible for smaller countries to temporarily have growth rates and inflation rates
that differ from those that would result from a national monetary policy aimed at maintaining  price
stability at the country level. Large countries could also be in this position. If inflation is well above
the euro area average in one country, but below it in another, monetary policy may not contribute to
narrowing  the  divergences.  Where  such  divergences  are  not  the  result  of  catching-up  processes,
national economic cycles could potentially become more  pronounced.  Some  euro  area  countries  are
arguably  in this  position now,  or heading  towards it. The  Netherlands is  one  of those  countries.  Of
course, such a deviation can also occur in the other direction, with inflation and output growth rates
remaining  lower  for  longer  than  would  occur  with  a  national  monetary  policy.  This  can  lead  to
long-lasting social and economic costs if there are factors inhibiting a smooth adjustment process. I
will return to this issue shortly.
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  heterogeneity  occurs  across  several  dimensions.  In  addition  to  country
differences, there are also differences in economic performance between sectors in the economy. As
the internal market continues to deepen, there may be fewer regulatory differences between countries
and the Stability and Growth Pact constrains national fiscal policy. It seems likely that cross-country
divergences will increasingly reflect exposures that countries have to various sectors. Thinking about
heterogeneity at a sectoral level might therefore be more insightful for the euro area  than focussing
solely on cross-country comparisons.
Consider  trends  in  inflation.  The  Eurosystem  has  defined  price  stability  as  a  positive  inflation  rate
below  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  definition  recognises  the  fact  that  at  times  inflation  may
temporarily move outside that target range. That is currently occurring as a result of higher oil prices -
which are a kind of sectoral shock. The weak exchange rate is also contributing to higher prices. The
most recent HICP inflation rate shows that euro area consumer prices increased by 2.4% in the year to
July.  Almost  half  of  that  increase  is  due  to  higher  energy  prices.  Naturally,  cross-country  inflation
differences remain, and are relevant. However, these cross-country differences are themselves affected
by  higher  oil  prices,  reflecting  the  fact  that  energy  intensity  and  energy  taxation  vary  between
countries. In the current circumstances, analysing relative price trends can help in assessing whether
inflation is confined to specific sectors, or whether it is leading to more generalised inflation.
Implications for policy
So we have heterogeneity across several dimensions. What does that mean for policy, and why should
policy  makers  be  concerned  about  divergences?  Let  me  focus  on  price  divergences.  In  a  market
economy,  relative  prices  play  an  important  role.  And,  relative  prices  include  not  only  the  prices  of
different goods and services within a country, but also the prices of the same goods and services in
different  countries.  These  relative  price  changes  provide  the  signals  to  ensure  that  changes  in
preferences or technology flow through to changes in resource allocation. In theory, therefore, relative
price  movements  are  welfare  enhancing  and  not  something  that  we  should  be  concerned  about.  In
practice,  the  world  is  not  so  simple  and  markets  are  not  perfectly  competitive.  Relative  price
movements do not always occur freely, and adjustments to changes in preferences or technology can
be costly.
Monetary  policy  cannot  and  should  not  influence  relative  prices  within  the  euro  area  to  offset
divergences between sectors or countries. Those relative prices are determined by real factors. Instead,
BIS Review 74/2000
2
the best contribution that monetary policy can make to society’s welfare is to stabilise the general euro
area price level. That reduces the noise in relative price changes, and therefore improves the workings
of the price mechanism.
Nonetheless,  central  bankers  do  monitor  divergences.  Why  do  we  monitor  divergences  if  there  is
nothing  we  can  do  about  them?  First,  our  knowledge  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  is
incomplete. Information about the various parts of the economy, including divergences,  adds  to  our
knowledge of the economy as a whole. We are particularly conscious of this in the euro area where we
are still in the process of developing and enhancing indicators for the euro area as a whole. The second
reason  for  our  interest is that  regional or  sectoral  differences in  economic  performance  can provide
early signals of area-wide developments, as US experience has shown.
If  monetary policy cannot and should not react to  divergences,  what  about  other  policy  areas?  As  I
mentioned earlier, allowing relative price changes to occur is often the best approach, so that resources
are allocated to their most effective uses. Accordingly, structural reforms that allow the relative price
mechanism to operate are generally sensible. And, hearing central bankers call for structural reforms is
nothing  new!  My  colleagues  and  I  on  the  ECB  Governing  Council  have  been  regularly  calling  for
further structural reform. For example, labour market reform that stimulates the movement of labour
around the euro area is likely to reduce euro area unemployment overall, as well as reducing disparity
in prices, wages and unemployment rates  between  regions.  Central  bankers in  other  countries  make
similar points.
Another  approach  would  be  to  use  fiscal  policy  to  try  and  dampen  national  divergences.  However,
given  the  planning  and  implementation lags,  it  is  not  easy  to  use  fiscal  policy  in  a  counter-cyclical
manner.  In  addition,  the  main  objective  of  fiscal  policy  is  not  normally  to  reduce  cross-country  or
cross-sector  divergences.  Even  though  fiscal  policy  is  normally  formulated  within  a  multi-year
framework,  elements  of  discretion  remain.  Any  discretion  should  be  used  to  reduce,  rather  than
increase, cross-country divergences in inflation. Fiscal policy should also be in a sustainable position
so that automatic stabilisers can operate fully. At times it may even be appropriate for fiscal policy to
seek to offset divergences. It is certainly the case that there is little to be gained from discretionary
pro-cyclical  policies.  Rather,  economic  cycles  could  become  more  pronounced,  resulting  in  costly
adjustment taking place in downturns.
The  point  I  made  earlier  about  small  countries  is  relevant  here.  Euro  area  monetary  policy  is  not
significantly  influenced  by  the  inflation  rate  of  a  small  country.  It  is  therefore  important  for  small
countries  to  have  the  flexibility  in  other  policy  areas  to  offset  inflation.  Of  course,  large  countries
would also gain if they undertook structural reform and avoided pro-cyclical fiscal policy. And there
could be times when it is appropriate for large countries to use national policies to offset divergences. I
would merely make the point that the costs of not being flexible might be greater for small countries in
the event of a downturn.
Monetary policy after enlargement
I  would  also  like  to  briefly  discuss  how  these  issues  apply  to  enlargement.  First,  the  points  made
regarding  small  countries  currently  in  the  euro  area  apply  with  even  greater  force  to  accession
countries. Given the relative size of accession countries, monetary policy for the enlarged euro area
will be little influenced by their inflation rates. Accession countries are in general less converged in
real  terms  than  the  initial  EMU  members  were  when  monetary  union  began.  This  is  true  when
measured  on  the  basis  of  GDP  per  capita,  and  when  adjustments  are  made  for  differences  in
purchasing  power.  Real  convergence  may  therefore  take  a  considerable  period  of  time.  Ongoing
convergence,  EU  membership,  and  eventually  adoption  of  the  euro,  could  all  result  in  economic
shocks that mean monetary policy requirements in an accession country differ from those in the euro
area  as  a  whole.  Given  these  factors,  the  extent  of  the  difference  in  monetary  policy  requirements
could be greater or more protracted than is the case for small countries currently in EMU. To minimise
the economic and social impact of divergences, it is important that accession countries have flexible
economies,  sound  financial  systems,  a  solid  fiscal  position,  and  a  well-developed  institutional
framework. Arguably, accession will therefore have greater consequences for countries now than was
3
BIS Review 74/2000
the case previously, in the sense that they are less converged in real and institutional terms than initial
EMU  members.  A  cautious  approach  to  the  adoption  of  the  euro  therefore  appears  appropriate,  as
premature adoption could prove costly.
Second, monetary policy within the EMU will continue to focus on area-wide conditions. Obviously,
that area will be larger following enlargement. One of the important issues for us will be to ensure that
the  indicators  we  use  in  our  monetary  policy  deliberations  are  based  on  developments  across  the
enlarged  area.  Our  data  requirements  will  expand  accordingly.  We  will  also  need  to  learn  how  the
monetary policy transmission mechanism works across the new area. I expect that the national central
banks from the accession countries will have an important role to play here in helping us understand
the workings of the enlarged euro area.
Conclusion
Despite having given some warnings about the consequences of divergences, I would like to conclude
on an optimistic note. Yes there are differences within the euro area. But the differences do not create
problems for euro area monetary policy. The overall gains from membership certainly outweigh the
costs. I am confident the same will apply for accession countries. What the divergences do teach us is
that  other  policies  must  play  their  part  if  we  are  to  maximise  the  gains  from  a  common  monetary
policy. That is particularly important for small countries.
Thank you for your attention. I would like to repeat my welcome to you, and wish you well for the
remainder of the conference. I am sure that it will be both stimulating and fruitful.
BIS Review 74/2000
4
