Lars Nyberg: Are the risks growing in the banking system?
Speech given by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at an analyst meeting at
Enskilda Securities, held in Stockholm, on 14 June 2000.
 I would like to thank you for inviting me to today’s analyst meeting and giving me the opportunity to
discuss financial stability issues with such a qualified audience.
I would like to start by briefly explaining the Riksbank’s analysis of financial stability. In addition to
the  inflation  target,  the  Riksbank  has  another  primary  task,  namely  that  of  being  responsible  for
financial  stability.  These  two  important  functions  are  closely  linked.  A  stable  financial  system  is
important for price stability since financial imbalances can threaten the inflation target. Likewise, an
inflation  target  policy  contributes  to  stability  in  the  financial  system,  as  it  has  a  levelling  effect  on
cyclical fluctuations.
The  Riksbank’s  analysis  of  financial  stability  can  be  interesting  for  analysts  of  bank  and  property
shares,  since  we  closely  monitor  the  banking  sector  and  property  market  within  the  scope  of  this
analysis.  Our  perspective  is  somewhat  different,  however,  since  we  are  mainly  interested  in  risks
which  can  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  which  often  appear  to  be  relatively
improbable,  while  stock  analysts  attempt  to  assess  the  most  likely  developments  in  the  market.
However, the information about the markets is largely the same and analysts also need to consider the
risks in the companies which they are covering.
After  this  introduction,  I  will  then  go  on  to  discuss  the  strong  credit  expansion  in  Sweden  and  the
measures that a central bank can take if it assesses that this development constitutes a potential threat
to financial stability. I will conclude by looking at international developments, since the development
in Sweden is by no means unique.
The Riksbank and financial stability
The comprehensive changes that have taken place in the financial sector and the financial crises that
have occurred in various parts of the world have meant that the work on securing financial stability
has become increasingly prioritised. Those countries which have undergone severe banking crises in
modern  times  are  now  leading  the  way  in  terms  of  the  work  on  financial  stability.  For  example,
Sweden  was  the  first  country  in  the  world  to  regularly  and  openly  publish  special  stability  reports
analysing  the  situation  of  the  financial  system.  We  would  say  that  the  initiative  was  received  with
mixed  feelings  by  other  central  banks,  some  of  which  were  concerned  that  these  kinds  of  reports
would cause problems rather than preventing them. However, the attitude of the Riksbank has been
that it is through open and honest communication with the financial players that we can observe and
remedy potential problems at an early stage. Despite some initial scepticism, several  countries  have
now  followed  the  Riksbank’s  example.  Norway  and  the  UK  now  publish  stability  reports  and
Denmark  also  recently  issued  its  first  stability  report.  Since  the  financial  markets  operate  across
national borders, the Riksbank works together closely with foreign central banks on these issues. For
example, the Riksbank participates in several ECB committees related to stability issues and takes an
active part in the ongoing work to reform the capital adequacy regulations.
It is also stipulated in law that one of the primary functions of the Riksbank is to promote a stable and
efficient payment system. In order to fulfil this task, the Riksbank must closely follow developments
in those financial institutions that are of central importance to the payment system, i.e. primarily the
four major banks, which are each sufficiently large to cause problems for financial stability if they fail.
The analysis focuses on three main areas. The first area concerns general developments in the banking
sector - how the competitiveness and long-term profitability of the banks are developing. The second
area examines credit risks related to the banks’ lending to households and non-financial companies.
1
BIS Review 50/2000
The third area that is analysed is counterparty and settlement risks that arise in connection with the
banks’ trading and taking positions in the financial markets. The analysis is undertaken on an ongoing
basis and is presented in the Financial Stability Report, which is issued twice a year.
I will mainly focus on the analysis of the banks’ credit risks associated with lending to households and
companies.  This  is  a  subject  that  has  attracted  growing  attention  as  lending,  especially  to  the
household  sector,  has  risen  significantly.  A  certain  increase  in  lending  is  normal  in  an  economic
upswing, when companies need to borrow in order to invest, while households borrow, for example, in
order to meet rising house prices. In an economic boom, loan losses are also generally low, while they
tend to be higher during a recession.
The increased level of indebtedness has also come under discussion. The question has been raised of
whether households and companies today borrow to such an extent that this could lead to problems in
the banking sector when the economic cycle turns downward. History shows us that the factor which
has triggered banking crises in modern times has often been extensive loan losses caused by changes
in the macroeconomic environment. This was also the case during the Swedish banking crisis at the
beginning of the 1990s.
Is the growth in credit worrying?
So what is the situation at present? Figures for April show that total lending to the general public is up
7.3% compared with April 1999. The main growth is in household lending, which has risen by 8.8%,
while corporate lending has increased by 4.1%.1 A perspective on these figures can be obtained if we
consider them in relation to GDP. This gives a measure of whether lending is growing at a faster rate
than the economy as a whole, which provides us with an indication of whether imbalances are being
built up.
Corporate lending in relation to GDP has remained relatively constant over the last four years, and is
currently  far  below  the  levels  which  prevailed  at  the  end  of  the  1980s.  The  financial  statements
presented  by  companies  are  also  currently  strong,  which  suggests  good  solvency.  In  this  context,  I
would also like to point out that those companies within the “new economy” that are currently very
much in the news and which show weak profitability finance themselves primarily via the risk capital
market and not via bank loans. This means that a possible downturn in this part of the corporate sector
should only have limited direct effects on the banks.
In  terms  of  household  lending,  the  situation  is  rather  different.  Lending  to  households  has  risen
relatively strongly over the last two years and currently amounts to over 40% of GDP. It is therefore
approaching the levels we saw at the end of the 1980s. However, it should be stressed that households’
interest expenses are currently lower due to the low interest rates. This rise in lending is also reflected
in the household debt ratio, i.e. debts in relation to disposable income, which has risen and which now
amounts to 104%.
Households are borrowing to an increasing extent, at the same  time  as their  economic  situation  has
improved  as  a  result  of  rising  disposable  incomes  and  falling  unemployment.  Households  have
traditionally borrowed mostly for housing, and the current increase in this type of lending is perhaps
not  so  surprising  in  view  of  the  fact  that  housing  prices  in  metropolitan  areas  have  risen  relatively
significantly. What is more remarkable is that lending for other purposes is increasing at a higher rate.
It is difficult to see from the statistics exactly how the borrowed money is used, but lending both from
banks and finance companies is now growing at a faster rate than lending from mortgage institutions.
This  has  given  rise  to  apprehensions  that  households  are  borrowing  for  consumption  or  in  order  to
invest in shares, which could lead to rapid increased risks. In order to gain a better understanding of
whether  or  not  this  is  the  case,  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  has  recently  commenced  an
examination of the banks’ lending to the household sector.
1 Excluding repos.
BIS Review 50/2000
2
There  are  several  reasons  why  property  prices  play  a  central  role  in  any  discussion  of  financial
stability. In addition to the fact, as I mentioned earlier, that the credit demand among households is
largely governed by the demand for and price level of property, property can also be used as collateral
for loans. Another reason for monitoring the property sector is that a large part of the banks’ lending is
to property companies. These companies also accounted for a large part of the loan losses during the
banking crisis in the early 1990s.
Property prices have risen recently, and in particular the prices of residential property in metropolitan
regions.  In  contrast  to  the  1980s,  we  do  not  see  the  same  broad  price  increase  across  the  whole  of
Sweden, as was the case then. Likewise, the causes of the rising prices appear to be low interest rates,
a high rate of new occupancies and low construction activity rather than speculation. This indicates
that there are currently no major risks of a fall in residential property prices. However, there is every
cause  to  observe  developments  carefully.  New  construction  always  takes  place  with  a  considerable
time lag and experience shows that many projects are not ready and do not come onto the market until
after a turning point has occurred, at which point things can quickly deteriorate.
With regard to commercial property, the development has been more moderate. Again, it is mainly in
the  metropolitan  areas  that  prices  have  risen  due  to  high  demand.  The  level  of  new  construction
continues to be low and most premises today are already leased before building commences.
One way of analysing the extent to which speculative tendencies are inherent in property prices is to
place the direct yield in relation to risk-free interest.2 At the end of the 1980s, the risk-free interest rate
was  considerably  higher  than  the  direct  yield  on  properties,  which  suggests  that  people  bought
properties on the expectation of future price rises and/or significant rent increases. Today, the situation
is  different.  Direct  yield  levels  appear  reasonable  in  relation  to  risk-free  interest.  With  regard  to
apartment buildings in Stockholm, the direct yield is lower than the risk-free interest, but at the same
time prices are affected by the fact that most property deals are made in connection with converting
apartment buildings to tenant-owned apartments. For these types of transactions, direct yield cannot be
used as a measure since the tenant-owners association does not have a required return comparable to
that for an owner of a rental property.
The financial statements presented by property companies are also considerably stronger today than
what they were ten years ago. The risks associated with lending to this sector by the banks appear to
be considerably lower than then. Among listed property companies, it seems as though many consider
that the level of indebtedness has become too low, considering the extensive interest in buying back
shares within the sector. At the same time as buying back shares can lead to a higher return on equity,
there  is  reason  for  companies  and  their  credit  granters  to  observe  the  risks  associated  with  higher
indebtedness. Above all, the companies can become extremely sensitive to changes in interest rates.
An overall assessment of the credit situation in Sweden thus suggests that there is greater cause to be
pleased that lending is growing as an integral part of the current economic upturn than to worry about
the risks which may accumulate. However, an integral part of the Riksbank’s role is to remind about
changes that can occur both rapidly and unexpectedly.
What is the situation in other countries?
Getting back to the credit expansion in the household sector, the development we see in Sweden today
is  not  unique.  The  American  economy  has  been  the  subject  of  much  recent  discussion.  A  growing
number of voices have warned that the risks have been built up into something of a financial bubble.
The apprehensions derive from highly  inflated  asset  values,  low  saving  and  increased  indebtedness,
i.e. in principle, a similar situation to the one we currently have in Sweden. Total lending by American
banks  increased  in  March  by  10.1%  compared  with  March  1999  and  lending  in  relation  to  GDP  is
currently at a historically high level. The lending statistics show that the primary increase is in lending
2
For example, a 5-year government bond.
3
BIS Review 50/2000
for  housing,  due  to  rising  property  prices.  At  the  same  time  as  lending  is  increasing,  saving  is
declining. Over the last five years, saving as a proportion of disposable income has fallen by nearly 5
percentage  points  and  amounted to  a  low  2%  during  the  last  quarter  of  1999.  Sweden has  shown  a
similar development. During the last five years, the saving ratio has fallen by over 9 percentage points
and is currently at 2%. There are thus several signs of a development that is worrying from the view of
financial  stability.  The  rising  debt  ratio  has  without  a  doubt  made  households  more  vulnerable.
However, as in Sweden, employment and households’ financial assets have increased, which favours
the households’ ability to pay.
Another example is the Netherlands which, like Sweden, is normally characterised as a small, open
economy. Even there, worrying signals similar to those in the Swedish and American economies can
be perceived. The improved economic activity has led to falling unemployment and rising asset prices.
During the last two years, total lending has risen at an annual rate of around 15%. In the Netherlands
too, a large part of this rise in lending can be explained by rising prices, especially house prices. Dutch
house prices rose on average 15.8% during 1999. As a comparison, it can be mentioned that Swedish
house prices rose by approximately 8% during the same period (prices for tenant-owned apartments
rose to a considerably higher extent, however). In the Netherlands, household indebtedness in relation
to GDP has traditionally been low,  but  has  risen  dramatically  in recent  years and today  amounts  to
almost 45% of GDP.
If  we  compare  the  developments  in  Sweden,  the  USA  and  the  Netherlands,  we  see  Dutch  property
prices  have  risen  considerably  faster  than  Swedish  and  American  prices  both  in  real  and  nominal
terms. In this context, the development in Sweden appears to be less sensational.
What can the Riksbank do if the build-up of risk increases?
An  increasing  level  of  indebtedness  in  the  economy,  combined  with  rising  asset  prices,  involves
greater vulnerability to changes in the macroeconomic environment, i.e. growing risks. The obvious
question then, is what the authorities can do to prevent such a build-up of risk. The Riksbank discusses
a  number  of  possible  measures  in  its latest  Financial  Stability  Report.  Firstly,  the  Riksbank  tries  to
influence developments by communicating our views on what is happening publicly and in the form of
a  dialogue  with  the  banks.  The  Financial  Stability  Report  plays  a  central  role  in  this  context.  The
Riksbank  can  in  certain  situations  provide  a  more  comprehensive  picture  of  the  risks  than  the
individual market players, as the latter attaches greater importance to evaluating developments in their
own portfolios.
If the Riksbank believes that an unhealthy build-up of risk is occurring and our assessment has not had
the intended influence on the individual market players, there are other measures that the Riksbank can
take.  In  extreme  cases,  quantitative  regulations  may  be  introduced,  such  as  raised  required  capital
adequacy ratios or a reserve requirement. Nor can an increase in the repo rate be ruled out if financial
stability is threatened. However, these are more far-reaching measures and would only be used if the
build-up of risk was assessed to constitute an acute problem. The assessment of the situation made by
the Riksbank and other authorities will always be marred by a large measure of uncertainty, as it is
extremely difficult to evaluate how serious the build-up of risk actually is. If drastic measures are to be
taken, the assessment must be based on a strong foundation.
The development we can see today is, as I mentioned earlier, far from requiring any intervention. The
Riksbank’s assessment is that if the macroeconomic situation should worsen, it will lead to problems
for individual households in meeting their payment obligations, but will hardly comprise a serious risk
for banks in general and therefore not threaten financial stability either. In this context it is important
to  mention that the  household sector  normally  accounts  for  a  small  percentage  of  loan  losses,  even
during the banking crises. There is thus no reason in the current situation for the Riksbank to resort to
special measures to intervene against the build-up of debt currently occurring in the household sector.
When discussing the banks’ loan losses, I have alluded to the risk that households and companies will
not be able to pay their loans. Loan losses can also arise when the banks cannot meet the obligations
among themselves. These risks are usually called counterparty and settlement risks. This type of risk
BIS Review 50/2000
4
arises in the banks’ trading and taking positions in the financial markets. As the major Swedish banks
have  extensive  commitments  to  one  another  and  also  to  foreign  banks,  problems  in  one  bank  can
rapidly spread to the others and cause problems throughout the entire financial system. Such a problem
need not be due to a bank being insolvent; it may be based on, for example, a failing computer system
or similar. The Riksbank has on several occasions pointed out that these individual  exposures are  a
growing  problem  from  the  point  of  view  of  stability.  To  overcome  this  problem,  the  Riksbank  has
begun a review of the regulations, together with the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority.
Conclusion
In  the  current  situation  there  are  great  expectations  that  the  future  will  bring  economic  growth  and
good times. “The new economy” with a low inflation rate and high levels of employment and growth
has  gradually  crossed  the  Atlantic  to  reach  us.  In  such  times  of  strong  confidence  in  the  future,
consumption and indebtedness increase, while saving declines. We have seen this happen many times
before. If the expectations are fulfilled, there is no problem. However, if the expectations race ahead of
economic developments, asset prices and indebtedness can develop in a way that causes imbalances. If
there is an economic downturn, households may find difficulty in meeting their payment obligations,
which will lead to a rapid increase in saving, falling asset prices and a decline in demand. This is also
something we have seen in other contexts.
While  this  development  could  give  cause  for  concern,  it  is  important  not  to  paint  an  excessively
negative picture. As the Riksbank has  pointed  out  earlier, a  decline in  the  macroeconomic  situation
would  probably  lead  to  problems  for  individual  households,  but  would  hardly  cause  sufficient  loan
losses to threaten the banks’ stability.
However, there is every reason to be vigilant with regard to continued developments, particularly from
a price stability perspective. Continued rising asset prices and credit expansion could risk leading to
overheating and thus rising inflation. An increase in the repo rate would in this case contribute both to
counteracting incipient inflation tendencies and to reducing the risk of financial imbalances, through a
dampening effect on demand for credit and on asset prices.
5
BIS Review 50/2000
