William J McDonough: The review of the Capital Accord
Remarks  by  William  J  McDonough,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Eleventh  International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors,  held  in
Basel, 20-21 September 2000.
 I am greatly honored to be here as Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. I’d like
to  begin  by  thanking  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Kurt  Hauri  and  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking
Commission, and Andrew Crockett and the BIS for organizing and hosting this important conference.
They’ve done a wonderful job, for which I know we’re all very grateful.
It is also a great pleasure to be with you under such dramatically different circumstances than when we
last gathered together. Just two years ago, turbulence in the financial markets around the world had
affected, in one way or another, the banking systems of virtually every nation, and bank supervisors
were struggling to preserve confidence and stability. Today, of course, the global financial situation is
much more stable and the outlook is very favorable.
In the United States, we continue to enjoy the longest economic expansion in our nation’s history, and,
following  passage  of  financial  modernization  legislation,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  now
enjoy unprecedented strategic opportunities.
In  Europe,  following  monetary  union  in  January  of  1999,  the  banking  industry,  along  with  other
corporate sectors, is becoming more efficient and competitive as economic and political reforms have
sharpened the focus on shareholder value.
In  Asia,  and  in  many  emerging  market  economies,  meaningful  headway  has  been  made  toward
recapitalizing  banking  systems,  ridding  banks’  balance  sheets  of  problem  assets,  and  improving
supervisory  and  regulatory  frameworks.  As  a  result,  economies  are  growing  again,  equity  markets
have rebounded, and foreign capital has begun to return. What a difference two years of hard work can
make.
When I last addressed this conference in October of 1998, I said that bank supervisors have a special
role in maintaining financial stability, and that our special role has two components: facilitating  the
resolution of problems when they occur, and taking the necessary steps to lower the risk of problems
occurring. Two years ago we were busy with the first component – crisis management and resolution.
Today, as we stand on the threshold of a new century, we have the opportunity to focus on the second
– prevention.
With that in mind, it is my view that the greatest challenge to the long-term goal of financial stability,
both locally and globally, is the accelerating pace of change and financial innovation, driven by the
steady march of technological advancement. To be sure, such rapid change has created unprecedented
opportunities for both producers and consumers of financial products and services. But it must also be
acknowledged that with such remarkable progress has come new, more complex and potentially far-
reaching risks.
I’d like to begin by addressing the profound impact of today’s technology on banking and the financial
markets, then move on to the implications of that impact for effective supervision in the twenty-first
century. On the subject of official supervision, I will discuss the Basel Committee’s Core Principles
for Effective Supervision, and then conclude  with  an update  on the  Committee’s  major initiative  to
revise and refine the 1988 Capital Accord.
1
BIS Review 75/2000
Technology changing the world, banking and supervision
It’s been said that information is power. Whoever said that surely never had to deal with the flood of
e-mail  most  of  us  receive  each  day.  Indeed,  with  increasing  frequency,  the  complaint  nowadays  is
about  “information  overload.”  With  wireless  communications  enabling  us  to  conduct  business
anytime, anywhere, I sometimes feel, as I’m sure many of you do, that no matter where I am in the
world, I’m expected to be awake and working.
For those who occasionally feel overwhelmed by technology’s marvels, it’s worth remembering that
there  was a  time,  and  not  so  long  ago,  when  reliable  market  information  was  decidedly  scarce  and
concentrated in the hands of a privileged few. The Rothschilds built an international banking empire
on the wings of carrier pigeons, whose messages enabled the brothers to buy and sell on information
about  investment  opportunities  or  financial  disasters  in  distant  places  long  before  their  competitors
heard the news.
Today,  information  of  all  kinds  is  transmitted  easily,  inexpensively  and  instantaneously  around  the
world, providing finger-tip access to anyone with a laptop computer, cellular phone or palm pilot. As
but one example, I’d mention that, as of last month, the most popular items on the Federal Reserve’s
public  web  site  –  including  statistical  reports  on  foreign  exchange  rates,  selected  interest  rates,
consumer  credit  and  industrial  production,  along  with  press  releases  and  Federal  Open  Market
Committee announcements – are accessible by wireless remote.
If  information  is  power,  and  it  surely  is,  then  a  profound  and  irreversible  transfer  of  power  is
underway in the global financial marketplace – from providers of products and services to consumers.
For example, the Internet – something most of us had never heard of five years ago – is changing how
consumers shop for financial products and services, the prices they pay, and with which providers they
establish relationships.
In response, financial institutions, who once viewed technology mainly as a cost center, now see the
Internet  and  other  technological  capacities  as  strategic  tools  for  enhancing  the  value  of  customer
relationship through cross-selling and improved customization. A recent survey of bank managers in
the United States reported that, for the first time, investment in Internet technology was cited as the
top  budgetary  priority,  ahead  of  items  such  as  investments  in  call-centers  and  brick-and-mortar
branches.
The  growing  importance  of the  Internet  as a  distribution  channel is  also eroding  traditional  barriers
between  financial  service  providers  and  technology  firms.  Banks  are  increasingly  providing
technology  services,  such  as  account  reconciliation  software  and  “web-enabling”  assistance,  while
technology firms are making inroads into services once the domain of banks and brokerage firms, such
as financial planning and bill payment. Indeed, many banks are beginning to think of technology firms
as competitors – or are contemplating ways to partner with them.
I’d  guess  that  most  of  us,  perhaps  even  all  of  us,  consider  the  advancement  of  computing  and
information  technologies,  and  their  role  in  the  development  of  ever-more  sophisticated  financial
instruments  and  techniques,  to  be  decidedly  positive  developments.  Such  technologies,  and  the
innovation  they  enable,  have  reduced the  costs  of  financial  transactions,  improved  the  allocation  of
financial resources, increased the competitiveness and efficiency of financial institutions and markets,
and  opened  new  avenues  through  which  individuals  and  institutions  can  better  diversify  and  hedge
their risks.
But  with  this progress  has  also  come  new  and  difficult  challenges. The  rapid  pace  of  technological
advancement and financial innovation has introduced new, highly complex elements of risk, increased
the speed and volatility of the markets, and blurred the barriers between previously distinct sectors of
the financial marketplace.
Even as supervisors confront change, the fundamental questions remain the same. Where is the risk in
banks’ activities, and how effectively are they managing it? Where are banks extending credit and in
what form? Who are banks’ customers, and how are those customers changing? To what extent are
credit risks being transformed into liquidity and operational risks?
BIS Review 75/2000
2
The difference today is that the timeframe for answering these fundamental questions is dramatically
shortened. As supervisors, we must be able to look at rapidly changing financial institutions and assess
whether their  strategies  make  sense  and  whether they  are  effectively  evaluating  the  risks  associated
with executing those strategies.
Technology  and  innovation  have  also  rendered  geographic  boundaries  all  but  meaningless,  and
undermined the power and control of financial authorities. As you know, one of the principal means of
supervising internationally active banks has been the process whereby the host supervisor approves the
establishment  of  a  brick-and-mortar  presence  in  its  country  or  jurisdiction.  By  way  of  a  web-based
platform,  banks  can  now  target  customers  far  beyond the reach  of  a  typical  branch,  and  even  cross
borders  into  countries  where  they  have  no  local  offices  and  may  never  have  conducted  business
before. We’ve already seen a few cases in which a bank is chartered in one country, handles its data
processing  in  another,  and  targets  customers  in  still  others.  Such  situations  will  surely  challenge
traditional notions of “home” and “host” supervisor, and raise difficult issues regarding international
coordination and cooperation, information sharing, law enforcement and privacy.
In a world of instantaneous communication, interconnected markets, and more complex instruments
and  risks,  effective  supervision  is  more  important  than  ever  to  maintaining  financial  stability,  both
locally and globally. To remain effective and relevant, supervisors must understand how and to what
extent the  “wired”  economy  and  other  technologies are  changing  banking  and  finance.  At  the  same
time, we must take care that our efforts to ensure the safe and sound operation of the financial markets
do  not stifle the innovation  and  creative  energy  that  is  changing  banking  and  finance  –  indeed,  the
world – for the better.
With these thoughts in mind, it is my firm conviction that to successfully meet the challenges of the
twenty-first century, our very notion of supervision, broadly speaking, must evolve to include financial
institutions themselves and the discipline applied by the marketplace.
Supervision in the twenty-first century
And so what is the purpose of supervision in the twenty-first century? What are the objectives, and
how can those objectives be best pursued?
Let me say first of all that there is no easy or single answer to these questions. The twenty-first century
financial  marketplace  is  too  dynamic,  too  complex,  and  supervisors  must  work  within  the  political
realities of our respective nations. What I envision is a flexible, multi-faceted strategy that emphasizes
prudence and problem prevention, compatibility with the market, and a close and cooperative working
relationship between the private and public sector.
effective bank-level management;
With  these  priorities  in  mind,  I  believe  there  are  three  essential  elements  of  a  modern  supervision
framework:
• 
• 
• 
Let  me  discuss  each  of  these  in  turn,  noting  that  each  should  reinforce  the  others  to  effectively
promote a safe and sound financial system.
market discipline; and,
official supervision.
Effective bank-level management
Primary responsibility for the safe and sound operation of a banking institution lies with its board of
directors and senior management. Boards of directors should oversee the development of the overall
strategy of the organization and the decisions made by senior management in pursuit of those strategic
objectives.  In  effectively  executing  these  responsibilities,  boards  make  a  critical  contribution  to  the
long-term success of the institution. This is a fundamental principal of banking that has not changed
with technological advancement. Indeed, if anything, the greater complexity and sophistication of the
3
BIS Review 75/2000
modern  financial  services  firm  require  more  energy,  effort  and  expertise  from  directors  than  ever
before.
I  see  two  areas  of  board  operation  as  being  particularly  crucial.  First,  banks  and  other  financial
institutions must ensure that specific skills and competencies, consistent with the institution’s strategic
focus, are represented on their boards. Institutions that engage in complex credit or market activities,
utilize  sophisticated  financial  products,  or  expand  their  Internet  or  e-commerce  capabilities,  should
include one or more board directors with pertinent expertise in such areas.
Second,  boards  should  establish  clear  guidelines  regarding  the  independence  of  their  directors.
Generally,  it  is  desirable  for at least some  directors, and  perhaps  a  majority,  to  be independent  and
from outside the ranks of the management of the institution. Further, the board should set parameters
regarding at what point, or under what circumstances, a director’s outside business interest becomes so
significant as to raise questions of a possible conflict.
Serious  measures  to  ensure  relevant  competencies  and  independence  will  greatly  enhance  boards’
effectiveness  and  go  a  long  way  toward  ensuring  they  perform  their  increasingly  critical  role  in
overseeing the decisions of senior management.
The role of senior management, in turn, is to set the business strategy, oversee day-to-day decisions
made within the organization, and ensure their consistency with long-term objectives and policies as
determined by the board.
Capable and experienced management;
Independent and competent outside directors, as I mentioned a moment ago;
There  are  several  aspects  to  effective  bank-level  management.  First,  I  would  underscore  the
importance of good corporate governance, the basic elements of which include:
• 
• 
• 
• 
Together, these elements contribute to an overall operating process conducive to long-term health and
prosperity. A tightly run ship with a disciplined crew led by an experienced and competent cadre of
officers is far better able to survive a long journey that will inevitably confront sudden storms.
A coherent corporate strategy and business plan; and,
Clear lines of responsibility and accountability.
Closely related to good corporate governance and critical to any banking institution’s well-being is a
rigorous  internal  control  apparatus.  Of  course,  effective  internal  control  systems  have  always  been
centrally  important  to  sound  banking.  This  point  becomes  clear  if  we  consider  for  a  moment  their
basic purposes:
• 
To provide reasonable assurance that the bank’s and its customers’ assets are safeguarded,
that  its information is timely  and  reliable,  and  that  errors  and  irregularities  are  discovered
and corrected promptly;
 To promote the bank’s operational efficiency; and,
To  ensure  compliance  with  managerial  policies,  laws,  regulations  and  sound  fiduciary
principles.
With  these  purposes  in  mind,  it  is  clear  that  the  long-term  success  of  any  banking  organization
depends on the effectiveness of its internal control apparatus.
And  never  has  this  been  more  true  than  today.  As  the  activities  of  commercial  banks  have  become
increasingly diverse and complex, internal controls have become critically important to the sound and
successful execution of banks’ strategic objectives.
I want to stress this point as strongly as I can. As a former commercial banker myself, I know there is
a powerful temptation for management to focus its attention and resources on the front office – those
areas and individuals that generate profits for the institution. But if something goes wrong in the back
office, it can quickly become the most important aspect of a bank’s operations. We’ve seen this time
BIS Review 75/2000
4
and time again. It is essential that sufficient resources, staff and managerial attention are devoted to the
back office and internal audit functions.
Firmly  rooted on  the  foundation  of  good corporate  governance  and  rigorous  internal  controls  is  the
central importance of effective risk management. Banking by its very nature is a business of taking
calculated risks. If they didn’t take risks, banks could not perform their essential functions in a market
economy. But sound banking also entails the prudent management of those unavoidable risks.  Each
banking institution must have in place the technical systems and management processes necessary to
identify the risks associated with its activities – lending and otherwise – and to effectively measure,
monitor and control those risks.
But even if an institution has an effective risk management and control structure in place, that structure
must  also  be  accompanied  by  an  institutional  management  culture  that  ensures  that  written  policies
and  procedures  are  actually  translated  into  practice,  with  buy-in  at  all  staff  levels.  Ultimately,  an
institution's culture is determined – once again – by the board of directors and the senior management
it chooses to install. Management must take active steps to ensure that its commitment to an operating
environment that includes effective risk management and rigorous controls filters down the line of the
organization.
To  summarize,  these  aspects  of  effective  bank  level  management  –  good  corporate  governance,
rigorous internal controls and effective risk management – represent the first and most important line
of defense against potential problems. And this will increasingly be the case as the activities of banks
and other financial institutions become more complex and more global.
Market discipline
After effective management at the bank level, the second line of defense against financial instability is
market discipline, which is an increasingly important ally of the official supervisor. When armed with
timely and meaningful information on banks’ performance, market participants can, by way of their
investment and credit decisions, encourage bank managers and boards of directors to manage their risk
exposures soundly.  Equally  as  important,  market  participants  can  penalize  those  institutions  that  do
not.
But, of course, effective market discipline is not possible without meaningful public disclosure. While
significant progress has been made in recent years, it unfortunately remains the case that  disclosure
practices have not kept pace with the rapid changes in banks’ business activities and risk exposures,
and with how these exposures are measured and managed.
For this situation to be fully remedied, notions of what is proprietary information and what should be
in the public domain must change. Knowing a company’s appetite for risk and  its approach to, and
methodologies  for,  managing  risk  is  essential  to  understanding  the  risks  of  being  a  shareholder,  a
creditor or a counterparty. All financial market participants should approach the issue of disclosure as
users of financial statements rather than as issuers.
There should be little question about the urgency of achieving dramatic progress in this area. Clearly, a
full appreciation of risk cannot be achieved without sufficient information. All of us know that there is
no greater enemy to financial stability than a loss of confidence – and nothing undermines confidence
more than a lack of  reliable  information.  Discipline imposed  by  markets  might  not  be  pleasant,  but
more, higher quality information – in a word, transparency – bolsters the confidence of depositors and
other creditors and therefore makes doing business easier and more secure for everyone.
Of course, progress on the disclosure front will be limited until accounting standards are enhanced to
ensure proper valuation and to reflect innovations over the past decade, both in terms of new products
and modern risk management techniques. Accounting systems serve a variety of purposes, but none
more  important  than  helping  creditors  and  investors  make  rigorous  and  clear-eyed  decisions  as  to
which enterprises meet market tests of efficiency, competitiveness and profitability that are necessary
to fulfill their obligations. Sound accounting systems also enable investors to determine the value of
enterprises,  and,  in  so  doing,  assist  in  attracting  capital,  both  foreign  and  domestic.  With  these
5
BIS Review 75/2000
important  purposes  in  mind,  ongoing  efforts  to  enhance  accounting  standards  worldwide  should
continue and even intensify.
There is also a need for greater harmonization of accounting standards across  countries. We  simply
must  get  to  a  point  where  supervisors  and  market  participants  alike  can  analyze  and  compare  all
internationally active financial institutions on a consistent basis. And it will not be possible to have
uniform  capital  standards  until  we  have  achieved  some  consistency  in  accounting  standards  across
countries.  I  applaud  the  significant  progress  being  made  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards
Committee and look forward to the continued cooperation between the Basel Committee and the IASC
toward achieving the goal of harmonization.
Official supervision
While effective bank level management and meaningful market discipline are crucial elements of an
overall strategy for promoting and preserving financial stability, neither can substitute for the critical
role  played  by  official  supervision.  While  banks  perform  functions  that  are  indispensable  to  the
success of any market economy, these same functions, by their very nature, introduce risks that  are
capable of undermining the prospects for such success.
This reality was acknowledged by Adam Smith over two centuries ago in his seminal tract The Wealth
of Nations. And it is with this fundamental reality in mind that governments have long recognized that
banking and other financial institutions must be subject to at least some form of regulation and official
oversight.
The reasons for official supervisory intervention in the banking and financial system can be summed
up as promoting financial stability and minimizing systemic risk. This is a broad mandate – to ensure
that markets operate in a fair, transparent, and efficient manner, and that participants comply with the
rules  of  the  game.  To  successfully  fulfill  this  critical  responsibility,  it  is  clear  that  the  fundamental
approach, scope and methodologies of official supervision must evolve in line with the way financial
institutions manage their activities, which increasingly is along business lines rather than legal entities.
With this in mind, supervisors should continue efforts to develop a more dynamic, risk-focused and
process-oriented  framework,  reflecting  the  reality  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  are
increasingly  able  to  alter  their  risk  profiles  at  will.  By  “risk-focused,”  I  mean  that  supervisory
resources  should  be  directed  at  the  most  material  risks  to  which  an  institution  and  its  capital  are
exposed,  given  its  array  of  business  activities.  By  “process-oriented,”  I  mean  that  examiners  and
auditors should determine whether management processes and methodologies are sufficiently rigorous
and  effective,  given  the  institution’s  identified  risks.  Institutions  that  demonstrate  a  sound  control
structure  and  effective  management  processes  should  be  subject  to  less  intrusive  supervision  than
institutions that do not have this essential infrastructure in place.
The Core Principles
Specific supervisory arrangements, practices and techniques vary from country to country depending
on  differences  in  culture,  financial  system  structure  and  internal  political  realities.  The  diversity  of
practices notwithstanding, a set of basic principles has be identified that should guide all supervisors in
an increasingly interconnected, global financial marketplace.
In  1997  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank  Supervision  issued  a  set  of  twenty-five  Core  Principles  for
Effective  Bank  Supervision  to  serve  as  a  benchmark  against  which  the  effectiveness  of  different
supervisory regimes can be assessed.
The  Core  Principles  document  brings  together  concisely  all  of  the  fundamental  elements  needed  to
carry out effective bank supervision – a remarkable achievement in its own right. Equally important,
in my view, the document also balances the desire to set high standards for supervisory practices with
the pragmatic recognition that not all countries are in the same stage of financial market development.
As such, the Core Principles document is of particular importance for developing market economies,
BIS Review 75/2000
6
as it establishes a clear set of standards against which any country’s current approaches and progress
can be measured.
It should be emphasized that, in attempting to craft a document that would have the legitimacy, quality
and  flexibility  to  meet  the  needs  of  bank  supervisors  around  the  world,  the  Committee  made  a
conscious effort to consult broadly throughout the various stages of the project, and particularly with
supervisors  from  emerging  market  nations.  Only  through  an  inclusive  approach  could  we  design
comprehensive principles with broad applicability and support.
In  October  of  last  year,  the  Basel  Committee,  in  cooperation  with  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,
produced a follow-up document called the Core Principles Methodology. This report was initiated in
response  to  requests  from  a  number  of  countries  for  additional  guidance  on  how  to  interpret  and
implement the Core Principles. The Methodology document provides specific criteria for evaluating
and implementing each Core Principle. One set of criteria focuses on issues deemed essential for the
minimum  implementation  of  the  Core  Principles;  the  other  focuses  on  those  issues  deemed  to
represent “best practice.” The IMF and the World Bank currently use the new methodology to assess
the banking sectors in individual countries.
It should be stressed that the most important efforts to implement the Core Principles are occurring in
individual countries and, with this in mind, I am pleased to say that approximately 120 countries have
now endorsed the Core Principles. Without the support and backing of national authorities to follow
through with the implementation of these principles, our broader efforts simply cannot be effective.
In  this  connection,  the  Basel  Committee  has  long  recognized  the  need  for  effective  training  of
participants  in  the  global  supervision  community,  and  over  the  years  has  sponsored  numerous
programs  which  have  been  beneficial  in  allowing  supervisors  from  different  countries  to  share
experiences and exchange ideas for improved practices. In 1998, the Basel Committee, along with the
Bank for International Settlements, jointly established the Financial Stability Institute, which conducts
leadership seminars for supervisors in emerging market countries and facilitates technical assistance.
Effort to revise the Basel Accord
Let me move on to the Basel Committee’s initiative to revise the 1988 Capital Accord. As you well
know, capital has been, and continues to be, an important supervisory tool.
Since 1988, capital regulation has evolved around a set of minimum ratios that were devised by the
Basel Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  set  forth  in  a  document  known  as  the  Basel  Accord.
The Accord was, without question, a milestone achievement – for the first time, supervisors were able
to  use  a  common  yardstick  for  assessing  banks’  capital  adequacy.  The  development  of  risk-based
capital ratios has helped to strengthen capital standards in the more than 100 countries that adopted the
Accord.
In recent years, however, the Accord has exhibited serious shortcoming. One significant weakness is
that the Accord’s broad brush structure may provide banks with an  unintended  incentive  to  take  on
higher risk exposures without requiring them to hold a commensurate amount of capital. It also has not
kept pace with innovations in the way that banks measure, manage and mitigate risk.
With these concerns in mind, in June of 1999 the Basel Committee released a Consultative Paper for a
new capital adequacy framework. While we knew this paper would not represent a perfect framework
for all banks, our aim was to release a credible package that would serve as a basis for discussion. We
actively sought feedback from the industry worldwide during the formal comment period that ended
on 31 March of this year, and we are continuing this dialogue.
I should note that we are very pleased and encouraged by the more than 200 comments received from
a variety of sources, including financial institutions, central banks and supervisors, non-G10 countries
and other market participants. The respondents on the whole have sent us a strong endorsement of our
overall  goal  of  developing  a  capital  framework  comprised  of  three  pillars  –  minimum  capital
standards, supervisory review and market discipline – that is more risk reflective and appropriate to
banks of varying levels of sophistication.
7
BIS Review 75/2000
At  the  same  time,  the  respondents  raised  a  number  of  important  concerns  and  questions  that  the
Committee  is  reviewing  and  considering  carefully.  The  comments  offered  by  emerging  market  and
other  “non-G10”  countries  have  figured  prominently  into  the  Committee’s  review  of  its  initial
proposal,  and  Claes  Norgren,  who  is  chairing  the  next  session,  will  provide  an  update  on  the
Committee’s thinking regarding these points.
I’d like to take a few minutes to update you on our efforts, focusing on a few topics of special interest.
Given the progress we have already made, it is clear to me that the Committee is well positioned to
continue its momentum and to release a revised Consultative Paper early next year.
Internal ratings-based approach
The centerpiece of the new Accord is likely to be the internal ratings-based approach to credit risk. We
envision  that  the  internal  ratings  method  will  be  applicable  to  those  institutions  that  have  in  place
strong internal rating systems accompanied by robust internal controls. Naturally, our new standards
will also encompass guidance on supervisory oversight and provide for ample disclosure.
The Committee is looking to establish standards that are rigorous and yet permit institutions willing to
make the necessary investments to use the approach. I think that it is fair to say that the Committee
now expects that many sophisticated institutions will seek to use the internal ratings-based approach.
How will an internal ratings-based approach work? Simply described, there are three components to
the  internal  ratings-based  approach  being  developed  by  the  Committee.  First,  a  bank  would  assign
each of its loans or exposures to an internal grade, which reflects the risk associated to lending to each
borrower. A bank would do so by using the expert judgment of senior lenders and its own well-defined
internal rating scale and criteria. The bank would then assess the likelihood of default of borrowers in
each  internal  grade,  based  on  its  own  analysis.  Many  larger  banks  are  doing  this  now.  It  is  this
assessment of the probability of default that is the core of the internal ratings-based approach.
The second step is for the bank to assess the severity of loss should a loan default – most often referred
to  as  the  Loss  Given  Default.  The  Committee  currently  envisions  two  internal  ratings-based
approaches, a foundation approach and an advanced approach with even higher minimum standards. A
key distinction is that under the foundation approach, banks would use supervisory estimates of loss-
given-default based on loan characteristics, while under the advanced approach, they could make use
of their own analysis.
The third step is to derive the bank’s capital requirement. The Committee will set out the risk weights
that  correspond  to  different  estimated  probabilities  of  default  and  loss-given-default.  These  risk
weights are being developed by the Committee as a measure of unexpected loss, reflecting the amount
of potential credit loss for each loan.
A  key  aspect  of  the  internal  ratings-based  approach  is  the  development  of  rigorous  supervisory
standards for the assignment and quantification of internal ratings. An essential component  of  these
standards is the so-called “use test” that requires a system of internal ratings to be an integral part of a
bank’s risk management and own assessment of capital adequacy. The internal reliance on these risk
ratings will not only help supervisors gain confidence in the accuracy of a bank’s ratings system, but
will also provide a key link to the proposed second pillar of the Accord, supervisory review.
Other work on minimum capital requirements
While the focus of my remarks has been on the internal ratings-based approach, the Committee also is
working  on  other  key  aspects  of  the  new  framework,  including  revising  the  standardized  approach,
developing an expanded treatment of credit risk mitigation techniques and assessing a capital charge
for operational risk.
BIS Review 75/2000
8
Standardized approach
The  Basel  Committee  remains  dedicated  to  revising  the  standardized  approach  as  banks  and
supervisors  in  some  countries  may  not  yet  have  the  necessary  resources  to  implement  an  internal
ratings-based  method.  To  improve  the  risk  sensitivity  of  the  standardized  approach,  the  Committee
sought to establish capital requirements that recognized some differences in the probability of default
between  borrowers.  At  the  same  time,  the  Committee  sought  to  be  attentive  to  the  views  of  many
bankers and supervisors who wanted the standardized approach to remain simple so that banks of all
sizes  and  levels  of  sophistication  could  implement  it.  It  consequently  proposed  the  use  of  external
credit assessments,  such  as  credit  ratings,  as  a  means  for  helping  to  assign  risk  weights,  and  hence
capital charges, on claims.
We were pleased that on the whole respondents agreed with the goal of increasing the sensitivity of
the  standardized  approach  to  credit  risk.  Nonetheless,  given  the  difficulty  of  achieving  the  right
balance between sensitivity and simplicity, the proposal to base the standardized approach on external
credit rating agencies’ ratings has raised real concerns. Some have noted that, especially in emerging
market countries, very few borrowers have credit ratings, and the new framework might then not be
able to differentiate credit risk substantially between borrowers. Some also raised questions about the
performance record of some ratings agencies, particularly in the context of various regional financial
crises around the world.
Unfortunately, few alternatives were suggested during the comment period. Still, we remain open to
fresh ideas and are working hard to address the concerns noted. For example, we are exploring the use
of other indicators of a borrower’s credit quality to differentiate between risk exposures in a way that
could be applied by any bank. Moreover, in response to suggestions made by commentators that the
standardized approach could be expanded to allow for even greater risk differentiation, the Committee
is actively evaluating whether it would be feasible to incorporate additional risk weights, particularly
for  corporate  claims  and  the  riskiest  assets  held  by  banks.  Aligning  the  capital  charges  in  the
standardized  approach  more  closely  with  economic  risk  while  retaining  relative  simplicity  is  an
important goal, as the Committee wishes to ensure that all banks worldwide that look to the Accord as
the benchmark can subscribe to the new framework.
Credit risk mitigation techniques
The Committee is also  looking  to allow  for  greater  recognition  of  credit risk  mitigation techniques,
such as collateral, guarantees and credit derivatives, while at the same time addressing potential risks
that remain from their use. As we finalize our proposals, we are working to ensure that there is a high
degree of consistency between the treatment of risk mitigation techniques under the standardized and
internal ratings-based approaches, though the two are likely to differ in some respects.
Operational risk
The  Committee  recognizes  that  in  refining  the  measurement  of  credit  risk,  it  is  also  important  to
consider  the  coverage  of  other  important  risks,  such  as  operational  risk.  The  announcement  of  our
intention to incorporate an explicit capital charge for operational risk in the new capital framework has
had a catalytic effect on the industry, which is striving to improve its measurement capabilities in this
area.  The  Committee  wants  to  maintain  this  momentum.  It  is  working  closely  with  the  industry  to
develop  an  “evolutionary”  approach  to  operational  risk  that  would  reward  banks  that  improve  their
risk  management  and  measurement  capabilities.  We  intend  to  include  this  approach  in  the  next
Consultative Paper.
Pillar 2: Supervisory Review
Let  me  also  briefly  touch  upon  the  two  other  pillars  of  the  revised  capital  adequacy  framework  –
supervisory review and market discipline. These topics are certainly familiar and important ones to all
of you.
9
BIS Review 75/2000
As I mentioned in the context of the internal ratings-based approach, supervisory review of capital is a
critical  complement  to  minimum  capital  requirements.  The  task  for  supervisors  in  the  revised
framework  is  to  evaluate  how  well  banks  are  assessing  their  capital  needs  relative  to  their  risks,
including whether banks are appropriately addressing the relationship between different types of risk.
I  want  to  stress  that  this  proposed  approach  is  in  no  way  intended  to  replace  the  judgement  and
expertise of bank  management, or to shift responsibility for capital adequacy to supervisors. On the
contrary, it is well understood that bank managers have the most complete understanding of the risks
their institutions face, and it is they who have primary responsibility for managing those risks. Most
importantly, in proposing this second pillar, the Committee intends to foster a more active dialogue
between banks and their supervisors, such that when deficiencies develop, prompt and decisive action
can be taken to restore capital.
Pillar 3: Market Discipline
The  third  pillar  of  the  new  capital  adequacy  framework,  market  discipline,  will  serve  to  reinforce
capital  regulation  and  other  supervisory  efforts  to  promote  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks  and
financial  systems.  To  this  end,  the  Committee  has  been  working  to  formulate  a  set  of  disclosure
requirements that will ensure the availability of sufficient information to assess the appropriateness of
a  bank’s  capital  relative  to  risk,  while  taking  into  account  the  bank’s  proprietary  needs.  This  is
particularly important in relation to the internal ratings approach to credit risk.
In January of this year, the Committee issued a discussion paper detailing guidance for strengthening
the third pillar of the new capital framework. This paper provides recommendations on disclosures of
banks’ capital structures, risk exposures and capital adequacy. The Committee is continuing to expand
on  these recommendations  as its  work  on  the  first and  second  pillars of the  new  capital framework
evolves.
As  the  Committee  continues  to  fine-tune  the  new  capital  framework,  we  are  focusing  on  issues  of
primary concern to the industry and supervisors world-wide, seeking to avoid getting bogged down in
secondary issues that could slow the overall process. This most certainly is a broad-scoped effort that
will not, indeed cannot, meet every priority and concern of everyone. But we are well aware that the
perfect cannot be the enemy of the good. With this in mind, I fully expect that we will meet our goal
of releasing a new capital adequacy framework by early next year, followed by a short international
comment period and then implementation in each of the member countries.
Conclusion
In conclusion, let me simply say that the dawn of the twenty-first century is a time of unprecedented
opportunities  and  unique  challenges  for  financial  institutions  and  supervisors  alike.  In  meeting  the
challenges  posed  by  technological  advancements  and  the  rapid  innovations  they  enable,  and  in
pursuing  the  objective  of  a  modern,  flexible  yet  stable financial  system,  we  must  acknowledge  that
both the public and private sectors have a critical role to play.
While the perspectives of market participants and official supervisors may differ from time to time,
our objective is the same – to maintain a strong and vibrant financial system. Indeed, it is evident to
me,  as  a  former  commercial  banker  and  now  as  a  supervisor,  that  only  if  we  work  together,  each
meeting our responsibilities and reinforcing the other, will we be able to successfully manage a rapidly
evolving, ever-more complex financial services industry.
BIS Review 75/2000
10
