European Central Bank Press Conference introductory statements
Introductory statements given by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
and Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Press Conference held in
Madrid on 30 March 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
Today, the Governing Council of the ECB met for the first time outside Frankfurt. Therefore, let me
first  of  all  thank  our  host,  Governor  Rojo,  for  inviting  us  to  meet  in  Madrid  and  for  the  generous
hospitality offered to us. The Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the
Governing Council.
I should like to take the opportunity of this special meeting to take stock of where we stand 15 months
after the start of Monetary Union. In January 1999 the euro was successfully launched as the single
currency  for  11 Member  States  of  the  EU.  As  a  result  of  very  careful  conceptual  and  technical
preparations,  both  the  monetary  policymaking  process  and  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy
have functioned efficiently right from the start.
The challenges involved in setting up a central bank for a currency area as large as the euro area have
been  enormous.  The  Eurosystem - which  comprises  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  11 national
central banks of the countries which have adopted the euro - has met these challenges with success.
This would not have been possible without a strong willingness to cooperate on the part of the actors
involved. I should like to take this opportunity once again to thank all the members of the Governing
Council and the staff of the Eurosystem for this.
From  the  start,  we  had  extremely  productive  and  open  discussions  in  the  Governing  Council  on
monetary  policy  issues.  In  this  respect,  our  monetary  policy  strategy  has  provided  a  very  useful
framework  within  which  to  organise  our  thinking.  In  our  discussions  there  has  always  been  a  clear
understanding,  based  on  the  Treaty,  that  the  single  monetary  policy  can  only  focus  on  maintaining
price stability in the euro area as a whole. This is based on the simple fact that in a monetary union,
there is only one monetary policy, and this must be directed to a single objective. As laid down in the
Treaty,  each  member  of  the  Governing  Council  is  therefore  well  aware  that  he  or  she  is  not  a
representative of a country or central bank but acts in a personal capacity in deciding the appropriate
conduct of monetary policy for the euro area as a whole.
The  move  to  the  single  currency  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro  were  based  on  a  degree  of
convergence towards price stability in participating countries that few observers would have predicted
some years ago. In 1999 the average rate of consumer price increases in the euro area as a whole was
among the lowest recorded since the Second World War and, at 1.1%, remained fully consistent with
price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  Monetary  Union  does  not  mean  perfect  identity  of  economic
conditions in all parts of the euro area. The experience of all larger currency areas shows that some
differences in regional price developments and also in regional output growth may exist.
As  differences  in  national  or  regional  developments  cannot  be  addressed  by  the  Eurosystem,  they
require,  whenever  necessary,  country-specific  responses.  This  means,  in  particular,  responsible
national  wage  settlements  and  appropriate  national  fiscal  policies  aimed  at  counteracting  specific
national problems. In addition, reforms addressing rigidities in labour and product markets and aiming
at enhancing labour and capital mobility are the tools to ensure that market mechanisms will play an
increasingly important role in limiting the scope for divergent developments in the euro area.
The single monetary policy offers a great opportunity to maintain price stability in the euro area and to
create  the  conditions  needed  for  sustained  economic  growth.  Currently,  the  prospects  for  strong
economic growth in the euro area are very favourable - indeed, more favourable than they have been
for many years. Economic activity in the euro area strengthened markedly in the second half of 1999
1
BIS Review 29/2000
and this upswing is expected to continue through 2000 and beyond. Available forecasts point to real
GDP  growth  of  slightly  over  3%  in  2000  and  2001,  reflecting  both  the  favourable  external
environment and strong domestic demand. In line with this positive outlook, employment is expected
to increase further and unemployment to come down in this context.
At this juncture, it remains, indeed, important that the expected improvements in economic conditions
and  labour  market  prospects  are  not  jeopardised  by  inappropriate  wage  settlements.  In  fact,  wage
moderation,  combined  with  structural  reforms  in  the  labour  markets,  would  help  both  to  contain
inflation in the euro area and to lead to further progress with employment creation.
The contribution of monetary policy to strong and sustained economic growth is to ensure that price
stability in the euro area will be maintained in the years to come. The Governing Council has, over
recent months, raised ECB interest rates in three steps, in total by 1 percentage point, as a response to
signals  from  both  pillars  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  that  upward  risks  to  price
stability were increasing.
Since the last meeting of the Governing Council, which was held on 16 March 2000, the main new
data  released  relate  to  monetary  developments  and  HICP  inflation  in  the  euro  area.  With  regard  to
monetary developments, the annual growth rate of M3 in February 2000 was 6.2%, implying a small
increase  in  the  three-month  moving  average  of  annual  M3  growth,  to  5.9%  for  the  period  from
December 1999 to February 2000. The annual rate of change in the HICP in the euro area rose from
1.9%  in  January  2000  to  2.0%  in  February  2000,  reflecting  the  anticipated  upward  pressure  on
consumer prices stemming from oil price and exchange rate developments.
In  its  review  of  the  economic  and  monetary  situation,  the  Governing  Council  also  considered  the
recent developments in the exchange rate of the euro. Such developments need to be carefully assessed
in the framework of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy. The Governing Council regards the
present level of the euro as not reflecting the significant recent improvements in the outlook for the
euro area economy.
At today’s meeting the Governing Council decided to leave ECB interest rates unchanged. We shall,
however, continue to be vigilant in order to be in a position, if needed, to counter inflationary pressure
in a timely manner.
There remain, however, also challenges for other economic policies in the euro area.
As  regards fiscal  policies,  the  current  upswing  provides,  for  many  countries,  a  good  opportunity  to
comply more quickly with the objectives of the Stability and Growth Pact. This will free up resources
for private initiatives and will, over time, contribute to increasing the growth potential of the euro area.
At this juncture, probably the greatest challenge for the euro area lies in speeding up structural reform
in order to reduce the high level of structural unemployment. In this respect, the Eurosystem strongly
supports the conclusions of the European Council in Lisbon and calls for their timely implementation.
Furthering structural reform is the key to a lasting process of job creation and a sustained period of
strong economic expansion.
Let me now  give  the  floor to the Vice-President to  present some  of  the  additional  topics  discussed
today by the Governing Council.
I  should  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  following  two  items:  first,  the  international  financial
architecture, an issue which was discussed in preparation for the forthcoming IMF Spring Meetings in
Washington,  D.C.,  and,  second,  the  ECB’s  information  campaign  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro
banknotes and coins.
Let  me  start  with the  Governing  Council’s  deliberations  in relation to the current  discussion  on  the
international  financial architecture,  for  which  the  President  was  mandated  to  convey  the  Governing
Council’s  views  to  the  President  of the  ECOFIN  Council. Through  its representation  in  all-relevant
international  institutions  and  fora,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  able  to  participate  actively  in  ongoing
discussions over the past year.
BIS Review 29/2000
2
The  Eurosystem  actively  supports  those  efforts  made  by  various  institutions  and  fora - such  as  the
IMF,  the  World  Bank,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision - to enhance transparency and to improve the soundness both of financial systems and of
regulatory and supervisory frameworks.
Owing  to  the fact that  unsustainable  exchange  rate regimes  were a  factor  behind  financial  crises  of
previous  years, recent  discussions  have  focused  in particular on  the  choice  of  appropriate  exchange
rate arrangements. The Governing Council is of the view that such a choice should not be confined to
alternative  solutions  of  either  a  hard  peg  or  free  floating.  Intermediate  regimes,  such  as  adjustable
pegs,  may  suit  the  needs  of  emerging  market  economies,  depending  on  their  specific  domestic  and
external conditions.
Refocusing  the  role  of  the  IMF  has  been  central  to  most  recent  reform  proposals.  The  Governing
Council is of the view that strengthening the key responsibilities of the IMF, namely further enhancing
its  credibility  as  a  policy  adviser  and  provider  of  financial  assistance  to  members  facing  a  loss  of
market confidence, will make an important contribution to international monetary stability. As regards
crisis management, the Eurosystem is looking forward to seeing further progress in the complex but
crucial area of ensuring private sector involvement in crisis prevention and resolution.
Second,  the  Governing  Council  approved  the  overall  framework  for  the  EURO  2002  information
campaign - a  Europe-wide  campaign  intended  to  familiarise  citizens  with  the  euro  banknotes  and
coins.
The main objectives of the campaign are to help citizens:
• 
• 
to recognise the euro banknotes and coins and, in particular, their security features,
to familiarise themselves with the different (and, in many cases, new) denominations of the
euro banknotes and coins, and
 to  inform  themselves  about  the  means  by  which  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  be
introduced on 1 January 2002.
The strategy behind the ECB’s campaign is based on the concept of cooperation with “multipliers”,
such  as  banks,  retailers  and  their  associations,  as  well  as  educational  institutions  and  governmental
authorities,  at  both  a  European  and  a  national  level.  The  campaign  will  be  conducted  in  two  main
phases.  In  the  first  phase,  which  is  about  to  start,  the  “multipliers”  will  be  approached  in  order  to
prepare  their  own  activities  with  regard  to  training  and  the  provision  of  information.  In  the  second
phase, scheduled for the second half of 2001, the general public will actively be informed by means of
a centralised mass media campaign to ensure the smooth changeover to the euro banknotes and coins.
The main communication tools will be television spots and widely distributed printed matter supported
by radio spots and both billboard and press advertisements. I should like to stress that due account will
be  taken  of  the  specific  needs  of  the  various  groups  of  vulnerable  citizens  in  the  conduct  of  the
campaign.  Close  coordination  with  the  EU  institutions  and  the  Member  States  will  ensure  the
provision of consistent information.
3
BIS Review 29/2000
