Bank of Japan’s February report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 15 February 2000.
 The Bank’s View2
Japan’s  economy  has  recently  started  to  improve.  The  economic  environment  surrounding  private
demand is gradually improving, as seen in the continuing increase in corporate profits. However, clear
signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not been observed yet.
With regard to final demand,  housing  investment  has  peaked  out and  started  to  decline  slowly,  and
public investment seems to be decreasing moderately. Recovery in private consumption continues to
be weak with the decrease in income, particularly in winter bonuses. Business fixed investment, which
had been on a downward trend, is starting to level off. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus real
imports)  continue  to  follow  an  upward  trend,  despite  monthly  fluctuations,  due  to  an  upturn  in
overseas economies.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,  industrial
production continues to rise and an increase in corporate profits is becoming distinct. In this situation,
corporate sentiment continues to improve. Regarding the employment condition, the decrease in the
number  of  employees  is  gradually  slowing.  However,  the  improvements  in  corporate  profits  and
sentiment have not stimulated business activities of many firms, because these firms still strongly feel
that  they  have  excess  capacity  and  employees  and  that  they  should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore
financial  soundness.  In  addition,  efforts  by  firms  to  reduce  personnel  expenses  have  prolonged  the
severity of households’ income conditions.
As  for  the  outlook,  improvements  in  the  overall  financial  environment  partly  due  to  the  monetary
easing by the Bank, along with a series of economic measures taken by the government, are expected
to continue underpinning the economy. Moreover, the positive impact on domestic production of the
recovery  of  overseas  economies  is  likely  to  continue  for  some  time  and  have  favorable  effects  on
corporate  profits  and  then  on  household  income.  By  contrast,  it  is  highly  probable  that  housing
investment will continue to decline slowly, and public investment is expected to follow a moderately
downward  trend  for  some  time.  In  the  corporate  sector,  restructuring  is  gradually  improving
profitability  to  some  extent  and  some  firms  in  high-growth  sectors  are  inclining  toward  increasing
capital  spending.  Many  firms,  however,  are  very  likely  to  maintain  a  cautious  stance  toward  fixed
investment based on their modest prospects for sales. It seems that the appreciation of the yen since
the  summer  of  1999  will  have  an  adverse  effect  on  corporate  profits  in  the  near  term.  In  these
circumstances, future economic developments still require careful monitoring in spite of the gradual
recovery  in  the  environment  for  private  demand.  Furthermore,  it  is  important  to  promote  structural
reform in order to facilitate a recovery in private demand.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  rising  somewhat  due  to  the  increase  in  international
commodity prices such as crude  oil  prices,  along  with the recent  depreciation of the  yen.  Domestic
wholesale prices, notwithstanding the fall in prices of electric machinery, are flat mainly due  to  the
1
2
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 10 February 2000.
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 10 February as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 12/2000
rise in prices of petroleum and chemical products reflecting an increase in crude oil prices. Consumer
prices remain unchanged fundamentally. Corporate service prices are  still falling  slowly.  As  for the
outlook, overall prices are likely to be flat for the time being despite the  continued fall expected  in
prices  of  some  machinery.  This  is  because  the  supply-demand  balance  is  improving  gradually,  as
shown in the decline in inventories, and because the rise in crude oil prices to date will continue to be
passed  on  to  prices  of  other  products  for  a  while.  However,  attention  should  still  be  paid  to  the
downward pressure on prices, as clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not
yet been observed and wages continue to fall.
Turning to the financial markets, the influence on the money market of concerns related to the Year
2000 problem has almost disappeared.
The overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and financial institutions have been confident about
the  availability  of  overnight  funds.  The  amount  outstanding  of  funds  in  the  call  money  market  has
been basically unchanged.
Interest rates on term instruments have generally been stable at the level as low  as that  prior  to  the
emergence of concerns related to the Year 2000 problem. The Japan premium remains negligible.
long-term  government  bonds  declined  and, 
Yields  on 
late  January,  reached  around
1.60-1.65 percent.  But  then  they  rebounded  in  reaction  to  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  and  the
developments in the stock market, and are presently around 1.85 percent. The yield spread between
private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  continues  narrowing,
primarily that between private bonds with relatively low credit ratings and government bonds.
in 
Stock prices have been on a rising trend since mid-January against the background of the depreciation
of the yen, and are currently moving around 19,500-20,000 yen.
In the foreign exchange market, the trend has been toward a weaker yen against the U.S. dollar, and
the yen is being traded in the range of 107-110 yen.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base has eased  considerably.  Under these  circumstances,  major  banks  are  gradually  becoming  more
active in extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition,  firms  continue  to  reduce  debts  as  part  of  their  balance-sheet  restructuring  measures.  As  a
result,  credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  has  continued  to  be  basically  stagnant,  and  thus  private
banks’ lending has remained sluggish. Issuance of corporate bonds and CP has been sluggish.
The growth in money stock (M2+CDs) continues to slow reflecting the stagnant private credit demand.
In  this  financial  environment,  the  financial  position  of  firms  is  easing,  and  the  lending  attitude  of
financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  is  becoming  less  severe.  It  continues  to  warrant  careful
monitoring  how  these  favorable  developments  in  corporate  financing  environment  will  affect
economic activities.
BIS Review 12/2000
2
