Bank of Japan’s May report of
recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 19 May 2000.
 The Bank’s view2
The  improvement  in  Japan’s  economy  is  becoming  distinct.  Recovery  has  been  observed  in  some
areas of private demand, with business fixed investment continuing to increase gradually.
With regard to exogenous demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to follow an
upward trend due to steady developments in overseas economies, and public investment has started to
pick up reflecting the progress in the implementation of the supplementary budget for fiscal 1999. As
regards domestic private demand, housing investment is on a moderate declining trend, and recovery
in private consumption  continues  to  be  weak  through  lack  of  notable  improvements  in  employment
and income conditions. Meanwhile, business fixed investment continues to increase gradually.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand,  industrial  production  is  increasing,  and  corporate
profits and sentiment continue to improve. Firms as a whole still strongly feel that they have excess
capacity  and  employees,  and  that  they  should  reduce  their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.
Nevertheless,  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as  increasing  the  amount  of  fixed
investment,  is  increasing  gradually,  especially  in  high-growth  sectors.  Regarding  employment
conditions,  although  the  decrease  in  the  number  of  employees  and  in  wages  is  slowing,  efforts  by
firms to reduce personnel expenses have prolonged the severity of households’ income conditions.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  likely  to  increase  for  some  time.  This,  along  with  the
favorable financial environment created partly by the Bank’s monetary easing, is expected to continue
underpinning the economy. Moreover, net exports are likely to follow an upward trend reflecting the
recovery  of  overseas  economies,  and  it  is  also  highly  probable  that  business  fixed  investment  will
increase  gradually  with  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  sentiment.  However,  housing
investment is expected to continue declining moderately, and there seems to be no substantial change
in firms’ stance to reduce personnel expenses. Hence, it may take some time for households’ income
conditions  to  improve  and,  in  turn,  for  private  consumption  to  recover.  In  addition,  since  firms’
prospects  for  sales  remain  modest,  careful  monitoring  is  still  required  to  determine  whether  the
recovery in business fixed investment is sustainable and whether it is likely to spread to a wider range
of industries.
With  regard  to  prices,  the  rise  in  import  prices  is  slowing,  reflecting  a  temporary  decline  in
international commodity prices such as crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding
the  fall  in  prices  of  electric  machinery,  are  somewhat  strong  mainly  due  to  the  rise  in  prices  of
petroleum  and  chemical  products  reflecting  the  increase  in  crude  oil  prices  to  date.  Meanwhile,
consumer  prices  continue  to  be  somewhat  weak  due  to  the  slight  decrease  in  the  prices  of
private-sector services and the decline in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation
of the yen. Corporate service prices are still falling slowly.
As  for  the  outlook,  upward  pressure  on  prices  is  likely  to  arise  from  the  gradual  improvement  in
domestic supply-demand balance and from the rise in crude oil prices. On the other hand, downward
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 17 May 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 17 May as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 43/2000
pressure  is  expected  from  the  long-term  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  due  to  technological
innovations and from the fall in prices of imported products reflecting the past appreciation of the yen.
On balance, overall prices are likely to remain unchanged. However, attention should still be paid to
the downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand, although the pressure has weakened
given some recovery in private demand.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has generally stayed near zero, and financial institutions
have been confident about the availability of overnight funds. The amount outstanding of funds in the
call money market has remained generally stable.
Interest rates on term instruments have weakened somewhat. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds once rose above 1.8 percent in mid-April but then declined and
are  recently  moving  in  the  range  of  1.7-1.8  percent.  The  yield  spread  between  private  bonds  (bank
debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds continues narrowing, primarily that between
private bonds with relatively low credit ratings and government bonds.
Stock prices on the whole recovered from a plunge triggered by a drop in U.S. stocks although they
showed divergent movements by index.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen strengthened slightly against the U.S. dollar in mid-April but
generally weakened thereafter. The yen is currently being traded in the range of 108-110 yen.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base has eased considerably. Given this, major banks are becoming  more active in extending  loans,
while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is increasing in parallel with a recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result, credit
demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending seems to remain sluggish although its
year-on-year rate of decline slowed in April for the second consecutive month. Issuance of corporate
bonds and CP has been steady.
Money  stock  (M2+CDs)  grew  faster  in  April  compared  with  the  previous  month  on  a  year-on-year
basis.
In  this  financial  environment,  corporate  financing  conditions  are  easing,  and  the  lending  attitude  of
financial institutions is perceived by firms as less severe. It continues to warrant careful monitoring
how  these  favorable  developments  in  the  corporate  financing  environment  will  affect  economic
activities.
BIS Review 43/2000
2
