Mr Duisenberg discusses the ongoing dialogue on monetary policy,
the overall economic situation and other activities of the Eurosystem
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Hearing  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, on 20 March 2000.
 It is my pleasure to continue today our ongoing dialogue on monetary  policy,  the  overall  economic
situation  and  other  activities  of  the  Eurosystem.  Since  our  previous  hearing  in  November,  the
European  economic  outlook  has brightened further,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  balance  of  risks  to
price stability has shifted upwards owing, in particular, to external factors. Against this background,
the decisions of the Governing Council of the ECB to raise interest rates in early February and last
week,  as  well  as  the  reasoning  behind  these  steps,  are  at  the  centre  of  my  presentation  today.
Moreover,  I  should  like  to touch  upon the overall  European  economic  environment.  Finally,  I  shall
briefly turn to some other activities of the Eurosystem which might be of particular interest to you.
Current economic developments and prospects
1.
As you are aware, the Governing Council of the ECB decided on 3 February and 16 March 2000 to
increase  the  three  main  ECB  interest  rates.  These  two  decisions  followed  the  interest  rate  decision
taken on 4 November 1999. Whereas the interest rates were increased by 50 basis points in November
1999, on the past two occasions the main refinancing rate and the rates on the marginal lending facility
and on the deposit facility were each increased by 25 basis points, so that they now stand at 3.50%,
4.50% and 2.50% respectively. All three decisions were taken in the context of the monetary policy
strategy of the Eurosystem to address upside risks to future price stability in the euro area.
Both pillars of the monetary policy strategy indicated that the balance of risks to price stability in the
medium  term  had  been  shifting  upward  in  late  1999  and  early  2000.  Starting  with  monetary
developments in the context of the first pillar, the three-month average of annual M3 growth exceeded
the  reference  value  throughout  1999  and  in  January  2000.  Together  with  the  continued  strong
expansion, at annual rates of  around 10%, of credit  granted  to  the  private sector, this  signalled that
liquidity in the euro area is ample, contributing to upside risks to price stability in the medium term.
In the context of the first pillar, let me briefly take up the issue of the reference value for monetary
growth. As you know, the reference value is an expression of the prominent role of money in the first
pillar of the monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem. Following its meeting on 2 December 1999,
the Governing Council confirmed the reference value for the growth of the broad monetary aggregate
M3 at 4½% per annum. This decision was taken on the grounds that the main elements which entered
the determination of the reference value, namely the definition of price stability, the estimate of the
trend growth of real GDP and the trend decline in the income velocity of M3, had basically remained
unchanged.  The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  monetary  developments  against  the
reference  value  on  the  basis  of  three-month  moving  averages  of  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  as
monthly  developments  might  be  too  volatile.  In  addition,  we  also  noted  that  the  generous  liquidity
situation in  1999  will  have  to  be  kept  in  mind  when  assessing  the  information  content  of  monetary
developments in the future.
Considering the second pillar of the monetary policy strategy, namely the broadly based assessment of
other  indicators  containing  information  about  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  most  indicators  and
forecasts  have  been  pointing  to  increasing  upward  pressure  on  consumer  price  inflation  over  the
medium  term.  The  strong  increase  in  oil  prices  in  1999  and  early  2000  and  the  depreciation  of  the
exchange  rate  of  the  euro  in  recent  months  have  contributed  to  upward  pressures  on  import  and
producer prices. In addition to the direct effects of these pressures on consumer price inflation, there is
1
BIS Review 25/2000
the risk in the context of the strong cyclical upswing that these developments could, via second-round
effects, have lasting effects on consumer price inflation.
All  three  of  the  interest  rate  measures  taken  over  the  last  few  months  indicate  the  Eurosystem’s
continued  determination  to  counter  the  emerging  upside  risks  to  price  stability  in  a  timely  and
pre-emptive  manner.  It  is  our  strong  conviction  that  we  can  thereby  maintain  a  non-inflationary
environment, which is a prerequisite for making the economic upswing in the euro area sustainable.
Currently, the prospects for strong economic growth in the euro area are very favourable. We are very
much  satisfied  by  the  fact  that  economic  activity  is  now  expected  to  grow  more  strongly  than
anticipated earlier. In fact, most forecasts suggest that euro area real GDP growth will be above 3% in
2000  and 2001, reflecting  both the favourable external  environment  and  buoyant  domestic  demand.
These  expectations  have  just  been  underpinned  by  the  first  estimate  by  EUROSTAT  of  real  GDP
growth in the fourth quarter of 1999, which indicated that economic activity continued to expand at a
robust pace at the end of last year. Surveys of consumer and industrial confidence conducted by the
European  Commission  in  early  2000  indicate  that  the  positive  development  of  economic  activity
should have continued in the first months of this year. Financial markets also expect a prolonged phase
of economic expansion, as can be inferred from the fact that the yield curve has remained relatively
steep.
In  this  environment,  employment  is  expected  to  increase  further  and  the  still  very  high  level  of
unemployment should continue to fall. To date, wage growth has been moderate and the same applies
for actual wage settlements to date. It remains important that the expected improvements in economic
conditions and labour market prospects are not jeopardised by inappropriate wage settlements. In fact,
wage moderation would help both to contain inflation in the euro area and lead to further progress in
employment creation. Wage negotiators can be assured that the primary objective of the Eurosystem is
the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  that  we  are  fully  committed  to  this
objective.  The  temporary  increases  in  the  12-month  rate  of  consumer  price  inflation  which  we  are
currently  observing  as  a  result  of  the  oil  price  developments  should  not  be  reason  for  higher  wage
demands.
There  is  now  a  broad  consensus,  also  at  the  level  of  governments,  that  the  currently  favourable
prospects  for  output  growth  in  the  euro  area  would  be  enhanced  by  a  deepening  of  the  structural
reform process in the euro area. Governments of the euro area have already taken important initiatives,
but the high level of unemployment in many countries shows that there is still much to be done.
In  this  respect,  fiscal  policies  can  also  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  maintaining  favourable
economic  conditions  by  using  the  current  upswing  as  an  excellent  opportunity  to  proceed  swiftly
towards fulfilling the objectives of the Stability and Growth Pact. Governments should continue the
process  of  fiscal  consolidation  which  was  observed  in  the  run-up  to  Stage  Three  with  ambition.
Aiming at positions of budget surplus and reducing debt to GDP ratios should free resources, which
could be used by the private sector to finance new initiatives to create employment.
I am confident that the first decade of the new millennium could, if all parties concerned take their
responsibilities very seriously, mark the beginning of a prolonged period of price stability, growth and
employment creation. Inflation rates are currently among the lowest levels observed after the war, and
we are determined to  maintain this  very  substantial  achievement.  Fiscal  policies  have  already  made
good progress in correcting the serious mistakes of the 1980s and early 1990s and they are encouraged
to continue on the path of fiscal consolidation. These favourable conditions for a period of growth are
clearly better now than at any time over the  last ten  years  and  this should  both foster  and facilitate
structural reforms.
Other activities of the Eurosystem
2.
From among the other activities of the Eurosystem over the last few months, I should like only briefly
to report on a few specific issues, which might be of particular interest to you.
BIS Review 25/2000
2
At present, the ECB is preparing this year’s Convergence Report. As you will be aware, the Treaty
requires the ECB and the Commission to present such a report at least every two years. The purpose of
these reports is to  examine  the  progress  made  by  non-euro  area  Member  States in the fulfilment  of
their  obligations  with  regard  to  the  achievement  of  economic  and  monetary  union.  This  year’s
Convergence Report  will  cover  Greece  and  Sweden.  For  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom,  which
have a special status, the convergence examination is only to be carried out at their explicit request.
However, no such request has been made. According to our current planning, the Convergence Report
is to be published on 3 May.
In this context, I should also like to take the opportunity to confirm that, as envisaged, the ECB will
present its Annual Report for 1999 on 12 April, to be discussed in your Committee on 17 April 2000.
EU  enlargement  is  another  area  in  which  the  ECB  has  assumed  an  increasingly  active  role.  Even
though the ECB is not an official party to the accession negotiations, it goes without saying that the
Eurosystem’s views in its areas of competence should be properly taken into account. This applies, in
particular,  to  the  provisions  needed  to  guarantee  central  bank  independence,  the  liberalisation  of
capital movements, sound banking systems and overall financial stability.
Against  this  background,  the  ECB  is  closely  monitoring  the  EU  enlargement  process,  which  has
implications - already at this stage - for economic and monetary developments in accession countries.
Moreover,  the  ECB  has,  following  the  Helsinki  seminar  of  last  November,  further  intensified  its
bilateral and multilateral contacts with central banks from accession countries. A network of seminars
and fora has been set up, in which practical advice and information are provided at expert level with
regard to the adjustments required for EU membership in EMU-related areas of legislation, statistics
and payment systems. Moreover, the Eurosystem provides technical assistance in all relevant areas of
central banking. These activities are likely to be developed further and should make it easier for the
accession  countries  to  carefully  prepare  for  the  adoption  of  the  acquis  communautaire,  which  is
indispensable for the successful enlargement of the European Union.
Finally, I should like briefly to touch upon the status of preparations for the Eurosystem’s information
campaign  on  euro  banknotes  and  coins.  As  I  already  mentioned  during  our  previous  dialogue,  this
campaign is designed to allow European citizens to familiarise themselves with the new banknotes and
coins at an early stage. The campaign is also directed towards  people  in  other countries, albeit  to  a
lesser degree. Its main focus will be on the visual appearance of the euro banknotes and coins, their
security features, their denominations and the changeover modalities. Special attention will be paid to
the needs of vulnerable citizens. In the meantime, the preparatory work on the information campaign
has  progressed  further  and  should,  according  to  our  current  planning,  be  finalised  in  April.  It  goes
without  saying  that  the  ECB  would  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  present  the  main  features  of  the
campaign to your Committee in due course.
3
BIS Review 25/2000
