Mr Yam looks at the benefits a US dollar clearing system
will bring to Hong Kong
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive,  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the  Signing
Ceremony for the US Dollar Clearing System, Hong Kong, on 9 March 2000.
 It is a pleasure to welcome you all to this afternoon’s signing ceremony. The purpose of the ceremony
is  for  the  HKMA  formally  to  appoint  HSBC  as  the  Settlement  Institution  for  the  new  US  dollar
clearing  system  that  will  be  developed  in  Hong  Kong  over  the  coming  months.  When  it  is  fully
running  -  prospectively  by  the  end  of  the  year  -  this  system  will  enable  a  wide  range  of  financial
transactions in US dollars to be settled here in Hong Kong, many of them on a real time basis. The
project marks an important milestone in the development of Hong Kong’s financial infrastructure and
it should help to consolidate Hong Kong’s position as an international financial centre.
Developing  Hong  Kong’s  financial  infrastructure  is,  along  with  maintaining  currency  and  banking
stability, one of the three main policy objectives of the HKMA. Financial infrastructure, when it works
efficiently,  is  something  that  is  so  much  taken  for  granted  that  it  is  barely  noticed.  It  is  a  far  less
prominent public issue than currency or banking stability. Yet, without a properly working financial
infrastructure, there is little chance of currency and banking stability. Effective financial infrastructure
is as important to Hong Kong as is the extensive and far more visible physical infrastructure that we
see around us. And Hong Kong is fortunate to be equipped with a financial infrastructure that is as
advanced, reliable and efficient as the road, rail and airport facilities that keep our city moving.
Since 1994 the  HKMA  has  implemented  a  number  of  major  reforms  to  Hong  Kong’s  payment  and
settlement systems. The largest of these reforms was the launch, in December 1996, of Hong Kong’s
Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  system  for  interbank  payments  in  Hong  Kong  dollars.  This
state-of-the-art system is widely acknowledged to be one of the most advanced and robust of its kind.
It  has  served  Hong  Kong  remarkably  well,  and  made  an  important  contribution  to  maintaining
financial stability during the Asian financial crisis, which erupted not long after its introduction. Our
experience with the RTGS system, and in particular the technology produced for it, plays an essential
role in the development of the next great milestone, the US dollar clearing system.
The  US  dollar  is  the  currency  in  which  most  world  trade  in  merchandise  and  financial  products  is
denominated. Because of Hong Kong’s role as an international financial centre, and the fact that our
own currency is linked to the US dollar, there is extensive holding of US dollars and a considerable
trade in US dollar-denominated assets. The existing market demand within Hong Kong for a US dollar
clearing system is a persuasive enough argument for its introduction: the potential demand for such a
system, and the strategic impetus that it would give to our development as a leading financial centre, is
considerable. In the near term, Hong Kong’s US Dollar Clearing System will provide the necessary
infrastructure to support the Stock Exchange’s launch of the Growth Enterprise Market (GEM), which
will allow listed shares to be denominated and settled in US dollars. In the longer term, the system will
provide a range of opportunities for further developing our stock and debt markets into major world
markets.
A  local  US  dollar  clearing  system  will  bring  with  it  the  advantages  of  speed,  convenience  and
efficiency: it will, for example, allow US dollar cheques to be settled within two days, instead of the
current two weeks. In addition to these obvious advantages, it will also carry the benefit of safety, in
the form of reduced settlement risk. By enabling, within Hong Kong, delivery versus payment (DvP)
for  US  dollar-denominated  securities,  and  payment  versus  payment  (PvP)  for  foreign  exchange
1
BIS Review 22/2000
transactions between US dollars and Hong Kong dollars, the system will eliminate the settlement risk
that arises when a transaction is spread across different time zones.
Greater  safety  at  the  level  of  individual  transactions  will  be  complemented  by  the  contribution  the
system  will  make  to  monetary  stability.  By  reducing  the need for  using  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  as  a
vehicle currency for conducting non-domestic financial business, the US Dollar Clearing System will
reduce  the  impact  on  local  monetary  conditions  of  movements  in  portfolio  capital  unrelated  to
economic  developments  intrinsic  to  Hong  Kong.  This  is  an  excellent  illustration  of  how  a  piece  of
robust and efficient financial infrastructure can be conducive to other important policy objectives, in
this case monetary stability.
Let  me  turn now  to the  mechanics  of the system.  The  arrangement  adopted here  is  a  private  sector
solution, in which the Settlement Institution is a commercial bank. This is not only consistent with the
tradition in Hong Kong, but is also in line with international practice and with the recommendations of
the Bank for International Settlements. At the end of a rigorous selection process, a Selection Panel
made  up  of  disinterested  members  of  the  Exchange  Fund  Advisory  Committee  (EFAC)  and  senior
executives  from  the  HKMA  recommended  to  EFAC  that  HSBC  be  appointed  the  Settlement
Institution for a  franchise  period  of five  years.  Under  the  arrangements  agreed  between  the  HKMA
and  HSBC,  the  Settlement  Institution  will  in  turn  appoint  Hong  Kong  Interbank  Clearing  Ltd,  the
current  operator  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  payment  system,  to  develop  and  operate  the  US  dollar
clearing  system.  The  role  of  the  HKMA  will  be  to  oversee  the  design  and  implementation  of  the
system and to ensure that it meets the highest international standards.
The conceptual design of the system is firmly in place. The intention is that it should encompass not
only  the  best,  internationally  agreed,  principles  of  payment  system  design  but  also  state-of-the-art
technology. Leveraging on the technology used for the existing Hong Kong dollar RTGS system, this
US Dollar Clearing System will offer a range of advanced and sophisticated clearing functions. These
will include linkage with the Hong Kong dollar payment system to provide real time PvP settlement
for US  dollar-Hong  Kong  dollar  transactions,  as  well  as  linkages  with the stock  and  debt  securities
clearing  houses to  provide  DvP  settlement.  For the  general  public,  the  System  will  enable banks  to
offer  US  dollar  cheque  deposit  accounts,  which  means  that  US  dollar  payments  can  be  discharged
through the writing of a cheque in US dollars drawn upon a bank in Hong Kong. The various features
of  the  system  will  be  introduced  in  phases.  All  being  well,  we  hope  to  see  real-time  interbank
payments and PvP for US dollar-Hong Kong dollar foreign exchange transactions introduced by the
third quarter of this year and US dollar paper cheque clearing and a linkage with the HKMA’s Central
Moneymarkets Unit completed by the end of the year.
People have asked whether we propose to introduce clearing in other foreign currencies once the US
dollar  system  is  established.  In  principle  this  would  be  possible.  In  practice  there  needs  to  be  a
business  case.  The  HKMA  is  certainly  ready  to  respond  if  there  appears  to  be  market  demand  for
similar clearing systems for other major currencies.
Hong Kong will shortly have a state-of-the-art facility for conducting US dollar transactions in Asian
time.  The  benefits  of  this  for  both  local  business  and  international  customers,  in  both  trade  and
finance,  should  be  considerable.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  and  congratulate  those  who  have
worked  hard to  bring  the  project to its  present  advanced  stage  in so  short  a  time,  and  I  wish  every
success to all who will be involved in translating the design into reality.
BIS Review 22/2000
2
