M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul: Thoughts and reflections
on the development of the domestic bond market in Thailand
Speech  by  Mr  M  R  Chatu  Mongol  Sonakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  ADB
Conference  on  Government  Bond  Market  and  Financial  Sector  Development  in  Developing  Asian
Economies, held in Manila, 28-30 March 2000.
 Mr Chairman, distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I  am  honored  for  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  of  my  thoughts  and  reflections  on  the
development of the domestic bond market in Thailand.
The  Asian  economic  crisis,  which started  in Thailand  in  1997,  posed  the  most  severe  challenges  to
policymakers  -  how  to  contain  the  crisis,  how  to  ease  the  burden  of  the  poor  and  how  to  ensure  a
sustained recovery.
But the biggest challenge to us all must be how the crisis could have been avoided in the first place.
If I can turn back the clock and have a wish, my list may be long. But high in its ranking would be a
well functioning Thai baht bond market.
Benefits of bond markets
A  bond  market  provides  a  basic  infrastructure  for  the  development  of  the  financial  system  and  the
overall economy. The bond market is an important alternative to bank lending.
During a crisis, banks themselves often come under liquidity pressure, from both domestic and foreign
withdrawals. Not only do they cease to lend, they also recall loan from their best debtors. And even
after  the  crisis  has  peaked,  banks  still  face  the  problem  of  recapitalization.  During  these  times,  the
process of intermediation suffers.
The  existence  of  a  deep  and  liquid  bond  market  allows  financial  institutions  to  prepare  themselves
better for risk management. The authority can require the banks to maintain a higher liquidity ratio,
comprising both government and top-rated corporate bonds. The banks can then resolve their liquidity
problem on their own by selling these bonds, regardless of their credit standings, which tend to suffer
during a crisis.
In  Thailand,  the  lack  of  a  liquid  bond  market  meant  that  the  only  way  to  obtain  liquidity  under
pressure  was  for  the  banks  to  come  to  the  Bank  of  Thailand  using  their  entire  loan  portfolio  as
collateral. And as the crisis deepens, these loans were deteriorating day by day.
Another benefit of the bond market is that it can attract foreign investments. Foreigners can bring in
funds to invest in high quality papers denominated in Thai baht. They are the ones to absorb foreign
exchange risk. Without a bond market, Thai companies have no choice but to borrow abroad and bear
the foreign exchange risk, themselves. Experience has shown that they have yet to fully develop their
skills in doing so.
It is our intention, therefore, to expedite the promotion and development of the domestic bond market.
The  process  is  very  time-consuming,  but  they  are  worthwhile for they  provide  the  foundation  for  a
strong and diversified financial market that would be more resilient to future shocks.
Necessary conditions for bond markets
To develop a domestic bond market, we need three essential components:
1
BIS Review 30/2000
First, there must be a deep and liquid government bond market to serve as a benchmark against which
corporate papers can be priced. To ensure that the government bond market can continue to provide
the  benchmark  yield  curve,  the  supply  of  government  bonds  must  be  regular,  predictable  and
transparent.
In short, the framework of the budgetary process as well as debt management operation must support
the  continuing  supply  of  bonds  through  operations  such  as  automatic  refinancing  or  refunding  of
maturing debt. Tools such as re-opening of benchmark issues, government bond buy-back schemes or
repurchase operations are also essential for the efficient functioning of debt management operation.
Second,  there  must  be  adequate  infrastructure,  both  legal  and  operational,  to  support  the  trade  and
transfer of instruments and funds. Operational infrastructure includes such things as a delivery versus
payment system that is safe, rapid and efficient to ensure finality of fund transfers. An efficient bond
registration  system  is  also  essential  to  provide  legal  protection  of  ownership  of  bonds.  Rules  and
regulations  to  support  trading  and  financing  operation  such  as  repurchase  agreements,  securities
lending, short positioning as well as hedging practices are all essential elements.
Third, there must be a pool of market participants comprising both intermediaries such as dealers or
inter-dealer brokers as well as end-users such as mutual funds, provident and pension funds, insurance.
The end users will provide a steady stream of long-term demands for bonds which will complement
the dealers’ more traditional short-term horizon. In addition, the portfolio structure of end-users also
acts as a countercyclical force to the one-way market of financial intermediaries which is common to
an emerging market, and help preempt a massive panic or withdrawal of funds.
How are we doing on all these, then?
In  the  primary  market,  fiscal  prudence  in  the  past  decades  before  the  crisis  had  resulted  in  a  very
limited  supply  of  government  bonds.  All  this  has  changed  as  a  result  of  the  crisis.  The  amount  of
public sector bond has increased substantially during the past 2 years. Much of this was created by the
government  taking  on  the  responsibility  of  fiscalizing  the  costs  of  financial  sector  restructuring
incurred by the Bank of Thailand in our cleaning up of the financial institution system.
Currently, there is close to one trillion baht in public sector bonds outstanding, amounting to about one
fourth  of  the  country’s  GDP  and  the  banking  system’s  deposit  base.  With  even  further  losses  to
fiscalize, the supply of government bond is not going to be a constraint for future development.
Attempts  have  also  been  made  to  introduce  a  quarter-ahead  calendar  of  regular  issuance.  Thus,
Mondays  were  typically  reserved  for  treasury  bills,  Tuesdays  for  state-enterprise  bonds  and
Wednesdays for government bonds.
This has worked well for a brief period, but now we are back temporarily to waiting for new supplies
of bonds.
Therein lies an important lesson I would like to share with colleagues and friends in the  process  of
developing their bond markets.
Industrialized countries have been in a position to promote and sustain the development of their bond
markets because of the continuity and predictability of supply.
In our case, due to restrictions on management and investment of the government’s treasury balance,
the  government  understandably  has  been  unwilling  to  issue  securities  when  the  treasury  balance  is
high. This causes discontinuity in the supply of bonds.
At the same time, because the treasury balance could not be invested to earn a return, there is a cost in
terms of interest expense on those bonds issued against no revenue proceeds. Bond issuance has to be
done  on  a  regular  basis,  irrespective  of  the  size  of  the  treasury  balance.  But  it  may  be  difficult  to
explain  politically  why  it  should  become  necessary  to  maintain  a  higher-than-necessary  treasury
balance with borrowed money.
Proposals are on the way to fine-tune the current legal framework, to permit greater flexibility in the
management of treasury balance, while not compromising the discipline of budget finance.
BIS Review 30/2000
2
Turning now to the secondary market. This is an area where a central bank can become more active
and can make a more significant contribution than in the primary market. To date, substantial progress
has been made with regard to the basic rules and regulations to govern both market participants and
trading practices.
Daily trading volumes have quickly picked up in line with interest from market participants and now
amount to about 3-4 billion baht per day, compared to about 1-2 billion baht last year. Annual turnover
for  1999  for  certain  popular  issues  amount  to  one-third  of  its  outstanding  amount,  which  is  a  very
encouraging sign. Bid-spreads are narrowing and now can boast a level not significantly far from the
more developed bond markets.
We have completed a yield curve available on the internet that spans from less than one-year, out into
the 15-year tenure. This, complemented with the low interest environment, has boosted the issuance of
corporate  bonds.  Last  year  alone,  we  have  seen  over  200  billion  baht  of  private  bonds  issued.  Of
course, some of these were used to recapitalize the banking system, but no small amounts were also
used for refinancing corporate debts as well as for business expansion.
We are fortunate that the legal framework for the supervision of the capital market, namely private and
public offering and investor protection, have already been instituted. In fact the private debt market
started  to  flourish  since  1992  after  we  set  up  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.  With  this
framework, the private debt market was able to resume activity again after the crisis but this time with
the government yield curve as pricing benchmark.
With regard to the operation of the secondary market of government bonds, the Bank of Thailand is
currently  working  on  the  promotion  of  a  full-fledged  primary  dealership  system  to  facilitate  the
conduct  of  open  market  operations.  We  aim  for  the  primary  dealers  to  eventually  provide  market-
making functions for both government and private securities.
The operation of primary dealers or counterparties of the central bank will be complemented, should
market participants deem it useful, by the presence of inter-dealer brokers, who can assist in ensuring
continuous  two-way  quotation,  as  well  as  helping  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  transactions  or
positions held by a market participant.
In August 1999, we appointed 9 counterparties, which comprised eight banks and one securities firm.
Starting 19 January 2000, the Bank of Thailand also began trading outright with the 9 counterparties.
This  operation  serves  as  a  monetary  policy  instrument  as  well  as  the  mechanism  to  promote  the
development  of  the  secondary  bond  trading.  At  this  early  stage,  the  outright  operations  will  be
conducted  primarily  in  the  benchmark  issues  or  those  with  potential  to  become  benchmark  issues.
These selected counterparties are expected, ultimately, to become primary dealers and we are currently
working on putting the right incentives to ensure that appropriate rights and obligations be accorded to
these primary dealers.
The third area I would briefly touch on is infrastructure issues. Here, work is ongoing to promote a
fully  automated  system  of  delivery  versus  payment  (DVP)  settlement,  information  disclosure,  and
instituting appropriate code of conduct on market participants.
Currently, we have a semi-automated real-time delivery versus payment (DVP) system in place. It is a
stop-gap  measure  but  it  serves  as  an  important  infrastructure  in  the  settlement  of  the  scripless
government bonds. The system, when fully developed, will be supplemented by the intraday liquidity
facilities and queuing mechanism, employing the latest digital signature technology to ensure secured
and smooth real-time delivery and payment transactions.
We are entering an era when capital flow across borders can only become more volatile than in the
past.  And  we  still  have  fresh  memories  of  how  disruptive  it  was  before  the  crisis.  In  fact,  it  was  a
major cause of the crisis.
How do we go forward? How do we guard against this?
The work on the new International Financial Architecture seems to be very much lacking in the area of
the  behavior  of  key  players,  especially  the  highly  leveraged  institutions.  In  the  eyes  of  the  large
3
BIS Review 30/2000
Western  countries,  such  issues  have  somewhat  lost  their  urgency  since  the  event  surrounding  the
Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) left the headlines.
In the absence of such rules, it appeared that emerging markets can only look to our own selves for
protection. We have  to  help ourselves.  A  well functioning  bond  market  is  an  important  tool  in  this
respect.  It  will  act  as  a  reservoir  that  absorbs  capital  inflow,  and  channel  it  to  good  use.  A  sudden
withdrawal of foreign investors’ confidence may cause the price of bonds to soften, making new issues
temporarily unattractive, but it will not affect the business that had already obtained the funds.
However, developing a well-functioning bond market is no easy task. The work done in Thailand is
only  half  completed,  with  many  important  agendas  still  remaining.  The  ingredients  that  I  have
mentioned: adequate supply, good infrastructure, central bank’s active involvement in the market, and
investors’ demand - these are all very important. But they alone will not ensure continued success.
Success can be assured, and maintained, only if the market is able to win trust and confidence of all
investors.  This  means  good  governance  all  round.  This  means  not  only  a  well-supervised  and  fair
trading  system,  but  also  a  clear  and  transparent  information  system.  And  this  covers  not  only  the
information on macro economy, government actions and rules and regulations, but also information on
the firms, the issuers of the papers, to name but a few.
Asia, because of our younger population and our early stages of industrialization, will continue to need
funds from outside the region to finance our growth for many years to come. The countries that can
succeed in attracting the funds, and more importantly, can properly manage the inflow and outflow of
such funds, will have to develop not only the tools, but the high standards to go with it as well.
BIS Review 30/2000
4
