Einar Repse: Macroeconomic stability - a crucial precondition for a successful
development
Speech by Mr Einar Repse, Governor of the Bank of Latvia, at the Baltic Business Conference, held in
Riga, on 19 May 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen!
Today we are living in a world where global economic developments affect individual countries much
more than they did a decade ago. Along with the unprecedented degree of economic integration within
the European Union (EU), we see growth also in international trade and financial transactions in other
parts of the world, all of which provides visible evidence of an ever-expanding globalisation.
Latvia joined in this process after regaining independence in 1991. The sad experience of fifty years as
a part of a closed albeit large economy has convincingly shown Latvia that separation from the rest of
the  world  through  strict  economic  boundaries  is  counter-productive  and  cannot  ensure  sustainable
economic growth. For historical reasons, Latvia and other countries in Central and Eastern Europe had
to start their integration in the global economy from a disadvantageous position. Becoming actively
involved in international economic affairs is probably  the  only  means  by  which  these  countries  can
catch up with economically advanced countries in Europe in the coming decades.
When economic borders no longer exist and economic developments in one particular region directly
affect other regions, it is of vital importance that the economic policies of small countries like Latvia
are aimed at securing long-term stability. Being a small, open economy, Latvia cannot entirely avoid
external  influences,  but  sound  economic  policies  help  to  mitigate  the  negative  economic  impact  of
external shocks.
From this perspective, Latvia’s integration into the EU allows for the simultaneous achievement both
of greater integration in the global economy and sound economic policies. On the one hand, prior to
actual  EU  membership  Latvia  has  concluded  the  Europe  Agreement  with  the  EU,  thus  greatly
liberalising  its  foreign  trade  regime  and  completely  abandoning  any  restrictions  on  international
capital  flows.  Hence,  efforts  to  become  an  EU  member  have  enhanced  Latvia’s  progress  towards
integration into the world economy.
On the other hand, membership in the EU requires a well-functioning market economy, one which is
able to cope with competitive pressures and market forces within the union, as well as the capacity to
undertake the obligations of membership. Thus, pursuit of EU membership incontestably encourages
the pursuit of economic policies aimed at long-term stability.
With respect to Latvian monetary policy it is fair to say that the principles guiding actions at the Bank
of  Latvia  are  already  very  close  to  those  employed  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  The  law
singles out price stability as the main monetary policy objective of the Latvian central bank and in its
operational  practice,  the  Bank  of  Latvia  enjoys  full  independence  from  the  government.  Direct
government  borrowing  from  the  central  bank  is  also  explicitly  banned  by  the  law.  In  pursuing  its
monetary policy, the Bank of Latvia uses the same market-based instruments employed by the ECB.
Latvian  experience  confirms  that  an  independent  central  bank  and  firm  anti-inflationary  policies
produce the good results expected. Annual inflation in Latvia declined to 2.4% in 1999. The lats has
proved its stability for over six years, providing a solid foundation for restructuring and growth in the
Latvian economy. Even without participation in the EU Exchange Rate Mechanism, the lats has stayed
within the +/- 15% band against the ECU and later the euro during this entire period.
Fiscal  policy  in  Latvia  has  always  been  implemented  with  EU  accession  in  mind,  thereby,  in
accordance  with  the  European  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  provisions,  avoiding  unsustainable
government  expenditure.  Despite  the  dynamic  political  environment  in  Latvia  since  independence,
1
BIS Review 44/2000
every government has declared EU membership its top priority. Therefore, the pursuit of strict fiscal
policies has never been threatened.
Over  the  past  few  years,  as  prudent  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  led  to  productive  economic
transformation,  Latvia  has  become  one  of  the  most  successful  transition  economies  in  Central  and
Eastern  Europe.  These  policies  were  tested  in  1997-1998  during  the  Southeast  Asian  and  Russian
crises, but the Latvian economy has recovered from these shocks at a relatively fast speed and is now
on a growth path again.
At  a  time  of  external  pressures,  the  credibility  of  national  economic  policies  becomes  crucial  to
economic performance, as was evident in Latvia over the previous year and a half. In 1998, the current
account deficit in Latvia was financed mainly by long-term capital, as foreign direct investment and
other long-term capital inflows amounted to 72% of all capital flows. As a result, Latvia did not suffer
from a sharp reversal of short-term capital flows that could have damaged the economy. As time went
by  and  the  country’s  economic  situation  remained  stable,  the  confidence  of  foreign  investors
rebounded  quickly.  In  the  second  half  of  1999,  inflows  of  foreign  direct  investments  increased  by
27%, as compared with the first half of the year.
The confidence in the Latvian banking industry was also restored rather quickly among both foreign
investors  and  the  general  public.  Presence  of  foreign  capital  as  a  percentage  of  total  bank  capital
strengthened and main banking indicators improved considerably. Bank lending increased, acting as
the engine for economic growth. Total loans increased by 52% in 1998 and by 15.3% in 1999, and
95% of all loans have been directed at the private sector. Credit growth has been accompanied by a
gradual shift from short-term trade finance to increased lending directed towards the productive sector
of the economy. In February 2000, the share of loans with a maturity of more than 5 years amounted
to 16.8%, while at the end of 1998 the respective figure was 13%. Increased public confidence in the
banking sector is also indicated by a 6.3% growth in residents’ deposits in 1999. Long-term deposits
(over 12 months) grew by 82% in 1999, thus exceeding the pre-Russian crisis level.
Positive trends can be observed in other Latvian financial markets as well. After the share prices fell
during the aftermath of the Russian crisis in 1998, the stock market has rebounded: in January 2000,
the stock market index in Latvia exceeded the 100 mark for the first time since the Russian crisis. In
the first three months of this year, the Dow Jones Riga Stock Exchange Index increased by 33%.
In  2000,  the  market  for  government  securities  has  become  both  wider  and  deeper,  as  3-year
government  bonds  were  successfully  launched  in  the  domestic  market  for  the  first  time  in  January,
followed by 5-year bonds in March. The share of government bonds with a maturity of 1 year or more
amounts  to  86.5%  of  all  government  securities.  The  development  of  yields  on  government  bonds
issued in international markets also shows increasing confidence in the economic policies of Latvian
authorities. The spreads on 5-year Eurobonds in the secondary market narrowed from 330 basis points
at the beginning of May last year to 148 basis points in February of this year.
A  balanced  central  government  budget  for  1999  had  been  adopted  originally.  Strict  fiscal  policy
enabled the government to use the budget as an automatic stabiliser in the aftermath of the Russian
crisis and allow the budget deficit to grow up to 4% of GDP in 1999. However, it is important to stress
that  this  is  considered  an  extraordinary  one-time  measure.  The  government  has  expressed  strong
intentions to reduce the deficit to 2% of GDP in 2000, with a balanced budget remaining the target for
2001.
As  a  result  of  these  policies,  all  of  which  received  public  support,  the  unemployment  rate  dropped
from 10.1% in March 1998 to 9% in March this year, and real GDP development after a 3.6% growth
in 1998 remained positive in 1999 as well.
Given the beneficial impact of sound economic policies on Latvia’s integration into European markets,
there is little doubt that these policies will be implemented in the future as well. In fact, the provisions
of the European Stability and Growth Pact and requirements for the members of the monetary union
laid down in the EU Treaty specify the direction of economic policy, a direction to which Latvia is
committed. Although these criteria are not legally binding for the country prior to EU membership, in
the  opinion  of  Latvian  authorities  and  the  Bank  of  Latvia  the  Maastricht  criteria  are  the  proper
BIS Review 44/2000
2
principles of sound economic policies. Consequently, economic policy in Latvia will be implemented
in a way that facilitates thoroughgoing compliance with these requirements in due course. We strongly
believe that these policies will establish our country as a small but reliable player in world markets and
hence ensure rapid and sustainable growth in Latvia.
3
BIS Review 44/2000
