Mr Yam: Risks and challenges in coping with international capital flows
Opening address by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
Sixth Manila Framework Group Meeting, held in Hong Kong on 20-21 March 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
On behalf of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, I would like to extend a very warm welcome to all
of you to this Sixth Meeting of the Manila Framework Group.1
As you will no doubt recall, the Manila Framework Group was founded in the deep throes of the Asian
financial crisis in November 1997 to develop a concerted approach to restoring financial stability in
the  region.  With  the  worst  clearly  behind  us,  and  with  signs  of  a  strong  economic  recovery  in  the
region,  the  mission  of  this  group  has  still  not  ended.  This  forum  embodies  a  valuable  spirit  of
cooperation, with wide participation of emerging market economies in the dialogue. The value of this
forum lies in its quality dialogue on regional surveillance and on reform of the international financial
architecture.
There  is  no  doubt  that  economic  recovery  in  the  region  has  gathered  considerable  momentum.
Economic growth for most economies has been better than expected, external balances have improved
remarkably, international funds have renewed interest in the region’s asset markets, and yield spreads
of Asian sovereign bond issues over the US treasuries have narrowed notably. According to estimates
by  the  Institute  of  International  Finance,  net  private  capital  flows  into  emerging  markets  in  Asia
increased nearly six times from 1998 to US$39 bn in 1999, and are forecast to increase again by 50%
to US$59 bn in 2000. There is therefore a real danger that we might forget the severe pains inflicted by
the  Asian financial  crisis  over the  past  two  years.  It  is  also  easy  to  forget  the  lessons  learnt  and  to
become  complacent.  However,  if  the  recovery  in  the  region  is  to  be  sustainable,  we  should  remain
vigilant and beware of the risks lurking under these bubbling activities.
Risks and challenges in coping with international capital flows
Challenges of domestic structural reforms
In  order  to  address  such  risks,  we  would  need  to  tackle  three  challenges  faced  by  Asia.  The  first
challenge  is  that  the  globalisation  and  liberalisation  of  markets  require  structurally  sound  and
resilient domestic systems. Prior to the crisis, the banking systems were often inadequately supervised
and  were  prone  to  incurring  excessive  maturity  mismatch  risks  by  borrowing  short-term  funds  to
finance  long-term  investments.  Moreover,  the  corporate  sectors  of  many  Asian  economies  were
over-stretching themselves by engaging in risky or unproductive investments. To make things worse,
both  the  banks  and  the  corporates  were  taking  excessive  currency  risks  by  borrowing  in  foreign
currencies  to  fund  projects  that  could  only  generate  income  in  domestic  currencies.  Poor  risk
management on the part of banks, ineffective banking supervision, political interference, and a critical
lack  of  transparency  prevented  disciplinary  mechanisms  from  functioning  properly.  The  result  is  a
staggering bank restructuring cost of an estimated 25% of GDP for the crisis-hit economies in Asia.
1 The  Manila  Framework  Group  is  a  forum  comprising  senior  finance  and  central  bank  officials  from  14  economies,
namely,  Australia,  Brunei  Darussalam,  Canada,  China,  Hong  Kong  SAR,  Indonesia,  Japan,  Korea,  Malaysia,  New
Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, the United States of America. Senior representatives of the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the Bank for International Settlements and the Asian Development Bank also attend the
meeting. The Group meets twice a year.
1
BIS Review 24/2000
Since the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis, economies all over the region have taken important
strategic steps to promote conditions that foster a full and speedy recovery.  But recovery  cannot be
sustained unless it is accompanied by thorough structural reforms. It is encouraging to see that notable
initiatives  are  taking  place  in  Asia  where  extensive  programmes  are  in  progress  to  restructure  and
recapitalise banks. There are  also  efforts  to  tackle  the  problems  posed  by  over-stretched  and  highly
indebted corporations. But there is a risk that the problems  that  were  so evident  then  will be  swept
under the carpet  in the face  of  rapid  growth.  It  is  crucial  that  the  reform  momentum  should  not  be
allowed to falter, as it could undermine the fledgling recovery.
Challenges of monitoring and surveillance of capital flows
The second challenge I see is to understand better the risks posed by volatile capital flows and how to
capture  data  to  facilitate  our  understanding  of  such  flows.  For  a  long  time  it  has  been  taken  for
granted  that  capital  flows  are  analogous  to  trade  flows:  that,  wherever  they  occur,  and  in  whatever
form, they invariably benefit long-term economic development, and that therefore the more liberal the
flows,  the  greater  the  benefit.  But  between  the  processes  of  trade  liberalisation  and  financial
liberalisation there lies a great difference. In the case of trade liberalisation, there are well-established
statistical systems to capture data on international trade, and hence their impact on the real economy.
In addition, there has been parallel development of institutional framework and rules to deal with trade
measures  like  tariffs,  quotas,  subsidies  and  dumping,  and  also  counter-measures,  and  there  are
mechanisms  for  dispute  settlement  and  arbitration.  In  contrast,  the  statistical  framework  for  capital
flows is, relatively speaking, very modest. And we do not have any framework to deal with disruption
caused  by  volatile  capital  flows  comparable  to  the  World  Trade  Organisation’s  mechanisms  for
handling disruption from trade in goods and services.
The volume of global merchandise trade, valued at US$5.4 trillion in the year of 1998, in fact pales
beside  the  scale  of  global  international  finance.  The  average  daily  turnover  in  the  world’s  foreign
exchange market stood at US$1.5 trillion in 1998, or roughly 70 times that of merchandise trade. On
top  of  that,  the  OTC  derivative  contracts  had  a  daily  turnover  of  US$1.3  trillion  in  1998,  and  the
notional  amounts  outstanding  at  end-June  1998  came  to  US$72  trillion.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
growth of foreign exchange and OTC markets, together with advances in information technology, has
contributed  to  cross-border  capital  flows  and  enhanced  risk  management  standards.  It  is,  however,
legitimate to ask what lies behind these vast numbers. What does it mean for the underlying markets if
the  financial  derivatives  trading  continues  to  multiply?  Do  we  understand  exactly  what  these
US$72 trillion worth of derivative positions represent? Do we really understand the nature of the fund
flows generated from the financial derivative trading in the OTC markets?
The problem is that we do not have the answers to most of these questions. To start with, there is not
even  an  adequate  statistical  framework  to  capture  capital  flow  data. The  current  data  on  balance  of
payments, international investment position, or flow of funds accounts have two major short-comings:
(a) low frequency of quarterly data; and (b) limited breakdown of data by currency, sector, instrument,
etc. The BIS, IMF and OECD are examples of institutions which have made some attempts to collate
relevant statistics but they are far from complete or timely.
This is not just a statistical issue for the data compilers but a major policy issue for the authorities and
other users. The compilation of high-frequency and detailed data is going to be resource-intensive and
there is keen competition for statistical resources. It seems to me high time to take a fresh look at the
adequacy of data on capital flows and if necessary review the priorities currently assigned to collection
of real sector or other statistical data.
Challenges of coping with the destabilising impact of highly leveraged institutions
The third challenge I should like to touch upon is how to cope with the destabilising impact of highly
leveraged institutions (HLIs). The issue is how to improve the stability and functioning of the financial
markets  for  all  market  participants.  As  there  have  been  extensive  international  discussions  in  this
regard, I shall briefly recapitulate the key developments and the challenge ahead.
BIS Review 24/2000
2
The Asian financial crisis has shown that the highly competitive and  globalised  financial  world  has
created  individual  market  participants  that  are  huge  enough  to  mobilise,  often  with  the  help  of
leverage, financial resources larger than the GDP of smaller economies. They can build up dominating
positions  in  the  markets  of  smaller  economies  and  influence  short-term  market  movements  either
singly or through acting in concert. Combined with the lack of information on the OTC market, the
highly 
institutions  can  develop  potentially  excessive  and  destabilising  market
concentrations, whether consciously or unconsciously.
leveraged 
Under these circumstances, there are two types of scenario where HLIs could pose concerns in their
interaction with financial markets. The first scenario is a situation in which HLIs taking excessively
large  positions  are  overwhelmed  by  market  forces.  Rapid  deleveraging  of  positions  in  markets
associated with the default of an HLI of the size of LTCM could have systemic impact even in large
and mature markets, thereby threatening the global financial system. It has been said that a repeat of
the  like  of  an  LTCM  debacle  is  most  unlikely  to  occur,  given  the  downsizing  of  hedge  funds.  I
certainly hope that this is the case but I also notice that the recovery of investor sentiment has seen
more  money from institutional investors as well as high net  worth individuals flowing  to  the  hedge
funds.
The  second  scenario,  commonly  known  as  the  “Elephants  in  the  Pond”  problem,  is  a  situation
whereby the HLIs take very large and concentrated positions in smaller financial markets and adopt
aggressive trading practices that could be destabilising to such markets. It is very encouraging that the
“Elephants in the Pond” problem is by now recognised quite extensively as a real issue to be tackled.
What is being done and is it enough?
Different approaches have been  floated  to tackle  the  problems  arising  from  the two  scenarios  I  just
described. The prevailing approach is through improving counterparty risk management. This is done
indirectly  by  asking  the  banks  and  other  financial institutions  to be  more  prudent  in  granting  credit
lines  to  the  HLIs,  and  directly  by  encouraging  the  HLIs  to  enhance  their  own  risk  management
standards. This is eminently logical and sensible, since with more cautious bank lending and enhanced
risk  management  within  the  HLI  sector,  it  should  be  very  hard  for  the  HLIs  to  build  up  excessive
leverage and concentration in the major financial markets.
This measure is being pursued with earnest in both the public and private sector. The Basel Committee
on  Banking  Supervision,  and  IOSCO  have  issued  respective  guidelines  on  sound  practices  for
interactions with HLIs for banks and securities firms. The latest discussion has focused on the kind of
supervisory  incentives  for  the  compliance  of  risk  management  standards.  The  Basel  Committee  on
Banking  Supervision  has  put  forward  two  proposals  for  the  revision  of  the  Capital  Accord,  which
would  help  address the concerns  on  HLIs.  One  is  abolishing  the  maximum  50%  risk  weighting  for
non-bank OTC derivatives exposures; and the other is encouraging counterparties to impose an initial
margin on repo transactions.
From the private sector, the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group formed by twelve leading
international  financial  institutions  produced  a  report  in  June  1999.  Five  major  hedge  funds  also
produced an industry group report in February 2000 on improving counterparty risk management and
internal control.
While we agree that enhanced risk management of HLIs and their counterparties is a useful first line of
defence, two major concerns remain. First, the return of competitive pressure may lead to a relaxation
or even a breakdown in risk management standards again in the future. There is anecdotal evidence
that  some  large  HLIs  are  becoming  less  willing  to  supply  information  to  their  counterparties  as
memories of the LTCM saga are fading. It is thus important that regulators continue to promote the
introduction of suitable supervisory incentives that would encourage continued compliance with sound
risk management practices by the financial institutions.
Secondly,  these  proposals  may  not  be  sufficient  to  resolve  the  problem  faced  by  smaller  and  open
markets. Even with reduced overall leverage, HLIs could still build large foreign exchange positions
relative  to  these  markets.  It  might  also  be  possible  for  HLIs  to  build  up  potentially  destabilising
3
BIS Review 24/2000
positions in smaller markets while remaining inside internal limits on leverage and/or liquidity risk.
Enhanced risk management cannot therefore be relied upon, in isolation, to alleviate the problem.
A  second  proposal  to  enhance  market  stability  is  to  improve  transparency  and  disclosure  to  make
markets work better. There have been two major international initiatives in this respect, one at the firm
level and one at the market level. At the firm level, there is the Multidisciplinary Working Group on
Enhanced Disclosure, chaired by Peter Fisher of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which has
developed a disclosure template for individual firms to voluntarily disclose their risk exposures. This
initiative is breaking new ground, as it is the first time that the private sector would be providing more
information about their risk exposures. However, the usefulness of such disclosure depends very much
on the level of breakdown in the risk disclosure.
Furthermore,  the  US  President’s  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  recommends  (a)  a  reporting
framework for large hedge funds to disclose more meaningful and frequent market risk information to
the  public,  and  (b)  a  requirement  on  public  companies  to  disclose  information  about  their  material
financial exposures to HLIs. A challenge here is for other authorities to take similar steps to require
such standards of disclosure, as this would help to avoid the possibility of regulatory arbitrage.
At the market level, a working group set up by the G10, and led by Jean-Pierre Patat of the Banque de
France, studied the feasibility of collecting and disseminating aggregate positions data in the foreign
exchange market. I believe the initiative, if implemented, could have helped smaller and open markets
in better understanding their currency markets and the accumulation of highly concentrated positions.
However,  in  November  1999,  the  G10  Governors  decided  not  to  proceed  further  with  work  in  this
area. In making this determination, the G10 found that there were a number of practical limitations to
the proposal, including the difficulty in obtaining compliance, the unfeasibility of producing the data
in a timely manner, and the substantial costs involved. The demise of this initiative left a vacuum in
the area of transparency on market concentration. This is unfortunate and the international community
should explore other alternatives to bridge the information gap.
I  have  mentioned  two  approaches,  that  of  enhanced  counterparty  risk  management  and  improved
transparency and disclosure, which will hopefully help to address the concerns on excessive leverage
and on opaqueness of HLIs. There remains the issue  of  aggressive trading  practices,  such  as  taking
extreme  measures  to  manipulate  prices  and  to  precipitate  herding  or  panic  selling  by  other  market
participants. Such practices undermine market stability. I therefore call upon the private sector market
participants  to  review  matters  and  devise  a  code  of  conduct  to  improve  the  standard  of  market
behaviour and practices. For such a code to be effective, I believe it needs to be market specific and
applicable to all market participants in that market.
Conclusion
Ladies and  gentlemen,  it  has  often  been  said  that  history,  especially  financial  crisis,  tends to repeat
itself.  In  the  last  ten  years  alone,  we  have  had  the  ERM  crisis  in  1992,  the  Mexican  peso  crisis  in
1994/95 and the latest Asian crisis in 1997/98. Notwithstanding the disturbingly frequent occurrence
of  seemingly  similar  financial  crises,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  even  though  no  two  crises  are
exactly  the  same,  if  people  do  not  learn  from  past  mistakes,  the  market  will  continue  to  repeat  its
punishment.  The  only  difference  between  the  major  financial  crises  in  recent  years  is  that  the
punishment is getting more and more severe, if not violent.
I  have  cited  three  major  challenges  to  learn  from  the  mistakes  in  the  last  financial  crises.  First,
domestic structural reforms. Secondly, monitoring and surveillance of capital flows. Thirdly, coping
with the destabilising impact of HLIs. They are by no means exhaustive. However, if we, individual
economies  and  the  international  financial  community,  can  muster  the  determination  to  tackle  these
challenges, we will go a long way in helping to reduce systemic risks, and improve the functioning of
the international financial system and the stability of the financial markets. While much domestic and
international efforts have been devoted to these issues, there is still much catching up to do. This is
precisely  the  reason  why  we  gather  here  today  -  to  take  stock  of  progress,  exchange  views  on  the
BIS Review 24/2000
4
unfinished reforms, and work for a more robust and safe domestic as well as international financial
system for all of us.
5
BIS Review 24/2000
