M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul: Thailand - where we are now
and what we are trying to do
Speech by Mr M R Chatu Mongol Sonakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Asia Society
Southern California Centre, on 3 October 2000.
 President of the Asia Society of Southern California, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Two years ago this month, I came to speak to this Society. It was to tell you how Thailand was getting
along, what we were going to do and to solicit your support as friends of Thailand.
Those of you who were present might recall the things I said we were going to do. They were very
rudimentary as far as central banking goes, and that the economic and financial numbers then, whilst
improving, were not necessarily a basis around which a good future could be built.
The numbers are in many ways now better and we have gone on to do all the things which I said we
would do and develop the more sophisticated mechanisms of central banking, such that we are far in
advance of our indications two years ago. It is usually a happy occasion when one could report that
one  has  done  more  than  what  one  has  set  out  to  do.  But  I  am  not  really  a  happy  man  today.  The
economy is still fragile, and there are vast areas left to be mapped out and implemented.
The  one  thing  that  one  can  say  about  the  Thailand  of  old  is  that  we  really  did  underestimate  the
problems we were in and the structural changes needed to put us back to the forefront of international
competition.
Let me recall that two years ago, we were going through a negative growth of 10.7%, and inflation of
8.1%.  The  short-term  three  months  fixed  deposit  rate  at  that  time  was  8.25%,  and  the  minimum
lending rate was 15.8%, having peaked at over 20% earlier in the year. The only good news at that
time seems to have been the large current account surplus of around 10 billion dollars, which would
help stabilize  the  baht  dollar  exchange  rate  as  well  as  repay  our  huge  debts,  which  had  reached  an
unbearable level now known to be US$ 105 billion or over 100% of GDP at the particular point of
time that I was making the statement to this august body in 1998.
At  that  time,  I  indicated  that  in  my  mind,  our  problem  was  structural,  and  that  to  solve  and  put
Thailand back on the growth path, we must make structural changes, rather than just pumping money
back in. Now, I am even  more convinced that I was right and we have indeed pursued that  path  of
restructuring and rediscovering ourselves. Let me elaborate a little.
Prominent  but  unnoticed  by  many  Thailand-watchers  was  our  being  invited  and  joining  as
shareholders of the BIS, properly known as the Bank for International Settlements. Although this was
not a major decision for us, it was a very prominent confirmation of our status in the world economy.
BIS has less than 50 shareholders and is really an elite clique of the leading central banks. That it has
decided to invite us to become shareholders was in recognition of the status that Thailand now has in
the financial and economic market place of the world.
That the BIS last week decided to buy back  all  its privately  held  shares,  becoming  purely  a  central
bank for central banks is of course a reinforcement of this development.
Another achievement of our own doing, this time towards transparency is that we are now qualified in
the Special Data Dissemination Standard of the IMF, the 21st country to do so in May this year. This
set of data is a guarantee whereby a country delivers enough information in a timely manner, such that
international investors have a reasonable chance of evaluating its performance and prospects.
Many leading countries are still unable to qualify, because they have things that they wish not to be
shown  to the  public,  whereas  we  have  taken the road that  what  cannot  be  shown  in  public  perhaps
1
BIS Review 86/2000
should not be done. We therefore participated also in the international reserves template both voting
for it, and qualifying in the first group of countries to do so that have subscribed to the SDDS.
In terms of positioning ourselves for future participation in world activity, in the first half of this year,
we  announced  the  International  Investment  Position  to  replace  the  old  foreign  debt  data.  Although
statistically  it  was  a  partial  IIP,  since  our  legal  system  does  not  yet  allow  us  to  collect  our  foreign
investments  data  in  a  timely  manner,  it  allows  investors  to  know  our  investments  abroad
systematically for the first time,  a  sine qua  non  if  one  were to  borrow  substantially  from  the  world
community. One has to know what investments one has offsetting it as well.
In  announcing  the  IIP,  we  thoroughly  examined  the  foreign  debt  and  put  in  a  new  complete  data
collection system even though it would show that we owed 20.5 billion dollars more than what we had
previously  announced.  Our  IIP  was  announced  with  a  foreign  debt  of  105  billion  dollars  for  1997,
clearly underlining the bad performance of the economy in that year. It is now reduced to 88 billion
dollars,  a  level  compared  to  the  present  GNP,  which  is  quite  acceptable,  although  still  difficult  to
manage and must be watched with careful attention.
A  decision  was  also  made  again  in  the  spirit  of  transparency  and  sensibility  to  show  these  data  to
Moody Investor Services who thereupon upgraded us to investment grade.
To make future growth sustainable and high, after a long, arduous preparation over a year and a half,
we went into the inflation targeting system, with an inflation band of 0-3.5%. The ceiling, being the
average  in  the  last  decade  of  our  22  competitor  countries,  reflects  our  determination  to  be
internationally competitive with them for the years to come.
Our  inflation  targeting  model,  although  linear-quadratic,  shows  the  zone  or  banding  features  by
exhibiting a fan-shaped prediction both for the GDP and inflation. The Inflation Report that we issue
at the end of each quarter shows an advanced feature in that it gives a sensitivity analysis around a
band  of  exchange  rate  and  a  range  of  oil  prices,  something  countries  more  advanced  than  us  have
hitherto been unwilling to enter into. But as I have said, we are trying to be transparent and trying to
get our people and investors to be able to act as accurately as possible and to form a view as to what
the future of the economy might look like.
We believe entirely that the better the estimates, the lower will be the costs one puts or has to put for
taking  the  risk  of  investing  in  the  economy  and  that,  in  the  long  run,  the  country  will  be  more
competitive using less resources to produce the same goods other countries are producing.
For this reason, we are constantly trying to improve our techniques. Next February we are hosting a
select meeting of econometricians in inflation targeting model-making, and we will see if after that we
could  make  our  model  into  a  linear  zone-quadratic  model,  which  would  be  more  consistent  with  a
target band than the present model which is really better fitted to a point target.
The link back between inflation targeting and forex stability is, however, more nebulous and we have
therefore  fortified  it  with  technical  changes  in  the  trading  system  designed  to  keep  exchange  rates
more stable again basically through transparency.
In  my  statement  two  years  ago,  I  said  we  had  set  up  a  money  market  committee  to  oversee  our
operations in the money markets as well as forex, including swaps, forwards, options, and such likes.
This  we  have  now  developed  into  a  very  good  domestic  monitoring  vehicle,  and  the  control  of
offshore baht will be fortified next week with our reissuing of forex declaration forms, which reflect
the reality of the market condition today. The old forex forms allowed us to know the purpose of forex
transactions only of 40% of total transactions, since it was issued some 20 years ago, when 60% of
today’s transactions were unknown or insignificant in the system.
Although  this  in  itself  is  not  designed  to  limit  or  restrict  forex  flows,  we  believe  the  increased
transparency will make the system less prone to speculation especially as we are one of the few central
banks that have decided to keep supervisory powers within the central bank. This option makes the
bank harder to manage but supervision is a very effective tool against speculators.
On a more micro side, we have been putting good governance into our financial institutions. By good
governance,  we  mean  transparency,  competitiveness  and  good  internal  management.  Bank  directors
BIS Review 86/2000
2
are now required to have no more than three directorships in other limited liability institutions so that
they can spend enough  time  running  the  bank.  Of the  70 people  who did  not  qualify,  50  have  now
complied and we are working on arranging for the rest to be compliant as soon as possible using the
traditional amicable Asian way of trying to change things.
We are also working on getting the major shareholders not to vote for independent directors so that
minority shareholders are better represented on the board. One government bank has done this and the
new private commercial bank to be set up at the end of this year has agreed to do so. Seeing that it
could be done or how it could be done, we expect the remaining private commercial banks to follow
suit in next year’s annual shareholders’ meeting or at other relevant times.
Audit  committees  are  now  a  requirement  and  many  banks  have  nomination  and  compensation
committees to reduce the power of the major shareholders in the management of the bank. Nearly all
banks have risk management committees or at least asset and liability management committees, which
is preferable to having no risk management at all.
In the area of transparency, commercial banks since August this year have had to announce at the end
of each month their NPL level, penalties and fines imposed by the authorities and the related lending.
Public and stakeholders’ opinions are thereby used to augment the new supervision and examination
process we are installing with the help of the OCC and the FDIC.
In terms of bad banks, I expect that by the time I get back, or soon after I get back, the disposal of all
intervened banks will be complete. In terms of bad clients, since on the afternoon I left for the Annual
Meetings  of  the  World  Bank  and  IMF,  the  contract  for  the  transfer  into  the  government-run  Asset
Management  Company  of  some  12  billion  dollars  of  assets  was  signed  and  the  Cabinet  had  also
approved  the  covered  asset  pool  arrangement  for  another  intervened  bank  for  a  further
5 billion dollars. I expect that the NPL at the end of this year will be in the teens - a quite manageable
level compared to the high of 48% at the beginning of the year.
On the average, banks are now back into the positive spread, actually of 1.28% last month, which is
low  by  traditional  standards  and  still  not  profitable  but  still  over  half  of  the  spread  that  we  expect
banks to be operating in under the new competitive and transparent conditions that we will see in the
future.
In this respect, banks are now allowed to close branches freely and also are free to decide opening and
closing hours. We are working on the rules on the free opening of branches, being quite far ahead in
this,  and  we  expect to announce it, certainly  within  the  next  two  to  three  months,  whereby  lending
conditions tied to branch opening are probably going to be removed.
This initiative is undertaken under the concept that banking services coverage is now adequate and we
need not force banks any longer to do things for social reasons. Competition between service providers
will probably lead to better results than government directed banking.
We have now also agreed on the rules for internet banking, defined as the traditional counter service
banking using e-commerce technology. Our idea is simple in that what could be done over the counter
will be allowed over the internet. The similarity in service even goes so far as that we will not allow
pro-active selling in the internet but that it must be passive in the same way that we require that selling
of non-banking services over bank counters must be passive.
In terms of e-commerce, what that means is that logos of non-bank service suppliers in the bank’s web
must not be on the main page. Transactions with the suppliers must be done by transferring into the
supplier’s web rather than on the bank’s web services and, of course, the bank’s client, must log in.
The banks may not push their services onto their clients’ computers.
A lot of our advisors asked why banks cannot behave in the way of best interest to the bank, doing
whatever they wish. This, of course, applies to many other things that we do not allow banks to do and
the answer really is that we still wish to see “banks doing other services”, rather than “other businesses
also  offering  banking  services”.  This  is  because  banks  are  critical  organs  of  an  economy  and  they
should  be  separately  supervised  and  examined  such  that  they  are  safer  than  other  activities  which
might be allowed to fail more easily.
3
BIS Review 86/2000
Virtual banking, defined as banking without counter services, is still not allowed. The only thing that
we  have  decided in this  new  and  expanding  area  of  the  economy  is  that  if  the  e-commerce  service
takes deposits, a banking license must be sought before the services could be offered.
But like  many  things  in  life, it  is not  where  you  are, but  how  fast  you  are  going,  how  fast  you  are
catching up that is more important, and in this respect we are working assiduously to formulate the
new  rules so  that  we  can  join  the  leaders  in  the  change  to  the  New  Economy  -  new  rules  with  the
reliability that is always so necessary in any kind of good banking.
In summary on our financial institutions’ developments, they are going ahead very fast and they will
have good rules to perform to, but I must admit we are coming from way off, and have a long way to
go before we are competitive in our own country let alone abroad.
Ladies and gentlemen,
So far I have talked at some length about the macroeconomy, good governance and developments in
our financial institutions. Even if all the things I have outlined about Thailand were to happen, many
people  think  that  the  economy  would  still  be  prone  to  instability  unless  the  central  bank  is  also
revitalized. I am inclined to agree with them.
For some reasons not yet identifiable, and that worries me because a good change normally only can
happen  when  the  problems  have  been  clearly  identified.  But  in  any  case,  there  were  signs  that  the
Bank of Thailand somehow has been sidetracked into the crony capitalism of the rest of the economy,
a development whose job it is of the central bank to try and prevent.
It  was  obvious  therefore  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  had  to  be  restructured  into  an  organization  that
would be effective and neutral. Extensive work was therefore done employing re-engineering concepts
using consultants as necessary.
The six management levels have now been reduced to two, with people of different capabilities at the
second tier depending on the importance of their work.
At the operating level, there are also only two levels. At the top is the head of the business groups,
again  of  different  job  sizes.  The  next  level  is  four  kinds  of  work  units  reporting  in  a  hierarchy  or
directly  reporting  to  the  head  of  business  groups  depending  on  the  best  way  the  work  can  be
undertaken.
This is in place of the previous system where there were six management levels and only one level of
operation, which made for lengthy approval processes and inadequate delineation of responsibility.
Personnel  systems  have  also  been  totally  redesigned  with  career  development,  performance  and
potential evaluation, as well as succession and replacement plans being already effective or soon to be
implemented.  A  cornerstone  of  this  may  well  be  that  at  certain  levels  promotion  is  by  examination
rather than selection allowing capability to be a key determinant rather than just the traditional ability
to get on well with people, primarily young superiors.
In the more difficult areas of manpower, recruitment and pay structure, work has just begun or will
begin early next year as this requires that the restructure of organization and work processes be rather
complete. The restructure has still to be extended into a fully bank-wide process, whereas at present
re-engineering of work processes and organization has begun at only four of the 25 businesses groups.
Pay schedule will also have to be redesigned and here probably lies the biggest single difficulty, as in
the  lower-ranking  jobs  under  the  present  scale,  some  people  are  paid  five  times  more  than  another
doing the same job. As this has been the system for a very extended length of time, one ends up with a
lot of people being paid a lot and doing very little. As such, people don’t move on in jobs or move out
of jobs if they are not competent as might happen with a proper pay system.
However,  a  problem  identified  is  halfway  solved  as  the  saying  goes.  And  I  am  happy  to  note  that
outsiders and stakeholders who have had to work with the Bank of Thailand lately are very receptive
to the change and are saying much nicer things about us and our work. I also sense that the staff are
seeing that things are better and will probably give enough support to the restructure.
BIS Review 86/2000
4
Ladies and gentlemen,
To get back to the topic of the economy: two years ago I said that we would reduce interest rates as the
basic  strategy  for  saving  the  country.  This  we  have  done  and  now  the  14-day  RP,  the  monetary
instrument we use to transmit monetary policy to the general economy, is at only 1.5%. The lowest
lending rate is 7.5% - what a difference from when I talked to you two years ago.
The  currency  is  now  at  around  42  baht  to  the  dollar,  which  some  people  consider  weak.  Yet  when
compared to the 22 competitor countries, it has not much depreciated in the last two years.
Exports  being  our  only  area  of  sunshine,  we  have  to  make  sure  that  the  increasing  exports  are
maintained until such time that investment or consumption is taking place normally and this can only
be done with a low interest rate and a competitively priced baht.
For this reason, it is our belief that the low short-term interest rate, coupled with the long-term interest
rate of the same level as the EU and the US, is a correct strategy that we will try to maintain.
Inflation  is  still  low,  around  2%  headline  and  less  than  1%  core.  This  looks  like  a  good  level  of
economic numbers to nurse and nurture an economy that is still weak and recovering with a capacity
utilization of only 54%.
Astute investors will I think see all this and invest in the country just as they did two years ago when I
lowered interest rate from the very high and unbearable level to the low level of today, against many
contradictory advice from people who should know better.
Whilst nursing the economy though, let me emphasize that we intend to put in mechanisms to improve
the sustainability of growth and stability, some of which occurrence I have outlined in this speech, and
others we are working on as we learn more and more about the economy and improve the accuracy
and speed of our data collection and dissemination system.
Ladies and gentlemen. In ending my statement let me recall that I began by stating that we still have
plenty of problems. At least we are no longer underestimating them.
We have especially  uncertain  government  with  general  elections coming  up  very  fast.  We  have  not
effected the management change in our financial institution needed for the organization truly to absorb
modern technologies.
The  Bank  of  Thailand  Act  as  well  as  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  have  not  yet  been  passed  by
Parliament. The  latter  was  designed to  facilitate change  to  financial  institutions.  The  former  was  to
make  the  Bank  of  Thailand  independent  or  some  degree  of  it  depending  on  what  will  get  through
Parliament in the end.
There  are  different  opinions  on  this  -  on  what  the  Parliament  will  want,  on  what  the  government
wants, and on what the Bank of Thailand wants. But among central bankers, it is well known that the
independence needed to execute a sensible monetary policy cannot just be legislated.
It must be earned.
This I think we have done to no small degree, so I’m not unhappy about this most important area of
central banking.
Let me, therefore end my statement on this rather hopeful note.
5
BIS Review 86/2000
