Masaru Hayami: The impact of innovation in information and
communications technology on financial systems
Speech  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  held  at  Kisaragi-kai,  Tokyo,  on
5 October 2000.
 It is an honor to be invited and given this opportunity to speak at Kisaragi-kai. Today, I would like to
share with you our thoughts on changes in Japan’s financial system against the backdrop of the rapid
pace  of  innovation  in  information  and  communications  technology,  and  how,  under  such
circumstances, we should continue improving both the stability and efficiency of the financial system.
The recent rapid evolution of information and communications technology, which is generally called
the “IT revolution”, has been exerting a profound impact on economies and finance as a whole. In the
United  States  where  such  technological  innovation  has  been  one  of  the  driving  forces  behind  the
longest period of economic expansion in its history, there are views that a new economy that is totally
different  from  the  old  economy  has  been  born.  Some  even  claim  it  is  comparable  to  the  Industrial
Revolution of the 19th century. Though it will be a long time before economic historians can make an
objective  assessment  of  innovation  in  information  and  communications  technology,  which  is  still
under way, there is no doubt that it has had a profound impact on economies and finance as a whole.
Indeed,  I  don’t  think  I  need  tell  you  that  technological  innovation  has  brought  about  the  speedy
processing  and  transmission  of  information  enabling  a  substantial  reduction  in  costs,  wider
networking, and globalization on an unprecedented scale and scope. Moreover, it has affected a wide
range of industries, having a particularly dramatic impact on the financial services industry.
Man created an instrument called “money”,  which  is  a  unit of  account, a  means  of  exchange  and  a
store of value, for the smooth execution of economic activity. The financial services industry is closely
related to this instrument we call money, and its core business is based on information processing and
networking.  Therefore,  the  financial  services  industry  has  been  a  major  user  of  information  and
communications  technology,  and,  significantly,  it  is  an  industry  that  can  easily  take  advantage  of
technological innovation. As we all know,  computers  and  exclusive  communications  networks  have
greatly contributed to improving the efficiency and safety of business, for example, in retail deposit
taking where an enormous amount of information must be processed and recorded as well as in fund
transfers and domestic and foreign exchange where extensive networks are required. Furthermore, the
recent rapid growth of derivatives and securitization has been made possible through downsizing and
the spread of computers.
Changes  in  the  financial  system  stemming  from  the  recent  advance  of  information  and
communications technology are not limited to improving the efficiency of traditional businesses and
enabling  the  development  of  new  instruments  in  specific  fields.  Here,  a  good  example  is  the
development of a new supply channel for financial services, namely the internet, which has made it
possible  to  establish  extensive  and  low-cost  financial  networking.  Traditionally,  the  provision  of
financial services was very much dependent on the branch networks of financial institutions. But now,
information  and  communications  technology  has  enabled  the  more  diversified  and  convenient
provision of financial services, including via the internet and unmanned ATM networks.
The  creation  of  a  new  supply  channel  for  financial  services  has  substantially  reduced  the  cost  of
financial  transactions.  For  example,  internet  banking  has  greatly  lowered  the  processing  cost  of
banking.  According  to  research  conducted  in  the  United  States,  in  some  cases  processing  by  the
internet is estimated to cost less than one hundredth what it does at a bank branch window.
Furthermore,  the  emergence  of  a  new  supply  channel  for  financial  services  and  the  substantial
reduction  in  processing  costs  have  brought  forth  changes  in  the  composition  of  financial  service
providers.  One  example  is  entry  into  financial  services  by  non-financial  business  firms.  While  the
1
BIS Review 84/2000
provision  of  financial  services  was  traditionally  via  the  branch  networks  of  financial  institutions
featuring  vaults  and  lobbies,  the  emergence  of  new  supply  channels  such  as  internet  banking  and
unmanned ATM networks has made it possible to convert without much difficulty networks used for
non-financial activities into ones that can provide financial services.
The reduction in processing costs of financial transactions and the  easy  conversion  of  non-financial
networks to  financial  ones  have  created  a  profitable  opportunity  for  non-financial  business  firms  to
enter  the  financial  services  industry  by  selecting  such  specialized  areas  as  payment  and  settlement
without needing the synergies obtained from  accepting  deposits  and extending  loans.  Because  entry
into  selected  financial  services  has  become  possible,  it  appears  that  the  initial  entry  cost  has  been
further  reduced  and  the  incentive  for  non-financial  business  firms  to  enter  the  sector  further
strengthened.
Following revision of the Securities and Exchange Law in 1998 that permitted entry into the securities
field through simple registration instead of licensing, quite a few non-financial business firms began to
engage in securities activities. And recently, some non-financial business firms have announced plans
to  start  banking  operations.  Such  active  entry  into  banking  has  not  been  seen  since  1993  when  the
Financial  System  Reform  Law  was  enacted  and  securities  houses  began  entering  the  banking  area
through subsidiaries. The reduction in entry costs, thanks to technological innovation in information
and  communications,  has  enabled  not  only  mutual  entry  into  each  other’s  field  between  banks  and
securities houses within the financial services industry, but also new entry into the financial services
industry by non-financial business firms.
The advance of information and communications technology has not only strengthened the incentive
of non-financial business firms to engage in banking but also urged existing financial institutions to
review their management. Recently we have observed various forms of alliances and reorganization
among  financial  institutions,  and  particularly  conspicuous  is  the  movement  of  major  financial
institutions toward M&A and consolidation among themselves. The main aim of the movement toward
mega-banks  is  for  financial  institutions  with  different  niches  to  strengthen  competitiveness  by
complementing  each  other.  Under  the  current  situation  where  information  and  communications
systems might strongly affect competitiveness, it is indispensable that financial institutions effect huge
IT-related  investments  to  strengthen  their  competitive  position.  Thus,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the
incentive to rationalize IT-related investments in overlapping fields, thereby alleviating the financial
burden  and  making  it  possible  to  increase  IT-related  investments  in  strategic  areas,  has  been  a  big
driving force behind financial consolidation.
While  innovation  in  information  and  communications  technology  will  bring  about  advances,
diversification and improved efficiency, thus eventually leading to better services for users, it is also
true  that  more  information-oriented  financial  services  and  networking  will  give  rise  to  greater  and
more  complex  risks,  the  quicker  transmission  of  such  risks,  and  possibly  new  types  of  risks.  For
example, the diversification and greater use of derivatives has resulted in more complex  and  bigger
risks. Moreover, financial globalization has further deepened the linkage of financial markets both at
home  and  abroad,  thus  significantly  increasing  risk  of  financial  turbulence  in  one  market  being
transmitted  to other  markets  overseas. The  spread  of  financial  networks  has  further  exacerbated  the
possibility  of  illegal  entry  into  computer  systems  by  hackers,  leading  to  the  diversification  and
proliferation of operational risks.
What should be our basic attitude toward changes in the financial system generated by innovation in
information and communications technology? Given that innovation will further proceed in terms of
both transmission speed and scope, and since it is a major driving force promoting structural reform,
one of the most important agendas for the current Japanese economy, we have no alternative but to
embrace innovation and try to reap the maximum benefits.
Before  I  elucidate  on  this,  let  me  summarize  the  main  points  of  what  follows.  First,  technological
innovation  proceeds  very  rapidly,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  foresee  its  impact  on  the  financial  system.
Under such circumstances, we should be positive and flexible in responding to changes in the financial
system. Second, it is not appropriate to maintain financial system stability through traditional ex ante
regulations  since  they  would  nip  the  seed  of  private  sector  innovation  in  the  bud  and  weaken  the
BIS Review 84/2000
2
dynamism of financial markets. To realize both an active and stable financial system, we rather need
to emphasize risk management and market discipline.
There  is  a  possibility  that  innovation  will  ultimately  make  the  existing  financial  system  obsolete,
threaten the status of financial institutions that have traditionally provided financial services, change
the nature of deposits at banks, and eventually the currency created by the central bank.  In  view  of
accelerating technological innovation, those  who are  involved  in  the  financial  system,  including  the
central  bank,  should  bear  such  possibilities  in  mind.  But  before  that  eventuality  occurs,  existing
financial  institutions  will  most  likely  strive  to  improve  the  financial  services  they  offer  by  taking
advantage of technological innovation. Thus, it can be anticipated that competition between existing
financial institutions and the new entrants will continue for a long time.
So far, changes in the financial system generated by innovation in information and communications
technology have been gradual with the existing framework being improved step by step. For example,
non-financial  business  firms,  which  intend  to  enter  the  payment  area,  will  establish  subsidiaries  to
acquire banking licenses and accept deposits, which are the traditional medium of payment, rather than
establish  firms  that  will  introduce  a  new  medium  of  payment.  This  suggests  that,  in  such  areas  as
payment  where  the  existing  infrastructure  can  be  utilized,  at  least  for  the  time  being  traditional
institutions and transaction channels, like banks and deposits, will be more useful than otherwise. In
other  words,  technological  innovation  has  progressed  to  the  point  where  barriers  to  non-financial
business firms entering financial services have been lowered, but not to the extent where the existing
framework has been made completely obsolete.
It  appears  that  rapid  technological  innovation  and  subsequent  changes  in  the  financial  system  have
thus far had little effect on the fundamental functions of finance, including the transfer of funds from
fund surplus to fund shortage sectors, the reallocation of risks, and payment and settlement.
To  summarize  so  far,  while  it  is  true  that  technological  innovation  may  significantly  change  the
financial system, there exists great uncertainty regarding the extent and speed of change. Therefore,
when  responding  to  change,  we  should  be  positive  and  flexible  while  paying  close  attention  to
uncertainty.
Then,  what  should  we  do  to  reconstruct  an  efficient  and  stable  financial  system  under  the  rapid
advance of information and communications technology? In Japan we have traditionally emphasized
detailed  ex  ante  regulations  and  specific  guidelines  for  individual  financial  institutions  as  ways  to
maintain  financial  system  stability.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  such  measures  have,  to  some  extent,
contributed  to  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system  characterized  by  the  strict  segmentation  and
specialization  of  business  areas.  However,  over-dependence  on  ex  ante  regulations  and  specific
guidelines  will  undermine  the  incentive  for  management  to  pursue  differentiation  because  the
development  of  new  instruments  is  not  linked  to  initial  rewards  attaching  to  innovators,  thereby
leading  to  the  spread  of  a  “keep  up  with  the  Joneses”  mentality  among  financial  institutions.
Furthermore,  we  might  have  to  pay  a  huge  price  in  terms  of  the  weakened  vitality  of  the  financial
system as innovation and competition are hindered. Currently, the “Big Bang”, which is based on the
basic principle of free, fair and global, is being promoted in Japan, and we have effected a wide range
of  reforms,  such  as  the  diversification  of  financial  instruments  and  services,  the  promotion  of
competition  in  the  financial  services  industry  and  the  improvement  of  financial  markets.  These
reforms  are  much  needed  to  invigorate  financial  markets  and  should  be  further  effected  as
expeditiously and steadily as possible.
The truth of the matter is that with the rapid advance of innovation in financial technology we can no
longer maintain financial system stability solely through traditional ex ante regulations. It has become
impossible  for  the  authorities  to  foresee  changes  and  the  direction  of  financial  markets  and
transactions and to implement detailed regulations in advance.
When changes are dramatic and entail a lot of  uncertainty, it is important  to further  emphasize  risk
management and market discipline in order to maintain financial system stability without impairing its
efficiency. Though we cannot exclude uncertainty regarding the impact of the advance of information
and  communications  technology  on  the  financial  system,  what  is  crystal  clear  is  that  financial
institutions  will  need  a  risk  management  ability  corresponding  to  the  advances  in  information  and
3
BIS Review 84/2000
communications  technology.  It  is  thus  a  prerequisite  for  financial  institutions  to  improve  risk
measurement  methods  so  as  to  accurately  grasp  more  complex  risks  and  establish  an  appropriate
capital base in order to win amid intense competition. In the process of innovation, risk management is
also the object of innovation, and only those who succeed in risk management will be able lead the
world. Technological innovation has made traditional thinking that believes risk management is a cost
completely outmoded. Financial institution management must realize that risk management is a way to
maximize profits. While risk management has hitherto been primarily concerned with the management
of  credit  risk,  in  the  future  financial  institutions  will  have  to  construct  advanced  risk  management
systems covering operational risk and interest rate risk in banking accounts, and also establish a high
quality capital base consistent with the level of risks they carry.
To establish a more efficient and stable financial system, market discipline is important. It is necessary
that  financial  institutions  constantly  strive  for  sound  management  and  higher  profitability  fully
realizing  that  their  every  move  is  being  closely  monitored  by  the  market.  From  this  viewpoint,  it
becomes  important  for  them  to  actively  disclose  their  financial  conditions  according  to  appropriate
accounting methods. In this regard, we have received criticism from abroad that accounting methods
and disclosure standards in Japan need to be improved in a number of areas. In response, I have to say
that based on the lessons we learned from the bursting of the bubble we have been rapidly improving
the infrastructure related to disclosure, including improvement of the standards for write-off and the
provisioning of non-performing assets. Also, consolidated balance sheets have been refined and mark-
to-market  accounting  expanded  from  the  viewpoint  of  international  compatibility.  In  the  area  of
corporate  information  disclosure,  markets  have  begun  to  positively  evaluate  those  firms  that  see
legally required disclosure standards as minimum standards and which at their own initiative disclose
management  strategy  and  financial  conditions  beyond  such  minimum  standards.  I  hope  these
movements will further prevail and take firm root in Japan.
How should the Bank of Japan respond to changes in the financial system as innovation in information
and  communications  technology  progresses?  Before  examining  this  issue,  let  me  begin  by  briefly
reviewing the role of the Bank of Japan in the context of the financial system and the payment system.
In  general,  banknotes  issued  by  the  central  bank  finalize  the  payment  of  transactions  when  handed
over to transaction counterparties. Similarly, current accounts with the central bank can also finalize
payment, a function which is supported by public confidence in the central bank. As such, settlements
through the liabilities of the central bank, namely banknotes and current accounts, possess “finality” in
the  sense  that  they  completely  settle  payment.  Furthermore,  various  private  sector  clearing  systems
eventually complete fund settlement as well as securities settlement by directly or indirectly making
use  of  the  medium  of  settlement  with  finality  conferred  by  the  central  bank.  Thus,  each  payment
system  is  operated  in  a  responsible  manner  by  a  respective  steering  body,  and  the  central  bank  is
responsible for maintaining the smooth and safe operation of the nation’s overall payment systems.
Article 1 of the Bank of Japan Law clearly stipulates that the Bank’s mission is to maintain the smooth
and stable operation of Japan’s payment and settlement systems: “The objective of the Bank of Japan,
... , is to issue banknotes and to carry out currency and monetary control. In addition ..., the Bank’s
objective  is  to  ensure  the  smooth  settlement  of  funds  among  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,
thereby contributing to the maintenance of an orderly financial system.”
To fulfill this mission, the Bank of Japan performs a variety of functions. First, it provides the medium
of settlement in the form of Bank of Japan notes and current account services, and constantly strives to
improve  efficiency  and  safety.  Its  function  to  examine  the  authenticity  of  banknotes  and  prevent
counterfeiting  while  securing  the  efficient  circulation  of  banknotes  lays  the  foundation  for  public
confidence  in  banknotes.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  has  been  making  various  efforts  to  improve  the
efficiency and safety of the settlement system for funds and government securities by providing online
services for current accounts through the BOJ-NET system.
In addition to such efforts, the Bank of Japan conducts on-site examinations and off-site monitoring of
financial  institutions  that  hold  current  accounts  with  it,  and  obtains  information  regarding  their
financial strength and risk management. If a financial institution faces a liquidity shortage that might
BIS Review 84/2000
4
seriously impair the smooth operation of payment systems, the Bank of Japan will provide liquidity as
the lender of last resort, thereby preventing systemic risk from emerging.
With this preamble, let me turn to the role of the Bank of Japan in securing efficient and safe payment
systems,  thereby  maintaining  financial  system  stability  under  innovation  in  information  and
communications technology. Payment systems in Japan consist of those operated by the Bank of Japan
and private sector ones. In view of the fact that payment systems are a fundamental infrastructure for
economic  activity,  it  is  always  important  to  maintain  the  safety  of  payment  systems  as  a  whole
regardless of whether technological innovation creates a new provider, a new channel or a new means
of  payment.  In  this  regard,  all  related  parties,  that  is,  financial  institutions,  the  steering  bodies  of
private  payment  systems  and  the  central  bank,  need  to  be  in  close  contact  and  make  efforts  to
discharge their respective responsibilities.
The Bank of Japan  provides  a  settlement service  called  BOJ-NET.  BOJ-NET  is  the  core  settlement
system for yen funds and government securities and is participated in by major financial institutions
and  private  payment  systems.  We  continue  to  make  efforts  to  accurately  grasp  new  waves  of
innovation  in  information  and  communications  technology  and  to  make  our  settlement  systems
support the advances of financial institutions and private payment systems.
The  Bank  of  Japan  is  currently  making  preparations  so  that  current  account  transactions  and  the
settlement of government securities will be executed by real-time gross settlement, RTGS, from the
beginning of next year. There are two current account settlement methods: fixed-time net settlement is
where settlement is finalized by paying net debit or credit balances among financial institutions at a
pre-designated time, and real-time gross settlement is where each settlement is finalized on a real-time
basis  without  calculating  net  debit  or  credit  balances.  Most  settlements  are  presently  fixed-time  net
settlement though it has the serious drawback that if one of the participating financial institutions fails
to make a payment, then all settlements of all financial institutions will be disrupted. To overcome this
we will abolish, in principle, fixed-time net settlement and introduce real-time gross settlement from
January next year. It is recognized globally that real-time gross settlement is appropriate for large fund
settlements  like  interbank  transactions  since  it  reduces  systemic  risk,  in  which  a  chain  reaction  of
defaults arises.
There  have  recently  been  discussions  in  the  securities  industry  that  the  settlement  period  between
contract and delivery should be shortened for transactions in equities and government securities. The
current  practice  is  to  settle  such  transactions  within  three  days  after  the  contract.  Many  argue  that
settlement  should  be  one  day  after  the  contract,  which  is  basically  the  right  direction  from  the
viewpoint of reducing the outstanding amount of unsettled transactions so as to enhance safety of the
settlement  system.  Such  discussions  have  indeed  been  promoted  by  the  rapid  improvement  of
information  processing  capabilities  and  communication  speed  under  the  advance  of  technological
innovation.  We  will  constantly  strive  to  improve  the  services  we  offer  so  that  we  will  be  able  to
appropriately support future changes in settlement practices.
Moreover, in order for BOJ-NET to contribute to  greater  efficiency  and  enhanced  safety  of Japan’s
payment systems as a whole, we must cooperate with the steering bodies of private payment systems.
For  example,  it  is possible to  conceive  a  situation  in  which  we  cannot  easily  enhance  the  safety  of
payment systems when one system among various systems is deficient in terms of risk management
and  settlements  become  concentrated  on  this  one  system.  In  particular,  although  technological
innovation enhances profitability and transaction convenience, it also creates new kinds of risks and
increases the degree of risk involved, thus making coordination with private payment systems all the
more  important.  In  collaboration  with  other  central  banks,  we  have  been  working  to  establish
internationally agreed core principles that major private payment systems  must comply with. In this
regard, Lamfalussy standards, which were established 10 years ago, are well known worldwide, and,
based on these standards, the drafting of new core principles is in progress. With these principles as a
guideline,  we  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  private  payment  systems  and  ensure  that  they
continuously pursue greater efficiency and safety, which is often called “oversight” abroad.
Innovation  in  information  and  communications  technology  has  raised  a  new  issue  about  our
relationship with individual financial institutions. Since their financial strength and risk management
5
BIS Review 84/2000
might have a big adverse impact on the efficiency and stability of the financial system as a whole, it is
an important issue for the central bank to evaluate its business relationship with individual financial
institutions. As I mentioned, we have recently begun to observe a new provider of payment services
such  as  institutions  that  specialize  in  internet  banking.  If  a  banking  subsidiary  of  a  non-financial
business firm  requests to  open  an  account  with  us,  we  will  decide  whether  to  enter  into  a  business
relationship with it in light of the already published standards for account opening and by examining
such factors as its capital base in comparison with the intrinsic risks faced, the relationship with  its
parent,  and  its  contingency  plans.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  paying  close  attention  to  how  such
subsidiaries might develop payment operations because their activity might exert not a small influence
on the efficiency and safety of payment and settlement systems. If we establish a business relationship
with such subsidiaries, we will monitor them through on-site examination and off-sight monitoring.
Views  are  now  divided  as  to  how  the  move  toward  mega-banks  will  change  risks  in  the  financial
system.  Some  are  concerned  that  the  financial  system  might  become  more  vulnerable  to  contagion
than before because such moves will bring about the concentration of risks. Others are more optimistic
and  believe  that  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  will  become  more  robust  in  terms  of  risk  taking
because  individual  financial  institutions  will  become  stronger  due  to  higher  profitability  and  an
improved BIS capital ratio as financial consolidation progresses.
At  the  moment,  non-financial  business  firms  are  expected  to  enter  banking  by  first  establishing  a
subsidiary which will acquire a banking license. Amid the move toward mega-banks, many financial
groups  will  establish  banking  subsidiaries  under  their  respective  holding  companies.  The  Bank  of
Japan  will  naturally  examine  those  banking  subsidiaries  that  are  direct  current  account  holders.
However, if parent companies and holding companies have the power to make important management
decisions, such as business operation and risk management strategy, for subsidiaries that hold current
accounts  with  the  Bank  of  Japan,  then  examination  of  subsidiaries  alone  might  not  be  sufficient  to
truly  grasp  their  condition.  In  such  a  case,  we  will  need  to  conduct  a  review  of  parent  companies,
including on-site examinations, to the extent necessary.
Japan’s financial system has been changing against the background of rapid innovation in information
and  communications  technology.  And,  as  always,  it  is  an  important  task  for  the  Bank  of  Japan  to
contribute to improving the functioning of the financial system by increasing the efficiency and safety
of payment and settlement systems. By responding to this task, we hope that the financial system will
function to appropriately reallocate the financial assets of the household sector, which amount to more
than  1,380  trillion  yen.  If  such  a  reallocation  mechanism  works  properly  according  to  market
discipline,  it  will  provide  strong  support,  from  the  financial  side,  for  the  promotion  of  structural
reform, which is one of the major challenges Japan’s economy faces.
BIS Review 84/2000
6
