Stephen Grenville: Inflation targeting in the world of volatile capital flows
Speech by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Bank of
Thailand’s International Economic Conference “Practical Experiences on Inflation Targeting”, held in
Bangkok on 20 October 2000.
 While a number of developed countries adopted inflation targeting in the early part of the 1990s, there
was  a  commonly  held  view  that  it  would  not  be  easy  to  apply  this  approach  to  monetary  policy  in
emerging  countries.  For  instance,  Paul Masson  et al.  (1997)  set  out  the  prerequisites  and  building
blocks of this monetary framework, identifying the main ones as being:
• 
the  ability  to  carry  out  a  substantially  independent  monetary  policy,  especially  one  not
constrained by fiscal considerations; and
freedom from commitment to another nominal anchor such as the exchange rate or wages.
• 
They concluded that “these fairly stringent technical and institutional requirements cannot be met by
many developing countries because seigniorage remains an important source of finance and/or because
there is no consensus that attainment of low inflation should be the overriding objective of monetary
policy.  We  thus  conclude  that  the  way  to  improve  the  monetary  and  inflation  performance  of
developing countries may not be through the adoption of a framework akin to inflation targeting, at
least not in the near term”.
In the short period since then, there has been a lot more attention and interest in inflation targeting in
emerging-market countries. What has caused this change of view? One answer is that the literature had
been overly influenced by the poor inflationary record in Latin America in the 1980s, and as the better
record in Latin America in the 1990s became clearer, commentators and analysis came to recognise
the benefits of an inflation targeting framework.
Perhaps  more  importantly  still  (and  relevant  to  this  paper  because  of  its  emphasis  on  the  external
sector and capital flows), decisions about exchange rate regimes have put inflation targeting more in
the forefront. To the extent that a number of Latin American countries had chosen a fixed exchange
rate as the nominal anchor for their monetary policy, in the hope of driving down the rate of inflation
and keeping it low by a commitment to a fixed exchange rate, there was no place for inflation targeting
in  this  strategy:  this  was  clearly  an  alternative  strategy  to  inflation  targeting.  But  over  time,  the
fashionable  paradigm  on  exchange  rate  regimes  has  shifted,  for  several  reasons.  First,  a  number  of
countries found the use of the exchange rate as a nominal target presented serious problems during the
phase  of  inflation  reduction.  Even  though  this  strategy  might  have  been  quite  effective  in  getting
inflation  down,  inflation  came  down  slowly  and  greatly  eroded  their  international  competitiveness.
There was, also, the “exit” problem. Secondly, there was much more attention on finding an exchange
rate regime which would help with the difficult task of adapting to a world of large and sometimes
volatile capital flows. While some countries responded to this by “hardening” their fixed exchange rate
policies (even to the extent of adopting currency boards or dollarisation), a number of other countries
have moved to the opposite end of the exchange regime spectrum, to some variation on floating rates.
Thirdly,  of  course,  there  were  crises  in  several  fixed  rate  countries  (Mexico  and  Brazil),  and  they
adopted flexible exchange rates as a result.
It  is  this  more  widespread  adoption  of  exchange  rate  regimes  at  the  floating  end  of  the  spectrum  -
which I would like to call “flexible” rather than “floating” (more on this later) - that brought inflation
targeting to centre-stage. Once a fixed exchange rate is abandoned as the nominal anchor of monetary
policy, the question is what should be put in its place.
Going back several decades, the answer might have been to adopt some form of monetary target. But
we have come to recognise (some of us painfully) that there is a very uncertain relationship between
1
BIS Review 106/2000
the monetary aggregates and the final objectives of macro policy (inflation and output). If there is a
relationship,  it  does  not  have  enough  stability  and  predictability  to  make  it  an  effective  basis  for
monetary policy.
So if this option is not feasible or desirable, and if fixed exchange rates are not the answer (for some
other reason), then the third main alternative to unconstrained discretion for monetary policy is some
form of inflation targeting. While it might still be possible to have an informal regime with a lot of
discretion (it could be argued that the United States is in this category), the “total discretion” regime is
one that requires a long history of good performance and quite a bit of confidence on the part of the
markets in the monetary authorities. For most of us, what we need is a regime which provides what
has  been  called  “constrained  discretion” -  a  consistent framework  which  will  help  the  authorities  to
resist  the  various  political  pressures  which  are  on  them  (often  captured  under  the  rubric  of  “time
inconsistency”); which the markets will judge to be in some sense “best practice”; but which allows
the authorities sufficient discretion to handle successfully the exigencies and shocks which inevitably
arise and which have been the downfall of simple mechanical rules. Hence the attraction of inflation
targeting, not only to those developed countries which adopted it in the early 1990s, but to emerging
countries which, having come through the Asian crisis, now accept that a high degree of flexibility of
the  exchange  rate  is  desirable.  In  this  world,  we  need  some  kind  of  framework  to  help  in  the
increasingly complex (both economically and politically) task of running good monetary policy which,
in the end, will be judged very largely in terms of the inflation performance.
What is inflation targeting?
Rick Mishkin  (2000,  p 1)  puts  the  heart  of  inflation  targeting  this  way:  “Inflation  targeting  is  a
monetary  policy  strategy  that  encompasses  five  main  elements:  (1) the  public  announcement  of
medium-term numerical targets for inflation; (2) an institutional commitment to price stability as the
primary goal of monetary policy, to which other goals are subordinated; (3) an information inclusive
strategy in which many variables, and not just monetary aggregates or the exchange rate, are used for
deciding the setting of policy instruments; (4) increased transparency of the monetary policy strategy
through communication with the public and the markets about the plans, objectives, and decisions of
the monetary authorities; and (5) increased accountability of the central bank for attaining its inflation
objectives. The list should clarify one crucial point about inflation targeting: it entails much more than
a  public  announcement  of  numerical  targets  for  inflation  for  the  year  ahead”.  Note,  in  particular,
point 3.
It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  inflation  target  is  an  alternative  (not  a  complement)  to  an
exchange rate target. Mishkin and Savastano (2000), in examining the Chilean experience, noted that
Chile  had  embraced  both  an  inflation  target  and  an  exchange  rate  target  (a  moving  band),  but  was
always prepared to make the exchange rate target subservient to the inflation target to the extent that
there was any conflict. So the first strong point we want to make is that countries need to settle on
their exchange rate regime before they decide to adopt inflation targeting, and if they have a strong
commitment to a particular exchange rate target, then it will be very difficult to simultaneously pursue
an inflation target. This  does  not  mean  that  the  exchange  rate  is irrelevant to the  inflation  targeting
regime - far from it. In fact, I will spend a fair bit of my talk today trying to figure out just where the
exchange rate does feature within an inflation target. But the basic starting point is that it has to be part
of and subservient to the inflation targeting regime.1 So inflation targeting should be seen as part of an
overall approach to macro policy, encompassing fiscal policy and the exchange rate regime.
1 Mishkin  and  Savastano  (2000,  p 7)  observe:  “What  is  important  to  stress,  however,  is  that  from  the  perspective  of
monetary policy a strategy of monetary targeting or inflation targeting does not imply or require “benign neglect” of the
exchange  rate  and  no  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  (ie a  ‘clean’  float).  What  matters  is  that  the  central
bank  makes  it  clear  to  the  public,  through  both  its  actions  and  pronouncements,  that  the  nominal  exchange  rate  will
always move in the direction set by the market and, crucially, that the exchange rate is not a nominal anchor for monetary
policy and inflation expectations”.
BIS Review 106/2000
2
Evolution of the inflation targeting framework, and the role of economic activity
At the same time that changes in views about exchange rate regimes have made inflation targeting a
relevant  option  for  a  wider  range  of  countries,  so  too  the  inflation  targeting  framework  has,  itself,
become  more  complex  over  time,  with  an  increasing  recognition  that  a  simple  interpretation  of  an
inflation target is misleading, or at least incomplete, as a guide for policy. Whereas early versions of
inflation  targeting  simply  specified  a  target  (usually  reasonably  rigorously,  ie narrowly),  and  even
went  out  of  their  way  to  avoid  any  mention  of  economic  activity  (or  its  related  variables,  such  as
unemployment)  in  the  target  itself  or  in  inflation  reports,  over  time  there  has  been  an  increasing
recognition  that  the  target  is  operationally  much  more  complicated  than  this,  and  that  for  it  to  be
successful  it  must  embody  a  considerable  degree  of  flexibility.  Hence,  the  notion  of  “constrained
discretion”. It is a reminder, if you like, that whatever you do in economic policy must be able to pass
through the filter of common sense. You must always keep your eyes open and wits alert, taking in all
the signals which the economy is giving.2
In  broad-brush  terms,  the  change  which  has  come  about  in  the  specification  of  inflation  targeting
regimes  comes  from  the  recognition  that  if  the  inflation  target  is  specified  narrowly  and  the  time
horizon  over  which  it  must  be  achieved  is  tight,  then  the  effort  to  keep  the  actual  inflation  rate
constantly  within  a  narrow  band  will  involve  quite  a  bit  of  short-term  variation  of  the  interest  rate
lever (and, consequentially, the exchange rate), and policy will be jerking output around disruptively,
probably unnecessarily. Central banks may regard their sole objective as inflation, but it seems pretty
clear that the community’s wishes (their objective function) have output in there as well. Any central
bank  which  achieves  its  inflation  objective  but  damages  output  in  a  way  unacceptable  to  the
community will not keep its mandate for long. It is the recognition of this point which has produced a
voluminous  discussion and  academic  literature,  which  basically  asks  the  question:  what  is  the  right
trade-off between rigid adherence, moment by moment, to the inflation target (on the one hand) and a
steady path of output (on the other).
So  the  issue  here  is  the  specification  of  the  target:  if  it  is  too  “tight”,  output  will  be  unnecessarily
volatile. If too loose, policy will lack credibility and the inflation objective will not be achieved. There
are obviously difficult issues here, which differ from country to country and, even within a particular
country,  probably  change  as  the  inflation  targeting  framework  gets  more  acceptance.  When  an
inflation target is first put in place, it probably needs to be more rigid in order to gain acceptability and
credibility,  but  as  credibility  is  established,  there  is  more  opportunity  to  let  go  a  bit  of  slack  on
inflation variability over time, in order to smooth other variables such as interest rates, exchange rates
and  output.  All  these issues  will  be covered  by  other speakers,  so  I  should  focus  on  the  one  which
stems  directly  from  issues  of  capital  flow -  ie the exchange  rate -  and  ask  if,  and  how, the  inflation
targeting regime should be modified to adapt it to the fact that the economy is open, and this openness
(providing  shocks  both  on  the  trade  and  capital  account)  is  transmitted  via  exchange  rate  changes.
How should this be incorporated into the inflation framework?
Capital flows
First of all, just a reminder of how big, volatile and potentially damaging capital flows can be for the
countries of this region. The most graphic measure of how big they are is to remind you that in 1996
Thailand received capital inflows equal to 13 per cent of its GDP - an inflow which no country could
have absorbed easily. To see how volatile these flows are, we again need to look no further than the
recent experience, where inflows of US$90 billion per year turned into outflows of US$50 billion per
year.
To add to these historical observations of size and volatility, let me assert that flows of this kind will
return, and will be the norm rather than the exception. What makes me confident in asserting this is the
2 As policymakers we should be pleased by this view, because the alternative - that it is a mechanical process which can be
captured by a relatively simple one-line rule - would mean that there is no serious job for us to do.
3
BIS Review 106/2000
existence of huge portfolios in the developed countries, in the form of actively-managed funds seeking
the highest return in a globalised world. The managers will inevitably shift part of their portfolios to
the  countries  of  this  region,  if  only  because  their  actual  degree  of  diversification  is  well  below  the
theoretical norm: these portfolios do not yet have enough weight of emerging market assets. On top of
this  (again  a  subjective  assertion),  the  countries  of  this  region  will  have  above-average  profit
opportunities over the next decades as they  move towards the technological frontier. Diversification
and profit prospects will drive developed countries’ portfolio managers to shift funds into this region.
The question of scale is not simply  that  the  supply  of  these  funds  comes  from  portfolios  which are
huge: the point that Paul Volcker has emphasised again and again is one of relative size, in that the
recipient financial institutions and even the entire countries are quite small compared with the size of
the  portfolios  which  have  already  been  built  up  in  America  and  Europe -  and these  portfolios seem
likely to continue to grow strongly, as private individuals increasingly respond to concerns about their
retirement incomes. One more subjective assessment: these flows are likely to be volatile; this view
comes from the persistent evidence that financial markets overshoot and behind this overshooting is
herding and contagion - “fear, greed and ignorance” are still important motivations of capital flow, and
are likely to remain so. So the starting point, the environment in which we will have to work, is one of
large and volatile capital flows.
Exchange rate regimes
This takes us directly to questions of exchange rate regime. While there will be legitimate and indeed
powerful cases where individual countries might want to adopt a fixed rate (Hong Kong is the classic
example),  these  are  special  cases  driven  by  the  specifics  of  their  environment.  The  much  more
common case will encourage countries to move towards the flexible end of the exchange rate regime
spectrum, and this immediately raises the issue: with the exchange rate floating or flexible, what will
be the nominal anchor for monetary policy?
The extra element which we should discuss here is that it cannot realistically be expected that flexible
exchange rates will be stable. Even between the Big Three, where there are deep financial institutions,
and  well-developed  ideas  on  the  behaviour  of  the  exchange  rate  which  should  guide  markets  and
anchor their exchange rate expectations, it is now abundantly clear that the exchange rate can move
substantially, not driven  by  the fundamentals.  One  only  has  to quote  the  yen  at  80 per US dollar in
April 1995,  followed  by  147  in  mid 1998  to  see  the  problem.  We  are,  in  all  probability,  observing
some  similar  phenomenon  in  relation  to  the  US dollar  and  the  euro.  If  such  large  fluctuations  can
occur in deep, well-developed markets with long history of flexible rates and clear ideas on how the
price discovery process works (ie a well-defined “model”), then how much more difficult for emerging
countries  with  no  long  histories  of  exchange  rate  behaviour,  relatively  undeveloped  financial
institutions, and very few players (either at home or abroad) who are prepared to “take a position” on
the exchange rate, which - in the textbook story - is the anchor holding the exchange rate reasonably
stable.
So this takes us to what I believe is the central issue in this topic - given that large and volatile capital
flows  will  produce  quite  large  swings  in  exchange  rates,  how  should  this  be  incorporated  into  an
inflation targeting framework?
Exchange rates and the inflation target
This has been the subject of considerable academic research in recent years (see Ball (2000), Bharucha
and Kent (1998), Ryan and Thompson (2000) and Svensson (1998)). I will not attempt to add to this,
but merely to give an intuitive, heuristic interpretation of the issues.
Perhaps the easiest way to think about this is in terms of a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate. To
the extent that this pushes up inflation (via “cost push” channels, and also via the stimulus to activity
which  a  depreciation  provides),  how  should  an  inflation  targeting  regime  respond?  Of  course  the
depreciation cannot be an excuse for allowing inflation to rise to a permanently higher rate. So, to the
extent that the central bank’s objective is stated simply in terms of an inflation target, this clearly still
has to be met. The issue is: “over what time horizon”? Knowing that any change in interest rates will
BIS Review 106/2000
4
have  an  effect  on  activity  (after  all,  this  is  one  of  the  principal  channels  of  monetary  policy
transmission), how much “damage” should be done to activity to offset not only the extra stimulus to
activity from the depreciation, but the cost push effects as the effects of the depreciation feed through
to prices?
If the authorities had perfect foresight and were sure that the depreciation was temporary and short-
lived, then they might well want to do nothing - whatever upward pressures there are on prices will be
unwound in due course, and provided price expectations are not dislodged during this process, then no
great harm is done by any temporary increase in inflation.3 But on the other hand, if the depreciation is
permanent,  even  if  the  pressure  on  inflation  via  the  cost  push  channel  is  a  one-shot  boost,  the
depreciation gives an ongoing stimulus to activity which needs to be offset.
We are already getting, from this example, a hint of the central issue - that is, that policymakers need
more information than is available from a mechanical interpretation of (or rigid adherence to) a simple
inflation  target,  if  they  are  to  distinguish  between  these  cases  and  get  the  right  answer,  which  will
differ  depending  on  the  circumstances.  Most  specifications  for  an  inflation  target  do  not  include
something which begins: “it depends …”. But in an uncertain world, this is the right starting point.
It  is  intuitively  tempting  to  suggest  that  the  inflation  target  should  be  rejigged  so  as  to  focus  on
domestic prices (either non-traded goods or, the more deeply-embedded version, wages). The intuition
here is that, if the exchange rate depreciation is indeed temporary and not very long-lived, then it is
good policy to ignore it, allowing the temporary rise in inflation. While this gets the right answer in
the case of a temporary and reversed change in the exchange rate, it does not seem  to  get the right
answer if the exchange rate change is long-lived or structural. It is true that the direct cost push effect
of  the  depreciation  on  inflation  may  well  be  once-off  and  therefore  will  pass  out  of  the  system
(hopefully  without  disturbing  price  expectations).  But  the  depreciation  leaves  a  permanent  boost  to
activity which remains there unless or until inflation wipes out the effect of the nominal depreciation.4
When  we are  in the  world  of “it  depends …”, then  we  need  to relate the  policy  advice  much  more
specifically to the particular economy in question. At the Reserve Bank of Australia, we have  done
some  work  asking  the  question  whether  focusing  on  non-traded  prices  in  the  face  of  a  variety  of
shocks would tend to give better answers, and the short answer is “no”. “Non-traded inflation (and unit
labour  cost  growth)  rules  appear  to  generate  at  least  as  much  variability  in  output  and  aggregate
inflation - it is aggregate inflation that we care about - without any significant reduction in interest rate
variability” (Ryan and Thompson 2000).
These same issues were examined by Larry Ball (2000). He is attracted to the idea that “optimal rules
in open economies  differ considerably  from  optimal  rules  in closed economies.  In  open  economies,
stability is best achieved by targeting “long-run inflation” - a measure of inflation adjusted to remove
transitory effects  of exchange  rate  movements”.  But this is just  another  way  of  stating  the  intuition
with which this section opened - that in the face  of  temporary  exchange rate  shocks,  the authorities
should not react but in the face of a permanent or structural change in the exchange rate, they should.
The trick is knowing, as the exchange rate moves, whether it is temporary or structural. In practice, it
would seem sensible to assume that at least some of the movement is structural, or at least will last
long enough to either damage price expectations, or affect economic activity (too much expansion, in
the case of a depreciation). So I am not sure that the Ball rule has advanced us much past the intuition.
3 The damage done by short-term exchange rate movements may change over time, and be regime-dependent: “It is also
important  for  central  banks  to  recognise  that,  as  is  the  case  for  most  economic  relationships,  the  passthrough  from
exchange rate changes to prices is likely to be regime-dependent. After a sustained period of low inflation with effective,
as  opposed  to  fictional,  exchange  rate  flexibility,  the  informational  content  of  the  exchange  rate  in  the  expectations-
formation process and price-setting practices of households and firms is likely to fall. Thus, the widespread view that a
currently high passthrough from exchange rate changes to prices is a barrier to successful inflation targeting is probably
exaggerated” (Mishkin and Savastano 2000, pp 56-57).
4 After  all,  in  this  world,  there  is  no  point  in  wiping  out  the  real  effect  of  the  exchange  rate  change,  because  we  are
assuming that this is reflecting some long-term fundamentals, to which the economy should be adapting.
5
BIS Review 106/2000
But perhaps this is the important point to make - we still need to use intuition, and common sense, in
implementing inflation targets.5
Ball also  raises  another controversial  but  important  issue  in  trying  to  incorporate  the  exchange  rate
into an inflation targeting rule. He makes the case that  the  authorities  should  use  as  their  operating
rule (ie their policy reaction function) a monetary conditions index, rather than an interest rate. It is
interesting that an academic should come to examine this issue at this stage, because it has been an
issue tried in practice by at least two countries - Canada and New Zealand - and both have abandoned
or de-emphasised the use of an MCI. In Australia, it was urged on us (by the OECD). Ball examines
this issue with great finesse and subtlety, but let me try to set out the issues intuitively. It is true that
when an exchange rate goes down, this will be expansionary on an economy and if nothing else has
happened, then interest rates will need to be higher. So if the right weightings can be found between
interest rates and the exchange rate, it might be possible to produce an index which reflects, in some
sense,  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  practice,  however,  things  do  not  remain  the  same.  In
particular,  there  is  often  a  good  reason  why  the  exchange  rate  is  moving  down,  and  in  the  case  of
Australia in particular, it is often because commodity prices have moved unfavourably. In this world
of lower commodity prices, we need a more expansionary stance of monetary policy, and the fall in
the exchange rate provides this more or less automatically. It would not be appropriate or good policy
to offset this by raising interest rates. Once again, I am afraid, good policymaking starts off with the
proviso: “it depends …”.
So far I have talked about the sorts of problems we have faced in countries like Australia and New
Zealand. My intuition is that the countries of this region will face a different problem if they use the
combination  of  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  inflation  targeting  as  a  guide  to  the  “constrained
discretion” of policymaking. The problem is a familiar one, faced during the first half of the 1990s.
That is, that there are very large and increasing capital inflows, which put continuing upward pressure
on the exchange rate. Following the reasoning I have outlined so far, the proper response to this is to
allow the exchange rate to appreciate. To the extent that this is a long-term or structural change, the
inflation targeting framework would allow the appreciation to be reflected in inflation, to the extent
that it meant that non-traded (domestic) prices would rise faster than the target. On most counts, this is
o.k. -  it  is  proper  that  the  relative  price  between  tradeables  and  non-tradeables  changes  (in  order  to
encourage the current account deficit that is the counterpart of the financial capital inflows). But it is a
legitimate question to ask whether, having set an inflation target on the basis that this rate of inflation
is not disruptive, to accept that some of the most central and basic prices (principally wages) will rise
faster than this - see footnote 4. There is, of course, also the very substantial danger that a rise in non-
tradeable  prices  faster  than  the  target  inflation  rate  will  trigger  an  asset  boom,  particularly  in  the
classic non-traded asset of real estate property. There is also the issue that, compared with the situation
before  the  capital  inflow  and  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate,  interest  rates  will  have  to  fall:  we
know that the extra capital inflows are putting pressure on domestic asset prices, and it might well be
asked whether this is an appropriate time to be easing domestic interest rates - which seems to be the
implication of a simple reading of an inflation targeting regime.
I  hope  I  have  said  enough  about  this  case  (which  I  believe  will  be  relevant  to  many  of  you  before
long), to alert you to the policy difficulties which are faced in this environment. I hope I have not left
you with the impression that I know what the right answer is in this  case.  I  would  return  to  what  I
5 There may be another, subtly different, reason for focusing on domestic prices, separate from the point that movement in
exchange-rate-driven tradeable prices may be temporary. From the point of view of the smooth running of the domestic
economy,  some  notion  of  domestic  prices  (either  non-traded  goods  or  wages)  may  be  in  itself  the  proper  target  for
inflation. This depends to some extent on economics, but to some extent on the community’s “objective function”. It may
be possible to argue that an economy will work best if wages (or domestic prices) are growing at a particular constant
rate, and this is properly the main focus of stability. But if this argument were made, it would be important to keep in
mind that the change in relative prices between tradeable and non-tradeable goods is an important signal for investment
and resource allocation, and it would not be sensible to have this relative price moving about too much: it is not only
domestic prices that matter for price signals to the domestic economy. And, in any case, consumers care about the cost of
living (ie aggregate prices).
BIS Review 106/2000
6
regard as the bedrock or base of good economic policymaking - the application of common sense. In
circumstances  where  countries  are  receiving  large  capital  inflows  which  are  difficult  to  absorb,  the
first question might be whether something could be done to slow down these capital inflows without
distorting  the  economy  too  badly,  in  order  to help  the  transition  process. The sorts  of  things  which
might be done here are very intrusive prudential supervision and various rules (or at least monitoring)
on all those who borrow overseas, if only to try to put some “sand in the wheels”. Chilean-style capital
inflow  controls  might  also  be  a  possibility.  Direct  foreign  investment  may  be  easier  to  absorb  (the
goods  inflow  comes  as  part-and-parcel  of  the  capital  inflow,  so  the  transfer  takes  place  with  less
upward pressure on the exchange rate). Having done whatever is feasible and sensible to try to rein in
the capital flows (and hopefully make them less volatile by slowing down the herd), what should be
done then? There is little doubt in my mind that the exchange rate should appreciate. This is part of the
necessary process of bringing about the real transfer of resources (a current account deficit) which is
the counterpart of the financial flows. But, to the extent that the exchange rate may well overshoot in
this  process,  intervention  is  a  legitimate  policy  option.  We  all  know  the  constraints  and  difficulties
with this. In particular, it is fiscally very expensive. But it can be a useful instrument in the toolbox,
for  moderate,  occasional  and  discrete  use.  The  extra  element  which  can,  it  seems  to  me,  be
legitimately applied in these circumstances is to be vigilant in the face of asset price rises, and to use
whatever instrument (within reason) can be used to prevent such bubbles from occurring - prudential
rules, taxation, and even the classic fall-back, bureaucratic red tape.
Of course, there is some hope that the rising exchange rate might discourage the capital inflows (the
textbooks say that it should), although I have little faith that this mechanism will work at all smoothly,
and  there  is  too  much  evidence  of  herd  and  euphoria  behaviour  to  give  me  any  confidence  that
flexibility in the exchange rate will be an effective break on the sorts of capital inflows which you may
well see within a few years.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I would argue just one simple line - the inflation targeting regime has been enormously
useful to us in Australia, and used as a form of “constrained discretion” it may well be an important
part  of  a  good  regime  in  other  Asian  countries  which  do  not  have  a  strong  commitment  to  a  fixed
exchange rate. The inflation target provides an organisational framework for the debate on the impact
of capital flows and the exchange rate. But good policy does not come from simple one-dimensional
rules - it comes from strong institutions, a rigorous policy debate, and a dominant priority given to that
rarest element in policymaking - common sense.
References
Ball, Laurence (2000), “Policy Rules and External Shocks”, NBER Working Paper 7910.
Bharucha,  Nargis  and  Christopher  Kent  (1998),  “Inflation  Targeting  in  a  Small  Open  Economy”,
Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No 9807. Available at http://www.rba.gov.au.
Debelle, Guy (1997), “Inflation Targeting in Practice”, IMF Working Paper WP/97/35, March.
Debelle,  Guy  (1999),  “Inflation  Targeting  and  Output  Stabilisation”,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia
Research Discussion Paper No 1999-08. Available at http://www.rba.gov.au.
Debelle, Guy (2000), “The Viability of Inflation Targeting for Emerging Market Economies”, paper
presented  at  Australian  National  University  Conference,  “Financial  Markets  and  Policies  in  East
Asia”, Canberra, 4-5 September.
Masson, PR, MA Savastano and S Sharma (1997), “The Scope for Inflation Targeting in Developing
Countries”, IMF Working Paper WP/97/130, October.
Mishkin,  Frederic  S  (2000),  “Inflation  Targeting  in  Emerging  Market  Countries”,  NBER Working
Paper 7618.
7
BIS Review 106/2000
Mishkin, Frederic S and Miguel A Savastano (2000), “Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America”,
NBER Working Paper 7617.
Ryan, C and C Thompson (2000), “Inflation Targeting and Exchange Rate Fluctuations in Australia”,
Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper No 2000-06 (forthcoming).
Svensson, Lars (1998), “Open Economy Inflation Targeting”, NBER Working Paper 6545.
BIS Review 106/2000
8
