T T Mboweni: South Africa’s integration into the global economy
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Diplomatic Forum,
Rand Afrikaans University, Johannesburg, on 25 October 2000.
 “Globalisation refers to an evolving pattern of cross-border activities of firms, involving international
investment, trade and collaboration for the purposes of product development, production and sourcing,
and  marketing.  It  is  driven  by  firm  strategies  to  exploit  competitive  advantages  internationally,  use
favourable local inputs and infrastructure, and locate in final markets. These strategies are shaped by
declining  communication  and  transport  costs,  and  rising  R&D  costs;  macroeconomic  trends  and
exchange rate fluctuations; and liberalisation of trade, investment and capital movements”.
OECD Jobs Study. Facts, Analysis, Strategies. 1994.
Introduction
1.
Globalisation  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  There  have  been  many  periods  of  global  economic
integration,  followed  by  periods  of  backlash.  Despite  these  occasional  disruptions,  the  degree  of
economic integration in the world has been rising over time. Especially since the Second World War,
the  pace  of  economic  integration  has  become  more  rapid.  Technological  progress  has  improved
transportation and communications, enhanced information awareness and information processing, and
has  set  the  stage  for  new  products  and  innovations.  These  developments  make  it  much  easier  for
national markets to be globally integrated. Although these markets still do not form a global village,
they  have  become  so  interdependent  that  they  are  changing  the  environment  in  which  economic
activity takes place.
This new economic environment has, however, also brought about certain disadvantages, such as the
large reversals in international capital flows and resulting economic crises in many countries. Towards
the  end  of  last  year,  these  crises  led  to  protests  against  free  trade  and  “global  capitalism”.
Demonstrations were particularly strong in the City of London and at the World Trade Organisation
round  of  negotiations  in  Seattle.  More  recently  the  meetings  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  in
Washington  and  Prague  during  April  and  September  2000  were  also  the  focus  of  protests  against
globalisation and the debt burden of some developing countries. Despite these demonstrations, global
economic integration today is greater than it has ever been and is likely to become even stronger in the
coming years.
Consequences and lessons of globalisation
2.
New  technologies  will  continue  to  make  the  world  a  smaller  place.  The  linkages  between  stock
exchanges in many countries increased significantly in  the  1990s.  Recent  empirical  evidence  shows
that  due to the elimination  of obstacles to free  trade,  greater  financial  market  integration  has led  to
greater market efficiency and better risk-and-return combinations for investors. There has been a sharp
increase  in  the  weight  of  foreign  assets  in  the  portfolios  of  some  agents,  as  well  as  the  correlation
between the relevant stock indices and the ability of each market return to explain the behaviour of
returns  in  other  markets.  The  disadvantage  of  the  greater  integration  of  financial  markets  is  that  it
reduces the ability of domestically focused policies to deal with the problems arising in the respective
domestic financial markets.
South  African  share  prices  are  increasingly  influenced  by  the  views  of  international  investors.
Developments in London, New York, Frankfurt and Tokyo often have a greater influence on domestic
share prices than actual developments in South Africa. South Africa has seen major swings in foreign
exchange  flows,  interest  and  exchange  rates  in  recent  years.  Under  these  circumstances,  errors  of
1
BIS Review 95/2000
judgement  may  be  easily  made  with  domestic  macroeconomic  policy  that  could  have  a  detrimental
effect on aggregate domestic economic activity in South Africa. It can be said that the greater the level
of  integration  of  the  global  market,  the  greater  the  need  for  worldwide  supervision.  One  of  the
important  questions  in  this  regard  is  whether  such  worldwide  supervision  should  be  provided  by  a
single international supervisor or by a closely linked group of supervisors.
South Africa’s sophisticated financial system compares favourably with those of most industrialised
countries and surpasses those of many emerging-market countries. Although great strides have been
made in recent years with global and regional integration, the process of financial integration has had a
few setbacks. South Africa has experienced the contagion effects of periodic emerging markets crisis
that forced painful adjustments. The Mexican crisis, and more recently the Asian crisis, were unlike
any seen before and spread quickly around the world. They quickly took on systemic proportions and
could only be addressed through the immediate mobilisation of substantial international effort.
The  Asian  crisis  in  1997  and  1998  was  characterised  by  three  important  factors.  Firstly  there  were
macroeconomic imbalances, along with massive outflows of short-term capital. Secondly there was an
acute crisis in the financial sector, reflecting institutional and banking practice weaknesses. Thirdly an
economic  management  model  was  applied  which  was  not  in  keeping  with  the  new  demands  of  a
globalised economy. Before massive financial assistance could be considered for these countries, a set
of  measures  or  rules  was  required  that  would  lead  to  greater  transparency,  better  management  and
anti-corruption  efforts.  Furthermore,  the  relationship  among  corporations,  banks  and  governments
needed immediate fundamental changes.
Some analysts believe that the Asian crisis did not stem from so-called “crony capitalism” but from
economic  liberalisation.  They  postulate  that  a  flood  of  speculative  capital  first  caused  a  real-estate
bubble, which affected the rest of the economies when the bubble burst. The problem therefore was
not a lack of openness but too much of it, too soon. They also suggest that as capital rushed out of
Asia, countries like Taiwan and others still had sound fundamentals - budget surpluses, low inflation,
high  savings  rates.  Some  critics  also  maintain  that  the  IMF’s  actions  made  a  bad  situation  worse.
Draconian  prescriptions,  such  as  bank  closures,  budget  cuts,  higher  interest  rates  and  structural
reforms intended to root out everything wrong with the Asian approach to the economic policy, had an
excessive deflationary effect.
Whether the IMF’s actions were entirely appropriate in all instances during the Asian crisis is a matter
for another day, but the important characteristic distinguishing the Asian crisis from other crises was
the  prominence  of  private  financial  institutions  and  other  private  enterprises  as  both  creditors  and
debtors. As Michel Camdessus, former Managing Director of the IMF, pointed out, a number of trends
in  the  integration  of  capital  markets  stand  out.  These  trends  make  the  process  more  complex,  and
include the following:
(1) 
The  domestic  private  sector  is  playing  a  far  more  important  role  in  the  economy  of  most
countries.  Domestic  financial  and  capital  markets  have  sprung  up  in  Beijing  and  Moscow
and a host of other cities in the developing world.
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
The foreign investment community is far more diverse, comprising direct investors, portfolio
investors, banks and bondholders.
The different types of investment have responded to globalisation in different ways and even
during crisis periods flows of direct investment have in many instances not fallen steeply.
It is too  simple  to conceive  of nations  as belonging  to  either the  debtor  or  creditor  group.
There are powerful flows in many directions. The largest source of direct foreign investment
in Asia is, for example, Asia itself. Korea, Hong Kong, Thailand and Japan are all important
sources of foreign investment within the region, and remain so even though some were at the
heart of the Asian crises.
Globalisation accelerates and spreads the international consequences of domestic policies. No country
can escape the consequences of globalisation, and all countries are being called upon to ensure “rigour
and transparency in overall economic management; banking and financial sector soundness; reform of
the  institutions  of  the  state  in  terms  of  seeking  public  sector  efficiency,  appropriate  regulation,
BIS Review 95/2000
2
emphasis  on  the  rule  of  law,  independence  of  the  judiciary  (and  the  central  banks),  anti-corruption
measures, etc.; and growth that is centered on human development”.
Whether a country is large or small, a financial crisis can become systemic through contagion on the
globalised  markets.  The  domestic  economic  policies  of  the  major  industrialised  countries  have  in
recent years increasingly taken into account their potential worldwide impact. This duty of universal
responsibility  is  also  becoming  important  for  all  countries,  large  and  small.  As  globalisation
progresses, all countries take a measure of responsibility for the stability of the international financial
system and the quality of world growth. This adds commitment and responsibility that are required of
every government in the management of their economies. Globalisation also concerns the worldwide
integration of financial markets. Therefore active participation in this integration process implies that
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  have  to  be  subjected  to  the  disciplines  of  the  international  market.
Globalisation mercilessly exposes the shortcomings in national economic policies in countries that do
not apply the universal “laws” for prudent macroeconomic management. The process of globalisation
accentuates  the  pressure  for  change  and  for  greater  coordination  and  harmonisation  of  economic
policies.
The  World  Bank,  IMF,  OECD  and  other  international  organisations  are  encouraging  countries  to
discover what the consequences are of the circular relationship between the integrity of monetary and
financial  management,  high-quality  growth,  and  poverty  reduction.  Without  poverty  reduction,  the
first two have little chance of enduring, and without the first two, any efforts to reduce poverty will
take longer and be less successful.
South Africa’s re-entry into the global economy
3.
Since  1994  South  Africa  has  introduced  major  changes  to  domestic  political,  social  and  economic
structures.  After  years  of  apartheid-induced  isolation  from  the  global  economy,  countries  lifted
sanctions and companies ceased disinvesting from South Africa. Profitable opportunities were opened
up for South Africa to reintegrate its economy into the global economy.
South Africa’s integration into the global economy had important implications for the South African
banking sector. The official policy has been to open up the South African banking sector to foreign
participation, and to expose South African banking institutions to foreign competition. As a result of
this  policy,  15  foreign  banks  have  registered  branches  in  South  Africa  and  60  foreign  banks  do
business  in  the  country  through  representative  offices.  The  South  African  banking  sector  remains
sound  and  well-managed.  Some  mergers  are  taking  place  in  line  with  world  trends,  and  the  35
domestic banks are rationalising their activities to face the challenges of globalisation. The four big
banks in South Africa have assets of over R500 billion. The registered banks in our country have an
aggregate balance sheet of some R772 billion as at the end of August 2000 with capital and reserves of
R71,4  billion.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  responsible  for  bank  regulation  and  supervision
which is based entirely on the recommendations of the Basel Committee. Regulation and supervision
concentrates on the management of risk exposures within each banking institution.
Exchange controls were relaxed by removing all restrictions on current account transactions, and on
the inward and outward transfer of funds by non-residents, and then by gradually enabling residents to
invest  specific  amounts  of  capital  outside  the  country.  As  a  step  along  the  indicated  path  of
systematically  abolishing  exchange  controls,  all  such  controls  over  non-residents  were  abolished  in
March 1995 when the dual exchange rate system was terminated. The result was that the financial rand
disappeared and the proceeds of local sales of non-resident-owned South African assets were regarded
as freely transferable from the Republic and could also be freely used in the Republic for any other
purpose. In March 1997, the Minister of Finance also announced that individuals who are tax-payers
in good standing would be allowed to invest a specified amount of their savings in any manner abroad
and  in  fixed  property  in  SADC  countries.  Alternatively,  they  would  be  allowed  to  hold  foreign
currency  deposits,  up  to a  defined  limit,  with  South  African authorised  foreign-exchange  dealers  or
with foreign banks outside South Africa. In February 1999 the Minister also increased the amount that
South African corporates investing abroad could remit from South Africa from up to R30 million per
3
BIS Review 95/2000
new  investment  project  in  foreign  countries  and  R50  million  in  SADC  to  R50  million  and
R250 million respectively.
The  large  capital  inflows  over  the  past  few  years  have  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to  increase  the
country’s official foreign reserves from the equivalent of 6½ weeks’ worth of imports of goods and
services at the end of 1994 to 14½ weeks’ worth at the end of June 2000. The increase in the country’s
official foreign reserves in recent years also made it possible to substantially relax exchange controls
over the period.
Government  took  the  lead  in  reintroducing  South  Africa  gradually  to  the  global  markets  for  public
loan issues. A number of issues were made in the global and Yankee US dollar markets, in Sterling,
Deutsche  Mark  and  in  the  Samurai  Yen  market.  South  African  private  corporates  were  also
encouraged to raise funds through equity and bond issues in international capital markets, and were
allowed to use part of the proceeds from such issues for financing the expansion of their activities in
the rest of the world.
South African institutional investors, such as insurers and pension funds, were allowed to  exchange
part  of  their  rand-denominated  portfolios  for  foreign-currency  denominated  assets  through  swap
transactions  entered  into  with  foreign  counterparts.  In  accordance  with  the  principle  of  relaxing
exchange  controls,  permission  was  granted  in  June  1995  to  South  African  institutional  investors
(long-term  insurers,  pension  funds  and  unit  trusts)  to  exchange,  through  approved  asset  swap
transactions,  part  of  their  South  African  portfolio  for  foreign  securities.  In  March  1997  it  was
announced  that  institutions  that  qualified  for  asset  swaps  would  be  broadened  to  include  regulated
fund  managers  registered  with  the  Financial  Services  Board.  With  effect  from  July  1997,  portfolio
managers  registered  with  the  Financial  Services  Board  as  well  as  stockbroking  firms  which  are
members of either the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, the Bond Exchange of South Africa or the South
African Futures Exchange, could also apply to acquire foreign portfolio investments by way of asset
swaps.
Integration  into  the  world  financial  markets  required  a  major  restructuring  of  the  institutional
arrangements  in  the  South  African  capital  markets.  The  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  (JSE)
introduced  changes  to  provide  for  corporate  ownership,  foreign  ownership  of  stockbrokerage  firms,
dual capacity trading, negotiated commissions, and electronic screen trading. The JSE is continuing to
improve  its  facilities  by  providing  for  the  immobilisation  and  dematerialisation  of  shares,  and  for
improved clearing and settlement arrangements. The total value of shares traded on the JSE increased
from R63 billion in 1995 to R448 billion in 1999.
The most spectacular increase in volumes over the past few years took place in the Bond Exchange of
South Africa. Total turnover in this market increased from R2 trillion in 1995 to R8,8 trillion in 1999.
The relaxation of South African exchange controls made an important contribution to the development
of the Bond Exchange and transactions by non-residents in this market have increased significantly.
The adjustments that have occurred in the South  African  economy,  and  on  South  African  monetary
policies  during  the  past  few  years,  were  necessary  and  timely.  These  adjustments  were  needed  to
restore  and  maintain  overall  economic  equilibrium.  South  Africa  has  increasingly  developed  robust
financial, economic and foreign exchange markets. This latter market is growing rapidly and its daily
average turnover now exceeds $9 billion.
Another interesting development following the globalisation process is the emergence of a Euro-rand
market. The outstanding nominal amount of  rand-denominated loans  raised  in  this  market  by  South
African  and  non-South  African  borrowers  from  non-South  African  investors,  is  now  almost  R202
billion. A part of these loan issues is usually hedged by investing in South African bonds.
Globalisation and monetary policy
4.
The reintegration of South Africa into the world economy and the liberalisation of financial markets
also have important implications for monetary policy. As Bill McDonough, President of the Federal
Reserve  Bank,  pointed  out  in  1998:  “The  technology  for  processing  information  and  making  this
BIS Review 95/2000
4
information  widely  available  has  fundamentally  altered  the  way  the  world  channels  saving  into
investment.  No  longer  does  the  global  economy  rely  primarily  on  loans  from  commercial  banks  to
meet its financing and investment needs. Rather, more than even before, the global economy of today
looks  to  funds  from  the  fixed-income  and  related  capital  markets  to  intermediate  its  credit  needs.
Because the global capital markets have become so important in the credit intermediation process, the
economic well-being of us all depends on the orderly flow of funds in these markets. The flow of these
funds, in turn, increasingly relies on price signals generated by trading activity that takes place daily in
these  markets.  The  reliance  on  secondary  market  trading  for  price  discovery  constitutes  the
fundamental difference between funds from securities markets and loans from banks”.
This change in the way that savings are channelled to investments has resulted in greater volatility in
international capital movements. Recent non-resident transactions on our Bond Exchange are a clear
reflection  of  this  greater  volatility  in  international  capital  flows.  In  such  a  situation,  it  is  more
important  than  ever  before  to  create  and  maintain  a  sound  environment  for  foreign  investment  in  a
country.  This  makes  it  more  imperative  for  monetary  policy  to  pursue  clearly  stated  objectives.
Increasingly  throughout  the  world,  central  banks  are  pursuing  price  stability  as  their  basic  policy
focus. Where countries have high rates of inflation which are out of line with the rest of the world,
disruptive capital flows could occur because of fears of currency misalignments.
The closer integration of the world economy has therefore focused the ultimate objective of monetary
policy and made it even more important to attain this objective. It should, however, also be realised
that  such  a  policy  stance  does  not  provide  unconditional  protection  against  speculative  capital
outflows. External economic shocks or perceived poor policy measures can still trigger a reversal in
capital movements. Monetary policy cannot prevent these reversals. International investors make their
decisions on the basis of a wide variety of developments, including price stability. The best approach
that central banks can follow is to pursue financial stability in a transparent and accountable manner so
that they can at least forestall any uncertainties in this regard.
Although  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  has  been  better  focussed  within  the  context  of
globalisation,  the  integrated  world  economy  has  resulted  in  a  more  complex  mechanism  for
transmitting monetary policy. The relationship between changes in interest rates,  money  supply  and
inflation  has  become  less  clear  under  these  new  conditions,  compared  with  the  period  when  South
Africa was more isolated from external influences. As a result of large international capital flows, the
effects of policy changes are being transmitted to a greater extent through critical indicators such as
bond yields and exchange rates. There are of course longer time lags between policy changes and their
desired impact on the real economy.
These changes in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy have reduced the credibility of the
money  supply  as  an  intermediate  guideline  for  policy.  The  integration  of  financial  markets  and
financial innovations made the demand-for-money function less stable. This was clearly reflected in a
consistent decline in the income velocity of circulation of M3 money of nearly 15 per cent from the
end  of  1994  to  the  end  of  1999.  The  money  supply  accordingly  became  a  less  reliable  anchor  for
monetary policy.
Volatile capital movements further complicate the transmission  mechanism  under floating  exchange
rates, because of the impact that exchange rate changes have on the foreign transactions of a country.
In  a  closed  economy,  the  transmission  mechanism  runs  from  increases  in  the  repo  rate  and  other
short-term  interest  rates through  to  longer-term  interest rates and  asset  prices  and  then to  aggregate
demand  and  prices.  The  open  economy  version  of  the  transmission  mechanism  under  floating
exchange rates runs from interest rates, to nominal exchange rates, to the absolute and relative prices
of tradeable goods and eventually to the prices of non-tradeable goods.
In  view  of  this  more  complicated  transmission  mechanism  in  a  reintegrated  global  economy,  the
Reserve Bank has had to reconsider the framework that it applied in pursuing price stability. Informal
inflation targeting using intermediate money supply guidelines was obviously no longer suitable in the
changed international environment. From the beginning of this year, the authorities therefore decided
to  adopt inflation  targeting  as  the  formal  monetary  policy  framework  of  the  South  African  Reserve
Bank.  This  framework  should  focus  monetary  policy,  increase  transparency  and  lead  to  a  clearer
5
BIS Review 95/2000
accountability  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Such  a  framework  also  allows  for  exchange  rate  flexibility.
Exchange rates should essentially be determined by the supply of and demand for currency in foreign
exchange markets.
Conclusion
5.
The Reserve Bank’s approach to globalisation has been to adapt our framework as well as the banking
structure of the country to comply with the international best practice as understood by international
investors and regulators. This approach recognises the important contribution that these investors can
make to real economic growth, development and employment creation in South Africa.
I  remain  optimistic  about  the  benefits  our  country  will  derive  from  engaging  in  the  financial
globalisation  process  and  the  constructive  role  that  monetary  policy  will  play  in  this  process  by
ensuring financial stability. What we are seeing in many countries, is an improvement in governance,
and the establishment of transparent, arm’s length relationships among governments, corporations and
financial institutions, that are typical of mature markets. We are also witnessing the global acceptance
by  political  leaders  of  the  independence  of  central  banks  as  a  critical  factor  for  credible  monetary
policy.  I  actually  have  a  nice  quote  from  Prime  Minister  Lionel  Jospin  of  France.  He  says  that:
“Independence signifies  ignoring  pressures,  whatever its  source. The independence of central  banks
goes ... beyond independence from political, executive and legislative power. For me it also equates
with  independence  from  private  or  collective  economic  interests,  autonomy  versus  the  short-term,
frequently imposed by capital markets and, finally, freedom of action vis-à-vis the monetary policy of
other central banks”. There are greater responsibilities on all sides. Just as the public sector is being
called upon to change and improve codes of good practice, so too the private sector has to follow suit
by complying with these international norms and codes of good practice.
Thank you very much.
BIS Review 95/2000
6
