David Clementi: The Bank of England
- a central bank post-independence
Speech  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Annual  Leonard
Sainer Lecture, 14 November 2000.
 Introduction
It’s a great pleasure to be asked to give this lecture, the occasion being in honour of Leonard Sainer.
One of my first experiences as a young investment banker in the City was working in the mid-1970s
with Dick Russell and Michael Smith, then the young Turks of Leonard Sainer’s firm, on the financial
reconstruction of a Property Company. We have remained in touch ever since. At the time we were
working on the reconstruction of the Property Company, the Bank of England kept a fatherly eye on
how the matter was progressing, concerned as it then was, and still is, with systemic risk running from
the property sector into the banking sector which funded it. I have to say that it never occurred to me,
with my roots firmly based in the private sector, that I would one day be part of the Bank of England.
Indeed one or two of my friends, Dick Russell and Michael Smith among them, occasionally express
surprise  that  I  have  moved  from  the  commercial  world  of  Investment  Banking  to  Central  Banking.
They like to ask the question: “Does the Investment  Banker  know  the  difference  between  right  and
wrong?” To which the answer is: “Of course he does, provided he’s allowed two guesses!”
Having arrived at the Bank over three years ago, I am often asked what I actually do there. And the
answer is that I have three main roles. First, I am one of the nine members of the MPC; secondly, I
have  responsibility  for  the  Bank’s  work  in  financial  stability;  and  thirdly,  I  have  day-to-day
responsibility for the management of the Bank. One way or another, wearing these three hats involves
me  in  most  of  what  the  new  Bank  of  England  does  -  new  in  the  sense  that  the  1997  changes,
incorporated  in  the  Bank  of  England  1998  Act,  were  fundamental  to  the  Bank’s  activities.  Without
providing  a  personalised  “this  is  how  I  spend  my  day”  account  we  occasionally  read  in  the
newspapers, perhaps I could say a little about each of these roles.
Monetary Policy Committee
Being a member of the Monetary Policy Committee is a hugely rewarding experience.
The  process  we  go  through  has  been  quite  well  documented  elsewhere  so  let  me  be  brief  in  my
description. We are required by the 1998 Bank of England Act to meet at least monthly, although we
have the right to meet as often as we wish. On the Friday before the monthly MPC meeting we meet
with the Economics and Markets staff of the Bank, in what is known as pre-MPC, to go through the
latest  data;  and  this  process  takes  a  whole  morning.  Doing  it  on  a  Friday  allows  us  a  few  days  to
commission any additional work we need ahead of the MPC meeting itself. This is held in our main
committee room under the watchful eye of Augustus John’s portrait of Montagu Norman (Governor of
the Bank between 1920 and 1944) and starts on a Wednesday afternoon. This meeting is given over to
a  discussion  of  the  key  issues  raised  by  the  data  presented  at  the  pre-MPC;  and  of  any  tactical
considerations.  The  following  day,  Thursday  morning,  we  meet  and  after  a  brief  resume  of  the
previous  day’s  discussion  from  the  Governor,  proceed  to  go  around  the  table  with  each  member
indicating the factors he or she considers relevant and his or her vote. The policy decision (ie interest
rates up, down or constant) is released to the market at 12 noon on the Thursday. The minutes of the
meeting, including the individual votes of members, are released two weeks later.
Much has been written about the MPC’s constitution and operation, but perhaps I might make a few
observations.  In  the  first  place,  whilst  there  is  a  good  deal  of  talk  about  the  Bank  of  England’s
independence, it is important to put this in context. The objective of our Monetary Policy deliberations
1
BIS Review 102/2000
- the inflation target - is set annually by the Chancellor, not the Committee, and it is specified fairly
precisely. Thus the decision on the policy objective rests with the elected government, its execution in
the form of the technical decision-making rests with the MPC; and in this sense we tend to talk about
our system as one of “operational independence”.
Secondly, as is well known, the Chancellor has set the inflation target objective at 2.5% for each of the
first three years of operation. Such an explicit target aids accountablility; and plays an important role
in  anchoring  private  sector  expectations.  Our  remit  is  to  aim  for  this  target  at  all  times.  We  are
required  to  regard  deviations  above  and  below  the  target  in  the  same  light  and  the  target  is  thus  a
symmetrical one. We are obliged to write an open letter to the Chancellor if we deviate by 1% either
above  or  below.  The  importance  of  the  symmetry  of  the  target  is  not  well  understood,  but  in  the
working of the committee it is hugely important. As central bankers, we would obviously like to do
“the prudent thing”. And if the 2.5% target had been set as a ceiling, then it would be clearer, at times
of  doubt,  or  when  the  decision  was  finely  balanced,  what  the  right  action  to  take  on  interest  rates
would be. But since the target is set at 2.5% on a symmetrical basis, the concept of “prudence” cannot
be applied in the same way. The result is that we worry as much about being below the target as we do
about being above it. And I believe this makes good economic sense: the problems of severe deflation
are at least as great as severe inflation.
The particular indexed measure of inflation the Chancellor has chosen is RPIX,  that is the headline
RPI  number  after  excluding  -  this  is  the  X  bit  -  mortgage  interest  payments.  Some  believe  that  we
should  move  to  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP),  widely  used  in  Europe  and,
accordingly,  making  comparison  with  Euroland  inflation  easier.  HICP  inflation  in  this  country  has
been running consistently below RPIX by about 1%. This reflects differences in the construction of the
index, in particular the treatment of depreciation of property costs. Some have argued - most recently
the  Engineering  Employers’  Federation  -  that  if  we  moved  to  HICP,  then  interest  rates  could
immediately be lowered. But this does not follow. If we moved to a different calculation of inflation, it
would seem natural to revise the target at the same time. A 2.5% target for HICP would mean that we
are targeting a higher level of inflation than we are at present. In any event, my view is that, as we
seek  to  disseminate  the  benefits  of  low  and  stable  inflation  to  as  wide  an  audience  as  possible,
consistency of the existing index and level is an advantage.
Critics  of  the  process  often  argue  that  the  MPC  should  have  a  second  target;  most  commonly
industrialists argue that this should be an exchange rate target, seeking stability for sterling against our
major trading partners.  I  well  understand the  difficulties that,  in  particular,  exporters  face  given  the
volatile  movements  in  exchange  rates;  and  the  frustration  is  compounded  by  the  difficulty  in
explaining  such  movements  purely  in  terms  of  economic  fundamentals.  Nevertheless  it  should  be
recognised  that  the  recent  historical  experience  of  the  UK  in  operating  monetary  policy  geared  to
exchange  rate  stability  has  been  that  a  conflict  sooner  or  later  emerges  between  the  exchange  rate
objective and other policy considerations, so that the exchange rate objective has to be abandoned. The
most  recent  experience  was  our  membership  of  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  between  1990  and
1992. Fundamentally, there is a problem in operating monetary policy so as to achieve two targets -
which one has primacy? How would the trade-offs be made? My view remains that a single inflation
target objective is a better, as well as much clearer, framework for monetary policy.
My next point relates to the transparency of our process. In almost all committees I have served on in
the  past,  the  process  has  been  one  of  trying  to  achieve  consensus  on  the  way  forward.  The  MPC
process, however, involves no pressure to reach agreement. We are each accountable for our views;
full minutes are taken and published; our individual vote is publicly recorded. This is counter-intuitive
for anyone from a PLC  background.  It  is  impossible to  believe  that  a split in the  Board  of  a  major
corporation, certainly a split that was aired in the press, could exist for any length of time. Either the
split would need to heal rapidly, or more likely some high-profile departures from the Board would
ensue.
But  in  the  MPC  a  system  which  permits  different  views  to  surface  publicly  is  both  refreshing  and
appropriate.  Since  economic  analysis  involves  a  great  deal  of  peering  into  the  future,  it  is  not
surprising  that  there  should  be  disagreement.  There  is,  of  course,  the  old  joke  of  putting  nine
BIS Review 102/2000
2
Economists into one room and getting ten views. But it is better to be open about the disagreements
than try to forge a false sense of consensus. Of course, alongside this transparency and open voting
system goes a degree of personalisation within the Press. An industry has grown up geared to guessing
our personal habits, psychoanalysing our personalities and classifying us into different species of the
aviary. And alongside this has gone a demand for even greater transparency which falls only a little
short of having TV cameras in the Committee Room. All this has resembled at times an economics
version of Big Brother; indeed I expect the viewing economics community will ask next for the right,
through a telephone poll, to vote members off the Committee!
Occasionally the differences of view that surface in the Committee arise from different views about
the workings of some economic relationship; on other occasions they represent a difference in tactical
views. There is more than one interest rate path which would give an inflation profile consistent with
the target. And so there can be differences between those who might at any moment prefer to wait and
see - recognising that this might require a sharper movement in interest rates later on - and those who
might prefer a more pre-emptive activist approach to setting rates, what might be termed the Macbeth
School of Economics: “If it were done when ‘tis done, then ‘t’were well it were done quickly”. The
fact that there are different paths to achieve the 2.5% target is one reason why there is no automatic
link between our inflation forecast, which we publish on a quarterly basis, and that month’s interest
rate decision.
I  mentioned that the setting of interest rates requires  one  to  peer  into the future.  Unfortunately  it is
more  difficult  than  that.  It  also  requires  policy  makers  to  have  a  view  about  what  is  happening
currently.  There  is  often  considerable  uncertainty  about  what  the  current  situation  is  -  a  particular
problem relating to Q3 as we try to assess the impact of the petrol price crisis in September. Even the
past  is  uncertain  and  we  regularly  receive  from  the  ONS  revisions  to  past  data  about  growth  of
different parts of the economy. As I look at the data each month, knowing that some of the dials are
misreading, I am reminded of the saying: that the intelligent man knows that half the data he is looking
at is false; the brilliant man knows which half! More seriously we need to have in our mind a view
about  which  data  series  are  reliable  and  which  are  particularly  erratic.  Happily  the  RPIX  data,  our
goal, is easily observable. But, by way of example, wages, which are a key piece of data, are much less
easy to observe. And as we look at the average earnings data, we need to recognise that, not only is it
difficult to measure and calculate, it will also occasionally exhibit “noisy” features that may obscure
what is going on in the real economy. Indeed, over the Millennium period, as special Y2K bonuses
were being paid, it was very difficult to determine what represented real “news” about the economy,
and what was mere “noise”.
Sitting at the controls of the aircraft, trying to pilot a sensible middle course between the extremes of
unsustainable take-off and hard landing, we need “eyes and ears” on the ground. Our network of Bank
of England Agents is extremely important in this area. Around the country we have twelve Agencies,
in  general  staffed  by  long-serving  Bank  of  England  people,  constantly  collecting  information  at  the
grass-roots level from their many business contacts. And the information, which they provide direct to
the MPC on a monthly basis, can often prove helpful: either in helping us unravel inconsistencies in
the  data;  or,  as  was  the  case  in  the  Summer  and  Autumn  of  1998,  alerting  us  to  problems  in  the
economy before they show up in the official data.
Notwithstanding  the  help  of  the  Agents,  problems  with  interpretation  of  the  data  abound.  Some  of
these will be discussed in our Quarterly Inflation Report, due to be published on Thursday this week. I
hope you will have the opportunity to read it.
Financial stability
Perhaps I could now turn from monetary policy matters to financial stability; and to the second part of
my job as the Deputy Governor responsible for this part of the Bank’s work.
Go back a little over three years and the Bank had a large department with four hundred and fifty staff
supervising banks. Hard on the heels of the decision to grant the Bank independence, the Government
decided  in  May  1997  to  establish  the  Financial  Services  Authority  bringing  together  existing  UK
3
BIS Review 102/2000
financial regulators and supervisors under one roof. The decision was intended to streamline the UK
regulatory framework and, recognising that the distinction between different types of financial firms
had begun to blur, to  bring  together financial  regulation  in  a  single  organisation  and  under  a  single
piece of legislation, the Financial Services and Markets Act. In a world crowded with acronyms, this
gave an opportunity for something of a cull, consigning the numerous self-regulatory organisations -
or SROs - like SFA, IMRO and PIA to history!
However, while you may be able to take financial supervisors (quite literally) out of a central bank,
you cannot remove all responsibility from a central bank for the safe-running of the financial 7 system.
The  Bank  stands  at  the  heart  of  the  financial  system  not  only  in  the  implementation  of  monetary
policy,  monitoring  the  financial intermediaries  that  make  up  the  transmission  mechanism  for  policy
changes,  but  also  operationally,  as  a  market  participant:  on  a  daily  basis  carrying  out  open  market
operations or providing final settlement for payment systems across accounts at the Bank; or, in more
extreme circumstances, intervening in the market to support the currency or to provide liquidity to a
bank in difficulty.
Thus, while responsibility for supervision of individual banks has moved to Canary Wharf, the Bank
has retained responsibility for maintaining the stability of the financial system as a whole. The Bank’s
role is recognised in the Memorandum of Understanding agreed between the Bank, the Treasury and
FSA and published in the Autumn of 1997, which sets out how the three organisations are to cooperate
in  monitoring  the  UK  financial  system.  To  this  end,  the  MOU  established  a  tripartite  Standing
Committee  which  meets  monthly  to  discuss  issues  of  current  concern;  and  cooperation  is  further
enhanced by the fact that I sit on the FSA Board and Howard Davies is a Member of Court.
Coordination  is  also  important  internationally.  The  Asian  Crisis  in  1998  demonstrated  how  quickly
shocks could pass between markets. One response from the international financial community was the
establishment of the Financial Stability Forum, a body similar in purpose to the Standing Committee.
The  Forum  meets  semi-annually,  bringing  together  central  banks,  regulators  and  finance  ministries
from developed and developing countries, to discuss the threats to financial stability. The Bank is an
active participant in the FSF, along with HMT and FSA.
Having described the organisational structure, I want to turn now to the four broad areas  where  the
Bank is involved in financial stability.
The  first  is  the  analysis  of  developments  in  G10  and  emerging  market  economies  and  financial
markets and the potential impact on financial stability. Macro-prudential surveillance is at the core of
the  Bank’s  financial  stability  effort,  bringing  together  detailed  knowledge  of  the  macroeconomic
environment  and  financial  markets  to  identify  potential  vulnerabilities  in  financial  systems  in
aggregate. Recent examples include the volatility of technology stocks, the growing size of telecom
debt or the problems of the Japanese insurance industry. Much of the work is published in the Bank’s
Financial Stability  Review  which is intended  to  promote  public  understanding  of  financial  stability.
The most important part of the FSR is an assessment of the global conjuncture and potential risks to
the UK financial system.
Emerging  market economies have attracted particular attention in recent years.  Not  only  were these
countries the source of the most recent shock to the international financial system in 1998 but, since
that  time,  they  have  been  a  major  focus  in  international  groups  such  as  the  FSF.  The  work  to
strengthen the financial system  has  centred as  much  on  crisis prevention  as crisis  resolution.  Under
crisis prevention, the accent has been on improved disclosure, establishing new international standards
for transparency for governments and private sector firms in the publication of economic and financial
data. In terms of crisis resolution, discussion has turned to the role of the official sector, and the IMF
and World Bank more particularly, in helping countries that get into difficulty. Many of the crises in
emerging  market  economies  have  been  marked  by  a  sudden  withdrawal  of  private  sector  capital,
including  outflows to  private sector  creditors  of  official  funds intended  to  stabilise the  position  and
reverse  this  capital  flight.  The  Bank  of  England  has  taken  a  leading  role  in  discussion  with  other
governments and central banks, and with the private sector market participants, to find a more orderly
approach  to  crisis  situations  and  to  avoid  the  kind  of  damaging  scramble  to  withdraw  funds  from
emerging market economies that marked the Asian Crisis.
BIS Review 102/2000
4
The second area of Bank involvement is market infrastructure, the payments and settlements systems
that  underpin  financial  markets.  Given  the  size  of  payment  flows,  domestic  and  cross  border,  the
importance of robust and reliable systems is paramount. Any failure in payment systems would result
in gridlock and widespread disruption. The Bank has an operational interest, closer to home, in that
payment  systems,  especially  in  the  wholesale  market,  often  rely  on  the  transfer  of  payments  across
central bank accounts. Because of this, under the MOU the Bank is explicitly given responsibility for
the systemic oversight of payment systems. In carrying out this responsibility, we take a close interest
in  the  interaction  of  these  systems  with  other  parts  of  the  infrastructure  -  settlement  systems  and
clearing houses. This interest extends to exchanges and the dizzying process of alliances, mergers and
failed bids  that  has  marked  the attempt  to consolidate  global  equities  markets,  especially  in  Europe
where, despite EMU, trading is still widely split between markets.
The third area of Bank involvement is regulatory policy. Although responsibility for supervision of the
bank has passed to the FSA, the Bank retains an interest in the design of the regulatory structure and
the impact that this has on the stability of the system as a whole. The Bank is represented on the Basel
Supervisors Committee and has been closely involved in discussions on the new Basel Accord and the
capital  requirements  to  be  applied  to  banks.  Clearly  ensuring  that  individual  banks  are  adequately
capitalised has a direct bearing on the ability of the system as a whole to withstand shocks. However it
is only really in a crisis or an economic downturn that it is possible to tell what the full story is. As one
of  my  colleagues  colourfully  puts  it, it is  only  when  the  tide rolls  out  that  you  find  out  who  is  not
wearing swimming trunks!
The final area I would like to mention is the Bank’s role in reviewing financing for business in the
UK. This is more focused on efficiency and competitiveness than financial stability but, over several
years,  the  Bank  has  built  up  a  leading  role  in  looking  at  financing  conditions  for  small  firms  and
high-technology companies. More recently the Bank has  also  become  involved  in the  government’s
initiatives under the Social Exclusion unit to look at financial exclusion and the provision of banking
services to deprived areas. On occasion, the Bank also takes a role in corporate restructuring, holding
the ring between large debtors and their bank lenders. The Bank in this way provides a kind of ACAS
for  syndicated  lenders,  known  as  the  London  Approach.  Like  ACAS,  the  London  Approach  is
voluntary, informal and by mutual agreement. It is also less active now than previously, certainly since
my own first encounter with the Bank in the mid-1970s, hopefully a good sign for Financial Stability.
Management of the Bank
Having dealt with the policy implications of the changes announced by the Government in May 1997 -
the advent of the Monetary Policy Committee and the transfer of line supervision for banks to the FSA
-  I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  profound  impact  that  the  changes  have  had  on  the  Bank  as  an
institution and to the third part of my job, responsibility for day-to-day management of the Bank.
With the new responsibilities for monetary and financial stability came a recognition of the need for
less generalist and more specialist analytical skills, and in particular for highly trained economists. At
the same time, in our banking and other operations, as in other financial organisations, the introduction
of new technology brought increasing demands for staff with emphasis on IT and not purely clerical
skills. These have presented huge challenges for the management of the Bank and its staff. Looking
back over the last three years, we have made changes in many areas, but I would like to pick out four
in particular.
Increased efficiency
First has been the move towards greater efficiency and a reduction in overheads. At the time of the
transfer to the FSA, the Supervision division was, as I have already mentioned, the largest in the 10
Bank with 450 people. However, while the frontline supervisors all moved out, none of the associated
central  services  and  overhead  costs  moved  with  them.  We  committed  to  remove  these  excess
overheads, setting ourselves the target of taking £20 mn off costs - 10% of total costs - over a five-year
period. We are consolidating our property portfolio, shrinking the buildings we use from five down to
5
BIS Review 102/2000
one, our main office in Threadneedle Street, in order to deliver substantial savings in accommodation
and  maintenance  costs.  At  the  same  time  we  have  sought  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  our  central
services; and this has required substantial reductions in numbers in some parts of the Bank.
Our objective has been, as a public sector organisation, to deliver value for money, to ensure that the
Bank  is  cost  effective  in  its  operations  and  comparable  to  best  practice  elsewhere.  Finding  suitable
benchmarks for the Bank, however, is not easy. The Bank employs 2,500 staff which compares with
over 15,000 at the Banque de France and also at the Bundesbank. But direct comparison with other
central banks is made difficult by differences in functions. For example, the Banque de France retains
a network of 211 branches for distribution of banknotes whereas the Bank has closed all but one of its
regional  cash  centres,  moving  to  a  system  using  commercial  banks  for  note  distribution.  Where
possible,  individual  functions  -  personnel,  finance,  property  services  -  are  benchmarked  against
equivalent functions in private sector firms. However the  Bank’s  cost effectiveness  in  all functions,
even those where benchmarks are hard to identify, is monitored closely by management and is subject
also to the scrutiny of the Court of the Bank of England.
Corporate governance
The role of Court and changes to the Bank’s corporate governance arrangements is the second area I
would like to address. The powers of Court to oversee the operations of the Bank were substantially
enhanced by the 1998 Act. In particular the Act:
(a) 
(b) 
requires the Court of the Bank to determine our Objectives and Strategy for the year; and
sets  up  a  non-Executive  Committee  to  review  the  Executive’s  performance  against  the
Objectives.  This  is  chaired  by  our  Senior  Non-Executive,  a  position  formally  designated
under the Act.
So our latest Annual Report for the year to February 2000 sets out the Bank’s ten key Objectives for
the  year,  includes  a  long  description  by  the  Executive  of  the  Bank’s  performance  against  the
Objectives; and finally a section, written by the Non-Executives, commenting on our performance.
The aim of the Act was quite plainly to increase the level of transparency of our operations; and to
raise the accountability of the Executive to Court as a whole, and in particular to the Non-Executive
Directors appointed to review our performance.
Risk control
Thirdly, I would like to comment on the enhancements we have made to our risk controls. This is an
area  where  the  private  sector  has  made  enormous  advances  in  recent  years,  much  of  it  strongly
encouraged by the banking supervisors. Risk management has become more sophisticated with more
differentiation between risks: the separation of credit and market risk; the recognition of operational
risk as a distinct category; and the importance of reputational risk. Notwithstanding that the nature and
size  of  our  operations  are  different  and  smaller  than  many  private  sector  institutions,  the  Bank  is
exposed to many of these same risks.
In managing these risks, we have wanted to ensure that our practices are consistent with best practice
in the private sector, to the extent that this is applicable to a central bank. We have invested heavily in
technology to allow management  of  the risks  on  a  consolidated  basis  and  where appropriate in  real
time. We have also instituted a number of organisational changes, setting up an Assets and Liabilities
Committee which I chair and which reviews at senior level the management of our balance sheet; and
a  Risk  Monitoring  Department  (based  in  part  on  the  Middle  Office  model  of  the  private  sector),
independent from our banking line management. Above this, like public companies, we have a number
of Board sub-committees, and in particular an Audit Committee, taking reports from the Internal and
External Audit, looking carefully at our internal systems and controls and our policies and processes
for management of the main financial, operational and reputational risks. Like public companies, and
BIS Review 102/2000
6
no doubt many of you here who are directors of public companies, we are working hard to ensure full
compliance with the Turnbull report.
Personnel policies
Finally I would like to mention the changes we have made to our personnel policies.
I have already indicated that the changes imposed by the 1997 proposals, together with the changes
brought about by a changing environment, placed a heavy demand on the flexibility of our workforce.
We have needed to increase the analytical capacity of the Bank, in part by additional recruitment of
economists. Indeed we are among the largest employers of professional economists in the country. We
have  also  substantially  upgraded  our  programmes  under  which  individuals  are  able  to  go  back  to
full-time education supported by the Bank to obtain the Masters, and in some cases Doctorate degrees,
that we need to keep us at the forefront of thinking on economic and financial issues.
We have reorganised the rank structure within the Bank. For some time, we had two broad categories
of staff: officers and officials. Counter-intuitively, the officials were senior to the officers, rather like
the Civil Service of many years ago when Administrative Grades were senior to the Executive Grades.
We have merged the officers and officials grading into one structure, taking out several layers while
we were at it - although I would have to admit that the Bank remains a formidable hierarchy!
Along with the flatter rank  structure,  we  have  introduced a  more  discretionary  and  merit-based  pay
system, removing some of the barriers to rapid advancement of the very best people. At the same time,
we reformed our benefits arrangements, removing a system that geared benefits in  part  to length of
service and replacing it with one geared to contribution to the organisation. In particular we removed
subsidised  mortgages,  arguing  that  the  Central  Bank,  now  responsible  for  interest  rates,  should  not
insulate its staff against the effects, for example, of rising interest rates which might affect the rest of
the country. The approach to the new flexible benefits is modern, offering staff a menu of benefits up
to a percentage of their salary; if none of the choices appeal, they can take cash instead.
Many of these management issues are dealt with in our Annual Report - and I hope this gives comfort
that the Bank of England is not hiding behind its unique role to limit disclosure. Rather we recognise
that we should play our part in being open and accountable.
In  aiming  to  achieve  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  we  must  recognise  that  we  will  never  reach  any
absolute  goal  -  but  we  do  want  to  stand  up  well  in  comparison  to  other  organisations  in  the  public
sector. We have set ourselves the goal of seeking excellence as one of the leading central banks in the
world; and at home to stand out as one of the leading UK public sector institutions.
Perhaps I could close at this point by thanking you for coming. I have got a few points “off my chest”
- and I hope for your part I have made a few points which have been of interest.
7
BIS Review 102/2000
