Jürgen Stark: The role of the euro in the world - past developments
and future perspectives
Speech  by  Dr  Juergen  Stark,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Joint
Bundesbank/BIS  conference  on  “Recent  developments  in  financial  systems  and  the  challenges  for
economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 Introduction
I.
Great  expectations  were  attached  to  the  international  role  of  the  euro,  especially  by  politicians.
However,  a  currency’s  international  importance  is  primarily  determined  by  international  financial
markets.  It  depends  on  the  policies  pursued  in  the  currency  area  and  on  the  amount  of  confidence
which financial market players have in the currency.
Both of these aspects are important for assessing the role of the euro in the world. Use of the euro by
the  international  financial  markets  will  be  strengthened  by  further  progress  towards  an  integrated
European  financial  market.  But  equally  important  are  credible  policies  in  the  euro  area,  with  a
monetary policy geared towards price stability and fiscal and structural policies that promote sustained
non-inflationary  growth.  In  addition,  the  Eurosystem’s  involvement  in  international  institutions  and
fora contributes to a more stable international financial system.
It should be borne in mind that on the part of central banks there was no intention to displace the US
dollar with the euro. The Eurosystem maintains a neutral stance regarding the international use of the
euro - just as the Bundesbank did in the past with regard to the D-Mark. Confidence of the markets is
gained  by  pursuing  a  credible  policy.  The  crucial  requirement,  therefore,  is  that  the  contractual
principles of monetary union are strictly applied and become a living reality; then it will be up to the
markets to assess the currency’s international role.
The history of the international financial system taught  us  that  a  shift  from  one  reserve  currency  to
another takes time. This could be experienced when the US-Dollar took over the role of the leading
reserve  currency  as  successor of the  Pound  Sterling  long  after the  US  became  the  leading  financial
market. Since then also the D-Mark and the Yen became reserve currencies to some extent.
During  the  fifty  years  of  its  history,  the  D-Mark  rose  to  the  position  of  the  second  most  important
international currency after the dollar. At the end of 1998, 13% of the exchange reserves and 10½% of
international bonds were denominated in D-Mark. As already mentioned, this process was not actively
fostered by the German authorities. On the contrary, for a long time the Federal Government and the
Bundesbank endeavoured to curb the development of the D-Mark into a reserve currency. Even so, on
account of its stability advantage and the associated confidence of global investors, the D-Mark grew
into the role of an international currency.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  international  role  of  the  euro  has  the  potential  to  develop  further.
Notwithstanding the Eurosystem’s neutral stance of neither  fostering  nor  hindering  the  international
use of its currency, the euro does provide a potential alternative to the US dollar as an international
currency.
The  neutral  stance  is  not  incompatible  with  efforts  to  promote  an  efficient  and  fully  integrated
financial  market  for  euro-denominated  assets  and  liabilities,  which  may  have  the  indirect  effect  of
making the euro more attractive to international investors. As the euro’s international use is expected
to gradually increase over time, this will have policy implications for the relationships of the euro area
with outside countries.
1
BIS Review 81/2000
The international use of the euro
II.
Let me first turn to the use of the euro as an official reserve. The introduction of the euro caused a
structural  break  in  the  composition  of  the  foreign  reserve  assets  of  the  euro  area  countries  because
those  foreign  reserves  which  had  previously  been  held  in  the  predecessor  currencies  of  the  euro  -
notably D-Mark - became domestic assets as soon as the single currency was introduced. If this effect
is disregarded, the euro has held up well compared with its constituent predecessor currencies.
The  euro  has  established  itself  as  the  world’s  second  most  important  reserve  currency.  Our
calculations show that - after eliminating the “automatic domestication effect” at the turn of 1998 - the
D-Mark, French franc, Dutch guilder and private ECU had a combined share of 14½% in the global
foreign  exchange  reserves  at  the  end  of  1998.  By  comparison,  the  corresponding  share  held  by  the
euro at the end of March 1999 was just under 14% and in the subsequent four quarters it remained
more or less constant at just over 13%. Based on the exchange rates prevailing at the start of 1999,
however, the euro’s share actually increased during 1999 by ¾ percentage point and in the first quarter
of 2000 rose by a further ½ point to almost 16%. The euro has thus surpassed the combined share of
its main constituent predecessor currencies.
The  US  dollar  still  is  the  unchallenged  leading  reserve  currency  -  and  will  remain  so  for  the
foreseeable future. According to the latest figures 67½% of the global foreign  exchange  reserves in
March  2000  were  denominated  in  US  dollars.  However,  eliminating  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  the
share of the US dollar increased by just over 1 percentage point in the course of 1999 and then showed
virtually no change up to March 2000.
The use of a currency as an official reserve is one important factor in determining its international role.
However, its use by the private sector as an investment and financing, a payment and vehicle currency
is pivotal.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  accentuated  the  integration  of  European  capital  markets  and  the  trend
towards securitisation and the associated disintermediation of the banking sector. The euro also acted
as a catalyst in diversifying European portfolios away from local-market-based to euro-based issues.
Developments in the international financial markets show that the euro quickly established itself for
new issues. Thus, in the first nine months following its  introduction, the  euro  accounted  for  a large
share of international bonds and notes issues and almost equalled the dollar: according to BIS data, in
1999:
• 
• 
• 
for the second quarter of 2000 the BIS reports net issues of bonds and notes in euro equal to
US$ 95.8 bn;
US$ 543.9 bn of net bonds and notes issues were dominated in US$;
net issues of bonds and notes in euro amounted to US$ 521.2 bn; 
US$ 2,615.6 bn denominated in US$;
compared with a net issue in US-Dollar equal to US$ 96.1 bn.
• 
But the euro is still a young currency: according to the BIS, by end of June 2000 stocks of all bonds
and notes amounted to:
• 
• 
• 
That shows that adjustments in the portfolios of international investors or in official reserves of the
public sector will take much longer as much bigger sums have to be moved and large-scale portfolio
shifts would have implications for securities prices and exchange rates.
which means a share of the US$ of 47.7% compared to a share of the euro of 29.7%.
compared with US$ 1,616.0 bn denominated in euro;
It is also highly unlikely that the euro will displace the dollar as an investment and reserve currency in
the foreseeable future because there is no public issuer in the euro area comparable to the US-Treasury
and  because  the  European  capital  markets  are  still  fragmented  to  some  extent  -  despite  monetary
union.
BIS Review 81/2000
2
Considering the first point, it has been suggested recently that national governments in the euro area
should pool their debt issuing in one central agency, acting on behalf of borrowing governments. This
suggestion was made with reference to the greater liquidity that such a procedure would create for the
euro-denominated government bond market and the savings in borrowing costs it would allow.
You  will  hardly  be  surprised that  I  do  not  agree  with  this  proposal.  Admittedly,  a  few  basis  points
might perhaps be saved in the debt management of some governments of small countries or countries
with low debt levels in the short run. However, a pooling of debt issuance would also mean pooling
risks and liabilities of the debtors. This would be  a  violation  of  Article  103  of the  European  Union
Treaty, the so-called “no-bail-out clause”, which prevents governments from assuming any liability for
other governments’ debt. Such sharing of liabilities, in my view, could create moral hazard that would
undermine the credibility of the new currency. The result would be higher rather than lower long-term
interest rates, leading to higher borrowing costs for member states.
Concerning  the  development  of  a  single  European  capital  market  it  is  obvious  that  transnational
integration in capital markets is a gradual process. Nevertheless, this process has already, within the
first months of the new currency, acquired considerable momentum. In fact, the development of broad,
deep and liquid capital markets covering the whole of the euro area is one of the great potentials of
European  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  However,  despite  a  greater  degree  of  coordination,  the  fiscal,
economic  and  social  policies  of  the  participating  countries  will,  for  the  present,  remain  a  national
responsibility.  Therefore,  a  euro-denominated  government  debt  market  of  similar  liquidity  and
homogeneity as the market for Treasury bonds in the US might emerge only as the long-term result of
a sustained evolutionary process of political integration.
A  single  market  for  financial  services  has  been  under  construction  in  the  EU  since  1973.  With  the
introduction of the euro there has been a two-fold development on capital markets concerning bond
and stock markets. The immediate conversion of goverment issues into euro and the large degree of
harmonisation  in  market  conventions  due  to  competition  have  played  a  major  part  in  the  market
becoming  more  homogeneous.  On  the  other  hand  the  European  stock  market  landscape  is  still
distinctly fragmented with a large number of market models, trading and settlement systems, despite
the cooperation and merger activities which have been initiated.
Furthermore,  businesses  and  consumers  continue  to  be  denied  cross-border  access  to  financial
institutions. It is therefore crucial that - in addition to the self-regulation of the markets, which will
lead to a further consolidation of the stock market landscape in Europe - the action plan adopted by the
European Council to implement the internal market for financial services by 2002 is also rigorously
applied.
Credible policies in the euro area
III.
The  further  development  of  the  international  role  of  the  euro  will  depend  in  the  first  place  on  the
confidence  which  the  financial  markets  place  in  the  new  currency.  In  the  long  run  this  trust  in  a
currency can only be earned by pursuing credible policies.
For  monetary  policy  this  means  safeguarding  price  stability.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  created  the
institutional framework for the European Central Bank (ECB) to pursue a credible, stability oriented
policy.  And  with  the  transparent  monetary  policy  strategy  and  instruments  the  ECB  Governing
Council and the ECB have the means to fulfill their mandate of safeguarding the internal value of the
euro.
However, other policies, particularly fiscal and structural policies are equally important for the euro to
earn credibility. Now that the instruments of exchange rate policy are no longer available within the
euro  area,  negative  effects  of  a  lax  budgetary  policy  can  be  passed  on  much  more  easily  to  other
member  countries  and  also  impair  monetary  policy.  The  Treaty  therefore  contains  a  procedure
designed to avoid excessive deficits. The Stability and Growth Pact has spelled out these requirements
in greater detail and envisages the imposition of sanctions.
3
BIS Review 81/2000
Although monetary policy became centralised with the introduction of the euro, budgetary and other
economic policies remain largely decentralised. Given the different economic structures and different
adjustment problems of the individual regions, however, it is an advantage that these policies remain a
national responsibility in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity. While coordination is necessary to
ensure that economic policy measures do not adversely affect the other countries, there is no need for
extensive centralisation.
If the agents keep to the institutional and contractual provisions, an optimum policy mix will emerge
almost automatically. From a monetary policy point of view, the key requirement is to ensure that the
euro’s  internal  value  remains  strong.  Fiscal  policies,  which  remain  a  national  matter,  must  remain
committed to the goal of stability and - given  the  current  favourable  macroeconomic  situation  -  the
consolidation  efforts  need  to  be  stepped  up  even  further.  The  other  policy  fields  must  steadfastly
continue along the path of growth-promoting structural reforms upon which they have embarked.
The existing structural problems on the labour markets differ from one member state to another and
can  therefore  only  be  solved  by  each  of  the  member  states  themselves.  In  major  areas  such  as
structural reforms or wage policy, decentralised decisions are thus necessary. All demands for “more
harmonisation”  at  the  European  level  have  to  be  met  with  scepticism.  By  contrast,  competition
between the countries of the euro area is desirable in the field of economic policy because the euro
area countries must not forget that they must also hold their own in global competition. Thus, I am
very much in agreement with the so called “best-practices” approach of the Cardiff-process.
EU enlargement and the role of the euro
IV.
As  far  as  the  role  of  the  euro  in  the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  (CEE)  and  of  the
Community of Independent States (CIS) is concerned, it is - in its national denominations, in particular
the
D-Mark  -  already  used  as a  parallel  currency.  It  plays  a  special  role  on  the  Balkans.  The  euro  also
serves as an anchor in currency board regimes there. The ongoing process of enlargement of the EU
will have important repercussions for the international role of the euro. Now that accession talks and
negotiations have started the question of the monetary policy relations between the euro area and the
accession countries has become a major issue.
A  clear  distinction  is  to  be  made  between  becoming  a  member  in  the  EU  and  the  joining  of  the
euro-area. An extended transitional period is needed between a country’s accession to the EU and its
entry  into  the  final  stage  of  monetary  union  without  a  derogation.  Moreover,  an  immediate
introduction of the euro would be impossible on legal grounds, too. Only after a country has joined the
EU can it begin to participate in the deficit procedure. And an assessment of whether a country meets
the convergence criteria may be made, at the earliest, two years after its accession to the EU.
But  over  and  above  these  minimum  periods,  the  accession  countries  must  go  through  a  process  of
nominal and real convergence, without which entry into the monetary union would be neither in the
interest  of  the  current  members  of  EMU  nor  in  the  interest  of  the  accession  countries  themselves.
Particularly real or structural convergence is a process that takes time and continues after accession to
the EU. Portugal may serve as an example:  after  membership,  it took  Portugal  seven  years  to enter
ERM I in 1992 and fully liberalise capital flows and another seven years to enter EMU. In the early
nineties, at the time of the Maastricht treaty, Portugal and Spain appeared to be at a higher level of
structural convergence than the accession countries at the current stage. It seems unlikely that at the
time of accession a sufficient level of structural or real convergence can be guaranteed in order to be
able  to  commit  to  EMU.  Therefore  a  higher  degree  of  real  convergence  with  focus  on  specific
structural and administrative convergence issues after accession seems to be crucial.
Concerning  monetary  policy,  at  a  very  early  stage  -  preferably  even  before  joining  the  EU  -  the
accession countries must adopt the Community’s acquis communautaire. From the point of view of
the ESCB this particularly concerns the legal underpinning of the central bank’s independence. At the
same time, particular attention should be given to the stability of the banking system and the financial
markets in the accession countries. Even prior to accession, the economic policy of candidate countries
BIS Review 81/2000
4
must be geared towards stability-oriented monetary and budgetary policies coupled with the necessary
structural reforms. On the other hand, no universally valid rules can be laid down for exchange rate
policy prior to accession.
The timetable from accession to the EU until the introduction of the euro must then be based on the
individual progress made by each accession country. At present there is a broad range of exchange rate
regimes  in  CEE  countries.  In  our  view  membership  of  ERM  II  is  of  crucial  importance.  Under  the
terms of ERM II the accession countries are responsible for ensuring the stability of their currencies
vis-à-vis  the  euro.  Pegs  to  currencies  other  than  the  euro  or  a  crawling  peg  are  incompatible  with
participation in ERM II. The goal is the stabilisation of the exchange rate; in this system, adjustments
of the central rate are the exception, not the rule.
A more difficult question in this context is how currency board arrangements should be assessed. On
the one hand, a successful currency board can indicate that fiscal and wage policy makers are prepared
to  subject themselves  to  the  constraints  of  a  single  monetary  policy  and  that  necessary  adjustments
occur via the real economy. On the other hand, however, experience shows that inflation frequently
remains higher in currency board countries than in the country with the anchor currency, thus resulting
in a real appreciation of the currency. The task of setting the right exchange rate via a currency board
is  made  harder  by  the  fact  that  no  role  is  assigned  to  the  market.  Once  such  a  country  joins  the
monetary union, there is then a danger that its parity does not correspond to the fundamentals and that
the country consequently joins EMU at the “wrong” exchange rate.
From a formal point of view a currency board is hardly compatible with the framework of ERM II.
Euro-based  currency  board  arrangements  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  acceptable  substitute  for
participation in ERM II, neither can be any form of “euroization”. However, currency boards can be
seen as a unilateral formal ex ante commitment augmenting the commitment to exchange rate stability
deriving  from  participation  in  ERM  II.  The  appropriateness  of  euro-based  currency  board
arrangements  therefore  will  have  to  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  avoiding  any  general
encouragement to introduce such arrangements.
The international role of the Eurosystem
V.
Allow me to discuss some institutional aspects of the role of the euro, in particular the Eurosystem’s
responsibility  for  the  global  monetary  system.  In  this  respect  the  question  of  the  international
representation of the Eurosystem is relevant for the international role of the euro.
The Eurosystem as a new regime of global importance in the field of monetary and foreign exchange
policy  has  to  be  represented  externally  in  an  appropriate  manner  and  have  commensurate
representation in international bodies.
At its meeting in December 1998 in Vienna, the European  Council  agreed on  the  principles  for the
external representation of the Community in Stage 3 of EMU in international fora such as the G7 and
the IMF by endorsing the Report of the Ecofin Council on this issue.
Since the external representation in Stage 3 implied changes in the organisation of international fora, it
was clear to the Council that third countries and institutions would need to be persuaded to accept the
solutions proposed by the EU. The Council called for a pragmatic approach that should minimise the
adoption of rules and practices, provided that it resulted in an outcome which gave proper recognition
to the role of the euro.
For  representation  concerning  issues  of  particular  relevance  to  EMU  (Article  109  section  (4)),  the
Council suggested using early pragmatic solutions that should be developed over time and adhere to
the following principles:
• 
• 
the  Community  shall  be  represented  at  the  Council/ministerial  level  and  at  the  central
banking level; and
the Community must speak with one voice;
5
BIS Review 81/2000
 the Commission “will be involved in the Community’s external representation to the extent
required to enable it to perform the role assigned to it by the Treaty”.
At  their  meeting  on  12  June  1999  in  Frankfurt,  the  G7  finance  ministers  agreed  on  changes  to  the
format of meetings of G7 finance ministers and central bank governors, and stated:
• 
Future  meetings  will  consist  of 
the  world
economy/multilateral surveillance and exchange rate matters. Part Two will be open for the
discussion of all other issues concerning the international financial system.
two  parts.  Part  One  will  cover 
   The presidency of the Euro-Group (minister and deputy) and the President of the ECB will
attend Part one of the meetings because of the importance of surveillance and exchange rate
issues  to  EMU.  They  will  thus  replace  the  governors  of  national  central  banks  of  the
Eurosystem.
The governors of NCBs will in turn participate in Part Two, that is when issues concerning
the international financial system are discussed.
Consistent  with  current  practice,  the  European  Commission  will  not  participate  in  the
meetings except on specific issues as determined by the finance ministers.
Concerning the representation at the International Monetary Fund, the Council suggested considering
solutions that do not require an amendment to the Articles of Agreement of the IMF. In this regard, a
first step had already been taken at the time of the Council’s Report:
• 
The  IMF  Executive  Board  had  agreed  to  grant  the  ECB  a  position  as  an  observer  on  the
Board.
 Furthermore, the Council suggested that views of the European Community and EMU would
be presented to the IMF Board by the Executive Director of the member state holding the
Euro-Group  presidency.  He  would  be  assisted  by  a  representative  from  the  Commission
(so-called Vienna Compromise on the IMF).
The  current  solutions  for  the  Eurosystem’s  representation  within  the  G7  and  in  the  IMF  might  be
rather transitional in nature. Negotiations on this issue are of paramount importance, since the Council
stated  in  its  report  that  solutions  for  the  G7  will  provide  a  basis  for  finding  solutions  for  other
groupings.
An important step in preparing for future negotiations with non-European partners is judging whether
Europe’s  position  has  been  strengthened  or  weakened  by  the  Vienna  compromise  and  its
implementation.
The  outcome  of  the  G7  negotiations  in  June  1999  has  clearly  reduced  and  fragmented  Europe’s
presence:  The  NCBs  of  France,  Germany  and  Italy  have  been  removed  from  the  surveillance  and
exchange rate sessions, while the ECB and the Euro-Group have not been granted regular access to the
other parts of G7 meetings.
Bearing that in mind, Europeans might ask whether it would have been better to maintain the status
quo or to make France, Germany and Italy speak for Europe on an alternating basis. But, who should
represent Europe on the political level? To be clear on that subject, in the longer run, common external
representation of the euro area is not possible without progress towards a political union.
Future perspectives - does the euro need a political union?
VI.
The  future  international  role  of  the  euro  will  depend  not  least  on  the  extent  to  which  European
integration can be successfully deepened; only in this way can monetary union be credible in future,
too.  At  first  sight  this  view  appears  to  contradict  the  view  that  there  is  no  need  for  extensive
centralisation. As I see it, however, this is not a contradiction as these are quite separate issues: on the
one hand ensuring healthy competition in economic, tax and structural policies, and on the other hand
continuing  the  process  of  political  integration.  This  is  a  logical  implication  of  the  step  towards
BIS Review 81/2000
6
integration represented by a monetary union. A monetary union is more than a technical federation for
the  management  of  the  single  currency.  A  monetary  union  must  be  based  on  a  joint  political
commitment on the part of the countries participating in it.
This inevitably raises the question as to the outlook beyond monetary union and, in particular, as to the
finality of the integration process. Against the backdrop of EU enlargement, too, it is important and
necessary to present credible prospects leading towards a political union.
The  Maastricht  Treaty  created  the  technical  preconditions  for  the  functional  viability  of  monetary
union. These are based on the fundamental principle of the single market as the overarching regulatory
framework and are also underpinned by the principle of subsidiarity. They therefore manage with  a
minimum  of  the  constructional  elements  of  political  union  -  but  nevertheless  comprise  all  the
mechanisms needed to guard against potential conflicts between a single monetary policy and fiscal
policies, which remain the responsibilities of the member states. Technically, the construction of the
monetary union is thus adequately secured.
Why then is progress towards a political union necessary? A stable internal structure of the union can
ultimately  only  develop  from  a  growing  awareness  of  community.  This  awareness  of  community
should  be  based  on  accepted  political  institutions  and  transparent  decision-making  processes,  but
should also permit the coexistence of the many different nationally and culturally determined special
features without conflicting with or being in opposition to the Community’s tasks. Admittedly, such a
political  integration  does  not  leave  room  for  national  self-centredness.  But  complete  harmonisation
and standardisation with the objective of a firmly fixed European state structure would not have any
chance of becoming a reality either.
By  contrast,  it  will  be  much  more  important  on  the  external  side  to  present  the  union  as  a  single
economic area and, politically, as an economic power factor. To do this, it will be necessary to develop
the  relevant  arrangements  and  to  strengthen  the  political  representation  of  the  currency  area  on  the
external side.
From a legal point of view, this boils down to the question of a future constitution of Europe. Against
that background, it is much less complex and detailed than might be assumed at a first glance. Here,
the most important thing will be to continue developing regulations  that already  exist  and to  divide
responsibilities among nation states and the Union.
Community  institutions  with  clearly  defined  tasks  and  responsibilities  might  be  helpful  beyond  the
narrow area of economic policy. But, at present, it has to remain an open question whether the nation
states are actually prepared to transfer powers to European bodies in the core area of state sovereignty.
Without  a  political  union  there  cannot  be  a  uniform  external  representation  of  the  euro  area.  A
benchmark in this connection might be a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. An
indication from France and the United Kingdom of their willingness to give up their seats in favour of
a European seat on this body would be a very clear signal of the willingness to make progress towards
a political union.
The basis for extending the international role of the euro will be improved by making further advances
in integration on the way towards a political union. The euro is not merely the result of a technical
exchange rate arrangement but also is an expression of the willingness and determination to achieve
further  integration.  Such  further  progress  is  therefore  the  precondition  for  the  credibility  of  the
monetary union and an appropriate international role of the euro in future.
7
BIS Review 81/2000
