I J Macfarlane: Economic growth, inflation and monetary policy in Australia
Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  in  Wagga
Wagga on 1 December 2000.
 I would like to start by endorsing the remarks of the Chairman and saying what a pleasure it is to be in
Wagga Wagga for the first hearing to be conducted outside Sydney, Melbourne or Canberra. Like you,
Mr Chairman, I think it sets a good precedent for future meetings, even if it does represent a cautious
start,  given  that  Wagga  Wagga  is  half-way  between  Melbourne  and  Sydney  and  not  that  far  from
Canberra. Perhaps the Committee will be more adventurous in its future choices. I would also like to
record our thanks to the Mayor of Wagga Wagga and his colleagues and to Kay Hull (a member of
this Committee) for their hospitality earlier this morning.
As usual, I would like to start by reviewing the forecasts I put before the Committee at the previous
meeting  in  Melbourne  in  May.  Starting  with  economic  growth,  you  may  recall  that  the  Australian
economy  grew  by  about  4½  per  cent  per  annum  in  1997,  1998  and  1999,  and,  as  usual,  we  were
expecting a modest slowdown in the year to June 2000. The forecast I put forward for that period was
4 per cent, and the  outcome  was  4.7  per  cent, continuing  our tradition  of  modest  underestimates  of
economic growth.
For the year to June 2001, I said that we had no quibble with the figure of 3¾ per cent contained in the
Budget Papers, nor would we quibble with the recent update which puts it at about 4 per cent. It is
largely a matter of rounding, and not much should be made of small differences: the figure is meant to
suggest again some modest slowing  from  past  growth  rates.  I  would  note  that the number  for  GDP
growth involves a substantial slowdown in final domestic demand – from about 6 per cent growth to
about 3 per cent – which is mostly offset by a further swing in net exports into positive territory and
the assumption that the inventory rundown recorded over the past year does not occur again.
On inflation, the story is a little more complicated. Last time we met, I said I expected the CPI to rise
by 3 per cent in the year to June 2000 – the actual outcome was 3.2 per cent. Not a very big difference,
but the first time for quite a while that the outcome was higher than forecast. The reason for this was
the  higher-than-expected  oil  prices.  When  we  look  ahead,  we  should  make  sure  our  forecast  goes
beyond June 2001 in order to avoid the “once-off” lift to the price level attributable to the GST. At the
last hearing, I suggested that inflation could be in the upper half of the 2 to 3 per cent range once we
are well into 2001/2002. Our Statement on Monetary Policy, which was released about two weeks ago,
forecasts that inflation would be around 3 per cent by that time. This small increase is primarily due to
the lower exchange rate now prevailing compared with the middle of the year.
You are probably tired of being reminded that we are still in the longest expansion we have had for
three decades, but that fact has to be the starting point for any economic discussion. When we receive
the September quarter national accounts in a couple of weeks time, I expect to see them confirm that
the  expansion  has  continued  unabated  into  its  tenth  year.  During  this  period,  the  growth  rate  has
averaged 4.2 per cent per annum, and most of the annual rates have been between 3 per cent and 5 per
cent,  with  a  few  outliers  above  and  below  this.  Over the  whole period, inflation  has  remained  low,
which,  of  course,  has  been  a  major  factor  behind  the  expansion’s  longevity.  And,  in  turn,  this  has
contributed to a fall in the unemployment rate of nearly 5 percentage points to 6.3 per cent.
Despite this record, we should not become complacent – we should always be looking ahead to see
where the risks  to  the  outlook  are  likely  to  come  from.  Not  surprisingly  for  an  economy  like  ours,
which is in reasonable balance, the risks are on both sides. That is, while we are comfortable with our
present forecast, there are circumstances which could lead to a stronger economy and hence a speed-
up in inflation, and others that could lead to a greater slowdown in economic activity than our current
numbers indicate.
1
BIS Review 114/2000
I will start with the risks to the inflation outlook. Obviously, the current year has not been an easy one
in this respect. In addition to the GST-induced lift in the price level – which was easily foreseeable
and appears to have gone according to plan or better – we have experienced two upward “shocks” in
the form of the rise in oil prices and the fall in the exchange rate. It is never easy to digest three such
events in one year, so we have to be especially vigilant to make sure that any rise in prices is “once-
off”, and on-going inflation does not rise to the point where it threatens our medium-term objectives.
So  far,  we  seem  to  be  on  track  to  pass  this  test.  The  GST  caused  a  smaller  rise  in  the  September
quarter CPI than expected and, on balance, the data on wages suggest that wages are growing in a way
consistent with our inflation target. But there is still some way to go before we can be confident that
these temporary factors do not push us off course. If it turned out that the economy was more buoyant
than we think, the chances of the shocks feeding into higher on-going inflation would rise.
I will now talk about risks that the outlook for economic activity could be weaker than we currently
envisage. But before doing so, I should remind you that our forecasts already  embody  a  slowing  in
GDP growth compared with last year, and a more pronounced slowing in domestic demand. So we are
not oblivious to the presence of some factors which point to a less buoyant outlook than we have had
over recent years.
The first of these risks is the world economy, and the United States in particular. For some time now,
most observers have expected lower growth in 2001 than in 2000 for both the world economy and the
United States, but there is always the risk that the turnaround could be sharper, particularly if there is a
shake-out in asset prices. No-one can be sure that, after such a long expansion, the United States can
achieve a soft landing, but at present the odds point to this result.
On  the  domestic  front,  the  area  of  weakness  that  many  people  point  to  is  in  housing  construction.
There  is  no  doubt  that  there  will  be  a  big  contraction  here,  but  we  should  remember  that  it  was
predictable  (and  has  been  predicted  by  virtually  all  forecasters  for  some  time).  We  have  just  gone
through a period when activity in the housing sector was really quite frenzied. At its peak in the June
quarter, investment in dwellings was at its highest level ever as a percentage of GDP. A lot of activity
in the housing sector that would normally have taken place this financial year was brought  forward
into last financial year in order to get in before the GST, so the cycle in housing is likely to be more
pronounced than normal. The rises in interest rates, no doubt, also played a role, but they were small
compared to the GST effect.
The third risk that some people have focussed on is business confidence. We have to be careful here
because  we  have  over  a  dozen  surveys  of  business  confidence  and  they  do  not  all  show  the  same
results. Even so, it is true to say that business confidence is not as high as it was a year ago and that it
has fallen in recent months. I think the recent fall owes a lot to the realisation that the housing and
construction sector will be weak, to the fact that a number of businesses have only recently had to face
up to the practical implementation of paying the GST, and to rising petrol prices.
What  does  the  foregoing  mean  for  the  economy  and  for  monetary  policy?  Starting  with  monetary
policy,  our  main  message  is  that  it  will  continue  to  be  conducted  according  to  the  medium-term
principles  contained  in  our  inflation  targeting  approach.  We  think  this  approach  has  served  the
economy extremely well, not only in the direct sense that it has maintained low inflation, but in the
wider sense that it has provided the preconditions for sustainable growth. We will be looking closely
at  all  the  influences  on  inflation  over  the  coming  year  –  including  the  demand  pressures  in  the
economy, the growth of wages, and the level of the exchange rate – in order to judge how they will
collectively influence the outlook. Monetary policy will then be set accordingly.
We will also, of  course, be  closely  watching  developments in the real  economy,  the  labour  market,
financial  markets  and  our  exports  and  imports.  There  is  a  wide  range  of  statistics  available  on  an
almost  daily  basis, from  the  Bureau  of  Statistics and  from  other  sources,  which  chart  the  course  of
these economic variables. You only have to read the daily press to see how much attention is paid to
these statistics. We at the Reserve Bank, of course, follow them in great detail, something we are able
to do because we have a good staff and a lot of experience at examining them. But I want to suggest to
you  that  this  sort  of  data  gazing,  important  though  it  is,  is  only  one  aspect  of  assessing  likely
developments in the economy and, on its own, can at times give misleading signals. The problem with
BIS Review 114/2000
2
statistics is that, as well as containing systematic information, they also contain a fair bit of random
variation and sampling error. Sometimes this means that we get a group of strong statistics arriving
together  or  a  group  of  weak  ones,  which  may  signify  nothing  more  than  the  statistical  anomalies
referred to above. If we rely only on these statistics to form our view of the outlook, we run the risk of
regularly swinging from optimism to pessimism  and  back  again,  depending  on  relatively  short-term
variation in the data.
Obviously, other approaches are needed to augment exclusive reliance on statistical observation and so
help  to  identify  the  underlying  direction  of  the  economy.  There  are  many  advocates  of  approaches
such as sophisticated econometric modelling, extensive industry liaison, and examination of leading
and lagging indicators or the forecasts embodied in financial prices. All of these have their merits and
can provide a broader perspective. But there are two other approaches that I would like to remind you
of.
The  first  is  to  go  back  and  examine  previous  expansions  and  ask  what  were  the  imbalances  that
brought about their demise, and then to see whether those imbalances exist at present. I did this earlier
this year in a speech in Melbourne,1 where I identified a number of domestic imbalances in previous
cycles:  high  inflation,  a  wage  surge,  overvalued  asset  prices,  excessive  physical  investment  and
excessive  credit  growth.  Not  all  of  these  were  present  towards  the  end  of  earlier  expansions,  but
usually two or more were.
Underlying inflation is about 2¼ per cent, rising to 3 per cent over the forecast horizon.
In looking at the Australian economy at present, it is hard to see evidence of any of these imbalances.
• 
• 
• 
The share market has risen over the year, but does not seem overvalued compared with many
overseas markets. House prices have risen over recent years, but appear to be stabilising at
present; rises in commercial property prices have been quite restrained.
Wages are growing at somewhere between 3 and 4 per cent.
  There has been no evidence of over-investment or over-capacity in plant and equipment or
construction.
Credit to households is still growing strongly, but appears to be moderating. Credit growth to
businesses has not been unduly strong at any stage in recent years.
Overall, I think it is hard to find signs of the type of imbalances that occurred in the early 1970s, late
1970s/early  1980s  and  late  1980s  which  led  to  such  unhappy  results.  Many  people  would  add  the
current account of the balance of payments to my list, and point out that in the later stages of previous
expansions,  fast  economic  growth  led  to  a  widening  in  the  current  account  deficit.  Again,  we  are
different this time in that the buoyant domestic demand growth we have experienced over the past year
has been accompanied by a decline in the current account deficit.
Of course, I have only listed domestic factors that give rise to imbalances and imperil the expansion.
As I said earlier in my introduction, the world economy plays an equally important role, but we have
no  control,  or  even  influence,  over  that.  It  is  possible  to  construct  disaster  scenarios  for  the  world
economy,  and  no  doubt  some  will,  but  I  am  comfortable  sticking  with  the  majority  in  assuming  a
modest slowdown in world growth or, in current parlance, a soft landing.
No two economic expansions are the same; each of the previous ones differed, and the present one has
its own unique features. As a result, we cannot rely only on cyclical comparisons such as I have just
presented, but they are a helpful part of any overall assessment. A second approach, which I think is a
useful reality check, is to look at how the present setting of policies is affecting the economy.
1
“Managing the Expansion”, Address to the Economic Society of Australia (Victorian Branch), Melbourne, 11 February
2000.
3
BIS Review 114/2000
On monetary policy, there is a tendency for attention to be focussed on changes in interest rates, even
when  each  change  is  quite  small.  It  is  at  least  as  important  to  look  at  the  level  of  interest  rates  in
nominal  and  real  terms,  and  ask  whether  their  present  setting  involves  a  significant  risk  that  the
economy will overheat or contract. As you know, a year ago we thought that the continuation of the
then setting  of  interest  rates  would  risk  the  former  outcome.  That  is  why  we  moved  to  our  present
setting, which we would characterise as being in the neutral zone, i.e. not presenting either of the two
risks to any substantial extent. Because it is in this zone, there is no overwhelming case to move it in a
particular direction at present. Overall, the main point for present purposes is that you could not claim
that the current setting of interest rates is inhibiting the growth of the economy.
Another important influence on the economy which is often put under the heading of monetary policy
is the level of the exchange rate. I do not wish to spend  much  time  on  this  subject today  because  I
devoted a whole speech to it less than a month ago.2 Suffice to say that I do not think there is anyone
who  would  deny  that  the  current  level  of  the  Australian  dollar  makes  our  exporting  and  import-
competing  industries  super-competitive,  and  hence  it  is  exerting  an  expansionary  influence  on  the
economy.
On fiscal policy, the need to more than compensate consumers for the imposition of the GST ensured
that it moved in an expansionary direction between last financial year and the present one. Again, I
think we can all agree that, even though the budgetary  position  will  remain in  surplus for  medium-
term  purposes,  the  current  stance  of  fiscal  policy  is  not  imposing  a  contractionary  influence  on  the
economy.
Overall, therefore, I conclude that because the economy has not developed the imbalances of the past,
it has not been necessary to attempt to remedy them with the sort of counter measures in the fiscal and
monetary areas that were often needed in the past. This is another way of saying that we have, in my
opinion, avoided the boom-bust cycle in economic policy, and hence have an excellent outlook for the
coming year.
I have no further comments to make on the economy at this stage, but will be happy to answer your
questions. The only other point I would like to make concerns the economics of banking. In the past,
we have often provided to the Committee a paper on some banking subject, such as bank margins or
bank  fees and  charges.  On this  occasion, there is  no  special  paper,  but  we  have  recently  finished  a
major study, in conjunction with the ACCC, on interchange fees in credit and debit card schemes. We
will be happy to answer any questions on that study.
2
“Recent Influences on the Exchange Rate”, Address to CEDA Annual General Meeting Dinner, Melbourne, 9 November
2000.
BIS Review 114/2000
4
