Urban Bäckström: The Swedish economy
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Swedish  Shareholders’
Association, Gotland section, in Visby on 29 January 2001.
 Thank you for inviting me to Gotland to talk about the Swedish economy. Being in Visby is always a
pleasure, besides reviving many memories — as some of you may know, I spent some time here in
the Sixties.
Today I intend to begin by looking back at economic developments in recent years. That should help
to put the current discussion about the Swedish economy in perspective. After that I shall be saying
something about  the  economy’s recent cyclical  path and how I  assess  the  future  in  the  light  of  the
information that is presently available.
We  have  now  experienced  a  series  of  years  in  which  the  economy  has  been  expanding  strongly.
Since the upturn began in the summer of 1993, the annual GDP growth rate has averaged about 3 per
cent. Not since the period in the late Sixties and early Seventies have we had growth figures like this.
The  favourable  trend  has  contributed  to  rapidly  rising  employment  and  decreased  unemployment.
Open unemployment has dropped in only four years from 9 per cent to less than 4 per cent. In recent
years, moreover, an average of almost 100,000 new jobs have been created annually. A look at the
statistics shows that this expansion of employment is the strongest Sweden has experienced since the
labour force surveys were first published in the early Sixties.
The markedly favourable trend is not confined to growth, employment and unemployment. Both our
foreign transactions and the public finances are generating surpluses.
Another aspect of the good situation is that inflation has remained moderate. In recent years the rate
of inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, has been just under 2 per cent. This has paved
the way for real wage increases on a scale we have not seen since the Sixties.
In the light of all these factors — rapid economic growth, rising employment, falling unemployment,
internal and external surpluses, low inflation and favourable real wage increases —the picture of the
Swedish  economy  is  very  bright.  What,  then,  is  the  explanation  for  this  advantageous  course  of
events? In my opinion, it has to do with a combination of factors.
The economic crisis that ravaged Sweden in the early Nineties clearly meant that plenty of resources
were  available  when  activity  subsequently  recovered.  That  reduced  the  risk  of  production  soon
reaching its ceiling.
At the same time, the Swedish economy has been performing more efficiently, particularly compared
with the previous quarter-century, when even relatively low growth rates tended to generate inflation.
One explanation lies in the realignment of economic policy that began in the late Eighties to promote
stability and predictability. Today we can say that confidence in the Riksbank’s 2 per cent target for
annual inflation is strong; it functions as a clear benchmark for price-and wage-setting decisions.
The transformations that have been achieved with new establishments — not least in the IT sector —
and increased competition, as well as the deregulation of important markets, should also be included
in a complete account of factors that have contributed to the good performance in recent years. They
have pushed prices down and thereby kept inflation in check, making a strong expansion of demand
feasible.
Sooner  or  later,  however,  an  excessively  rapid  increase  in  demand  that  is  allowed  to  continue  will
result in an unbalanced economy. This is simply because rising resource utilisation increases the risk
of tensions between supply and demand. Even in the best of worlds, an economy cannot disregard the
fundamental laws by which it functions. In many respects, the most recent crisis in the early Nineties
was occasioned by the economy being left for so long to expand at a rate that could not be sustained.
This ended in a crash. So in order to avoid a situation with mounting imbalances, in time economic
growth in Sweden will have to start slowing down to a rate that is sustainable in the longer run.
What,  then,  is  the  level  of  this  potential  growth  rate?  According  to  a  common,  though  not  entirely
certain estimate, the Swedish economy’s sustainable annual growth rate lies between 2 and 2.5 per
BIS Review 5/2001
1
cent. In view of the high growth rates in recent years and considering that we have moved towards a
situation where resources are becoming increasingly strained, it might be concluded that it would be
healthy for the Swedish economy if activity were to slow a little in the future.
Many observers counted on interest rate hikes
I recall that during the past year a good many observers counted on fairly large interest rate increases.
They  thought  they  saw  clear  signs  of  the  Swedish  economy  being  on  the  way  to  overheating  and
considered we ought to act promptly to prevent this from happening. Along with the frequent warnings,
moreover,  a  number  of  other  central  banks  increased  their  instrumental  rates.  The  U.S.  Federal
Reserve, for instance, raised its rate  in the course of  last  year  to  6.5  per  cent.  In  Europe  the  ECB
tightened its monetary stance and increased the refinancing rate to 4.75 per cent, while the Bank of
England adjusted the interest rate upwards during 2000 to 6.0 per cent.
The  Riksbank,  however,  took  a  more  cautious  course.  For  although  our  assessment  of  economic
activity was relatively similar to that of other forecasters, we differed all the more about the  path  of
inflation.  In  a  sense,  the  inflation  forecasts  can  be  said  to  register  the  temperature  of  activity  and
indicate how quickly the economy is capable of expanding. We saw clearer and clearer signals that
the relationship between growth and inflation had become more favourable. It looked as though the
economy  could  cope  with  somewhat  higher  growth  for  a  period  without  becoming  overheated  and
generating higher inflation. We took it in stages, with a relatively mild monetary stance, as the forecast
horizon shifted into the future. Today we can note that at 4 per cent, the repo rate in Sweden is lower
than in most other industrialised countries.
Closer focus on resource utilisation
During the autumn we focused increasingly on resource utilisation. The economy was moving towards
a situation in which the growth of total production was ultimately liable to be excessively high. There
was nothing dramatic about this; in view of the strong activity, it was only to be expected. What was
perhaps surprising was that shortages had not become more acute, particularly in the labour market.
In an upward cyclical phase, the development of a situation where the tensions in markets for goods,
services and labour threaten to gain the upper hand and threaten price stability is a gradual process.
That makes it difficult to tell exactly when the imbalances will constitute a genuine problem for inflation
prospects.
What we and other observers have to do is endeavour to draw conclusions from a continuous inflow of
economic information, where each item is carefully scrutinised. This is not a simple matter and there is
a risk that interpretations will sometimes be wrong. Moreover, there is a time lag before measures of
monetary policy elicit effects — our premise is that the full effect of an interest rate adjustment takes
one  to  two  years  to  materialise. We  therefore  have  to  balance  the  risks  of  acting  too  soon  against
those of acting too  late. If the Riksbank acts prematurely,  unemployment  is liable to  fluctuate  more
widely than otherwise. Acting too late, on the other hand, may lead to higher inflation expectations as
well as rising prices and wages. In that case, the economy may ultimately land in a recession, perhaps
with higher unemployment.
Fortunately, it is not a question of either/or. A monetary policy adjustment can be decided gradually,
with stepwise adjustments to the repo rate. Consequently it is always possible to compare forecasts
with outcomes, assess the policy stance continuously and make any adjustments that are called for.
If monetary policy is successfull, a foundation is laid, not only for low, stable inflation in line with the
target and the Riksbank’s statutory objective, but also for stable output growth in the longer run and a
stable development of employment. That is something I find important to underscore.
Various forms of demand adjustment
In  the  coming  years  there  will  accordingly  have  to  be  some  adjustment  of  demand  to  the  Swedish
economy’s long-term growth trend. In principle, this can happen either as a spontaneous slackening of
activity,  for  instance  because  Sweden  is  affected  by  an  international  economic  slowdown,  or  via  a
monetary adjustment. In practice it can result from a combination of the two.
2
BIS Review 5/2001
There are increasingly clear signs  of a slowdown  in  the U.S. economy. In Europe’s euro area,  too,
activity  has  been  somewhat  weaker  than  expected.  In  Japan  it  looks  as  though  a  recovery  will  be
further  delayed  on  account  of  the  problems  that  have  already  beset  the  country  for  a  long  time.
Moreover, the weaker trend in the United States may have a regional effect on Southeast Asia.
The global economic slowdown, together with the Riksbank’s repo rate increase of 0.25 percent age
points last December, are tending to adjust the expansion of demand towards the long-term growth
path. As far as Sweden is concerned, the slowdown we have observed to date can to some extent be
regarded as welcome.
Alternative scenarios in the inflation assessment
Now for some comments on the alternative scenarios that can be discerned in the future and which
add up to our risk spectrum. As you no doubt know, the Riksbank’s quarterly Inflation Report contains
a thorough account of our appraisal of economic developments in the coming twenty-four months.
In the Report we presented early last December we counted on growth rates for the Swedish economy
of 3.4 per cent this  year and  2.9  per cent in 2002. The main scenario accordingly incorporated the
assessment  that  demand  growth  will  slacken  somewhat  in  the  forecast  period.  The  underlying
assumptions  included  somewhat  lower  international  growth,  a  weaker  development  of  consumption
and an appreciating exchange rate.
The rate of underlying or core inflation, measured as UND1X, was judged in the main scenario to be
1.8  per  cent  one  year  ahead  and  1.9  per  cent  after  two  years.  The  corresponding  assessment  of
consumer price inflation, measured by the CPI, gave rates of 1.8 and 2.1 per cent, respectively.
In addition, we presented alternative scenarios that highlighted four different factors that were liable to
upset the main scenario. All in all, however, the risk of inflation being higher than in the main scenario
was judged to be greater than the risk of lower inflation.
Of the four risk factors, three accordingly pointed to rising inflation:
• 
• 
For one thing, there was judged to be a risk of the oil price remaining at a high level.
For another, there could be a risk of the Swedish krona not appreciating as foreseen in the
future.
Thirdly, a risk was perceived of the wage trend being stronger than in the  main scenario.
Fourthly, we considered there was a downside risk of international growth being weaker than
in the main scenario
 A weighted combination of these four factors indicated an overall upside risk for inflation both one and
two years ahead. It was against that background that the repo rate was raised 0.25 percentage points
in December, to 4 per cent.
So  how  does  that  assessment  stand  today?  As  far  as  the  exchange  rate  is  concerned,  the  level
relative to  Sweden’s  main  trade  partners  is  still  weak.  On  the  other  hand,  the  international  price  of
crude  oil  has  become  somewhat  lower.  It  is  still  too  early  for  a  more  definite  assessment  of  wage
agreements, not least because settlements have still to be concluded for a relatively large proportion
of  the  labour  market.  Thus  far,  however,  it  can  be  noted  that  there  now  seems  to  be  less  risk  of
sizeable  upward  deviations  from  the  Riksbank’s  earlier  wage  assessment.  When  concluding
agreements, the negotiating parties appear to start from the inflation target, which is positive.
Generally speaking, it can be said in conclusion that the slowdown which so far seems to be going on
in  the  Swedish  economy  is  in  a  way  to  be  welcomed.  A  limited  retardation  helps  us  to  adjust  the
development of demand to the long-term path of growth, and thus reduces the need for further interest
rate  hikes.  It  remains  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  the  international  slowdown  will  suffice  to
dampen the Swedish economy’s somewhat too rapid earlier expansion. But neither can one rule out
the possibility that the downturn in the U.S. economy will be more pronounced than various observers
count on at present. It is thereore important to keep a close eye on and interpret incoming statistics on
activity,  in  Sweden  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  world,  with  the  aim  of  arriving  at  a  picture  of  future
inflation  prospects  that  is  clearer  than  we  can  form  at  present.  For  the  same  reason,  it  is  also
important to monitor the outcome of the current wage negotiations and other influential factors.
BIS Review 5/2001
3
