Lars Heikensten: Behind the granite walls up at Brunkebergstorg - monetary
policy in practice
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Riksdag's
Social Democrats, Stockholm, 21 March 2001.
 The theme for today’s seminar is monetary policy in practice. I find it extra stimulating because it is a
subject I don’t often get a chance of talking about. While thinking about how to arrange what I want to
say, I felt that, besides talking concretely about how we at the Riksbank go about assessing inflation, it
would be a good idea to spend some time on some matters of principle. In that way I hope to lay a
good foundation for the ensuing discussion.
First I shall say a little about monetary policy’s purpose and our target. Then I shall describe how we
make our assessment and how the Executive Board works. Before winding up, I shall also consider
some issues connected with communication and transparency.
‘Hate inflation’
As we all know, monetary policy’s purpose is to safeguard low inflation. That has been the case in any
event since the beginning of the 1990s. It became explicit, of course, when the Riksbank adopted an
inflation target in February 1993. Since 1999, moreover, the Riksbank Act states that the objective of
the Riksbank’s operations shall be to "maintain price stability".
So why is this our objective? Basically, there is now a broad consensus that low inflation is good for
economic development and accordingly contributes to gains in prosperity. While it is true that in certain
situations the economy can be stimulated by means of low interest rates, this works only if there are
unutilised resources. Taken too far, it is liable to result in bottlenecks that push prices and wages up.
There  is  then  a  risk  of  households  and  firms  gradually  starting  to  act  in  the  belief  that  inflation  will
continue to be high — inflation expectations become firmly fixed on this.
In  other  words,  in  the  long  run  monetary  policy  is  not  capable  of  influencing  growth.  What  does
underlie a country’s economic development and thereby its prosperity are such factors as the labour
force,  a  willingness  to  invest  and  technical  progress.  The  best  the  Riksbank  can  do  is  promote  an
economic  development  that  is  more  stable,  with  smaller  fluctuations  around  the  long-term  trend.  It
therefore  seems  to  me  that  the  economic  debate  is  somewhat  lopsided.  The  long-term  issues  you
work on in the Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) ought to attract more attention. The Riksbank’s doings
get more than their fair share.
Convincing people in Sweden about the value of low inflation really should not be difficult. After all,
what did we get out of letting inflation take off in the 1970s and ’80s? Recurrent devaluation cycles
and a level of prosperity today that is considerably below that in many other countries. The economic
imbalances  became  so  large  that  when  the  bubble  finally  burst  as  we  moved  into  the  1990s,  the
consequences were considerable.
I should perhaps stress that I am not just talking about the economy in some abstract academic sense.
These developments were very tangible to the man in the street. Take the example of someone who
placed, say, 10,000 kronor in bonds in 1970 and looked forward to reaping interest at the current rate
of 8 per cent; by 1990, after twenty years, the real value had actually shrunk more than 750 kronor,
leaving only 9,250 kronor. For someone who bought a property in Stockholm at the same time, things
turned very differently; by 1990 the real value had grown to almost 17,800 kronor. The same amount
invested in the Stockholm stock exchange had doubled in real terms to over 20,000 kronor.
Such  differences  were  not  solely  due  to  inflation,  of  course,  but  it  did  play  a  large  part.  Arbitrary
redistribution in this fashion causes problems for those who are hit by them as well as for the social
climate. It  was not by chance that Gösta Rhen,  perhaps the Trade  Union  Confederation’s  foremost
economist, in the 1960s coined the slogan: Hate Inflation.
BIS Review 24/2001
1
A distinct target: 2 per cent
Some months after the krona’s fall in 1992 the Riksbank introduced an inflation target of 2 per cent. A
tolerance  interval of 1 percentage point on either side of the  target  was  included  mainly  to  make  it
clear that deviations would probably occur but also that they should be limited. The target was tied to
the consumer price index, the measure of inflation that was most familiar and reliable, besides being
published regularly.
There is a great deal to say about this — the choice of the target’s level and the choice of index — in
the light of our experience and the academic literature that accumulated in the 1990s. I shall have to
be  brief,  however,  because  otherwise  there  will  be  no  time  for  the  more  practical  issues  about  our
procedures, which is today’s theme.
So here are three short comments:
• 
The  appropriate  level  of  inflation  is  one  debatable  point.  There  are  arguments  for  a
somewhat  higher  level  as  well  as  a  somewhat  lower.  With  our  present  knowledge,  this  is
ultimately  a  matter  of  judgement  and  so  far  there  has  been  nothing  to  persuade  me  that
there are any grounds at present for changing our target. As I see it, the most important thing
is to set up a distinct target so that a given rate of inflation is anchored among all economic
agents, be  they households or firms, employers  or  employees.  In  this  we  have  been  very
successful.
The choice of an index is a complicated matter. Unfortunately there is no measure of inflation
that  in  every  situation  can  show  whether  monetary  policy  is  properly  balanced  or  which
measures  are  called  for.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  CPI’s  advantages.  The  main
drawback is that from time to time this index is markedly affected by price movements that
the Riksbank neither can nor wants to counter. Not wanting to counter them mainly has to do
with  the  time  lag  before  monetary  measures  bite;  another  reason  is  that  we  would  be
chasing our own tail if, for example, we were to raise the interest rate to counter an increase
in interest expenditure that stems from our own earlier interest rate hikes. We have therefore
clarified how policy is formed in relation to price movements that are transitory. In practice,
monetary policy in recent years has been based on forecasts of inflation excluding indirect
taxes, subsidies and interest expenditure, that is, on the index known as UND1X.
The third issue is the exchange rate’s role in monetary policy. There is less talk about this
today but in the early years with the inflation target the public debate was all the more lively.
The  discussion  subsided  when  the  Riksbank,  early  in  1996,  made  it  clear  that  policy  is
guided  by  the  long-term  outlook  for  inflation  and  continued  to  lower  the  repo  rate  even
though the krona had weakened. For monetary policy the central consideration is thus the
exchange rate’s impact on inflation. Perhaps I should add that we do have a rough idea of
the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  that  seems  reasonable  in  the  longer  run.  We  have  not
intervened  since  the  occasion  during  the  financial  turbulence  in  1998  when  the  krona
weakened in a way that both then and in retrospect seemed unreasonable.
  Assessments of the coming 1–2 years are crucial
It takes time for monetary measures to affect inflation. Some effects of an interest rate adjustment may
indeed occur very quickly. The stock market, for instance, is influenced as soon as an adjustment is
announced and this can have immediate consequences for household consumption, for example, and
thereby a quick impact on certain prices. Monetary  policy can also elicit exchange rate movements
and  quickly  affect  prices  for  exports  and  imports.  Normally,  however,  there  is  a  time  lag  between
monetary measures and their effects. For example, an interest rate hike leaves households with less
money  for  other  expenditure  and  also  reduces  the  return  on  investments.  By  gradually  influencing
consumption  and  investment,  this  leads  in  time  to  changes  in  total  demand.  With  weaker  demand,
firms then have more difficulty in raising prices and that leads to lower inflation.
Interest  rate  adjustments  accordingly  affect  inflation  through  a  variety  of  channels  that  economists
refer  to  as  the  transmission  mechanism.  We  know  more  about  some  channels  than  we  do  about
others. It is not clear just how long it takes for the effects to materialise. Calculations by the Riksbank
and other central banks suggest that a reasonable time perspective when formulating monetary policy
is the coming twelve to twenty-four months. Our simple rule of action is accordingly that if inflation one
to two years ahead looks like being above the target, then normally the repo rate should be raised and
2
BIS Review 24/2001
vice versa. But we also attach some importance to our policy’s effects before as well as after this time
horizon.
In view of the uncertainty in this respect, some differences of opinion — in our Executive Board as well
as in the public debate — as to what policy’s time perspective should be are only natural. If it is feared
that  inflation  will,  for  instance,  shoot  up  beyond  the  target  horizon,  then  there  may  be  grounds  for
acting particularly early. In my opinion, however, the clear target horizon has stood us in good stead in
recent  years.  It  has  made  policy  easier  to  understand  and  foresee.  It  has  also  been  beneficial
internally by forcing us to be specific and have good arguments for departing from the rule of action.
There have, moreover, been a number of occasions when our ideas about prospects in the longer run
were faulted by new developments. One example is when rising activity and inflation in 1997–98 were
broken by the Asian crisis and the associated fall in international prices. Today, when rising domestic
resource  utilisation  is  beginning  to  slacken  in  response  to  developments  in  the  United  States  and
falling  stock  markets,  the  element  of  uncertainty  in  our  work  is  highlighted  again.  All  this  cautions
against attaching undue importance to assessments of the longer run.
Another matter that has been discussed a great deal in recent years is how monetary policy ought to
handle price movements in assets such as real estate and shares. This is not much of a problem in
the normal course of events. Rising house prices, for example, are usually connected with a general
economic upswing that may generate increased inflationary pressure and thereby prompt an upward
revision of forecast inflation and perhaps a repo rate increase. But what if that does not happen inside
our normal time horizon? I personally believe there may still be grounds for adjusting the repo rate if
one either foresees a future ‘bubble’ that may show up in inflation in the longer run or is concerned
about the consequences for the economy and the financial system when the ‘bubble’ finally bursts. In
the light of our experiences when the ‘financial bubble’ burst in the early 1990s, I believe that support
for such a line of action could be justified, which of course would require clear motives and arguments.
Not an exact science
Our preparations for monetary policy decisions consist to a large extent in constructing forecasts. And
as Alf Henriksson, if my memory does not fail me, said on some occasion, making forecasts is difficult,
particularly  about  the  future.  It  calls  at  least  for  knowledge  of  what  has  happened  and  is  now
happening in the economy, as well as of various economic relationships that can be used to interpret
the available information.
One  approach  involves  assessing  the  factors  that  affect  prices  and  trying  to  identify  simple
relationships between them and inflation. Such calculations are a part of the material that is presented
to the Executive Board as a basis for decisions. If they add up to a uniform picture, the calculations
presumably say something about the direction in which inflation is moving.
Our  main  assessment,  however,  uses  methods  that  are  more  complex.  Like  other  economic
observers, we endeavour to construct a picture of economic developments in the coming years that is
coherent and consistent. We do this with the aid of what economists call a model: a computer spread-
sheet for processing economic data. This largely guides the presentation of our assessments in the
Inflation  Report  (Chart  1.The  Inflation  Puzzle).  Starting  from  appraisals  of  global  economic
The inflation puzzle
International
developments
I Development
of GDP
I Interest rates
and exchange
rates
I Oil prices
Swedish
economy
I Development
of GDP
I Productivity
I Utilisation of
resources
I Wages
The
krona
etc
etc
Other
I Inflation
expectations
I Taxes and
subsidies
Inflation
BIS Review 24/2001
3
developments, various international prices, for oil for example, the exchange rate, interest rates and
what is happening in the domestic economy, we estimate a picture of economic activity and resource
utilisation in Sweden. Normally it is resource utilisation that is crucial for inflation. To this we add an
assessment of inflation expectations as well as estimates of factors with effects that may be more or
less  transitory,  such  as  changes  in  interest  rates  and  taxes.  The  combined  result  is  a  forecast  of
inflation.
The large model is made up of a number of relationships, The equations for calculating exports are
one  example.  Swedish  exports  are  estimated  as  a  function  of,  for  example,  global  economic
developments and the path of the krona’s exchange rate or some other measure of relative prices. But
as some important relationships are not particularly stable, we have to make judgements on the basis
of  other  experiences.  Sometimes,  moreover,  there  are  grounds  for  supplementing  a  model-based
calculation  with  more  specific  information.  There  may  be  indications  that  investment  activity,  for
example, will be higher than historical relationships indicate.
The information we use comes from many different sources. The bulk of it consists of official statistics
from Statistics Sweden, the National Institute of Economic Research and so on or their counterparts in
other countries. We also take a close look at the assessments of other forecasters in Sweden as well
as elsewhere. In addition, we try to collected as much information as possible on our trips in Sweden
and  abroad.  I  set  great  store  by  a  continuous  dialogue  with  a  number  of  colleagues  about  what  is
happening in their parts of the world and their thoughts about monetary policy.
Monetary policy is obviously not a matter of applying an exact science. As our Governor and I have
both talked about earlier in this building, domestic inflationary pressure has been unexpectedly low in
recent  years,  for  example.  The  historical  relationships  suggested  that  domestic  inflation  would  be
higher. Part of the explanation seems to lie in deregulations and increased international competition
making prices increases in the traditional manner more difficult. There are also signs that the low and
stable  inflation  expectations  I  mentioned  earlier  have  aided  us.  We  now  believe,  moreover,  that
resource  utilisation  has  not  been  quite  as  high  as  our  earlier  calculations  suggested.  All  in  all,  the
economy seems to have been functioning more efficiently than we and most other observers expected
earlier.
Examples of other forecasting problems are not hard to find. A highly topical issue is, for instance, how
developments in stock-markets, which are now of major importance for households, are likely to affect
private consumption. Then, of course, forecasts can be wrong simply because something unexpected
happens.  The  Gulf  war  and  the  Asian  crisis  are  two  examples  but  even  smaller  shocks  can  upset
earlier predictions.
The uncertainty that is inherent in decision-making is handled by not concentrating exclusively on one
forecast for the economy and inflation. We also look at a spectrum of risks in the form of alternative
scenarios. Last December, for instance, it was conceivable that economic activity would be weaker on
account of a slowdown in the United States, with repercussions on the Swedish economy and inflation.
At the same time, factors that might lead to higher inflation were the wage negotiations going wrong,
the oil price rising and the exchange rate remaining weak. Since then the picture has shifted; weaker
activity and a lower oil price have reduced the risks of inflation, though there are still certain upside
risks from domestic inflation, future wage agreements and the weak exchange rate. We try to gauge
the probability of each scenario and multiply this probability by the effects on inflation. In this way we
arrive  at  a  distribution  of  the  probabilities  in  our  assessment  of  inflation.  The  result  serves  as  a
foundation for monetary policy.
A broad, comprehensive internal discussion
Monetary  policy  is  discussed  by  the  Executive  Board  eight  to  ten  times  a  year.  On  four  of  these
occasions the Board also adopts an Inflation Report. The meetings are scheduled about six months in
advance both for the sake of our internal work and to inform those who follow this, for instance in the
financial markets. Additional meetings can, of course, be arranged if necessary and we have said that
they will be announced as soon as we have fixed a date. But we have now used this procedure for
more than two years and that has not yet happened.
The publication of the Riksbank’s quarterly Inflation Report is preceded by at least three discussions in
the Executive Board: one or two to consider which general questions to include in the Report and our
picture of future inflation, a meeting to finalise the text and a final meeting about a week later to set the
4
BIS Review 24/2001
repo rate. At the intervening Board meetings we simply compare new information with the picture in
the most recent Inflation Report and decide the repo rate.
Processes in compiling the
Inflation Report
Executive Board
Discussion of
synopsis.
Assessment
of inflation
from staff.
Discussion of
the inflation
situation.r
Decision
made on
inflation
situation and
text.
Decision
made on
interest rate.
Drafting committee
Discussion of
inflation
situation.
Discussion of
interest rate
decision.
Material for each Board meeting is prepared by the Monetary Policy  Department, where some forty
economists are involved in various ways. Starting from this material, the Board members endeavour to
arrive at a joint view of economic developments and inflation. By and large, we follow the structure of
Chapter 2 in the Report and start with international prospects. Our opinions naturally differ on some
things,  large  as  well  as  small,  as  can  be  seen,  for  example,  from  the  published  minutes  of  the
meetings. But an effort has always been made to arrive at a joint view and in this we have generally
succeeded.
I  want  to  underscore  that  this  is  a  balancing  act.  It  is  important  that  different  perspectives  are
compared and as many difficult questions as possible are discussed. But it is also desirable that we
ultimately  arrive  at  something  of  a  consensus.  In  the  longer  run  it  would  hardly  be  good  for  the
Riksbank  to  publish  six  different  inflation  reports,  which  in  a  way  would  be  the  logical  outcome  of
carrying the Board members’ individual responsibility to an extreme. This raises the issue of what the
Inflation  Report  stands  for.  The  Board’s  decision  that  it  represents  a  majority  view  enables  us  to
compile a clear and consistent presentation. The Bank of England has a different procedure that aims
to present different views in a single report.
The  material  produced  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Department  is  distributed  simultaneously  to  all  the
Board  members  to  make  their  conditions  as  similar  as  possible.  As  the  member  responsible  for
monetary  policy  preparations,  I  am  in  a  position  to  influence  discussions  and  decisions,  apart  from
those at Board meetings, mainly as chairman of the internal monetary policy group that is made up of
leading members of the Bank’s competent departments. Matters on the monetary policy agenda are
discussed by this group on a continuous basis. In the light of that discussion, at Board meetings I also
present proposals about the direction of policy. However, all the members of the group attend Board
meetings and are able to present their own views.
The arrangements we have chosen for internal discussions and preparations build on experiences at
other central banks. A proposal for the approach we have  used since autumn 1999 was drafted by
some  of  us  after  talks  with  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Federal
Reserve.  There  are  some  important  differences,  however.  The  officials  who  prepare  the  Board’s
material  are  in  a  stronger  position  compared  with  other  central  banks.  We  ask  them  to  produce  a
comprehensive assessment of inflation independently, whereas in the Bank of England, for instance,
the counterpart to our Executive Board is involved in this work. And at neither the Bank of England nor
the ECB are staff present at policy meetings. In other central banks, moreover, before the preparatory
material  is  presented  to  the  counterpart  to  our  Executive  Board,  it  has  to  be  approved  by  the
competent board member. So in all these respects our internal process is very open. We opted for this
in order to make discussions as fruitful and lively as possible, as well as to motivate and engage our
staff.
That does not alter the fact that the final decision is up to the Executive Board. In the past two years or
so we have not refrained for altering either the main scenarios or the risk spectrums that the staff has
BIS Review 24/2001
5
produced. Neither have we always shared the policy group’s majority view of the appropriate interest
rate.  But  the  Board  has  had  well  thought-out  and  consistent  assessments  on  which  to  base  its
decisions.
Communication and transparency
The  issue  of  central  banks’  communication  and  transparency  is  sometimes  discussed  as  though  it
were unconnected with the actual formation of policy — as though it were just a matter of selling a
given  message.  I  see  this  differently.  The  extent  to  which  a  central  bank  is  understood  and  the
credibility of its policy do, of course, depend on its track record in goal fulfilment and how long it has
been  operating.  But  the  clarity  of  its  policy  framework  also  plays  a  part,  as  do  the  procedures  for
arriving at decisions.
That the Riksbank managed to establish reasonable respect for its task and confidence in its policy so
quickly was no doubt largely a consequence of the Swedish economy’s good performance in recent
years. But it presumably helped that the Riksbank has endeavoured to open up discussions, present
the grounds for its policy and do so in accordance with clear principles.
In my opinion, the most important link in our communication is monetary policy’s analytical framework.
This includes the distinct 2 per cent target and the specification of the deviations from this that may be
acceptable in connection with transitory effects. It also includes the rule of action and the fact that to a
large extent we have adhered to it. Finally, it has to do with the forecasts and assessments on which
the policy is based being published and used to argue for the policy.
The changeover to the new Executive Board with six members gave transparency a new dimension.
Previously, external communication had been in the hands of the governor and the deputy governor
responsible for preparing monetary policy. It involved mutual consultations and aimed to voice a single
opinion. With the new  Board, each of the six members is individually accountable  for  the  monetary
policy  decisions.  So  ought  not  each  one  be  allowed  to  make  their  voice  heard?  How  could  their
individual  contributions  be  properly  assessed  without  knowing  their  positions  on  monetary  policy
issues? But how were all the speeches and other statements to be coordinated efficiently in practice to
ensure that they conveyed a single, clear picture?
With the procedure we have chosen, you know that each of us normally speaks independently of the
others.  The  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  are  published  after  a  time  and  record  our
discussions  in  outline,  besides  containing  information  about  how  each  of  us  voted.  We  have
deliberately  refrained  from  labelling  what  we  say  at  the  meetings  with  our  names.  We  believe  that
would  not  work  very  well;  the  discussion  would  presumably  be  more  premeditated  than  one  would
wish.  But  even  with  the  system  we  have  chosen,  there  is  presumably  a  risk  of  jeopardising  the
spontaneous exchange and testing of ideas.
Our joint communication about monetary policy issues takes the form of the Inflation Report and the
press notices  and communiqués that  are  issued  after  the  meetings. We  also  have  an  arrangement
whereby one of us is entitled to speak for a majority of the Executive Board. An announcement to that
effect is made and to date  it has happened  only  when the Governor meets the Riksdag’s  Standing
Committee  on  Finance.  At  the  press  conferences  on  monetary  policy,  moreover,  the  Governor  and
myself, as the member responsible for the preparation of material, speak on behalf of the Board.
Our procedure clearly entails risks. The media may focus most of the time on differences between our
views, which could harm the Riksbank’s image and possibly also create internal problems. While that
has generally not been the case, our system is vulnerable. It would not be difficult for a Board member
to act in such a way that ‘conflicts at the Riksbank’ hit the headlines. We have tried to avoid this, for
instance by not arguing with each other in public. We have also refrained from evaluating colleagues’
arguments and proposals.
Before choosing an approach to communication and transparency, we again tried to learn from other
central banks. The main issue in the public debate seems to have been the minutes of our meetings. I
believe  the  publication  of  minutes  has  advantages.  The  minutes  provide  a  clear  opening  for  the
evaluation  of  what  individual  Board  members  contribute  to  the  monetary  policy  discussion,  besides
facilitating the democratic control  of  and  insight  into  our  work.  In  my  opinion,  the  arrangements  we
have chosen can promote a better understanding in society in general of the Riksbank’s policy and our
deliberations. That is important not least in a small country where the discussion of stabilisation policy
is not all that broad.
6
BIS Review 24/2001
Some conclusions
Work on monetary policy has been arranged in ways that differ from country to country. This has to do
with historical differences that stem from the society in which the policy is constructed. Scandinavian
and  Anglo-Saxon  countries  require  a  greater  degree  of  openness,  for  example,  than  countries  in
Central Europe. The duration and acceptance of low-inflation policies also play a part. A reluctance to
change  a  winning  concept  was  no  doubt  an  important  reason  why  the  Bundesbank  continued  to
adhere  to  money  supply  targets  in  its  communication  for  so  long  even  though  academic  studies
showed that in practice its policy was being guided by inflation forecasts.
The internal construction of monetary policy is also related to the central bank’s legal framework. With
a  clear  mandate  from  an  elected  assembly,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  task  becomes  more
technical. That is the British model. It can make it possible to work in a different way and choose other
forms for decision-making.
Yet I still feel one should not be too agnostic. Our experiences seem to speak in favour of a number of
things that ought to be of fairly universal importance.
• 
A  clear  intellectual  framework  is  an  advantage  because  it  makes  policy  easier  to  explain,
understand and evaluate. That in turn reduces the risks of being misunderstood by media
and the general public and of disturbing the markets unnecessarily. The clearer the policy,
the better it can function as a short-cut to credibility.
Our clear intellectual framework does, of course, tie us down to some extent but it has also
obliged us to make a deeper analysis. The fact that this ‘straightjacket’ has worked to date
does not, however, mean that we follow our rule unconditionally. But a departure from simple
rules does exact a price in terms of less clarity.
The  internal  decision-making  processes  are  important  because,  for  instance,  they  can
ensure  a  good  foundation  for  the  decisions  and  contribute  to  a  better  internal  discussion.
Typical  features  of  the  Riksbank  in  an  international  perspective  are  the  short  distance
between staff and decision-makers and a continuous and extensive two-way communication
between the two. We also have an extensive interchange with the academic world.
Transparency has  presumably  helped  to  gain  acceptance  for  the  low  inflation  policy  more
quickly in many circles than would have been feasible otherwise. It has also paved the way
for a broader internal discussion as well as a dialogue between the Riksbank and external
observers  in  markets,  academy  and  elsewhere.  This  in  turn  has  made  us  sharpen  the
analysis and contributed to a monetary policy discussion in society in general that is more
realistic.
   BIS Review 24/2001
7
