Christian Noyer: Some ECB views on the accession process
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of The
Central & Eastern European Issuers & Investors Forum, held in Vienna on 17 January 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I should like to thank the organisers for the opportunity to participate in this Conference in Vienna. This
city has often been regarded, and rightly so, as a cultural bridge between the Member States of the
European  Union  and  the  so-called  candidate  countries  preparing  for  EU  accession.  Vienna  already
provided a stimulating backdrop to the discussion of issues related to accession about one month ago.
In  mid-December  2000,  the  Eurosystem  (i.e.  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  national
central banks of the 12 Member States that have introduced the euro) held its annual high-level policy
dialogue with the central bank governors of accession countries' central banks on the occasion of the
"Vienna Seminar on the EU accession process".
I am looking forward to continuing this discussion not only with my colleagues from the central banking
community  but  also  with  financial  sector  participants.  From  the  specific  perspective  of  a  central
banker,  I  can  appreciate  the  important  role  which  you  play  in  the  transition  process,  as  leading
investors and corporations that are active in this dynamic part of Europe. I am referring, in particular,
to  efforts  to  establish  and  maintain  market  discipline,  to  reinforce  good  corporate  governance  and
business  practices  and  -  at  the  same  time  -  to  provide  the  highly  valuable  capital  and  transfer  of
"know-how" to these countries.
Transition  has  been  challenging  also  from  a  central  banker's  point  of  view.  Central  banks  -  as  we
understand them - did not exist in the accession countries before the start of transition, and a society-
wide consensus about price stability and the role of central banks was not an issue. At the outset of
the transition, the conduct of monetary policy was complicated to an extent  which might be hard to
imagine for some of us in the ECB by far-reaching structural changes throughout the economy, the
lack  of  a  well-tested  set  of  monetary  policy  instruments  and,  last  but  not  least,  high  or  even
hyperinflation. Against this background, the achievements of the central banks in transition economies
have been most remarkable.
Assessing current economic developments in accession countries, and putting them into perspective
as regards their respective starting-points, I  am pleased to note the considerable progress that has
been made over the past decade. Undeniably, this progress, in particular structural adjustments, has
also lowered vulnerability to external financial crises, as shown by the limited contagion effects during
the Russian and - more recently - the Turkish crisis. A substantial reallocation of resources, a strong
reorientation  of  trade  links  towards  the  EU,  a  complete  institutional  overhaul  and  a  sizeable
development  of  the  private  sector  are  the  most  obvious  signs  of  systemic  change.  They  have  also
contributed to the output recovery of these countries. Positive growth differentials with the euro area
have also fostered real convergence, although this process is taking place - on average - at a more
moderate pace than we had either wished or expected, but the economic outlook for practically all the
countries is very positive.
 Despite all these achievements, we are well aware of the remaining challenges - and there are many
of them - which lie ahead in this historic process for accession countries and their central banks. In
order to support these reform efforts the Eurosystem is providing technical assistance - mainly via its
national central banks - and is making use of a common platform for a close policy dialogue. Almost
300 activities, comprising bilateral visits, seminars and technical assistance activities, were conducted
between the Eurosystem and accession countries in 2000 in all areas of central banking. In any event
- and I should like to make this clear- all these activities are based on the unequivocal recognition that
enlargement is ultimately a political decision which concerns first and foremost the Member States of
the European Union.
That said, the Eurosystem's attention to  accession countries also stems from a justified institutional
and functional interest, namely the prospective inclusion of these countries in the euro area, provided
that they fulfil the necessary conditions. In such a forward-looking perspective, we might consider the
road towards the adoption of the euro  as encompassing three  distinct  phases  with  different  sets  of
BIS Review 3/2001
1
criteria, namely: EU membership preceded by compliance with the Copenhagen criteria; participation
in ERM II; and the eventual adoption of the euro, based upon the fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria.
All  these  phases  are  equally  important  and  help  to  create  a  solid  basis  for  future  non-inflationary
growth. Just as in everyday life, though, where one should not put the cart before the horse, as it were,
by  taking  the  second  step  before  the  first,  it  is  clear  that  accession  countries'  ability  to  cope  with
preparations for EU entry, that is, their success in adjusting to the conditions of the Single Market, will
be crucial to determining the results and the timing of the two subsequent steps towards the euro.
Allow me to elaborate on the three phases in more detail:
1. In the first phase - prior to EU accession - candidate countries need to step up all their efforts to
comply with the so-called Copenhagen criteria. As you are certainly aware, one of these criteria calls
for  the  proper  adoption  of  the  acquis  communautaire.  This  naturally  also  includes  the  provisions
relating  to  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  In  particular,  legislation  will  have  to  be  put  in  place  that
ensures the full independence of central banks. In this respect, I  noticed  with some concern recent
episodes  in  some  countries  which  confirm  the  need  for  more  stringent  legislation  on  central  bank
independence.
Analysing candidate countries' monetary policy strategies, I find it rather encouraging that they are, in
most cases, increasingly similar to that of the ECB. Centred on price stability, the conduct of monetary
policy  is  built  more  and  more  around  the  use  of  indirect  and  market-based  instruments  to  control
liquidity conditions in the banking system. However, accession countries will need to further advance
the process of bringing down inflation rates in the years to come. At the same time, they should not
delay  the  much  needed  relative  price  adjustments  within  the  economy  which  are  part  of  the  real
convergence process.
As for exchange rate regimes - I understand that this issue may be of particular interest since many
foreign  investors  are  present  -  there  are  no  formal  requirements  in  the  pre-accession  phase.  Each
country  remains  responsible  for  the  chosen  exchange  rate  regime,  and  a  plurality  of  approaches
seems feasible. Such a variety could also be observed with respect to existing Member States prior to
their  entry  into  the  EU.  In  brief,  in  this  phase  the  consistency  of  economic  policies  and  their
appropriateness for the individual economic situation  appear to be more important than  the specific
choice of an exchange rate regime.
The Eurosystem also has a vital interest in the proper functioning of financial and payment systems in
accession  countries.  In  the  context  of  EU  accession,  we  expect  candidate  countries  to  adopt  EU
legislation  in  the  area  of  financial  services,  including  those  related  to  banking,  insurance  and
investment  firms.  In  this  context,  allow  me  to  recall  an  expression  used  by  that  famous  Viennese
economist, Joseph Schumpeter, who once contended that the only important institution in capitalism is
the bank.
The  establishment  of  an  efficient  and  competitive  banking  sector  as  well  as  a  smoothly  functioning
capital  market  ensures  the  stability  of  financial  systems  and  supports  the  convergence  process  in
these  countries.  It  is  also  an  essential  requirement  for  the  proper  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and
therefore also for successful future participation in the euro area - once the necessary conditions have
been fulfilled.
The  creation  of  deep  and  liquid  capital  markets  is  an  important  factor  enabling  an  efficient  use  of
indirect and market-based instruments in the conduct of monetary policy. It furthermore strengthens
compliance  with  the  rules  relating  to  the  prohibition  of  privileged  access  to  the  financial  system.
Finally,  structural  weaknesses  in  the  banking  sector  could  also  have  severe  implications  for  the
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  affecting  the  responsiveness  of  banks  to  changes  in  the
monetary policy stance.
Efforts to strengthen the financial sector and the banking system need to be undertaken in the years
ahead, not least in fulfilment of the so-called "economic" Copenhagen criterion. This criterion requires
the existence of functioning market economies and the capacity to cope with competitive pressures.
While  it  is  undoubtedly  a  difficult  task,  compliance  with  this  criterion  is  an  essential  step  towards
integrating  into  the  Single  Market  and,  in  this  way,  towards  creating  a  solid  basis  for  future  non-
inflationary growth.
2.  In  the  second  phase  of  the  aforementioned  three-stage  process  -  starting  immediately  upon
accession into the EU - the new entrants will, as far as EMU is concerned, have the status of "Member
 2
BIS Review 3/2001
States with a derogation". No "opt-out" clauses will be available for the future new members. As from
their entry into the EU, the new Member States will be obliged to treat their exchange rate policy as a
matter of common interest. This implies, for example, that competitive devaluations are not allowed,
since they would interfere with the smooth functioning of the Single Market.
Bearing in mind the final objective of adopting the euro, we expect accession countries to join ERM II,
when they have achieved a sufficient degree of convergence with the euro area. This mechanism can
accommodate  different  exchange  rate  regimes  including  euro-based  currency  board  systems,
provided that they are compatible with its key features and that the policy objectives are in line with
those of the mechanism and with participation  in the  Single Market. The only clear incompatibilities
with ERM II that can be identified at this stage are the cases of free floating, crawling pegs, and pegs
to reference currencies other than the euro.
Most  accession  countries  have  already  indicated  their  intention  to  join  the  mechanism  as  soon  as
possible after entry into the EU. In this context, I should like to stress that the experience of current
Member  States  reveals  that  the  time  between  EU  accession  and  entry  into  ERM  II  can  vary
considerably. Taking into account only the six countries that joined the EU after the establishment of
the European Monetary System (EMS) and the ERM in 1979, only one country, namely Austria, joined
the ERM immediately following its accession to the EU in 1995.
In this second phase we also expect candidate countries ultimately to satisfy the Maastricht criteria,
which - I think - require no further elaboration. Nominal convergence will become a key requirement
and  regular  convergence  reports,  both  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  ECB,  will  assess
whether the convergence process has progressed sufficiently to qualify for the adoption of the euro.
The Treaty requires the strict and sustainable fulfilment of these criteria, which we will apply to future
euro area entrants in the same way as we have done to past ones.
3.  As  a  final  step,  based  upon  the  fulfilment  of  these  criteria,  the  new  Member  States  will  then  be
expected to enter the third phase and to exchange their national currencies for the euro and, thus, to
become full participants in EMU.
 Before concluding my remarks, I should like to stress an  important  constraint  that  will  guide  all  our
actions  in  relation  to  the  three  above-mentioned  steps.  Whatever  the  intensity  of  the  Eurosystem's
involvement in the enlargement process, we will always focus on the maintenance of price stability in
the euro area. Hence, any arrangements or other forms of co-operation with accession countries will
be without prejudice to the Eurosystem's independence and our primary objective.
A number of years - I shall not venture to guess how many - lie ahead of us before the first candidate
countries will join the EU. Some more years will elapse before the best-prepared countries will adopt
the euro. This period will offer an opportunity for these countries to combine sound macroeconomic
policies,  much  needed  structural  reforms  and  robust  institution  building.  In  this  sense,  the  overall
period in the process depends on the candidate countries' individual efforts in advancing reforms and
it may, of course, vary from country to country.
I  should  like  to  end  my  remarks  here.  As  I  hope  I  have  made  amply  clear,  the  Eurosystem  is  fully
aware of the future implications of the ongoing accession process for the fulfilment of its own statutory
objectives. Preparations, on all levels, for a smooth integration into the European System of Central
Banks (ESCB) and - some time later - into the Eurosystem are well under way. As the historic process
of reunifying Europe unfolds before our eyes, let me assure you that  the  ECB is ready and  looking
forward to playing its part.
BIS Review 3/2001
3
