Donald T Brash: Promoting financial stability: the New Zealand approach
Address by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Conference for
Commonwealth  Central  Banks  on  Corporate  Governance  for  the  Banking  Sector,  London,  6  June
2001.
 Introduction
It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak to you today.
The theme of this conference – Corporate Governance in the Banking Sector – is a subject that has
been an important element in the Commonwealth Secretariat's financial sector work in recent years. It
has also been a notable feature of other international initiatives, including those of the International
Monetary  Fund  and  World  Bank,  in  their  efforts  to  address  the  causes  of  financial  crises  and  to
promote  greater  financial  stability.  Appropriately,  improving  corporate  governance  is  seen  as  a
significant way of encouraging banks to strengthen their capacity to manage risks. And it has rightly
been viewed as an important element in the management of central banks.
Today,  I  want  to  discuss  the  role  that  corporate  governance  plays  in  the  New  Zealand  banking
supervision  framework  and  to  relate  this  to  the  importance  we  attach  to  strengthening  market
discipline in the financial system. But before doing this, let me briefly recap the main points made in
the report issued by the Commonwealth Secretariat last year on the causes of financial instability and
the  policies  for  promoting  stable  financial  systems.  This  provides  a  useful  context  within  which  to
discuss the New Zealand approach to financial sector regulation.
Causes of financial instability
As indicated in the Commonwealth Secretariat's paper Corporate Governance in the Financial Sector,
financial instability is caused by a combination of factors. These include:
 
rapid  financial  sector  liberalisation  unsupported  by  measures  to  encourage  prudent  risk
management in the financial sector;
unsustainable macroeconomic policies, such as loose monetary policy and excessive fiscal
spending – such policies can contribute to asset price volatility and a subsequent erosion of
asset quality in the financial system;
exchange  rate  arrangements  that  lack  credibility,  including  unsustainable  exchange  rate
pegs – this is particularly important where financial institutions and corporations have come
to  rely  on  an  exchange  rate  peg,  and  fail  to  hedge  their  currency  risk,  only  to  sustain
currency losses when the peg collapses;
protection against imports and other policies that impede the efficient allocation of resources
in the economy;
poor banking supervision;
inadequate financial disclosure arrangements, including poor quality accounting and auditing
standards; and
weak  market  disciplines  in  the  banking  and  corporate  sectors,  reducing  the  incentives  for
high quality risk management by banks.
     Policies for promoting stable financial systems
The  broad  range  of  factors  that  can  contribute  to  financial  crises  suggests  the  need  for  an  equally
broad  set  of  policy  responses.  Of  course,  the  particular  policies  will  vary  from  country  to  country,
depending  on  a  country's  stage  of  development,  the  nature  of  its  economy  and  the  structure  of  its
financial system. There is no single "right" policy prescription. Each country must develop policies that
suit  its  own  particular  circumstances.  However,  at  a  general  level,  it  can  safely  be  said  that  the
following types of policies will be needed in order to promote financial stability:
BIS Review 53/2001
1
sound, sustainable and credible macroeconomic policies, including a monetary policy aimed
at promoting price stability;
microeconomic  policies  that  minimise  distortions  to  relative  prices  and  that  encourage
efficient allocation of resources;
exchange  rate  policy  that  is  seen  as  credible  by  all  market  participants,  that  facilitates
macroeconomic  adjustment  and  that  builds  in  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  hedge
against currency risk;
an effective legal and judicial system, facilitating the enforcement of legal contracts;
policies to encourage banks to manage their risks prudently, including corporate governance
and financial disclosure;
policies 
strengthening the incentives for banks to manage their risks prudently;
policies  to  promote  robust  payment  systems  and  minimise  inter-bank  contagion,  such  as
netting  arrangements,  real  time  gross  settlement  and  failure-to-settle  structures  within  the
payment system; and
effective and well-enforced banking supervision arrangements.
to  encourage  effective  market  disciplines 
financial  sector, 
thereby
the 
in 
 
It would be tempting to discuss each of these policy areas, given their importance to the promotion of
sound  and  efficient  financial  systems.  But  we  would  need  a  great  deal  longer  than  one  day  to  do
justice to such a broad range of complicated policy issues. Instead, I want to focus on the main theme
of this conference – corporate governance in the financial sector.
Corporate governance in the financial sector
As noted in the Commonwealth Secretariat's report, improving corporate governance is an important
way to promote financial stability. The effectiveness of a bank's internal governance arrangements has
a  very  substantial  effect  on  the  ability  of  a  bank  to  identify,  monitor  and  control  its  risks.  Although
banking  crises  are  caused  by  many  factors,  some  of  which  are  beyond  the  control  of  bank
management, almost every bank failure is at least partially the result of poor risk management within
the bank itself. And poor risk management is ultimately a failure of internal governance.
Although  banking supervision and the regulation  of banks' risk positions can go some  way  towards
countering  the  effects  of  poor  governance,  supervision  by  some  external  official  agency  is  not  a
substitute for sound corporate governance practices. Ultimately, banking system risks are most likely
to  be  reduced  to  acceptable  levels  by  fostering  sound  risk  management  practices  within  individual
banks. Instilling sound corporate governance practices within banks is a crucial element of achieving
this.
As  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat's  report  notes,  there  are  a  number  of  ways  in  which  corporate
governance in the financial sector can be strengthened. These include:
 
 
having a well designed and enforced company law;
having  codes  of  principles  developed  by  professional  or  industry  associations,  setting  out
desired  attributes  of  corporate  governance,  and  associated  educational  and
consciousness-raising initiatives;
maintaining high quality disclosure requirements for banks and other companies, based on
robust accounting and auditing standards;
adopting  measures  to  strengthen  market  disciplines  in  the  banking  sector,  including  by
promoting a contestable and competitive banking system and seeking to ensure that bank
creditors are not fully insulated from loss in a bank failure;
effective  banking  supervision  arrangements,  with  particular  emphasis  on  policies  that
encourage sound governance and risk management practices; and
leadership  by  example,  including  the  adoption  of  sound  governance,  accountability  and
transparency practices by central banks and regulatory agencies.
          2
BIS Review 53/2001
New Zealand's approach to financial stability
Against this background, let me briefly summarise the New Zealand approach to promoting financial
stability. This has three main strands:
 
 
 
promoting self discipline by banks in the management of their risks;
fostering effective market discipline on the banking system; and
supervising  banks  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  financial  stability,  but  seeking  to  avoid
supervisory practices that might erode market discipline and weaken the incentives for bank
directors to take ultimate responsibility for the management of risks.
Let me elaborate on each of these in turn.
Banks' self discipline in managing risks
Banking  supervision  in  New  Zealand  places  considerable  emphasis  on  encouraging  banks'  self
discipline  in  managing  risks,  primarily  by  reinforcing  the  role  of  bank  directors  in  taking  ultimate
responsibility for the stewardship of their banks. Since the mid 1990s, when a new public disclosure
framework  was  introduced  for  banks,  a  key  mechanism  for  encouraging  banks  to  manage  risks
prudently has been the need for banks to issue public disclosure statements each quarter.
The disclosure statements are in two forms: a brief Key Information Summary, which is aimed at the
ordinary  depositor;  and  a  more  comprehensive  General  Disclosure  Statement,  which  is  aimed
principally at the professional analyst.
The Key Information Summary contains a short summary of information on the bank, including:
 
 
 
the bank's credit rating;
the bank's capital ratio, measured using the Basel framework; and
information  on  exposure  concentration,  exposures  to  connected  parties,  asset  quality  and
profitability.
comprehensive financial statements;
credit rating information;
detailed information on capital adequacy, asset quality and various risk exposures; and
information on the bank's exposure to market risk.
The Key Information Summary must be displayed prominently in, and be available on demand from,
every bank branch.
The General Disclosure Statement contains wider-ranging and much more detailed information on the
bank and its banking group, including:
 
 
 
 
One of the most important features of this disclosure framework is the role it accords bank directors.
Each director is required to sign and make certain attestations in the disclosure statements, including:
 
whether  the  bank  is  complying  with  the  prudential  requirements  imposed  on  it  by  the
Reserve Bank;
whether the bank has systems in place to adequately monitor and control its banking risks
and whether those systems are being properly applied;
whether the bank's exposure to connected parties is contrary  to the  interests of the bank;
and
whether  the  disclosure  statement  contains  all  the  required  disclosures  and  is  not  false  or
misleading.
   Directors face potentially severe criminal  penalties and civil  liability  where a disclosure statement is
held to be false or misleading.
Complementing the disclosure requirements, banks incorporated in New Zealand are required to have
a minimum of two independent directors (who must also be independent of any parent company) and
a  non-executive  chairman.  These  requirements  are  intended  to  increase  the  board's  capacity  to
scrutinise the performance of the management team. In addition, independent directors provide some
BIS Review 53/2001
3
assurance that the bank's dealings with its parent or other related parties are not in conflict with the
interests of the bank in New Zealand.
The disclosure requirements have increased the accountability of bank directors  and,  indirectly,  the
accountability  of  various  levels  of  management  within  the  banks.  As  a  result  of  the  disclosure
arrangements, we have seen directors taking greater care than might otherwise have been the case to
ensure  that  they  are  adequately  discharging  their  obligations.  In  so  doing,  directors  have  strong
incentives  to  ensure  that  there  are  appropriate  accountability  mechanisms  within  the  management
hierarchy.
4
BIS Review 53/2001
