Joseph Yam: Consumer protection and the banking industry
Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, JP, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong
Kong Association of Banks’ Half-Yearly Dinner, Hong Kong, 19 June 2001.
 Thank you very much for asking me to give the speech this evening. The last time I  was invited to
speak at an HKAB dinner was almost exactly two years ago, and the time before that was nearly nine
years ago. Although I am not quite sure whether I could manage the pace if this rate of acceleration
were  to  continue,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  getting  together  with  you  more  frequently.  It  is  also  most
appropriate. The banking industry in Hong Kong is going through a period of rapid transformation. The
regulatory  system  is  in  the  middle  of  a  programme  of  intensive  reform.  And  the  Hong  Kong
Association of Banks, now in its 20th year, is currently reviewing its role and aims in the light of these
changes.  As  the  banking  sector’s  main  representative  body,  HKAB  has  an  important  role  to  play:  I
shall suggest later on, that indeed it has an increasingly important role to play as the banking sector
continues to evolve and adapt to changing conditions. Before I  turn  to  that  subject,  I  should  like  to
address, very briefly, two broad interconnected subjects: first, the theme of competition, particularly in
the  context  of  the  current  programme  of  banking  sector  reform;  and  secondly,  the  question  of
consumer protection, in the light of increasing competition and other trends.
Competition and banking sector reform
We  are  now  two  years  into  our  programme  of  extensive  banking  sector  reform.  In  fact,  the  first
measure  under  that  programme  was  my  clarification,  at  your  dinner  in  June  1999,  of  the  HKMA’s
policy on the question of Lender of Last Resort. It was a pretty heavy-going speech for an after-dinner
occasion, and I still recall the drooping eyelids and stifled yawns. But at least those of  you who sat
through it can take satisfaction in the fact that you were witnessing a minor historical event.
Since then, the reform programme has made a great deal of progress. In 1999 we relaxed the “one
building” condition on foreign banks licensed since 1978. Last year we expanded access to Real Time
Gross Settlement and implemented the first phase in the deregulation of the remaining Interest Rate
Rules. We also completed a study and a public consultation on the case for establishing a commercial
credit reference agency. Earlier this year, a similar public consultation was completed on the case for
a  deposit  insurance  scheme.  The  general  view  in  these  consultations  was  that  the  two  schemes
should be pursued, although we fully recognise that there are dissenting opinions on the question of
deposit  insurance.  We  are  now  working  out  the  details  for  both  schemes,  and  we  look  forward  to
further consultations with HKAB and other bodies as the proposals progress.
The  theme  of  the  reform  programme  is  facilitating  greater  competition  in  the  banking  sector  while
strengthening safety and soundness. Perhaps the single most important measure to remove barriers
to competition will be the abolition early next month of the last remaining Interest Rate Rules, which
involves removing the interest rate cap on savings accounts and ending the prohibition on interest on
current  accounts.  There  is,  of  course,  much  speculation  about  the  immediate  impact  of  this  event:
whether it will be a big bang that will change the face of banking services, or merely a quiet change of
gear. Given the plentiful liquidity in the banking system, it is likely that it will be the latter. But there
should be no doubt about its significance in bringing to an end restrictions that have been in existence
for more than a third of a century. The restrictions, some of you may recall, were introduced in 1964 as
a measure to prevent cut-throat competition among banks. They served their purpose, but they have
now outlived their usefulness.
Why do we place so much stress on facilitating competition through regulatory reform? I use the term
“facilitate” because it is not within the power of a government – and it is certainly not the policy of our
government – to create competition, or to force competition to happen. Competition is a part of Hong
Kong’s  free  market  ethos.  It  is  already  strong  in  the  banking  sector  here.  We  have  witnessed  it  in
particular – and occasionally with some concern – in the mortgage war and in the provision of credit
card and other consumer services. Competition is being sharpened and stimulated by  globalisation,
which opens up hitherto restricted markets to businesses that are able to export their strengths, and
by technological advance, which puts a premium on innovation and ingenuity.
BIS Review 55/2001
1
For  the  economy  as  a  whole,  competition  promotes  efficiency  in  the  allocation  of  resources  and
strength  and  flexibility  in  the  face  of  change  or  crisis.  In  the  banking  sector,  greater  competition
strengthens both individual banks, by forcing them to focus on their own core competence, and the
banking system as a whole, by weeding out inefficiencies. For the consumer, competition promotes
choice, quality and efficiency in products and services, and more reasonable costs. But competition,
by its very nature, produces winners and losers. It also complicates the relationship between banks
and  customers,  as  services  and  fee  structures  become  more  complex  and  more  sophisticated
products proliferate.
The general government policy on competition in Hong Kong is to adopt a sector-specific approach.
We are not disposed to the idea of a general, overarching competition authority, since each sector of
the economy has its own special needs and concerns. The banking sector, which has its own unique
history, and which, for obvious reasons, is subject to more supervision than perhaps any other sector
of the economy, requires a particularly focused approach. The approach here is a simple but proactive
one. The main policy objectives are to remove barriers to competition, such as the Interest Rate Rules,
and to maintain a level playing field, particularly with regard to access to infrastructure.
In addition to this proactive policy approach, there are two main subsidiary concerns. One of these is
to watch out for signs of collusion or anti-competitive behaviour in the industry and to address these
when  they  occur.  I  should  note  here  that  we  do  not  see  such  signs  at  present,  though  we  remain
vigilant.  The  other  is  a  general  concern  that  the  adjustments  to  fees  and  services,  which  form  a
necessary part of the competition and reallocation of resources resulting from deregulation, should not
lead to the exclusion of certain groups in society from a basic level of banking services, and that they
should be introduced in a transparent way. Again, I should make it clear that, despite the concerns
expressed by a number of groups over the last few months, we believe that, in general, the banks are
addressing  this  point.  I  should  also  add,  for  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  that  it  is  not  the  HKMA’s
policy to regulate fees and charges. This is something  that is  left  to  the  market.  It  would  hardly  be
consistent for us on the one hand to  be promoting greater competition  and on  the  other to seek to
determine  or  influence  fees  and  charges.  However,  the  public  concern  about  the  effects  of
deregulation, coupled with the recognition of the importance of banking services to people’s daily lives,
suggest that we should be paying more attention than we have in the past to the question of consumer
issues. This is the subject to which I should now like to turn.
Consumer protection
First, I think it needs to be understood that the changes now going on in banking services, including
the restructuring of fees and charges, are not solely the result of interest rate deregulation. There are
a number of factors – global as much as local – that are driving banks into refocusing their business.
These include: increased competition from both within and outside the banking industry; pressure to
increase shareholder value; the need to develop new income streams amid a shortage of conventional
lending opportunities; and globalisation, which is inducing banks to specialise in forms of business in
which  they  have  a  competitive  advantage.  These  various  factors  are  forcing  banks  to  innovate
 through  new  products  and  new  technologies  –  in  order  to  diversify  their  income.  They  are  also
forcing banks to become more cost-efficient: to scrutinise the profitability of their various services, and
to rationalise cost structures. The result in many cases has been substantial changes in retail banking
services: for example, the selling off of business units, the closing down of branches, the expansion
into fee-based business, such as MPF and insurance services, the development of more cost-effective
modes of service delivery, such as the ATM network and the Internet, and the imposition of specific
fees and charges on services that did not incur fees and charges in the past.
Consumers  also  need  to  react  to  the  changing  environment  –  for  example,  through  making  use  of
delivery  channels  such  as  ATMs,  telephone  banking  or  the  internet  that  reduce  the  cost  of  using
banking services. Cost minimisation also provides the incentive for consumers to shop around, and
new technology in the form of the Internet enhances the means of doing so. With the shopping around
comes awareness of what else is on offer, and greater expectations on the part of the consumer. Less
positively,  there  has  been  disruption  and  anxiety,  which  has  been  reflected  in  the  steadily  growing
number of complaints and protests, and in the greater political attention being paid to this subject.
What is the stance of the HKMA? We do not, as I have already said, regulate fees and charges. But
we seek to ensure that there is transparency in the provision of services, particularly in the setting out
of fees and charges. The Code of Banking Practice, which is a non-statutory code issued jointly by
HKAB and the DTC Association with our endorsement, is the main tool for achieving this end, and, as
2
BIS Review 55/2001
you  all  know,  the  Code  is  currently  being  subjected  to  extensive  revision  and  strengthening.  This
process is almost at an end and we believe that it will make the Code an even more effective tool. In
addition to transparency, we hope that the banks, in making their decisions on fees and charges, will
show some sensitivity to the needs of the more vulnerable members of society. We believe that, so
far, banks are displaying such sensitivity. We also wish to ensure that there continues to be choice for
customers.  Again,  we  believe  that  there  is  choice,  and  that  deregulation,  new  technology,  new
products are indeed combining with competition to provide a greater choice than ever before. We shall
continue to monitor.
This is a reasonably healthy picture. But it is time also, I think, to look at the current arrangements for
consumer  protection  in  the  banking  industry,  to  see  whether  improvements  are  needed,  and  if  so,
what they should be. The HKMA already plays an informal role in addressing consumer complaints,
though we have no powers to settle disputes. Should we – or should someone else – be given such
powers?  Should there be sanctions for banks that fail to comply  with codes of practice?  How  does
Hong Kong compare with other jurisdictions in this area?
It was with the intention of clarifying some of the issues surrounding banking consumer protection that
we recently undertook a comparative study of the practices in the UK, Australia and Hong Kong. The
report on this study has been presented to the LegCo Panel on Financial Affairs and has been made
available to the general public, and, of course, to the banking sector. The study examines the different
approaches to this subject in  Australia and the UK, but  it notes that,  in contrast to Hong  Kong, the
regulators  in  both  places  have  been  given  a  specific  mandate  in  relation  to  the  protection  of
consumers of financial and banking services. Two further major differences between Hong Kong and
the overseas regimes are highlighted: first, in the setting, monitoring and enforcement of standards of
business  practice;  and,  secondly,  in  the  investigation,  resolution,  and  arbitration  of  customer
complaints.  With  regard  to  the  former,  Australia  and  the  UK  both,  like  Hong  Kong,  have  a
non-statutory Code of Banking Practice, which sets the standards. But both Australia and the UK take
this a stage further, with the formal monitoring of compliance by a specialist agency, which, in the UK
case at least, has the power to impose sanctions against institutions that breach the Code. For the
resolution of customer complaints, both the UK and Australia have a formalised Ombudsman scheme,
with powers to arbitrate in disputes.
These two key features of the British and Australian systems illustrate how the arrangements in Hong
Kong  do  not  go  as  far  as,  or  are  less  formalised  than,  those  in  other  jurisdictions.  This  may  have
something to do with different philosophical approaches: in Hong Kong the tradition has been a free-
market one, which entails a very low level of government involvement in business relationships. But as
the Hong Kong market becomes more sophisticated and more competitive, and as consumer issues
are coming more to the fore, it may be useful to consider whether Hong Kong should follow the path of
other jurisdictions.
At  this  early  stage  of  discussion,  there  seem  to  be  three  broad  options,  which  are  not  necessarily
mutually exclusive. The first is some form of self-regulation by the banking industry. The second is to
provide a specific mandate to the regulator, that is the HKMA. The third is to place the responsibility in
the hands of an Ombudsman. There are a number of issues – some philosophical, some practical –
that will need to be taken into account in deciding in the fullness of time where the responsibility would
lie. As far as the HKMA is concerned, the arguments for and against are, I suggest, finely balanced.
One  argument  holds  that  a  more  formal  role  for  the  HKMA  in  this  area  might  create  a  conflict  of
interest between our prudential regulation and consumer protection roles. The other point of view is
that the two roles can co-exist if there are sufficiently high and thick Chinese walls between them, and
that, furthermore, there are synergies between the two roles, and cost benefits to be achieved. The
HKMA has an open mind on this issue, and we are hoping to receive views on the way forward, from
the industry, from Legislative Councillors, and from the community at large. And I should stress, before
the charge of empire building is raised, that this is not necessarily one of the functions that the HKMA
would wish to add to its already onerous responsibilities.
There is, of course, the parallel question of whether HKAB, as the main industry organisation, and as
the  traditional  vehicle  for  self-regulation,  should  play  a  role  in  consumer  protection.  Here  again  the
arguments seem to be evenly balanced. On the one hand, the knowledge and proximity to the industry
would place HKAB  at  an  advantage  in  handling  complaints.  On  the  other  hand,  there  could  be  the
perception  of  a  conflict  of  interest.  I  note  that  it  is  not  HKAB’s  wish  to  take  on  the  formal  role  of
consumer protection, and I respect that. But, whichever organisation takes on the formal role, HKAB
will almost certainly have a part to play in shaping policies and practices in this area.
BIS Review 55/2001
3
The future role of HKAB
Quite apart from consumer protection, the larger question remains of  what  the industry, the HKMA,
and  not  least  the  community  might  expect  from  HKAB  in  the  future,  after  one  of  its  principal
responsibilities – the weekly setting of interest rates – has been taken away. It is this subject that I
should like briefly to address in the final section of this speech.
It is, perhaps, something of an irony that, at a time when HKAB’s formal powers are diminishing, its
public profile has never been higher. We know from the television and the press that it has become
almost  a  weekly  tradition  for  your  Chairman  to  appear  down  in  Statue  Square  to  receive  petitions,
banners, and all kinds of symbolic objects from concern groups. I think this says something about the
reputation  that  HKAB  has  established  as  the  industry  body.  It  also  says  something  about  public
expectations of its role. It is therefore timely, during a period of deregulation and rising expectations,
that there should be a reconsideration of how HKAB’s role could be developed.
I should stress that the decision on how that role should be developed is ultimately a matter for HKAB
itself. HKAB has, in fact, already commissioned a consultant to examine this subject, and  you have
now published the Report for consultation with member banks. The HKMA has read the Report, and
from our point of view the recommendations in it are sensible and realistic. Taking into account the
Report, and how we see the banking sector developing, we see scope for developing HKAB’s role in
four broad areas.
First, and perhaps most important, the Report recommends that HKAB could take further its function
as the voice of the industry. We support this recommendation. HKAB already fulfils this role to a great
extent,  particularly  in  its  submissions  on  policy  proposals  and  in  its  regular  meetings  with  us  on  a
variety of operational issues. But this role could be deepened, particularly in developing a more unified
position on major policy issues, and in achieving a position that broadly reflects the views of the whole
of the banking industry. I  would even suggest that there  is scope for HKAB to  become not just the
spokesperson for the banking industry, but also a lobbyist for the industry. This is not an easy task,
because the banking industry in Hong Kong is diverse and not always able to come to a single view on
issues that affect it. Nor is there any reason why it should do so on every issue. However, HKAB could
develop its profile and gain strength as a representative organisation if it were to work on developing
its role as the clear industry voice.
The  second  main  recommendation  in  the  Report  concerns  HKAB’s  role  in  the  development  of  the
Code of Banking Practice. The Code, which sets the standards for banking services, is jointly issued
by HKAB and the DTC Association, with the endorsement of, and involvement of, the HKMA. It is a
non-statutory code, although compliance with it is expected of all AIs. It is monitored by the HKMA as
part of its regular supervision, although, as I mentioned earlier, we have no formal, statutory mandate
in this project. There is, I think, scope, as the Report advocates, for HKAB to take greater ownership of
this code, particularly in the setting of standards – and in ensuring that these are high standards – and
in  monitoring  and  enforcing  compliance.  This  would  be  consistent  with  the  practice  of  banking
associations in other jurisdictions, and it would be a logical development of HKAB’s role.
A  third  area  highlighted  in  the  Consultant’s  Report  is  consumer  education  in  the  field  of  banking
services. This is a neglected subject in Hong Kong. The question of which organisation should take
the  lead in  this  is,  of  course,  tied  to  the  question  of  who  should  take  on  consumer  protection.  But,
whatever the answer to the second question, it seems clear that HKAB would need to be involved in
some  form  or  another.  This,  in  fact,  reflects  the  practice  among  industry  organisations  in  other
jurisdictions, many of which have a strong tradition of producing plain-language factsheets, webpages
and other resources on running personal finances, protecting one’s financial interests, and making the
most of new forms of financial services.
Moving away from the recommendations in the Consultant’s Report, there is, I think, a fourth area in
which  HKAB  could  become  more  involved.  This  is  in  the  development  of  Hong  Kong’s  financial
infrastructure. This is one of the HKMA’s key policy objectives, but it is also an area in which HKAB
has a keen and constructive interest. In particular, HKAB, together with the HKMA, is joint owner of
Hong Kong Interbank Clearing Ltd, which operates one of the key features of Hong Kong’s financial
infrastructure, the Real Time Gross Settlement System. One other project on which HKAB can work
closely with the HKMA is in the development of a Commercial Credit Reference Agency. Some of your
members  are  already  participating  in  the  Working  Group  that  is  now  engaged  in  thrashing  out  the
details  of  how  the  CCRA  would  work.  An  issue  which  has  been  raised  in  the  deliberations  of  the
Working  Group  is  whether  HKAB  should  participate  in  the  ownership  of  the  CCRA,  as  it  does  in
HKICL. This was not an idea that found much favour when we consulted the industry on the CCRA
4
BIS Review 55/2001
scheme last year. But perhaps, now that it seems likely that such a scheme will go ahead, it is an idea
which should be revisited at some stage in the future. That is a matter for HKAB and it is one that I
leave you to think about. Even if you were to confirm the earlier view not to participate directly in this
particular  project,  it  would  not  undermine  the  general  principle  that  the  HKMA  and  HKAB  should,
wherever feasible, work hand in hand in developing important pieces of the financial infrastructure.
Conclusion
To  summarise,  deregulation  will  bring  greater  competition  to  the  banking  industry,  which  should
enable banks to exercise a great deal more freedom in the nature of business they pursue and in the
form of services they offer. Ideally, this freedom should also provide greater choice for the consumer,
greater  efficiency  in  the  delivery  of  services,  and  better  value  for  money.  In  practice,  however,  the
transitional period in which we now find ourselves will also give rise to misunderstandings, disputes,
and  dissatisfaction  among  many  consumers  that  will  need  to  be  resolved.  To  approach  these
problems and to find practical ways of resolving them, we need to develop a more sophisticated and
better  organised  system  of  consumer  protection. We  have  now  placed  the  subject  on  the  table  for
discussion.  I  hope  that  the  community  and  its  representatives,  and  the  industry,  through  your
organisation, will take up the debate and help shape an effective solution.
BIS Review 55/2001
5
