Nout Wellink: Prospects for a unified Europe
Speech  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank,  at  the  European  Institute  in
Washington DC, 30 April 2001.
 Introduction
The European Institute has asked me to focus on the topic of economic diversity in Europe. It is a key
issue, and I am glad to share with you some of my ideas on it. At the end of my speech, I will allow
myself  to  take  a  broader  view  and  consider  the  longer-term  prospects  for  Europe.  But  first,  I  will
discuss  a  more  down-to-earth  issue  of  immediate  relevance  to  us  all:  the  prospects  for  economic
growth in Europe. The key question is: With declining US growth, will Europe be the white knight that
rescues the world economy from slowing?
Growth prospects for Europe
The European economy is on solid ground. Real GDP growth in the euro area amounted to 3.4% in
2000,  which  is  the  highest  growth  rate  of  the  past  ten  years;  at  the  same  time,  the  ECB  remains
successful in maintaining inflation at low and stable levels; employment growth has been higher than
in the US for each of the last three years; and finally, high fiscal deficits have been eradicated, and are
a  thing  of  the  past.  So,  the  background  is  encouraging.  In  at  least  two  respects,  the  euro  area
economy is currently less vulnerable than the US:
First,  Europe  has  a  positive  rate  of  personal  savings,  serving  as  a  buffer  against  unexpected
contingencies, such as a sharp decline in equity prices. With a negative personal savings rate, as in
the US these days, shocks in equity prices may have relatively large effects on consumer expenditure
and, hence, economic activity. This is all the more so, as shares are more widely held in the US. In
1999,  the  average  American  family’s  equity  ownership  was  worth  174%  of  its  disposable  income,
roughly twice the German figure.
Second, and connected with the first observation, the current account position is stronger in Europe
than in the US. The US current account has reached a record deficit of 4% of GDP. This reflects the
fact that business investment in the US has become more and more dependent on foreign sources of
finance. As a consequence, a change in international investor confidence away from the US is likely to
aggravate a significant slowdown in economic activity, and thereby to lead to a downward spiral in the
external value of the dollar. We don’t see this right now, but it has happened before.
This is not to deny that the current US slowdown will affect Europe. The familiar truism that Europe
catches  a  cold  when  the  US  sneezes  still  applies.  Although  direct  trade  links  are  limited,  other
channels are more important. In today’s global economy, disturbances on US financial markets impact
significantly on their European counterparts. A decline in US economic prospects will also undermine
European producer and consumer confidence. But even if the uncertainties concerning the European
economy materialize, domestic economic conditions in the euro area seem to be more robust than in
the US. In 2001, euro area GDP is expected to grow more or less in line with potential, and faster than
the US economy. Nevertheless, since imports of goods and services count only for about 16% of GDP
in the euro area, it would be misguided to think that Europe could be the one-and-only power engine
for the world economy. A buoyant global economy requires healthy growth in both Europe and the US.
Economic diversity in the euro area
So far, I have discussed the euro area as an economic entity. I will now talk about the euro area as a
collection of 12 separate EU countries.  Recall  that  the  UK,  Sweden  and  Denmark  are  EU  member
states not participating in monetary union for the time being. Taken on their own, these 12 euro area
countries were small in comparison to the US. But with the establishment of monetary union, these
countries have integrated important aspects of their economies into a single euro area economy. In
many  respects,  the  euro  area  and  the  US  are  comparable.  For  instance,  the  euro  area  has  a
population of 300 million people; the US has 270 million people. The share of the euro area in world
BIS Review 34/2001
1
GDP is 16%, which is slightly less than the US share of 22%. On the other hand, the share of euro
area exports in world exports is 19%, whereas the US share is 15%.
In spite of monetary union, economic diversity across the euro area has not disappeared completely.
Growth differentials between countries have been more or less stable over the last decade; inflation
rates  have  converged  in  the  run-up  to  monetary  union,  but  have  diverged  somewhat  since.
Divergences in Europe attract much more public attention than do regional differences in the US. This
is  striking,  since  in  fact  economic  differences  across  the  US  do  not  vary  greatly  from  those  across
Europe. Admittedly, the dominating position of large member states in Europe is unprecedented in the
US.  Germany  counts  for  32%  of  euro  area  GDP,  France  for  22%.  Taken  together,  California,  New
York and Texas count only for a modest 28% of US GDP. But on the other hand, GDP in our smallest
euro area member state, Luxembourg, is roughly the same as the share of small states like Vermont,
South  Dakota  or  Maine.  Consider  another  example.  In  Europe,  the  Finnish  economy  is  heavily
dependent on only one sector, telecom. I am sure, the Nokia trademark rings a bell here, too. But take
Texas: it is heavily dependent on the oil industry. Such differences in economic structure can cause
differences in cyclical patterns among regions, both in Europe and in the US. These differences also
explain differences in exposure between regions to economic shocks, a phenomenon well known in
the US.
Maybe economic divergences in Europe attract much more public attention than in the US because
the euro area has a very short history. Or maybe divergences in Europe catch the eye due to the fact
that we are used to thinking about economic divergences in terms of sovereign countries. Probably,
both answers contain elements of truth. But there is an additional reason why regional divergences in
the US do not attract much attention. Regional differences in the US tend to cancel each other out in
the medium term. It is common for a US state to have inflation and economic growth above the federal
average  in  a particular  year,  and  to have inflation  and growth rates  below  average  few  years  later.
With only two years after the establishment of monetary union, we do not know whether this will also
be the usual pattern in the euro area.
US states do not diverge persistently from federal trends. That is due to economic mechanisms that
restore equilibrium. A very important mechanism is labor market flexibility. If there are lay-offs in one
part of the US, people tend to move to other, more buoyant regions. Every year, more than 2% of the
American  population  moves  to  another  state  to  find  a  job.  A  further  mechanism  that  contributes  to
restoring equilibrium in the US is income transfers by the federal government. To be honest, similar
redistribution mechanisms to absorb shocks on an interregional basis are less developed in Europe.
Labor mobility is limited across Europe, and even within countries. Fiscal transfers between countries
would  be  politically  difficult  to  implement  and  they  lack  public  support.  In  addition,  the  current
European Commission budget is very small in comparison to the US federal budget, and certainly too
small  for  significant  fiscal  transfers.  Instead,  our  system  relies  much  more  on  the  intertemporal
absorption of shocks within individual countries. This works through automatic stabilizers in national
budgets, which are large in comparison with US state budgets. According to the so-called Stability and
Growth pact, member states should have fiscal surpluses in boom years in order to allow for possible
deficits during economic downturns. They must also keep deficits below 3% of GDP; over the cycle,
budgets of member states are required to be in equilibrium or in surplus. In the European context, the
Stability pact is a much better mechanism for smoothing divergences than income transfers between
countries would be.
As  regards  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  economic  diversity,  an  important  consequence  of
monetary union is that varying national monetary policies and national exchange rates can no longer
cause  divergent  business  cycles  or  inflation  differentials.  Until  the  early  1990s,  interest  differentials
and, more importantly, exchange rate disturbances often caused economic divergence. In the run-up
to monetary  union  during the second half of the  1990s, more uniformity  emerged.  In  1999  a  single
monetary policy was established that took away these potential causes of regional divergences. From
1999 onwards, the ECB has aimed at low and stable inflation in the euro area as a whole. The single
monetary policy is not in a position to influence the dispersion of inflation rates across the euro area.
However,  the  ECB  is  aware  of  inflation  and  growth  differentials.  Large  economic  divergence  could
undermine public  support  for  the  single  monetary  policy  of  the  newly  created  ECB,  as  divergences
make a ‘one-size-fits-all’ monetary policy less appropriate for certain parts of the area. Again, like in
the US, a second reason for our interest in regional divergences is that they can provide early signals
of  area-wide  developments.  In  this  respect,  there  is  no  major  difference  between  the  ECB  and  the
Fed. The Fed reports regularly on US regional developments in its Beige Book.
2
BIS Review 34/2001
The  fundamental  difference  between  the  euro  area  and  the  US  concerns  market  flexibility  and
economic  stability.  The  European  model  has  benefits  associated  with  greater  economic  stability  for
economic  agents  than  in  the  more  dynamic  US  economy.  Recall,  for  example,  the  more  generous
European social safety  net.  However, doing it the European  way comes  at  a  price  in  terms  of  less
flexibility.  For  instance,  the  American  model  is  more  adapted  to  integrating  new  technologies.  The
major challenge for Europe is to increase market flexibility  without risking the benefits of its current
system.
European economic structures are improving. On 1 January 1993, Europe created a single market.
Only six years later, the common monetary policy was put in place. Budgetary discipline has improved
considerably over these  years. More recently, Europe has abolished most barriers to competition  in
the telecommunication and energy sector. Reforms are under way on a broad front. For example, at
the Stockholm summit of EU heads of government last month, new steps were announced to make
Europe more competitive and knowledge-based. Several initiatives relate to removing obstacles to the
mobility of workers between European countries. The most practical step forward was the agreement
on proposals prepared under the chairmanship of Alexandre Lamfalussy aimed at taking away the last
hurdles  to  a  fully  integrated  European  capital  market.  Subject  to  the  energetic  implementation  of
structural reforms, especially those in the field of labor markets and social security, Europe will be able
to benefit more from new technologies, and trend economic growth will increase.
Many countries  in  Europe show encouraging signs that progress on structural issues  is under  way.
Take France for example. Flexible work schedules have recently been introduced on a broad scale.
The government has reduced the state’s stake in banking, air transport and telecoms. France has also
made a first step in lowering the fiscal burden with a one percentage point reduction in VAT last year.
There are also developments that point to another direction, for example recent government plans to
double redundancy pay by employers. But, on the whole, France has moved from a vicious cycle of
higher unemployment and welfare charges to a virtuous growth cycle.
Enlargement and closer cooperation across Europe
Taking  a  broader  view  across  Europe,  one  can  say  that  the  coming  EU  enlargement  to  Eastern
Europe  bolsters  prospects  for  structural  reforms.  Currently,  negotiations  are  under  way  with  12
accession countries. Imagine how different the EU will look when they have joined. The EU will then
consist of 27 countries; its population will increase by 30%, though GDP will increase by only 5%. It is
difficult  to  imagine  that  enlargement  to  the  East  would  occur  without  reforms  leading  to  lower
agricultural subsidies, fewer transfers from so-called cohesion funds and more efficient social security
systems.  The  more  so  as  our  policies,  in  contrast  to  US  policies  towards  their  Latin  American
backyard, are aimed at full integration of accession countries in the EU. However, the new states that
we  want  to  welcome  to  the  ranks  of  the  EU  must  realize  they  have  to  bear  the  main  burden  of
adjustment. Their first step is to enter the EU. In this context, they have to adopt European legislation,
to  implement  EU  environmental  standards  etcetera.  When  they  subsequently  prepare  for  joining
monetary  union,  the  accession  countries  will  have  to  continue  the  adjustment  process  in  order  to
successfully converge towards the standards of the euro area. This could take several years after EU
entry. However, the potential for structural reform and, therefore, for additional growth is immense.
Apart from enlargement, closer cooperation in several policy areas is another major theme within the
EU. In this respect, monetary union works as a catalyst for more cooperation on economic policies.
For instance, tax structures are moving closer together across the euro area. Another sign in this field
concerns the euro area Council of ministers of finance. They have an  unprecedented power to fine
member  states  with  excessive  budget  deficits.  This  Council  can  also  make  recommendations  to
member states with economic policies that are inconsistent with broad policy guidelines. They made
such a recommendation recently to Ireland. It is understandable that within the EU, euro area member
states  want  to  cooperate  more  closely.  For  example,  the  euro  area  ministers  of  finance  have
intensified their cooperation in the so-called euro group.
With closer European cooperation on monetary and economic issues, it is natural that cooperation on
other policies will increase too. However, there is no ultimate goal for closer political integration. Some
dream about the United States of Europe, but Europe will not be ready for this within the foreseeable
future. Others think of a United Europe of States. Anyhow, there is a growing understanding among
European political leaders that Europe cannot develop faster than the people want. As I see it, from
time to time this can mean that there  is  a  pause  at  the  current  level  of  integration.  But  there  is  no
moving backward. As it stands, we have to be realistic and focus on issues that have to be resolved at
BIS Review 34/2001
3
relatively short notice. The main issue now is how to deal with enlargement to Eastern Europe in terms
of  decision-making  processes.  If  we  want  to  have  both  enlargement  and  closer  cooperation  on
particular issues, there is a need for pioneering groups of member states that move closer together on
these issues. That is unavoidable; whether  you refer to these groups as ‘centers of gravity’,  ‘avant-
gardes’ or in the best tradition of Eurocrat-speak ‘member states of a multi-tiered Europe with variable
geometry, in concentric circles with a hard core’. Last year’s Nice summit has cleared the ground for
this flexible approach.
Concluding remarks
Let me conclude. European economic growth prospects are favorable. Euro area economic diversity is
a  fact  of  life,  but  not  very  different  from  the  US  situation.  Admittedly,  the  European  economy  has
considerable progress to make in structural reform. But the improvements so far are genuine and are
likely  to  last.  Closer  European  cooperation  on  economic  and  political  issues  is  under  way.  If  I  may
quote  the  American  economist  Lester  Thurow  from  his  1992  bestseller  Head  to  Head:  ‘future
historians  will record that the  21st century  belonged to the  House  of  Europe’.  End  of  quote.  In  this
environment, a common European culture is emerging. As of January 1, 2002, euro notes and coins
will  give  European  citizens  a  concrete  sign  of  their  common  identity.  Nonetheless,  some  cultural
differences will remain, just as in the US. Joe-six-pack as the average American is only virtual reality. I
am sure that someone from New Jersey is very different from someone from Texas. Also in Europe,
we will keep national traditions. I was born Dutch. Now I feel European, but a Dutch European. I am
proud of that.
4
BIS Review 34/2001
