Lars Nyberg: Sweden and the world economy
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Danske  Securities,
Stockholm, 24 September 2001.
 Exactly two weeks ago I landed courtesy of SAS at Newark airport, after circling around Manhattan. As
always, I was fascinated by the skyline dominated by the twin towers of the World Trade Center. Less
than 24 hours later, those towers were gone and thousands of people had lost their lives in an act of
terrorism that shook the entire world. It is tragic, terrifying and in many respects still incomprehensible.
You all work in the financial sector and I am sure many of you have business contacts or friends who
have  been  affected,  directly  or  indirectly.  I  myself  will  never  forget  the  pictures  of  human  despair
reflected in the US media during the week I had to wait for a flight back to Sweden.
Naturally,  the  events  in  New  York  and  Washington  will  have  both  political  and  economic
consequences. At the moment, everything appears to be very uncertain, for understandable reasons.
However,  it  is  necessary  to  take  developments  in  the  US  economy  as  a  starting  point  for  any
assessment of how the Swedish economy will develop over the next few years. This applied before
the attack against the USA and it applies even more now. I would therefore like to share with you -
after a brief description of what preceded the economic slowdown we have now entered – my view of
what are the core issues for assessing growth and inflation prospects for the near future, both in the
USA and in Sweden.
The driving forces behind the economic upturn in the USA
The  very  optimistic  expectations  regarding  long-term  growth  comprised  an  important  driving  force
behind the sustained rise in the US economy. It was the rapid developments in information technology
and the telecom sector in particular that were assumed to have such spread effects to the rest of the
economy that production was expected to continue increasing at a more rapid rate than before, even
in  the  long  term.  Investments  therefore  rose  strongly,  particularly  in  the  IT  sector.  There  were  also
many people  who claimed that future fluctuations in the business sector would be less  pronounced
than  before.  Efficient  stock  management  and  trimmed  production  processes  were  assumed  to  be
factors that would reduce the risk of major fluctuations in growth. The USA had taken the step into a
“new economy”. And developments on the stock market reflected the belief that “this time it’s really
different”.
At the same time, the fact that demand could increase so strongly and over such a long period of time
without inflation accelerating in the USA was regarded by many as the revenue from breaking earlier
economic ties. Low inflation expectations and a high level of confidence in the central bank’s capacity
and  willingness  to  maintain  price  stability  also  created  favourable  conditions  for  future  growth.
Confidence  in  the  US  economy  was  further  strengthened  by  the  positive  development  in  public
finances.
The optimistic expectations for the future - which were expressed in rising share prices and growing
wealth - also increased households’ willingness to consume durable goods. Together with the strong
rise in investment, this led to a large expansion of credit. Many IT companies were able to find cheap
financing  on  the  risk  capital  market,  but  despite  this  indebtedness  increased  markedly  among  both
households and companies. This  development  was  reflected  in  the  rapidly  increasing  deficit  on  the
current account, which was entirely due to a reduction in saving in the private sector. The financing of
the current account deficit was mainly achieved through a greatly increased capital inflow from foreign
investors’ purchases of US shares. Demand for US capital was so extensive that the dollar continued
to rise in value, despite the growing deficit on the current account.
In winter last year, however, the trend on the stock exchange was broken and the air slowly went out
of the IT bubble. When raised interest rates and high oil prices reduced household purchasing power
and  demand  during  the  autumn,  company  profits  also  began  to  decline.  Falling  profits  and  a  high
burden of debt contributed to subduing investment and the downturn in the US economy became fact.
With hindsight, one can wonder how so many people could be so sure that we had left the whole story
behind us and entered a new world. However, we will probably make the same mistake again. Let me
BIS Review 79/2001
1
just remind you of the first “IT bubble” at the beginning of the last century, which concerned wireless
telegraphy.  150  companies  were  introduced  onto  the  New  York  stock  exchange  in  1901  and  early
1902. In 1907, only one of these still showed a profit and paid dividends, and even that company had
halved its market value since its introduction.
Similar development in Sweden
The development I have outlined applies first and foremost to the USA until the end of last year, but
many  parts  of  the  description  also  fit  the  Swedish  economy.  Here,  our  GDP  growth  had  exceeded
3.5 per cent for three years at the start of the year. The IT and telecom sectors’ large share of Swedish
business  contributed  to  a  more  rapid  economic  growth  in  Sweden  than  in  many  other  European
countries. Many people claimed that Sweden also had one foot in the “new economy”.
However, the economic upturn here in Sweden started later than that in the USA, and from a situation
with a higher level of financial saving in the private sector. The imbalances in saving and foreign trade
that distinguished - and still distinguish - the USA thus had no counterpart in Sweden.
Despite the strong growth, however, inflationary pressure was unusually weak, even in Sweden. The
usual explanatory variables - resource utilisation, import prices and inflation expectations - were not
always enough to explain or forecast the low inflation rate that was established periodically – which
was also something that affected many forecasters and analysts around the world during this period.
When the economic upturn began, there were still plenty of free resources, which had a dampening
effect on inflation. At the same time, inflation expectations had stabilised around our inflation target of
2  per  cent  and  wage  agreements  were  moderate.  However,  apart  from  this  we  had  to  seek
explanations  for  the  low  inflationary  pressure  in  increased  competition  on  internationalised  and
deregulated markets supported by developments in information technology. We appeared able to live
with a lower growth rate than before, without this endangering price stability.
The low inflationary pressure meant that the Riksbank could be content with cautiously slowing down
the  economy  during  2000,  despite  the  high  growth  rate.  The  steering  interest  rate  was  raised  only
twice from the end of 1999 up to November last  year. Before  that the rate  had  been reduced from
almost 9 per cent in autumn 1996 to as low as 2.90 in March 1999. The Swedish repo rate was low in
comparison with the corresponding steering interest rates in, for instance, the USA and the euro area.
At the end of last  year, however, resource utilisation  in  the  Swedish economy  was beginning to  be
strained  and  inflation  was  estimated  to  rise  to  the  extent  that  it  would  exceed  the  target  level  two
years’  ahead.  The  Riksbank  therefore  raised  the  repo  rate  by  a  quarter  of  a  percentage  point  to
4.25 per cent. The assessment of the risk spectrum indicated at the same time that a weaker economy
in the USA could dampen growth in Sweden. As we now know, this is what happened.
Developments during the spring
During the first half of the year, the economic climate continued to weaken both in Sweden and other
countries, but the signals regarding the strength of the downturn were mixed. The weakening in the
economic  climate  was  concentrated  to  the  manufacturing  industry,  while  household  confidence
remained  strong,  despite  an  undermining  of  household  wealth  in  the  form  of  falling  share  prices.
Property  prices  were  not  affected  in  the  same  way  as  share  prices,  which  probably  contributed  to
keeping household’s confidence in the future strong. This applied both to the Swedish economy and
the US economy. In the USA the Federal Reserve lowered interest rates gradually by 2.75 percentage
points during the first half of the year, while tax reductions provided stimulation for households.
For the Riksbank the picture was complicated by the fact that import prices rose unexpectedly rapidly
in May. Later, the statistics showed that consumer prices had also risen more rapidly than expected.
The  increase  (measured  at  an  annual  rate)  in  May  was  3.1  per  cent.  At  the  same  time  as  the
economic climate gradually weakened, there were indications that inflation was beginning to rise. The
price increases could to some extent be attributed to non-recurring factors - such as higher food prices
caused by BSE (“mad cow disease”) and crop failure -but some of the price increase was more difficult
to explain. When the exchange rate also weakened substantially in June, there was justified unease
that this could have an impact in the form of rising inflation expectations.
Given these developments, a majority of the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided on 5 July  to
raise the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points to 4.25 per cent. There was still considerable uncertainty
as to how rapidly the US economy could recover. Nor was there any other economy elsewhere in the
2
BIS Review 79/2001
world that could take over the USA’s role as growth engine. Quite the reverse, the economies in the
euro area and Japan were weakening. The Asian economies that had been strongly IT-dependent in
their exports were also unable to act as pacemaker.
When the Executive Board had to make a decision regarding the repo rate this time, the situation was
unusually  complicated  and  uncertain.  This  was  also  reflected  in  the  fact  that  we  Board  members
differed in our judgements but hardly at all in our fundamental analysis. My assessment was that there
was  a  greater  risk  that  the  international  slowdown  would  be  deeper  and  more  prolonged  than  the
majority of the Board believed. The signals regarding developments in the US economy were mixed
and  the  assessment  hung  in  the  balance  between  a  rapid  recovery  and  a  more  long-drawn  out
sequence  of  events.  In  my  opinion,  there  was  every  reason  to  wait  for  clearer  indications  before
changing the interest rate. Others were more concerned that the weaker exchange rate would have an
impact on inflation.
The role of the krona for an inflation target policy
As the krona has long come under focus, I would like to briefly remind you of the role the exchange
rate plays in monetary policy. We have an inflation target, and the development of the krona has an
effect on inflation, partly through import prices, partly through influencing demand for Swedish goods
and services. For instance, if the krona has a low value, demand and resource utilisation in the export
industry increase.
When we want to influence inflation, we do so primarily via the repo rate. Occasionally, but in my view
very  rarely,  we  can  also  try  to  influence  the  exchange  rate  and  thereby  the  inflation  rate,  through
currency interventions. It is important to remember that we can never have a target for the value of the
krona while monetary policy is directed at an inflation target.
The monetary policy decisions are based on forward-looking assessments of the inflation rate. This
means that the Riksbank must make assessments of how the krona will develop in relation to other
currencies during the forecast period, and assess what effect the development of the krona will have
on demand for Swedish goods, as well as the impact the krona will have on consumer prices. None of
these assessments is simple.
Allow me first to point out the mechanisms that are important with regard to a direct impact on inflation
via  import  prices.  If  the  krona  weakens  and  prices  on  the  goods  we  import  are  determined  in  the
exporter’s home country currency, the weaker krona will have a direct impact on import prices. For the
weaker krona to have a full impact on prices of imported goods in the consumer channel, all domestic
intermediaries must pass the price increases on to the end consumer.
During the years with a floating exchange rate we have been able to note that the weakening of the
krona has not had the impact on consumer prices that we had expected. One explanation could be
that  internationalisation  and  increased competition  have first and foremost meant  that  the  exporting
companies endeavour to adapt their prices to developments on the markets where they sell, in order
to  retain  their  market  share.  It  is  reasonable  to  imagine  that  large  corporations  with  sales  and
production spread around the world can act in this way without facing large fluctuations in profits. A
German  exporter  selling  goods  both  in  the  USA  and  in  Sweden  could,  for  instance,  have  kept  its
profits up fairly well by determining its prices in dollars in the USA and in Swedish kronor in Sweden.
At the same time, increased competition should in general mean that wholesalers and retailers in the
domestic market have greater difficulty in passing import price increases on to the consumer channel.
The general demand situation in the world also has great significance for the capacity to raise prices in
all  channels  -  low  utilisation  of  resources  subdues  price  pressure  and  high  resource  utilisation
increases  price  pressure.  However,  our  knowledge  of  pricing  behaviour  among  both  exporters  to
Sweden and domestic operators is limited. This means that assessments of the effects on inflation of a
particular development in the krona are uncertain.
An  even  more  difficult  task  is  to  make  assessments  regarding  the  krona  exchange  rate  during  the
forecast  period.  In  the  medium  to  long  term,  we  do  not  obtain  much  guidance  from  the  theoretical
models  for  determining  the  exchange  rate.  Almost  all  models  are  based  on  the  real  exchange  rate
creating  balance  in  a  country’s  foreign  trade.  A  particular  basket  of  goods  shall,  for  instance,  cost
approximately the same here as in Germany. If it is -as is the case today - cheaper in Sweden, we will
increase our exports and have a surplus on the current account - which we have. A prolonged surplus
on the current account will sooner or later strengthen the nominal exchange rate so that a balance is
achieved. However, this can evidently take longer than expected.
BIS Review 79/2001
3
Although  the  long-term  value  of  the  krona  is  determined  by  flows  of  goods  and  other  items  in  the
current account, its price is governed in the short term by supply and demand on the foreign exchange
market, and here other factors can prevail. Developments on the financial markets have led to rapid
and substantial portfolio transfers when, for instance, Swedish investors have bought shares abroad or
foreign investors have sold Swedish shares. Changed expectations of earnings on various shares and
changes in the willingness to take risks appear to have increasingly governed the developments on
the  foreign  exchange  markets  in  a  way  that  is  not  captured  by  traditional  exchange  rate  models.
Portfolio transfers as a result of deregulation or changes in investment regulations may also have had
significance.
In  the  long  term,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  anything  other  than  the  development  of  the
fundamental economy shall determine how the exchange rate develops. Regardless of which model
we apply to explain the krona rate, it will show that the krona is undervalued and has been so for a
long time.
Despite  the  difficulties  connected  with  forecasting  exchange  rates,  we  have  to  make  assumptions
regarding  the  development  of  the  krona  in  our  assessments  of  inflation.  We  have  chosen  to  use
fundamental analysis as a basis but to also weigh in as far as possible the effects of other factors. This
means that our assessments assume that the krona will appreciate in the long term, which it has so far
stubbornly refused to do. Nevertheless, the consequences of these “misforecasts” have not been so
great. During the period we have had a floating exchange rate, fluctuations in the krona rate have not
had as large an impact on inflation as before, which we have taken into account when making inflation
assessment. This means that monetary policy has not been affected to any great extent by the fact
that the krona has not developed as expected.
What does the future hold in store?
The prospects for the US economy played a decisive role in the assessment of Swedish growth and
inflation  even  before  the  terrorist  attack  a  couple  of  weeks  ago.  One  important  factor  was  whether
there  was  actually  grounds  for  the  optimistic  expectations  of  future  growth  that  characterised  the
economy  and  that  had  previously  pushed  up  investment  and  share  prices.  Was  the  economic
downturn  in  the  shape  of  a  V,  i.e.  would  it  soon  be  over?  There  can  scarcely  be  any  doubt  that
developments in information technology had created and are still creating growth potential that is far
from exhausted. Or would it take longer time to grow into the overinvestment that occurred when the
“new economy” appeared to be a fact, i.e. would the economic downturn take on the shape of a U? Or
would the USA simply experience a recession in the backwater of the burst IT bubble?
At the Riksbank we were discussing a “banana-shaped” development from an early state, which could
best be interpreted as a very long drawn out U. And even in the USA, the assessments had already
changed from V to U even before the catastrophe and there was talk here and there of the possibility
of a recession. The positive figures expected with regard to consumption and investment had largely
failed to materialise, despite interest rate reductions and tax relief, while unemployment had increased
and consumers found it more difficult to pay their debts. Nor had the stock exchange shown the upturn
expected by many.
Of course, the tragic events in the USA will have a severe dampening effect on the business cycle, at
least in the short term. A number of central banks, headed by the Federal Reserve,  have therefore
lowered their steering interest rates. The Executive Board of the Riksbank also decided last week to
lower the repo rate by 0.5 percentage points from 4.25 per cent to 3.75 per cent. Subdued inflationary
pressure  as  a  result  of  lower  resource  utilisation  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad  was  judged  to
overshadow any price increases caused by the continuing weak krona.
We stated in the press release that “the uncertainty occasioned by last week’s act of terrorism creates
the risk of a further dampening of global demand. It is difficult in the present situation to assess the
collective consequences for the international economy and thus inflation prospects in Sweden over the
next few years. There is a risk that confidence in the future will decline in both the corporate sector
and the household sector, which could result in a deeper and more prolonged economic slowdown.
This would indicate that inflation two years’ ahead, with an unchanged repo rate, would be lower than
the Riksbank’s target. The shape taken by future developments will depend partly on the economic
policy measures taken now.”
Despite this gloomy statement, there is no cause for despair. The US economy is basically strong with
a high potential growth. Some increase in household saving is needed to reduce the burden of debt
4
BIS Review 79/2001
and the deficit on the current account. And of course the dollar appears to be rather overvalued. The
Swedish economy is also in good condition, with low unemployment, a surplus on the current account,
a  declining  central  government  debt  and  low  inflation.  The  conditions  for  coping  with  an  economic
downturn are good, even if the downturn proves more prolonged than we believed in the spring.
Thank you for listening.
BIS Review 79/2001
5
