Willem F Duisenberg: The European Central Bank, the Eurosystem and the
European System of Central Banks
Speech  delivered  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
ceremony  to  inaugurate  the  new  building  of  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg,  Luxembourg,  18
May 2001.
 Your Royal Highness, Prime Minister, Governor Mersch, distinguished guests,
Allow me first to congratulate you on the inauguration of the new premises of the Banque centrale du
Luxembourg. You decided to name parts of them – very appropriately, I find – after Pierre Werner, the
author of the first blueprint for Economic and Monetary Union in Europe. His report of 1970 laid the
conceptual foundations for many aspects of  the  institutional  set-up  and  policy  framework  of  today's
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  Most  significantly,
Werner presented a lucid account of a fundamental requirement of monetary unification in Europe: no
single currency without a common central bank, or rather a "Community system of central banks", as
he  called  it.  The  distinctly  federal  character  of  what Werner  saw  as  the  future  European  monetary
authority was in itself a reflection of the fact that Europe is not a single nation, but a group of nations.
Twenty years later, the Treaty on European Union established the European System of Central Banks,
with  the  European  Central  Bank  at  its  core,  and  transferred  to  it  the  task  of  conducting  a  single
monetary policy. In addition, the authors of the Treaty recognised that a functioning monetary union
requires  centralised  decision-making  and  harmonised  governance  over  all  those  tasks  which  are
closely  related  to  monetary  policy.  Consequently,  responsibility  for  the  management  of  foreign
exchange  reserves,  for  activities  to  support  the  oversight  of  payment  systems,  for  the  collection  of
euro area-wide statistics, for measures to ensure financial stability and for the issuance of banknotes
has also been assigned to the ESCB. At this point, I should like to clarify that, for as long as there are
EU Member States outside the euro area, all these tasks are being carried out by what we call the
Eurosystem,  rather  than  by  the  ESCB  as  a  whole.  The  Eurosystem  comprises  the  ECB  and  the
national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  the  euro  area  Member  States.  The  Eurosystem's  clearly  defined
policy  responsibilities,  together  with  its  independence,  the  strict  orientation  of  monetary  policy  to
stability and the federal  institutional model could be regarded  as the cornerstones of the  "monetary
constitution" of the Community.
The  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg,  is  –  in  this  sense  –  a  "child"  of  the  success  of  monetary
integration  in  Europe.  Moreover,  given  today's  festive  occasion,  one  could  even  regard  these  new
premises of the Banque centrale du Luxembourg as a tangible – or shall I say, concrete – expression
of the federal character of the Eurosystem. In accordance with the Treaty, the NCBs are integral parts
of the Eurosystem. Consequently, the tasks conferred upon the Eurosystem are to be carried out in a
collective manner. In line with the principle of subsidiarity, which – in itself – embodies recognition of
the fact that responsibilities should be distributed among the central institution and federated units on
the basis of functional requirements, the NCBs play an indispensable role in the conduct of the tasks
and functions of the Eurosystem.
In  the  run-up  to  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  many  observers  felt  that  the
decentralised monetary policy framework would become too complex and inefficient. However, these
concerns  have  not  been  borne  out  by  experience,  not  least  because  highly  developed  information
technologies  make  decentralisation  entirely  feasible.  Making  use  of  the  NCBs'  considerable
experience in dealing with their national counterparties has been, and continues to be, a real benefit to
the whole system.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it would, however, be an incomplete account of the role of the NCBs in the
Eurosystem to focus exclusively on implementation, or "downstream", activities. The NCBs also make
a crucial contribution to decision-making further "upstream". The federal character of the Eurosystem
is most clearly reflected in the composition of the ECB's decision-making bodies. As members of the
Governing  Council,  the  NCB  Governors  participate  –  in  a  personal  capacity  –  in  deciding  on  all
centralised  policy  functions.  In  addition,  the  various  ESCB  Committees  provide  a  tight  network  of
BIS Review 42/2001
1
professional,  as  well  as  human,  connections  between  NCBs  and  the  ECB.  In  the  work  of  these
Committees, expert knowledge and specific national experience are brought together, so as to provide
input into the deliberations of the Eurosystem decision-making bodies.
Last, but by no means least, the NCBs play an indispensable role in communications. Undoubtedly,
the multinational, multi-lingual set-up of the Eurosystem presents a challenge, to say the least. In this
context, the NCBs' assistance in conveying the ECB's policy messages in their national languages and
their  intimate  knowledge  of  the  respective  national  cultural  context  and  communication  conventions
represent invaluable assets, especially in these early years of the euro. By explaining the reasoning
behind  the  ECB's  policy  actions  in  the  national  political  arena,  the  NCBs  make  an  essential
contribution to informing the public debate in their Member States. The upcoming physical introduction
of euro banknotes and coins will pose a further communication challenge, since the task of ensuring a
smooth changeover will, to a considerable degree, also rest on the shoulders of our colleagues from
the NCBs.
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  before  I  conclude,  allow  me  briefly  to  address  some  of  the  institutional
challenges which the Eurosystem will be facing in the future. First, there is the process of constantly
reviewing practices and procedures within the Eurosystem. In this context, I am referring to our joint
efforts to fine-tune the existing framework in the light of the experiences of the first two years, so as to
increase  efficiency  and  respond  to  market  developments.  The  reality  of  the  single  currency  has
stimulated changes in market structures which have  altered the  outlook for and practices of market
participants and regulators. It is thus appropriate for the Eurosystem also periodically to review its own
procedures which, after all, were designed before the euro came into existence.
In such a dynamic and changing environment, closer co-operation within the Eurosystem can also be
beneficial  in those  policy fields that  are  not  directly  linked  to  core  monetary  policy  tasks,  but  which
have  traditionally  been  a  realm  of  central  bank  activity.  Speaking  with  one  voice  and  presenting  a
common  view  –  as,  for  example,  in  our  recent  joint  statement  on  "The  role  of  central  banks  in
prudential supervision" – can help to strengthen the influence of our policy messages and to amplify
their public and political impact. Naturally, any such joint, and mutually beneficial, efforts are without
prejudice to the distribution of responsibilities between the ECB and the NCBs.
A great challenge for European institutions in general, and for the Eurosystem in particular, will be the
forthcoming enlargement of the EU to take in 12 or more countries from central, eastern and southern
Europe.  In  purely  institutional  terms,  the  accession  of  new  Member  States  entails  an  immediate
enlargement  of  the  ESCB,  though  not  of  the  Eurosystem.  However,  since  enlargement  will  be  a
gradual  and  seemingly  open-ended  process,  it  is  obvious  that  the  "Eurosystem"  as  an  additional
construct to clarify the relationships between the "ins" and the "outs" within the ESCB is here to stay
for  the  foreseeable  future.  Even  so,  it  is  also  clear  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  the  final
destination  for  accession  countries.  In  fact,  there  is  even  a  certain  –  I  believe,  understandable
 –  impatience  on  the  part  of  future  new  Member  States  to  adopt  the  euro  as  soon  as  possible.
However, the Treaty lays down clear criteria for entry into the euro area, and requires their fulfilment in
a sustainable manner.
The eventual entry  of new  Member  States  into  the  euro  area  will  also  require  an  adaptation  of  the
institutional  framework  of  the  ESCB.  Examples  of  central  banks  from  around  the  world,  such  as  in
United  States  or  in  Germany,  show  that  it  is  possible  to  design  appropriate  structures  which  allow
effective decision-making in federal, decentralised systems and to reconcile efficiency demands with
considerations  of  adequate  representation.  Therefore,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  be  able  to  find  a
solution  that  guarantees  the  efficient  conduct  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  also  in  an
enlarged Eurosystem.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your attention.
2
BIS Review 42/2001
