David Carse: The changing landscape of banking in Hong Kong
Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to the Hong
Kong Investment Funds Association, Furama Hotel, Hong Kong, 15 August 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  you  at  the  Association's  luncheon.  My  topic  today  is  the
changing  landscape  of  banking  in  Hong  Kong.  I  shall  illustrate  this  by  reference  to  two  of  the  key
recent events that are changing that landscape and are going to go on doing so in the years ahead. I
am referring to the deregulation of interest rates, the final phase of which took place on 3 July of this
year,  and  the  introduction  of  the  Mandatory  Provident  Fund  scheme.  I  will  try  to  describe  the
implications of these for the banking industry and for the regulators. I will also try to place them in the
context of the broader trends and developments that are taking place in the banking industry.
Current industry trends
You are probably already familiar with some of these trends and developments. The most obvious one
is the increasing intensity of competition. This is a global phenomenon, whose full effects have only
recently hit Hong Kong. It has shown here up in the sharp decline in lending margins, particularly on
residential mortgages. It is a sobering thought that the interest rate on a 30-year mortgage in Hong
Kong is now down to as low as 4.25%, more than 1 percentage point below the yield on a AAA-rated,
US Treasury bond. It is no surprise that some banks are losing enthusiasm for the downward spiral in
mortgage  rates  and  are  standing  back.  Among  other  things,  this  is  showing  up  in  an  increased
appetite for investment in bonds.
The fall in lending margins is a classic case of too much money chasing too little demand. The impact
is, however, being softened to some extent by the favourable impact of the excess liquidity on deposit
margins. Partly as a result, underlying profits seem to have held up reasonably well in the first half of
the year despite the difficult operating conditions.
We are, however,  only  part of the  way through the reporting  season  and  it  will  take  a  bit  longer  to
come up with definitive conclusions about the interim results. As always, some banks have done better
than others, and it is worth looking at two of the factors that help to deliver a superior performance.
The first of these is skill in  asset-liability management. This is  necessary  to  enable  banks  to  widen
deposit margins as lending margins shrink. It means, among other things, trying to reduce reliance on
high cost deposits, trying to persuade depositors to consolidate deposits with your bank and looking
for alternative funding sources, including long-term debt. Another objective is to reduce the basis risk
that arises from having liabilities in the form of time deposits that are linked with HIBOR and loans that
are linked to prime. The deregulated environment that banks now face will add new complications to
the process of managing interest rate and liquidity risks. I shall return to the subject of deregulation in
a moment.
A second prerequisite for success is the need for banks to develop new sources of income. It looks as
if the days of easy profits from mortgage lending have gone, and the banks now need to work harder
to  generate  income  growth.  The  introduction  of  new  fees  and  charges  on  deposit  accounts  is  one
manifestation of this process. Another is the increasing shift of some banks into  higher  margin,  but
also higher risk, products such as credit cards and other types of personal finance.
Banks are also trying to become financial service providers rather than just banks. The aim is not just
to  broaden  income  sources,  but  also  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  income  through  more  reliance  on
recurring  fees  and  commissions.  One  way  of  achieving  this  is  to  move  into  the  realm  of  wealth
management, by which I mean securities, unit trusts, insurance, pensions and private banking. The
interim  results  of  some  of  the  local  banks  showed  a  growing  contribution  from  this  area,  including
particularly sales of guaranteed funds. As a result, I understand that May of this year was one of the
best ever months for fund sales in Hong Kong.
BIS Review 71/2001
1
The impact of interest rate deregulation
I have tried to show so far how interest rate deregulation fits into the broader industry trends. I will now
say a  bit more about  what  the  impact of the latest,  and final, round of deregulation has been.  This
involved removing the interest rate cap on Hong Kong dollar savings accounts and allowing interest to
be  paid  on  current  accounts.  It  was  the  end  of  a  process  that  began  in  1994  when  we  began  to
deregulate time deposits. Some would say that the process has been unduly protracted. But I think
that it was reasonable to be cautious, since experience elsewhere shows that liberalisation is all too
often accompanied by instability.
As it has turned out, the final stage of deregulation probably could not have happened at a better time
– at least from the point of view of protecting the regulator's peace of mind. The ample liquidity in the
banking system has reduced the risk of an aggressive price war for deposits, which was the HKMA's
principal  concern.  So  we  have  ended  up  with  a  Little  Bang  rather  than  a  Big  Bang.  But  I  should
emphasise that less than two months have passed since the interest rate controls were finally lifted.
Any conclusions about the impact of deregulation can only be tentative at this stage.
Some  of  what  has  happened  was  predicted  at  the  time  the  decision  to  deregulate  was  taken.
Deregulation has been the catalyst – the more cynical would say the excuse – for banks to introduce
fees and charges on deposit accounts. Most banks have also introduced tiered savings accounts, with
higher interest rates being paid on larger balances. Sometimes the rate depends on the range of the
bank's  products  and  services  that  the  customer  uses.  The  converse  is  that  some  banks  are  now
paying less than the standard rate on small deposits. A further innovation is that in a few cases there
are savings products that are linked to HIBOR.
Banks have not rushed to pay interest on conventional current accounts, though some have offered
combined savings and deposit accounts that pay interest. At least one bank offers an auto-sweeping
service  from  savings  to  current  accounts.  Such  products  are  effectively  offering  interest  on  current
accounts. Generally speaking, the amounts deposited in the innovative current and savings accounts
are still quite small.
Perhaps the biggest surprise so far has been that some of the banks have been able to lower their
benchmark savings account rate  to  1.75%,  which  is  probably  25bp  below  what  it  would  have  been
without  deregulation.  A  few  years  ago,  when  the  debate  about  deregulation  was  taking  place,  the
conventional wisdom was that the savings rate was artificially depressed and would rise closer to time
deposit rates after the cap was lifted. So far this has not been the case. Indeed, it appears that the
interest rate rules effectively imposed a floor as well as a cap.
In the current liquid conditions, therefore, the large banks have been able to cut their standard savings
rate. They are therefore seen by some analysts as the winners from deregulation since they now have
another lever to adjust their net interest margin. The unanswered question is whether they will be able
to get away without a significant erosion of deposits in savings and current accounts. A certain amount
of  switching  of  accounts  has  gone  on.  But  there  is  not  enough  evidence  at  this  stage  to  conclude
whether  deregulation  has  resulted  in  any  significant  redistribution  of  deposits  among  banks.  So  we
cannot  tell  how  interest  elastic  the  demand  for  savings  accounts  may  prove  to  be,  particularly  in
today's somewhat artificial conditions of high liquidity. However, what can be said is that deregulation
does  offer  the  smaller  banks  an  enhanced  ability  to  compete  for  savings  accounts  and  for  those
customers which the large banks may be less eager to retain. While the smaller banks may have to
pay a higher rate for their savings deposits, they will still benefit if they can substitute such funds for
even higher cost, and less stable, time deposits.
Consumers  will  also  benefit  from  deregulation  through  greater  choice  of  savings  products  and,  for
those with larger balances at least, from higher interest rates. However, we have to face the fact that
not all depositors will be better off in the deregulated world. The harsh laws of economics mean that
those with smaller balances may suffer disproportionately from new fees and charges and receive less
compensation  in  the  form  of  higher  interest.  Competition  will  help  to  address  this  concern  to  some
extent  since  banks  have  adopted  different  charging  and  interest  rate  policies.  Customers  should
therefore be prepared to shop around for the best offer. Diversity of approach among banks should
also help to mitigate the risk that an increasing proportion of the population will be excluded from the
banking system by prohibitive costs. But this is something that both the Government and the banks will
need to keep an eye on as the effects of deregulation work their way through.
2
BIS Review 71/2001
The Mandatory Provident Fund
The Mandatory Provident Fund is another innovation that is bringing new challenges and opportunities
for the banks and their related companies. The opportunities come from the chance to earn a stream
of annuity-type revenue stretching out into the distant future. The assets under management in MPF
funds are already building up faster than expected and amounted to about HK$22 billion at the end of
May. This includes assets transferred from ORSO schemes. The combination of regular contributions
and long-term investment returns means that MPF assets may total several hundred billion dollars in
ten years time. This will earn the MPF participants an annual all-in fee of around 1.75% of the assets,
though this will have to be shared among the various service providers.
The challenges come from the cost and effort of putting in place the necessary systems and personnel
to handle what is a complex business and which carries a high degree of reputation risk if something
goes  wrong.  Success  in  the  MPF  business  also  requires  an  established  customer  base,  good
distribution networks and strong brand image.
All this means that the MPF is not a business where small players can hope to be successful on a
stand-alone basis. Even for the large companies that have captured the lion's share of the business,
the start-up costs and the ongoing expenses mean that it will probably take a few years for them to
break even and still longer to achieve a reasonable return of capital. However, this should not blind us
to the strategic importance of the MPF for the banking and financial services industry in Hong Kong.
This is why it was vital for the smaller banks to pool their resources in the Bank Consortium Trust. This
has enabled them to establish a credible vehicle and win a market share that is probably larger than
the shareholders could have achieved if they had acted independently.
The  strategic  appeal  of  the  MPF  lies  not  simply  in  the  long-term  profit  opportunities  that  it  offers
directly. It is also that it will help to build a relationship with both employers and their employees that
can be used to generate cross-selling opportunities. This will be aided by the fact that the relationship
established via  the  MPF is likely to be a sticky one,  and  companies  are  unlikely  to  shift  to  another
scheme unless there are good reasons to do so. This does not mean, however, that MPF providers
can afford to provide a bad service. If they do, they will destroy goodwill and make it more difficult to
sell other products.
The cross-selling opportunities provided by the MPF are not theoretical. There are already signs that it
is making an impact on sales of other funds to individuals. As your Association recently announced,
the fund  penetration rate  in Hong Kong has risen from 7.8% to 10%  in  a  year.  This  is  a  creditable
performance  in  view  of  the  weakness  in  the  stock  market.  One  of  the  reasons  for  the  increasing
willingness to invest in funds is undoubtedly the low return now offered by bank deposits. However, it
also appears that the marketing of the MPF over the last  year has helped by focussing employees'
attention  on  the  attractions  of  funds  for  long-term  savings  purposes  and  on  the  need  to  plan  for
retirement.
the  Mandatory  Provident  Fund  Schemes  Authority, 
The role of the regulators
I have talked so far about the involvement of the banks in MPF business. In practice, however, the role
played by banks themselves is mainly to act as intermediaries, selling and advising on MPF schemes.
The various MPF services – trustee, administrator, custodian and investment manager – are generally
provided  by  other  companies  which  may  be  related  to  the  bank. What  this  means  is  that  the  MPF
brings  together  a  number  of  different  companies  and,  along  with  these  companies,  their  various
regulators: 
the  Securities  and  Futures
Commission, the Insurance Authority and the HKMA.
The involvement of four regulators creates an obvious need for clarity on their respective roles and
coordination of these roles. The MPFA is clearly in the driving seat as the lead regulator. It has the
responsibility  to  administer  the  MPF  Ordinance  and  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  legislation.  It
approves and regulates the trustees who have the central role in ensuring that schemes are properly
managed.
The  MPFA  has  also  produced  a  code  of  conduct  for  MPF  intermediaries.  However,  the  day-to-day
supervision of such intermediaries rests with the SFC, Insurance Authority and HKMA depending on
which of us is the main regulator of the intermediary in question. The SFC also has a role to play in
authorising MPF funds and in the licensing and supervision of investment managers and advisers.
BIS Review 71/2001
3
This  may  seem  complicated,  but  it  seems  to  work.  The  arrangements  have  been  cemented  by  a
Memorandum of Understanding among the various parties and through the establishment of a MPF
Intermediaries  Regulation  Coordinating  Committee  that  comprises  representatives  of  the  four
regulators and the Financial Services Bureau. At a higher level, all the various parties are represented
on the Council of Financial Regulators, which is chaired by the Financial Secretary and whose remit is
to address cross-sectoral regulatory issues.
Similar issues of division of responsibility and coordination arise in relation to the issue of supervision
of  banks'  securities  business.  As  you  know,  this  is  a  somewhat  controversial  issue  because  of  the
exemption  that  banks  and  other  authorised  institutions  enjoy  from  much  of  the  current  securities
legislation.  Although  this  exempt  status  is  retained  in  the  new  Securities  and  Futures  Bill  currently
going through Legco, the scope of the exemption will be drastically reduced and the banks will in fact
be exempt in name only under the new legislation.
In future, in respect of their securities business, banks will be subject to most of the same legislation,
rules and standards of conduct that will apply to the brokers. These rules and standards will be set by
the  SFC,  in  consultation  where  necessary  with  the  HKMA.  The  HKMA  will  act  as  the  front-line
regulator of the banks' securities business on a day-to-day basis. That way the banks should normally
have  to  deal  with  only  one  regulator,  which  should  make  their  lives  simpler.  But,  like  the  MPFA  in
respect of MPF business, the SFC will remain in the driving seat; and if problems arise in respect of a
bank's securities business, the SFC will have the right to conduct its own investigation and to exercise
disciplinary powers.
There is much more that I could say on the subject of banks' securities business, but that is perhaps
best left to another speech. I will conclude, therefore, by noting again that economic pressures in the
banking  industry  are  driving  banks  to  try  to  diversify  their  income  sources.  This  is  contributing  to
erosion of the boundaries between different types of financial business. A consequence of this is that
new  approaches  to  financial  regulation  are  also  required.  What  we  have  done  in  Hong  Kong  is  to
come up with a pragmatic approach that tries to strike a balance between institutional and functional
supervision. We believe that, with the goodwill and cooperation of all concerned, this can, and will, be
made to work.
4
BIS Review 71/2001
