David Klein: The framework of Israel's economic policy for 2002
Speech by Dr David Klein, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to The Financial Forum, Tel-Aviv, 11 July
2001.
 Every  year,  in  the  framework  of  the  budget  discussions,  the  government  passes  two  resolutions
regarding  macroeconomic  policy  for  the  coming  year.  If  we  take  last  year  as  an  example,  on  16th
August  2000  the  government  reached  a  decision  (no.  2182)  about  “Economic  policy  for  2001-
budgetary aggregates-fiscal policy.” This decision, with no preamble, determined:
1. 
The extent of the budget deficit for 2001 in absolute terms (NIS 8.2 billion) and as a share of
GDP (1.75 percent);
The extent of government expenditure (NIS 194.2 billion);
The extent of the budget deficit for 2003 (1.25 percent of GDP).
2. 
3. 
The next decision (no. 2183), on the same date, refers to “Economic policy for 2001-monetary policy.”
The approach to monetary policy differs from that to fiscal policy in two respects: First, the decision
regarding monetary policy has a preamble specifying the “objectives of economic policy for 2001,” and
mentioning three of them:
 
 
 
Maximizing the economy’s ability to grow on a sustainable basis;
Increasing business-sector employment;
The  inflation  targets  for  2001,  2002,  and  2003,  with  the  one  for  2003  (1-3  percent)  being
defined as ‘price stability,’
There is no  interest-rate  target  because  there  are  other  factors  that  also  affect  inflation.  Hence,  no
specific interest rate is invariably consistent with the inflation target, and it must therefore change as
the circumstances require. It is somewhat odd to regard monetary policy alone as having a role to play
in  determining  growth,  employment  and  price  stability  targets,  keeping  fiscal  policy  detached  from
them.  In  the  past  we  proposed  that  the  goals  of  macroeconomic  policy  should  be  presented  as
relevant also for fiscal policy, and should feature in the preamble to both decisions.  Second, the two
decisions-on fiscal and monetary policy-differ in another respect: the monetary policy decision states
that the Bank of Israel must submit reports on the performance of monetary policy to the government
and the public, inter alia explaining deviations from the inflation target and their policy implications.
The Bank of Israel does this in the framework of its semi-annual Inflation Report. The absence of a
parallel reporting requirement with regard to fiscal policy is noteworthy. As a result, for example, this
year there  is  some  vagueness  regarding  the  expected  deviation  from  the  budget  deficit  target,  and
estimates  of  the  actual  deficit  currently  range  from  2.5  to  3.5  percent  of  GDP.  This  vagueness  is
accentuated by additional factors:
 
An interpretation that has been submitted to the State Controller by the Ministry of Finance is
that the budget deficit target is binding only at the planning stage. Does this mean that there
is no practical significance to the question of how the budget is implemented relative to the
target?
It is not clear what the implications are of the departure expected this year for the path of the
deficit target in coming years, and for the medium-term real interest rate;
Has there been a change-and if so, who made the decision-in the definition of the rules by
which  the  deficit  should  be  managed,  so  that  what  is  binding  is  only  that  part  of  the
government’s decision that relates to its expenditure ceiling but not to the budget deficit? The
justification  for  ignoring  the  income  side  appears  to  be  based  on  the  assumption  that
changes in actual relative to planned revenues always derive solely from the gap between
predicted and actual growth-an assumption that is unfounded also with respect to 2001.
The  experience  of  2001,  when  the  inflation  reserve  may  be  utilized  in  order  to  increase
expenditure in real terms, illustrates the need to review the necessity of including an inflation
reserve in the expenditure budget. If this tradition persists, it should be given a place of its
own in the government’s decision noting the assumption of inflation and its implications for
   BIS Review 63/2001
1
tax receipts too. This last estimate is required this year, for example, in order to answer the
question of what role is played by the deceleration of inflation, relative to the rate assumed in
the  budget,  in  explaining  the  underperformance  of  tax  receipts.  This  factor,  rather  than
slower growth, may explain most of the shortfall.
Thus, it is necessary to update the formulation of the fiscal policy decision, not only because of the
change  in  the  data  but  also  in  order  to  strengthen  the  discipline  of  fiscal  policy  as  well  as  its
transparency.
These remarks refer to  the  accepted  format  of  the  macroeconomic framework  that  was  in  place  till
now, and that may be submitted to the government once again when the budget for 2002 is discussed.
It appears to us that the perspective should be expanded in several directions.
As far as fiscal policy is concerned, the routine decision regarding the deficit and expenditure for 2002
may take the following directions:
 
The definition of the budget deficit should also be presented according to the definition used
in  the  rest  of  the  world,  making  it  possible  during  the  discussion  to  present  data  that  are
comparable with those available elsewhere. After the changes that have been made to date,
there  is  only  one  outstanding  difference  in  the  definition:  in  the  rest  of  the  world  it  is
customary to include all the government’s interest rate costs on the expenditure side, while
we include only real interest. This definition, which is unique to Israel and serves to make our
budget  deficit  smaller,  has  misled  many  people  in  the  past,  and  sent  out  a  reassuring
message  about  the  size  of  our  budget  deficit.  Furthermore,  even  when  the  deficit  is
presented in accordance with our definition, over time it must be given in consistent terms,
and  preferably  in  accordance  with  the  most  recent  definition.  Thus,  for  example,  the
reduction of the deficit from 1999 to 2000 was not from 2.5 percent of GDP to 0.5 percent of
GDP, but from 3.5 percent-a rate which is equivalent to the definition according to which the
budget is calculated at 0.5 percent for 2000.
What  is  needed  is  a  blueprint  for  the  deficit  and  government  expenditure  for  the  next  ten
years. The purpose of this would be to make it possible to fix the national debt at 60 percent
of GDP, and reduce the consequent debt servicing burden. The government’s long-term plan
for reducing the tax burden would also derive from this draft. The discussion of the national
debt  and its developoment, as  well as of its  repercussions  on  the  tax  burden,  on  the  one
hand, and the need to release significant budget sources for servicing the past deficit rather
than  solving  the  problems  of  the  future,  on  the  other,  would  shed  additional  light  on  the
proposals to further increase the deficit for these and other purposes.
It is important to deal with the matter of private members’ bills since they generally increase
government  expenditure  or  reduce  its  revenues.  The  attempt  to  make  the  discussion  of
these bills contingent  on  alternative financing has failed miserably. These proposals upset
the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy  and  arbitrarily  alter  the  priorities  set  by  the  government  and
ratified by the Knesset.
  Dealing with this issue does not mean dismissing, or even restricting, the possibility of tabling private
members’ bills. It must, however, evaluate these proposals in  the  context  of  national  priorities  as  a
precondition for approving them. A proposal of this kind was submitted by the Bank of Israel (as a draft
bill), in effect determining that a private member’s bill should take effect only after being reviewed in
the framework of the budget debate.
Before continuing, I would like to note that we are referring here to the outer wrapping of fiscal policy-
that which serves as the focus of the government’s decision when the budget is being discussed. We
have  not  spoken  about  content-priorities  in  expenditure,  the  government’s  social  policy,  and  the
composition of tax receipts-and its contribution to the process of economic growth. These topics have
not been discussed in the framework of the government’s budget discussions in the past, even though
they should have been.
With regard to monetary policy, since the government has decided on convergence towards  price
stability from 2003 on,  the  emphasis  must  be  shifted  from  a  discussion  of  the  inflation  target  to  an
analysis  of  the  conditions  for  creating  an  environment  of  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  is
disturbed when the equilibrium of one or more of the asset markets-securities, foreign currency, or real
estate-is  upset,  as  expressed  in  price  volatility  in  that  market.  Concurrently,  there  is  distress,  and
possibly  even  bankruptcies,  among  financial  institutions.  This  scenario,  which  is  known  to  us  from
many countries, is the outcome of two basic causes:
2
BIS Review 63/2001
  The unchecked behavior of agents active in these markets and those who finance them. The
best-known examples of this in Israel were the bank shares crisis of 1983, credit for buying
mutual  funds  at  the  height  of  the  bull  stock-market  in  1993,  the  provident  funds  ‘crisis’  in
1996, the stampede to replace local-currency credit with foreign-currency credit in 1994-97,
and  the  unchecked  expansion  of  the  real-estate  industry  in  the  wake  of  the  influx  of
immigrants in the early 1990s.
Another constant source of financial instability was created by the regulations introduced by
the government. These may have been all well and good in their time, but eventually turned
out to stand in contradiction to the logic of the market. When there is neither the strength nor
the  sense  to  abrogate  them  in  time,  or  when  for  reasons  that  are  not  relevant  they  are
stubbornly left in place-and regrettably both these reasons apply in our case-they constitute
a destructive force causing a financial crisis.
In  instances  like  these  a  large  segment  of  the  population  may  suffer  serious  damage,  which  could
have been avoided or at least limited had timely action been taken. Permit me to cite just the main
issues  which  should  be  decided  by  the  government  in  the  framework  of  the  debate  on  financial
stability:
1. 
Closing  existing  pension  funds  to  new  members  and  opening  purely  market-based
funds: only in the wake of this decision will it be possible to proceed with the discussion of
the  proposal  to  make  membership  of  a  market-based  pension  plan  compulsory  for  all
employees. The pension funds which are to be closed-and this refers to those of them that
were opened since 1995-will be eligible for earmarked bonds in their current format until their
task is completed.  The purpose of this decision is to keep the tradable bonds market from
continuing to dry up, together with the savings and credit channels based on it, including the
provident funds and the mortgage market.
Concluding the process of making the NIS  a convertible currency by  abolishing the
last  vestige  of  foreign-currency  control:  this  refers  to  the  restriction  preventing  the
provident  funds,  insurance  companies,  and  pension  funds  from  investing  more  than  5
percent of their asset  portfolios abroad  or in foreign currency. This restriction  lost  its logic
long ago, and its existence harms the stability of the market and the robustness of long-term
saving in Israel. This is the last stage on the road to full convertibility of the NIS.
Abolishing the exchange-rate band: its continued existence is in complete contradiction to
the liberalization of foreign currency and long-term capital flows which were-and continue to
be-the fuel of the engine of Israel’s growth, the high-tech industry.
The continued existence of the exchange-rate band imperils Israel’s financial stability. Three
assessments prevail in this connection:
The first assessment is that “There is an area where change can be speedily expressed on
the  ground  …  The  price  of  money…is  determined  solely  by  the  Bank  of  Israel.  The
instruments  it  controls  affect  another  important  variable:  the  exchange  rate”  (opinion  in
Ha’aretz,  8.6.2001).  The  automatic  reiteration  of  the  view  that  the  interest  rate  by  itself
affects the exchange rate does not make it true. Note, for example, that between the end of
1998 and June 2001 the Bank of Israel reduced its key interest rate by some 7 percentage
points,  and  the  spread  between  the  interest  rates  on  the  NIS  and  the  dollar  narrowed  by
some 6 percentage points-large changes by any criterion-without this having any real effect
on  the  exchange  rate.  In  order  for  a  reduction  in  interest  to  affect  the  exchange  rate  the
public  must  feel  that  we  have  abandoned  the  target  of  price  stability  and  that  the
circumstances have been created that prevent us from restoring it in the foreseeable future.
That, as you know, has not been the case in the last two and a half years. If a situation is
created in which the public is given to understand that steps have been taken to prevent us
from being able to maintain price stability, even at the present interest rate there will be a
shift  in  capital  flows  that  will  cause  more  rapid  local-currency  depreciation.  However,  a
change  of  this  kind  in  the  exchange  rate  will  not  bring  the  benefits  those  who  have  been
clamoring  for  it  for  years  expect  –  a  reduction  in  the  interest  rate  in  order  to  create
devaluation  – because stimulating economic activity  by encouraging exports requires real
depreciation, i.e., nominal depreciation without an increase in prices.
The second assessment  is  that  “Currently,  the  Bank  of  Israel  is  reducing  the  interest  rate
because  the  exchange-rate  band  exists”  (interview  in  Yedioth  Aharonoth,  6.7.2001).  In
2. 
3. 
  BIS Review 63/2001
3
other  words,  the  reason  why  the  Bank  of  Israel  reduces  the  interest  rate  is  to  keep  the
exchange rate away from the lower limit of the band. This view could have a foundation if the
reduction of the interest rate did in fact generate devaluation. As you know, this has not been
the case in the last two and a half years, when there was a continuous downward trend in
the  interest  rate.  Consequently,  this  consideration  was  never  relevant  for  interest-rate
decisions. The fact that the interest rate was reduced, and the extent to which this was done,
was determined solely on the basis of inflation expectations and the consideration of matters
pertaining to financial stability. If, because of the existence of the exchange-rate band, on the
other  hand,  inflation  could  accelerate-a  reasonable  outcome  in  certain  circumstances-the
band  would  oblige us to change  the  interest-rate  policy. There is absolutely  no  doubt  that
without the band Israel’s interest rate could be lower than with it.
Abolishing  the  ceiling  on  Treasury  bill  issues:  this  limit,  like  the  lower  limit  of  the
exchange-rate band, is  intended –  as various government representatives repeated at  the
recent  Caesarea  conference  –  to  restrain  monetary  policy.  The  story  sounds  somewhat
Kafkaesque: on the one hand, you set a target, while on the other you impose limits in order
to  make  it  more  difficult  to  attain.  The  quantitative  restriction  on  Treasury  bill  issues  does
indeed hamper monetary policy, as it obliges us as policymakers to influence the market via
the  banks.  As  a  method,  this  is  very  expensive  and  not  very  efficient.  Its  practical
significance  is  that  the  economy  has  to  function  with  a  higher  interest  rate  in  order  to
maintain price stability, so that the country pays unnecessarily for this restriction.
No  less  important,  however,  is  the  effect  of  the  Treasury  bill  ceiling  in  checking  the
development of the money market as a substitute for banking intermediation. The absence of
a  deep  Treasury  bill  market  is  one  of  the  reasons  for  the  spread  in  the  unindexed  local-
currency segment and for the absence of a market for short-term corporate bonds based on
Treasury bill prices. The upshot is that anyone depositing money in a bank receives lower
interest, while borrowers pay higher interest. This does further-and quite superfluous-harm to
the capital market and the economy.
Annulling  tax  distortions  on  individuals’  financial  income  received  directly  and  via
institutional investors: because of the attempts to connect these changes with a ‘large’ tax
reform that also addresses taxation on work income, this subject has also come to a halt.
What we are talking about here is equalizing tax rates and making taxation dependent as far
as possible on nominal income, and these changes should be neutral as far as government
revenues  are  concerned.  There  are  intolerable  gaps  in  Israel  today  between  taxation  on
income  from  different  financial  instruments,  as  well  as  between  taxation  on  investment  in
Israel and abroad. These distortions must be removed in order to bolster financial stability
and make the financial markets more competitive. In some cases it is necessary to increase
the tax rate, and in others to reduce it, and the combined results need not necessarily affect
government revenues.
Establishing  a  joint  body  to  coordinate  the  various  authorities  supervising  the
financial  markets:  obscuring  the  limits  between  the  various  spheres  of  activity  of  Israel’s
financial institutions, as well as Israel’s integration within the global economy – including the
involvement  of  foreign  financial  institutions  in  the  domestic  market  –  require  greater
coordination and exchange of information between the supervisory bodies in order to make
the system more efficient. Several financial crises have developed due to the exploitation of
the boundaries between the various supervisory bodies.
4. 
5.
6.
In the last decade Israel’s governments have adopted the norms of macroeconomic management that
have become accepted throughout the world. These include:
 
Fiscal discipline, thereby keeping the national debt and debt-servicing costs at a reasonable
level;
Price stability;
This  framework  must  be  completed  by  committing  ourselves  to  a  competitive  financial
system  and  financial  stability.  Empirical  studies  indicate  that  there  is  a  positive  relation
between sustainable growth and developed financial systems.
 Not only are these norms not superfluous in an economy that wishes to maximize its growth potential
and reduce unemployment, they are essential. We had better not delude ourselves that we can attain
sustainable growth and create more jobs suitable for a modern economy if we give in just a little as
4
BIS Review 63/2001
regards  the  budget  deficit,  and  perhaps  conceal  this  by  changing  definitions;  if  we  accept  a  rise  in
inflation,  at  first  by  talking  about  it,  then  by  hiking  up  the  target,  and  finally  in  actual  terms;  if  we
dismiss the changes required to ensure financial stability, and in order to make it quite clear where we
are headed we also constrain the Bank of Israel.
If we choose to retreat from accepted macroeconomic practice in the world, we will find that the world
can manage perfectly well without us and, what is worse, that Israeli companies and individuals prefer
to secure their economic future outside Israel’s borders. This should be particularly worrying to those
who are sensitive to the country’s social problems and who are forever demanding more resources.
Even the Jewish genius cannot produce something from nothing. When the government meets next to
determine the framework of economic policy for 2002 it would be well advised to think about this.
BIS Review 63/2001
5
