Mervyn King: The international financial system: a new partnership
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the 20th Anniversary of the
Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations, New Delhi, 9 August 2001.
 Introduction
It is both a great honour and a real delight to make my first visit to India in order to commemorate the
20th  Anniversary  of  ICRIER.  I  feel  especially  honoured  to  be  invited  to  deliver  the  first  K.  B.  Lall
Lecture. The theme of my lecture will be the international financial system, and the need for a new
partnership  between  those  countries  exporting  capital,  in  normal  circumstances  the  developed
economies,  and  those  countries  which  import  capital,  the  emerging  market  economies.  The
international financial institutions set up at Bretton Woods over 50 years ago were designed to deal
primarily with problems of current account imbalances. In recent years, however, major financial crises
have originated in the capital account. Why have these occurred, and how can we make them less
likely in future and improve our ability to deal with them when they do occur?
I can think of no better place to discuss this subject than ICRIER. The links between international flows
of private and public finance, and the need for a restatement of the role of the international financial
institutions and a clearer understanding of their modus operandi, are subjects at the heart of the work
of ICRIER. Your Founder Chairman, Dr K B Lall, whom I am delighted to say is with us this evening,
worked tirelessly over the years in so many areas of international economic policy, including a period
as Chairman of the General  Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.  Your  current  Chairman,  Dr  I G Patel,
served India not only as Governor of the Reserve Bank but also at the International Monetary Fund. It
is a great personal pleasure to see I G, as we all know him, here tonight because I owe him a great
debt for his help and support at the London School of Economics during his period as Director in the
1980s. And the new Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF, an important development in improving
the  accountability  of  the  Fund,  will  be  led  by  Mr  Montek  Singh  Ahluwalia,  one  of  India's  most
distinguished economists, and the husband of your Director, Dr Isher Judge Ahluwalia.
India was one of the 44 countries which participated in the meetings at Bretton Woods which led to the
creation  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank.  The  Bank  of  England  archives
contains some fascinating material on the Bretton Woods Conference and, in particular, on the role of
the Indian Delegation. Sir Chintaman Deshmukh, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, was reported to
have made a big impression on the delegates at Bretton Woods. A cable from the Foreign Office to the
British Embassy in Washington on 1 June 1944 argued that there were strong grounds for giving India
a  seat  on  the  Agenda  Committee.  The  reply  reported  US  opposition  to  this  idea,  in  part  because
Canada and Australia were already represented on the Committee. The resulting compromise was the
product of bureaucratic genius. An Indian representative was allowed to participate on the Committee
provided that there was no public announcement of the fact. In the end, common sense prevailed and
India received an official invitation to attend the Agenda Committee.
Domestic monetary autonomy;
Stable exchange rates;
Free capital mobility.
Recent international financial crises
Perhaps the key difference between the world of Bretton Woods and the world today is the size and
volatility  of  private  capital  flows.  Then,  as  now,  it  was  recognised  that  no  system  could  ensure  the
compatibility of:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
This "impossible trinity" has been at the heart of the debate on the international monetary and financial
system  for  many  years.  A  sustainable  system  must  sacrifice  one  of  these  three  objectives.  Some
countries have decided to abandon the first leg of the tripod, namely domestic monetary autonomy. In
Europe, twelve countries have formed a  monetary  union,  and  elsewhere,  such  as  in  Argentina  and
Hong Kong, currency boards, linked to the dollar, have replaced discretionary monetary policy. Other
countries  have  abandoned  the  attempt  to  maintain  rigidly  fixed  exchange  rates,  and  adopted  a
BIS Review 71/2001
1
combination of domestic monetary management based on an inflation target and a floating exchange
rate.  Examples  include  both  developed  economies,  such  as  the  UK  and  Canada,  and  emerging
market  economies,  such  as  Brazil  and  South  Africa.  There  are  arguments  for  and  against  both  of
these approaches. But what is clear is that both in theory and practice there is now a recognition that
pegged (fixed but adjustable) exchange rates do not provide a viable long-term middle course. More
interesting, perhaps, is the absence of serious debate on the merits of the third position, namely the
willingness to forego freedom of capital movements in order to retain domestic monetary autonomy
and stable exchange rates. That is perhaps surprising in the light of the experience of the two major
countries in Asia that escaped the financial crisis of 1997-98, namely India and China, which had in
common the presence of capital controls.
The willingness to impose controls on capital movements, at least temporarily, was certainly evident at
the  Bretton  Woods  Conference.  Mindful  of  the  weakness  of  Britain's  national  balance  sheet,  Lord
Keynes, urged on by the Bank of England, argued that there should be no legally binding obligation to
make  the  sterling  balances  convertible  into  dollars.  The  vulnerability  of  countries  to  financial  crises
when  private  capital  is  freely  mobile  was  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  officials  then,  and  has  recently
returned to prominence in the wake of recent crises.
Capital flows do, however, bring real economic benefits. They enable savings from around the world to
move  to  those  countries  with  the  most  profitable  investment  opportunities,  benefiting  lenders  and
borrowers alike. And such  capital  flows  also  transfer knowledge  and  expertise.  The  most  important
task of any financial system is to guide the allocation of scarce capital. As Larry Summers, the former
US  Treasury  Secretary,  said  earlier  this  year,  "If  you  are  looking  for  reasons  why  some  countries
succeed and why other countries do not succeed in the new global economy, a very large part of it
goes to the greater success of the successful countries in channelling capital into the right places, and
then making sure that it is used in a disciplined way."
At Bretton Woods it was thought that post-war reconstruction could be financed by capital provided by
the  new  World  Bank,  the  twin  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  Hence  it  would  be  possible  to
finance reconstruction from long-term investment supplied by official institutions, without the necessity
of allowing free movement of private capital that might raise the problem  of  the  "impossible  trinity".
Soon,  however,  the  demand  for  capital  imports  exceeded  the  ability  of  international  institutions  to
supply loans. Private capital markets came into their own. The expansion of private capital flows was
gradual,  and,  until  about  ten  years  ago,  was  primarily  concentrated  on  flows  among  the  developed
economies.  It  is  only  in  the  past  ten  years  that  the  explosion  of  private  capital  flows  to  emerging
market economies has taken place. Data from the World Bank suggest that  annual  capital  flows  to
emerging  markets  were  less  than  $10 bn  in  the  early  1970s,  rising  to  around  $300 bn  in  the  late
1990s. At their peak, capital flows to emerging markets were around 5% of those countries' GDP.
Unfortunately, capital flows on this scale  can  reverse  themselves  as  suddenly  as  they  appear.  The
result of such sudden and large reversals of short-term capital flows has been a series of international
financial crises, in Mexico in 1994-95, Asia in 1997-98, Brazil in 1998-99, and, more recently in Turkey
and Argentina. The frequency and scale of these crises, if they were to continue, would be a serious
impediment  to  the  evolution  of  the  international  capital  market.  Unless  we  can  both  reduce  the
frequency  and  severity  of  such  crises,  and  improve  our  techniques  of  crisis  resolution,  then  the
demonstrators against globalisation will be provided with unnecessary ammunition.
The costs of recent crises have been large. Between 1996 and 1998, the reversal of private capital
flows to the five Asian countries primarily  affected  (Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines  and
Thailand) was almost $150 bn, equivalent to about 15% of the pre-crisis level of GDP. Changes in the
capital account imply equal and opposite swings  in the current account. Inevitably, a change  in  the
current account on that scale is likely to mean a deep recession. And during the Asian crisis, real GDP
fell by 1% in the Philippines, 7% in Korea and Malaysia, 11% in Thailand and by 13% in Indonesia.
Several  years  of  economic  growth  were  wiped  out,  leading  in  some  cases  to  political  instability.  A
recent study by Robert Barro shows that countries that experience financial crises can expect to return
to  their  pre-crisis  rate  of  economic  growth  only  after  about  five  years  on  average.  Although  the
recovery of the afflicted Asian economies in 1999-2000 was more rapid, the fall in investment is likely
to affect their level of output for several years.
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  it  is  dangerous  for  countries  to  sail  unprepared  into  the  deep  waters  of
international capital markets. One of the important lessons of recent crises is that not all capital flows
are equally dangerous. Most of the reversals in capital flows to the Asian countries were in the form of
swings in short-term debt finance – about 80% resulted from changes in the net flows of finance from
2
BIS Review 71/2001
commercial banks. A build-up of short-term debt creates vulnerabilities in a country's national balance
sheet.  Where  there  are  significant  mismatches  in  either  maturity  and  currency  obligations,  then  a
country is vulnerable to a liquidity run. In such a situation sudden reversals of capital flows can occur
on a huge scale. That is the hidden cost of debt finance. In contrast, equity capital does not involve the
risk of crises that are associated with the possibility of interruptions to payments on debt finance. This
is  because  equity  investment  has  a  self-stabilising  mechanism.  Investors  cannot  withdraw  from  the
equity market without finding a buyer to replace them. The market price adjusts in order for the seller
to attract a buyer. Of course, the market price may move sharply and rapidly, and impact spending
decisions.  But  crises  resulting  from  payment  interruptions  are  a  feature  of  debt  finance.  Lenders
whose bonds mature or who choose to withdraw their deposits do not have to find a buyer. Instead
they simply exit, and, if they do so on a sufficiently large scale, countries can find themselves facing a
liquidity run.
Interest  rates  on  lending  to  a  country  vulnerable  to  a  run  can  rise  to  extremely  high  levels.  If  the
market anticipates that a country may allow inflation to rise, or the exchange rate to fall, to alleviate the
burden of domestic currency debt then interest rates on debt can rise rapidly. It is only ten years ago
since overnight interest rates of several hundred percent were seen during the ERM crisis in Europe.
But  even  on  foreign  currency  borrowing,  a  country  may  find  that  the  spread  of  the  interest  rate  at
which it can borrow over the interest rate charged to "safe" countries, such as the United States, can
reach extremely high levels. And where that interest rate is markedly higher than the growth rate of the
economy,  the  debt  burden  rapidly  becomes  unsustainable  unless  the  interest  rate  can  be  brought
down quickly. Before the Russian default and devaluation of 1998, the average spread on emerging
market  sovereign  debt  was  around  500  basis  points,  in  itself  a  sizeable  addition  to  the  burden  of
borrowing in international capital markets. That spread then rose sharply to  levels  of between  1000
and  1500  basis  points.  At  these  levels  debt  burdens  were  clearly  unsustainable.  Since  then,
macroeconomic reform in many of the affected countries, with the help and support of the IMF, has
reduced average spreads to a range of between 600 and 800 basis points, although there has been a
further rise recently following the difficulties in Turkey and Argentina.
Emerging market spreads are currently around 900 basis points over interest rates on US Treasury
bonds.  It is  not  easy  to reconcile spreads at this level  with the fact that sovereign debt  defaults  on
bonds are running at historically low levels. In part, the low level of defaults may reflect the increase in
the number of exceptionally large loans made by the IMF in recent years. So what does account for
the  high  level  of  emerging  market  spreads?  There  appears  to  be  a  good  deal  of  uncertainty
concerning the conditions surrounding the availability of official finance. It could be that investors are
demanding higher interest rates to compensate for that uncertainty. There is also uncertainty among
market participants about what would happen in the event of a debt restructuring and  the  expected
repayments  that  would  ensue.  One  role  for  the  official  community  is  to  try  and  mitigate  these
uncertainties  through  greater  clarity  about  the  criteria  for  official  lending  and  its  crisis  resolution
policies  –  a  theme  I  return  to  below.  If  successful,  one  outcome  of  these  reforms  would  be  lower
borrowing costs for emerging markets.
Investors are also starting to differentiate among borrowing countries more clearly than before. This
has led to a greater dispersion of spreads on emerging market debt. Before the Russian crisis these
spreads were tightly compressed with the central 50% of the distribution of emerging market spreads
covered by a range of only around 100 basis points. At present, the range covered by the central 50%
of  the  distribution  is  over  500 basis  points.  Correspondingly,  there  has  been  a  sharp  fall  in  the
correlation  between  changes  in  emerging  market  spreads.  The  rolling  26 week  correlation  between
changes in emerging market spreads reached a peak of around 0.8 at the time of the Russian crisis.
Since  then  it  has  steadily  declined,  reaching  a  level  of  only  0.2 before  the  recent  rise  to  around
0.35 following  adverse  developments  in  Turkey  and  Argentina.  This  differentiation  in  spreads  is  a
welcome development. It shows that the possibility of contagion from a country affected by a crisis to
others initially unaffected is less than might have been the case only a few years ago. Of course, if a
country did default then correlations might rise significantly, but the focus of attention on recent crises
and their causes has led investors to appreciate that many have been country-specific. Although there
is  no  room  for  complacency,  the  lower  correlation  of  spreads  and  the  greater  differentiation  of  risk
assessments represents an increase in the efficiency in the way capital markets operate.
The  experience  of  recent  crises  prompts  two  questions.  First,  what  can  countries  do  to  protect
themselves from the risk of further financial crises? Second, what should be the responsibility of the
international community towards emerging market economies?
BIS Review 71/2001
3
A new partnership
In describing a new partnership between emerging market economies and developed economies, it is
useful  to  distinguish  between  measures  to  improve  economic  performance  and  prevent  financial
crises, on the one hand, and  ways to resolve crises  once they  have occurred,  on the other. In this
section  I  deal  only  with  the  former.  Crisis  prevention  should  be  at  the  heart  of  the  policies  of  both
emerging markets and the international financial institutions.
In terms of prevention, recent experience suggests five lessons for the future.
1. 
First,  it  is  important  that  borrowing  countries,  especially  those  without  a  track  record  of
international borrowing, monitor and manage the maturity and currency composition of their
national  balance  sheet.  This  is  not  a  trivial  matter.  Most  countries  have  inadequate
information  on  the  composition  of  their  external  liabilities,  especially  those  of  the  private
sector.  Nevertheless,  monitoring  and  managing  the  exposures  of  the  public  and  financial
sectors are important to avoid a build up of potential vulnerabilities. In this respect, the IMF
can play  a helpful supportive role by providing  assessments  of  vulnerability  as  part  of  the
Article IV process, the new joint IMF/World Bank financial sector assessment programmes
and debt management guidelines, and technical assistance on the data requirements implied
by the need to monitor national balance sheets.
Second, limitations on  official finance mean that countries should think carefully  about  the
provision of self-insurance against a liquidity crisis. A simple, but often expensive, way to do
this is to build up large foreign currency reserves, a strategy taken to heart by a number of
emerging markets, including China and also Korea following its crisis. A potentially superior
alternative is the creation of  contingent  credit  facilities  with  both  official  and  private  sector
creditors. So far, even at the high spreads on emerging market debt, these facilities have not
proved attractive, and the CCL facility created  by  the IMF has lain dormant. The next few
years will be a test of the value of such facilities.
Third,  experience  has  shown 
the  value  of  borrowing  countries  establishing  good
relationships with creditors well before any possibility of difficulty in repayment arises. The
creation  of  investor  relations  programmes  and  the  regular  briefing  of  creditors  about
developments  in  economic  policy  can  play  a  role  in  providing  the  information  which  the
market requires to assess the riskiness of sovereign loans. It is never too early  to  build  a
relationship  with  actual  or  potential  creditors.  The  IMF,  in  collaboration  with  the  private
sector, have recently drawn up a set of guidelines that countries might usefully follow when
setting  up  an  investor  relations  programme.  The  second  aspect  of  relationships  with
creditors  is  the  insertion  of  collective  action  clauses  in  sovereign  debt  contracts.  This
proposal,  advanced  originally  in  a  G10 Deputies'  report  in  1996,  has  gradually  become
accepted as a sensible step forward. The UK has introduced collective action clauses into its
foreign currency debt instruments. And just last month, the G7 Finance Ministers agreed on
the importance of introducing collective action clauses into debt contracts to facilitate crisis
management. Again, time may be on the side of reform.
Fourth,  in  the  long  run,  the  best  way  to  avoid  the  problem  of  liquidity  crises  is  for  the
composition of capital flows to emerging markets to move away from debt, both  bank and
bond,  finance  towards  portfolio  equity  and  direct  investment.  Shocks  to  the  borrowing
country would take the form of a fall in equity prices, not a liquidity run with its associated risk
of a financial crisis and the need for external finance. Encouragingly, the pattern of capital
flows  to  emerging  markets  is  already  evolving  in  that  direction.  Bank  lending  represented
around 80% of capital flows to emerging markets during the 1970s. But by the end of the
1990s, FDI accounted for around 80% of emerging market capital flows, with portfolio equity
accounting for much of the remainder. As Ken Rogoff, the new Economic Counsellor to the
IMF, pointed out in 1999 there are still several biases towards debt rather than equity finance
in capital flows to emerging markets. One of these is deposit insurance in both creditor and
debtor  countries  which  makes  it  more  difficult  for  the  authorities  to  avoid  being  seen  as
providing some implicit support to international loans by domestic banks. There is no easy
answer to this problem, but a shared concern in both borrowing and lending countries is the
implicit  insurance  which  both  sides  are  giving  to  large  parts  of  the  financial  system.  The
moral  hazard  so  created  is  not  restricted  to  international  lending,  but  it  does  affect  the
incentives for the form of investment in emerging markets. We need also to guard against
institutional  or  regulatory  mechanisms  –  both  international  and  domestic  –  which  favour
BIS Review 71/2001
2. 
3. 
4. 
4
5. 
short-term  over  longer-maturity  capital  flows.  In  the  long  run,  the  solution  is  for  emerging
markets to create legal structures and a stable economic policy environment that provide the
confidence to support inward equity investment in their economies.
Finally,  greater  transparency  allows  better  informed  decisions  by  both  borrowers  and
lenders,  and  reduces  the  risk  of  contagion  by  allowing  markets  to  differentiate  among
borrowers. Much has been said, and, more importantly, achieved in the area of transparency
in recent years. There has been an explosion of codes and standards on different aspects of
economic and financial policy in recent years. So much so, that some countries are claiming
that  the  process  needs  to  slow  down.  It  is  certainly  important  to  recognise  that  the
appropriate codes and standards for a country at one stage of economic development may
not  be  appropriate  to  countries  at  other  stages.  I  say  advisedly  "may",  because  in  each
individual case the argument has to be made. But if it is accepted that codes and standards
are  likely  to  reflect  different  stages  of  development,  then  it  is  even  more  important  that
countries make clear to which codes and standards they are actually adhering. That is why
countries should not be able to opt out of "transparency about transparency". Following the
production  of  pilot  transparency  reports  on  a  number  of  countries,  including  the  UK  and
Argentina, the IMF has now made rapid progress in producing reports on the observance of
standards and codes (ROSCs). As of April 2001, 110 ROSC modules had been completed
for 43 countries, of which 76 have been published covering 31 countries. India has recently
had a ROSC published on fiscal transparency. It is critical that monitoring of the observance
of  standards  and  codes  be  fully  integrated  into  IMF  surveillance  under  Article  IV.  Here
implementation is urgent.
In  the  field  of  transparency,  the  key  elements  of  the  new  partnership  are,  first,  a  commitment  by
emerging  market  economies  to  implement  transparency  about  transparency  by  publishing  ROSCs,
and, on the part of the international community, new opportunities for emerging markets to engage in
the process of constructing and developing codes and standards. There is encouraging evidence of
greater collaboration and consultation between developed and developing countries in the design and
implementation of the core standards – for example, on banking, securities and insurance regulation,
data, payment systems, insolvency and transparency of monetary, fiscal and financial policies. That is
all to the  good  and  there  is  further  to  go.  It  is  crucial  that  we  find  new  ways  of  involving  emerging
market countries in the process of designing and implementing standards and codes.
In  this  area,  ownership  is  all.  Transparency  cannot  and  should  not  be  imposed  on  any  country.
Countries themselves benefit most from being transparent and releasing the reports of assessments
by the IMF about their financial systems. And the enthusiastic embracing of transparency by a number
of  emerging  markets  has  paid  off  in  terms  of  better  relations  with  creditors.  Ultimately,  the  most
successful route to enhance the influence of emerging markets on the development of standards and
codes  is  to  strengthen  the  role  of  the  IMF  and  the World  Bank,  the  twin  institutions  that  can  claim
legitimacy through the membership of 183 countries. Under British Chairmanship, efforts have  been
made to increase the effectiveness of the meetings of the IMFC which represents all countries around
one table.
Private finance and public funds
The second main area in which further progress is required is the resolution of crises. The problem
would  be  easier  to  solve  were  it  possible  to  distinguish  between  two  rather  different  sources  of
crises – a liquidity-based problem caused by a currency or maturity mismatch in a country's national
balance  sheet  despite  a  sustainable  macroeconomic  and  debt  position;  and  a  fundamentals-based
problem  which  means  that  the  debt  burden  is  unsustainable  or  the  exchange  rate  or  other  key
macroeconomic policies need to be altered. In the former case, the provision of liquidity support by the
international community might help to bridge to a position in which the country could re-engage with its
private  creditors.  In  the  latter  case,  the  main  requirement  is  not  liquidity  support  but  a  change  in
macroeconomic  or  debt  management  policies.  Recent  crises  have  seen  examples  of  both  types  of
problem.
Liquidity  runs  typically  occur  because  of  a  co-ordination  failure  among  creditors.  There  are  two
solutions to this co-ordination problem. The first is a lender of last resort that is able to provide liquidity
support quickly and on a large – indeed, potentially unlimited – scale for a short period to enable the
affected  country  to  meet  its  obligations.  Such  loans  would  normally  be  short-lived,  and  should  be
made available at an above-market interest rate such that this sort of finance is seen as last not first
BIS Review 71/2001
5
resort. The second solution  to the co-ordination problem is for the borrower to  impose  a  temporary
suspension of payments to create a "time out" during which the borrower can negotiate directly with
the creditors, and so arrange a new profile of repayments of debt. Both approaches, if understood and
implemented consistently over time, can provide an efficient solution to the co-ordination problem and
eliminate the incentives for a liquidity run.
But, as Ken Rogoff pointed out in 1999, the lender of last resort approach carries with it the risk of
introducing significant moral hazard into the loan market. If lenders believe that sovereign borrowers
are  likely  to  be  bailed  out,  then  their  incentive  to  assess  the  riskiness  of  their  loans  will  diminish.
Equally,  borrowing  countries  will  find  it  more  attractive  to  claim  that  the  measures  necessary  to
continue  servicing  their  debt  are  "politically  impossible"  if  they  believe  that  there  is  an  international
deep  pocket  willing  to  extend  loans  and  defer  the  moment  when  the  national  balance  constraint  is
binding.
There are two good reasons for the IMF not being able to play the role of an international lender of last
resort,  at  least  for  the  foreseeable  future.  First,  the  moral  hazard  created  by  both  lenders  and
borrowers  cannot  simply  be  assumed  away.  It  is  not  easy  to  quantify,  but  it  is  noteworthy  that  the
number  of  sovereign  defaults  has  declined  quite  sharply  during  the  1990s.  If  sovereign  risk  is
mis-priced by private capital markets, this sows the seeds of future crises. The increased provision of
official finance would proceed hand-in-hand with an increased incidence of crises.
Second, to be effective, a lender of last resort must have the ability to extend sufficient resources that
the  market  has  no  doubt  whatsoever  about  the  ability  to  provide  whatever  it  takes  to  deal  with  the
immediate crisis. The IMF is not in that position. There is no political commitment to provide the IMF
with  unlimited  funds.  As  the  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  representing  all  IMF
member countries said in their communiqué of the IMFC last September in Prague: "The Committee
notes that Fund resources are limited and that extraordinary access should be exceptional …".
In  practice,  however,  exceptional  access  has  often  been  more  the  norm  in  recent  years.  Normal
access is typically defined as  300%  of IMF quota. During the  Asian crisis,  Korea's  programme was
almost  2000%  of  quota  and  Thailand's  over  500%.  More  recently,  Turkey's  programme  was  over
1500% of quota and Argentina's 500%. If creditors and debtors continue to believe that exceptional
access is readily available, then international credit will be over-extended and the incidence of crisis
will increase.
One reaction to these extremely large packages – "bailouts" – and the accompanying moral hazard is
simply  to  say  that  the  official  sector  should  have  no  part  to  play  in  what  is  essentially  a  private
international capital market. Official lending is now small relative to private capital flows. Over the last
three years, private flows have been around 7.5 times greater than official flows, according to IIF data.
Against that backdrop, some have argued that the IMF should be abolished. This would be to throw
out the baby with the bath water.
What is needed is a "middle way" between full IMF insurance and no insurance at all. This middle way
would  comprise  IMF  lending  but  within  strong  presumptive  limits.  A  key  principle  underlying  this
approach is that the international community needs to set out as clearly as possible the criteria that will
govern the size and scope of IMF lending. Since most agree that there are limits on IMF lending, there
is merit in explaining those limits to both potential borrowing countries and their private creditors. This
would enable debtor countries better to plan their policies. It would also allow creditors to assess risk
more  accurately.  Indeed,  put  more  controversially,  how  can  sovereign  risk  be  accurately  assessed
without clarity about the  Fund's  role?  A  lack  of  clarity  about  the  likely  response  of  the  international
community to potential crises is a recipe for inaccurate assessments of risk. Such uncertainty would
add to the (already high) cost of borrowing by emerging markets.
So  far,  the  "middle  way"  seems  a  statement  of  the  obvious  –  namely  that  there  are  limits  to  IMF
lending and that there is merit, for debtors and creditors, in having clarity about those limits. The other
side  of  this  coin  is  that,  on  occasions,  there  will  be  countries  that  have  run  up  unsustainable  debt
burdens,  or  face  severe  liquidity  pressures,  and  who  have  little  alternative  but  to  restructure  or
reschedule their debt. Perhaps this is why the international community has moved significantly in the
direction of giving "private sector involvement" a greater role in the resolution of financial crises than
was typically the case in the late 1990s. The IMF communiqué in Prague last year, the G7 Finance
Ministers statement last month, recent joint work by the Bank of England and Bank of Canada, and,
significantly, speeches by the new Managing Director of the IMF, Horst Kohler, have all emphasised
the need to move further in the direction of greater private sector involvement. As one example the
Report of the G7 Finance Ministers to the Heads of State and Government only last month stated that,
6
BIS Review 71/2001
"While the IMF has an essential role to play, official resources are limited in relation to private financial
flows. The engagement of private investors is thus essential for the resolution of payment imbalances
in crises… the official sector needs to avoid creating expectations that private creditors and investors
will be protected from losses or that official resources would be used to finance large, sustained capital
outflows. … We underscore the need for further progress".
The opponents of this approach raise two important questions. First, is it possible to define limits on
IMF  lending?  Second,  is  it  acceptable  for  the  official  sector  to  countenance  default  by  a  sovereign
borrower when the consequences for both the country and the international financial system could be
devastating? I shall try to provide answers to both of these questions.
It is true that recent crises have been the result of developments in the capital account rather than the
current  account.  As  capital  flows  have  grown,  so  too  have  the  potential  demands  on  the  official
community  as  they  attempt  to  fill  capital  account  financing  gaps.  That  is  why  so  many  more
programmes have involved "exceptional" access in relation to quota. So perhaps, in a world of capital
account crises, exceptional access should become the norm?
This  argument  is  superficially  quite  attractive.  But  its  implications  need  to  be  assessed  carefully.  It
would mean that IMF resources would need to increase in line with private capital flows even for the
IMF to maintain its current role. And since 1970, capital flows have grown around four times as fast as
world incomes. The share of world GDP devoted to resourcing the IMF would grow rapidly over time.
In  fact,  as  private  capital  markets  came  to  understand  this,  the  scale  of  private  capital  flows  could
increase  to  an  even  greater  extent.  Private  creditors  and  debtors  would  accumulate  ever  larger
bilateral debts, safe in the knowledge of a multilateral insurance mechanism. The logical end point of
this game is that the international community would be locked into providing ever increasing sums of
money to countries in difficulty – in short, an international lender of last resort  would be created by
stealth. There is no evidence that anyone wishes to go down this route.
To guard against this, it is crucial that there be some clearer presumption about the scale of "normal"
access. That scale may well be higher than was the case in a world of current account crises. And the
approach of defining limits in terms of multiples of quota may be unsatisfactory because the size of
quotas  in  some  cases  needs  to  be  revisited.  But  that  is  not  an  argument  against  the  principle  of
presumptive  limits;  it  is  a  case  either  for  reconsidering  quotas  or,  in  a  more  practical  vein,  relating
access to finance to some other metric.
The  key  to  limiting  lending  is  not  strict  rules  but  stronger  presumptions.  These  presumptions  then
provide  the  backstop  for  debtor-creditor  negotiations  and  help  condition  expectations  in  financial
markets.  Exceptional  lending  above  this  presumptive  limit  would  be  possible  in  order,  to  provide
operational flexibility in extreme cases – for example, those threatening systemic stability. That is why
the  framework  is  one  of  presumptive  limits  rather  than  strict  rules.  But  granting  exceptional  access
should require much greater ex ante justification and ex post accountability. For example, exceptional
access programmes should be automatically referred to the new Independent Evaluation Office of the
IMF. This would raise the hurdle for granting exceptional access and provide greater clarity to debtors
and creditors about the support countries could expect from the official community.
The  logical  consequence  of  limited  official  finance  is  that  inevitably  there  will  be  times  when  a
reprofiling of sovereign debt may be necessary for some countries. Some have argued that sovereign
debt restructuring or default is potentially too disastrous to contemplate, for the country or indeed for
the world economy. The Russian default  in  1998, and the disruption to  world markets that followed
from it, is often cited as evidence for the prosecution.
More careful analysis suggests two rather different conclusions from the Russian experience. First, the
Russian default was disruptive in part because it came as a surprise to market participants. Private
creditors had planned on one assumption – exceptional IMF financing, or the "moral hazard" play as it
was labelled by the market – and were surprised when their comfort blanket was removed. Greater
clarity and stronger presumptions about the size and form of Fund financing would have reduced the
surprise  and  the  accompanying  contagion.  Expectations  of  debtors  and  creditors  would  have  been
conditioned ex ante and the severity of the crisis thereby reduced ex post.
Second, the Russian  experience  illustrates the  importance  of  having  orderly  default  mechanisms  in
place. In assessing the costs of default, the maxim should be: "it's not what you do it's the way that
you  do  it".  In  Russia,  it  was  not  that  they  defaulted  but  the  way  that  they  did  it.  The  default  was
disorderly  –  neither  efficient,  nor  equitable,  nor  expeditious.  And  that  contributed  importantly  to  the
disruption to Russia and more widely. But default need not be like that. There are dead weight costs to
BIS Review 71/2001
7
disorderly default. So there are lump-sum gains – to  both debtors and creditors – to having orderly
mechanisms in place.
This is where the official sector has a role to play. A key principle of any crisis resolution framework is
that decisions on a sovereign's debt are the responsibility of the borrowing country, in consultation with
its  private  sector  creditors.  Neither  the  IMF  nor  any  group  of  countries  should  tell  a  country  to
restructure  its  debt.  There  are  a  range  of  options  open  to  debtors  in  dealing  with  their  creditors  at
times of crisis. Countries with a good track record of repayment and long standing relationships with
their creditors may be able to borrow more from the international market. Others, facing more severe
liquidity  pressures,  may  seek  to  undertake  voluntary  rescheduling  or  rollover  of  debt  by  bringing
together  all  or  some  of  their  major  creditors,  as  in  the  cases  of  Korea  and  Brazil.  Those  facing
unsustainable debt positions may seek to negotiate market-based write-downs of their debt, as in the
cases  of  Ukraine,  Pakistan  and  Ecuador.  And  in  yet  another  set  of  cases,  a  country  may  find  it
necessary  to  impose  a  temporary  timeout  on  payments  to  all  creditors,  to  give  themselves  some
breathing space to address macroeconomic or co-ordination problems. The decision on exercising any
of these options must rest with the debtor country.
The role of the official sector is to ensure that the full menu of financing options is made known and
available to the debtor, from which it then chooses. This menu should include both the easier options
–  such  as  raising  new  private  sector  money  – as  well  as  the  harder ones  –  such  as  suspending
payments. Each of these options is backstopped by limits on IMF lending, so that the "pure bail-out"
option  is  heavily  circumscribed.  Indeed,  it  is  this  backstop  which  helps  provide  the  incentive  for
creditors and debtors to seek alternative, market-based solutions sooner.
The  IMF  should  stand  ready  to  assist  countries,  whichever  of  these  options  debtors  choose  to
exercise, provided the appropriate prior conditions are satisfied. For example, should a country facing
severe liquidity pressures decide to suspend payments temporarily, then the IMF should be willing to
support that decision while remedial policy measures are put in place. This support could take the form
of  bridging  finance  –  so-called  IMF  lending-into-arrears.  The  pre-conditions  of  lending-into-arrears
could  be  designed 
in  an  orderly
fashion – for example, that they are time-limited and equitable, and the debtor is negotiating in good
faith. This would reduce uncertainty on the part of both debtors and creditors as to how the end game
would be played out, thereby reducing borrowing costs.
These sets of procedures represent evolution in, rather than revolution of, the international financial
architecture.  They  are  about  ensuring  the  official  sector's  own  actions  are  clear,  consistent  and
accountable, so that they contribute effectively to the resolution of financial crises. These procedures
are fully consistent with the principles of private sector involvement outlined in the IMFC communiqué
last  September  and  more  recently  by  the  G7 Finance  Ministers  last  month.  The  framework  set  out
here is an attempt to begin to add some operational colour to those overarching principles.
To  sum  up,  both  borrowing  countries  and  private  sector  creditors  must  expect  that,  except  in
exceptional cases of systemic concern, the limits on official finance means that they and they alone
will be responsible for dealing  with a resolution of problems concerning  debt repayment.  Standstills
and  debt  restructuring  will  be  only  one  of  many  options  open  to  negotiation  between  debtors  and
creditors. The IMF should not attempt to impose a solution on borrowing countries. It should be willing
to  lend  into  arrears  in  circumstances  where  countries  have  chosen  the  route  of  a  standstill  and  its
associated conditions. But it should not create expectations that exceptional access is the norm.
that  payments  suspensions  are  handled 
to  ensure 
Conclusions
Progress can be made only by closer co-operation between the developed and developing countries.
The development of standards and codes, the design of IMF lending and the wider agenda of trade
liberalisation  and  international  co-operation  are  examples  of  the  new  partnership  of  which  I  have
spoken. The closeness of the relationship between Britain  and  India  is a compelling reason  for  our
working together in the various international fora to improve the international financial system. In his
final report to the British Government on the creation of the Bretton Woods system, Maynard Keynes
wrote that "the excellence and closeness of our relations with the Indian delegation deserves special
comment. Sir Chintaman Deshmukh handled his case with high dignity, ability and reasonableness;
we  always  supported  him  on  his  interests  and  he  always  supported  us  on  ours".  Perhaps  our  joint
work on international financial architecture will recall the common architectural heritage of the Bank of
England and official buildings in New Delhi. Herbert Baker, who, with Lutyens, was responsible for the
8
BIS Review 71/2001
design of early New Delhi also rebuilt the Bank of England in the inter-war period. In the upper storeys
of the Bank he placed  pavilions  which are derivatives of  the  ends  of  the  Secretariat  blocks  in  New
Delhi.
As Lord Keynes said in his speech at the closing plenary session of the Bretton Woods Conference on
22 July 1944, "it has been our task to find a common measure, a common standard, a common rule
applicable  to  each  and  not  irksome  to  any.  We  have  been  operating,  moreover,  in  a  field  of  great
intellectual  and  technical  difficulty.  We  have  had  to  perform  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  tasks
appropriate to the economist, to the financier, to the politician, to the journalist, to the propagandist, to
the lawyer, to the statesman – even, I think to the prophet and soothsayer. … We have shown that a
concourse  of  44 nations  are  actually  able  to  work  together  at  a  constructive  task  in  amity  and
unbroken concord. If we can continue in a larger task as we have begun in this limited task, there is
hope for the world." The IMF is still the only international body with the legitimacy, as well as staff and
expertise, to build and defend a successful international financial system. It is important, therefore, that
we not accept uncritically the way it has developed, and we must examine closely how far changes in
international financial markets require us to understand the consequences of limits to IMF lending and
the implications of those limits for borrowing countries and private creditors alike. We need neither a
grandiose new plan nor another Bretton Woods Conference. But we do need greater clarity and less
fudge about how the present system is supposed to operate.
BIS Review 71/2001
9
