Bank of Japan’s September report of recent economic and financial
developments1
Bank of Japan, 20 September 2001
 The Bank’s View2
Adjustments in economic activity are becoming more severe, as the substantial decline in production,
starting from a fall in exports, is beginning to have a negative influence on employment and income
conditions.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  continue  to  decline,
reflecting not only a slowdown in overseas economies but also sluggish demand for IT-related goods.
Business  fixed  investment  is  also  decreasing  noticeably  while  exporting  conditions  continue  to
deteriorate.  Housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public  investment  is  declining.  Meanwhile,
private consumption remains flat on the whole, although there are some weak indicators.
Industrial production continues to decline considerably, reflecting these developments in final demand
and  strong  excessiveness  in  inventories  of  electronic  parts  and  materials.  Corporate  profits  and
business sentiment are also worsening, particularly in manufacturing. Affected by such developments,
household income is weakening gradually.
Turning to the outlook, public investment is expected to follow a declining trend. Net exports are likely
to  continue  decreasing  for  a  while  amid  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies  and  ongoing
inventory adjustments in IT-related goods worldwide. Based on the developments in leading indicators
and judged from the successive downward revisions of firms’ investment plans in the information and
communications  sector,  business  fixed  investment  is  also  expected  to  follow  a  downward  trend.
Private  consumption  is  likely  to  become  weak  gradually  while  employment  and  income  conditions
continue to deteriorate. In  addition  to  such  developments  in  final  demand,  inventory  adjustments  in
goods such as electronic parts and materials will continue for the time being. Industrial production is,
therefore, expected to follow a declining trend.
As  for  IT-related  goods,  although  the  sluggish  final  demand  of  these  goods  worldwide  has  been
preventing the progress in inventory adjustments, the view that the adjustments are likely to finish by
around next spring is prevailing. Therefore, the decline production in this sector is expected to cease
some  time  in  the  future.  However,  uncertainty  regarding  the  outlook  for  the  recovery  of  overseas
economies,  particularly  for  the  U.S.,  is  growing  further  while  the  global  economy  continues  to
decelerate concurrently. At home, while the income-generating mechanism from corporate profits to
employment and  wages is starting to  work adversely, government spending is projected to follow a
downward trend. Under these circumstances, it may take some time for overall production activity to
stop declining.
Overall, adjustments in economic activity, starting from the decline in exports, are expected to have a
negative  influence on domestic demand gradually  and  this  in turn  will  possibly  prolong  the  ongoing
adjustments. Moreover, while the economy continues to be in a fragile state, attention should be paid
to the growing risks of a negative impact on the economy  induced  by  developments  in  foreign  and
domestic capital markets via corporate and household confidence.
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  declining  mainly  reflecting  the  softening  of  international
commodity prices. Domestic wholesale prices are also declining somewhat faster because the effects
from the past high crude oil prices and the prior depreciation of the yen have abated, while prices of
electrical  machinery  and  materials  continue  to  decrease.  Consumer  prices  are  weakening  owing
mainly  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  imported  products  and  their  substitutes.  Corporate  service  prices
continue to decrease.
                                                     
1
This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on
September 18, 2001.
2
The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on September 18 as the basis for monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review 77/2001
1
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  with  the  ongoing  adjustments  in  economic
activity, the balance between supply and demand in the domestic market is likely to exert downward
pressure  on  prices.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by
technological innovations, the decreases  in the  prices of goods and services reflecting deregulation
and  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  restrain  price  developments.  Overall,
prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high
degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will
further intensify downward pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate declined further and is moving around zero percent as
the current-account balances at the Bank of Japan were increased to around 6 trillion yen due to the
changes in the guideline for money market operations decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on
August 14.
Interest rates on term instruments are declining further owing to the monetary easing by the Bank. The
Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields on long-term government bonds are recently moving around 1.35 percent. The  yield spreads
between  private  bonds  (bank  debentures  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds  are  mostly
unchanged.
Stock prices are plunging reflecting the drop in U.S. stocks.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently being traded in the range of 116-119 yen to the
U.S. dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans, mainly
to  blue-chip  companies,  while  carefully  evaluating  the  credit  risks  involved.  However,  the  lending
attitudes  of  financial  institutions  perceived  by  small  firms  are  becoming  slightly  more  cautious.
Meanwhile, the fund-raising conditions of firms in the markets for such instruments as corporate bonds
and CP continue to be favorable owing to a decline in market interest rates and the more active stance
of investors to take credit risks.
On the other hand, credit demand in the private sector is declining faster mainly due to a decrease in
business fixed investment while firms continue to reduce their debts.
In  view  of  this,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  private  banks’  lending  is  expanding  slightly.  The
growth rate of amount outstanding of corporate bonds  issued  is about  2 percent on  a  year-on-year
basis. Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of CP issued continues to be at a high level, significantly
exceeding that of the previous year due to the favorable environment for issuing CP.
The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in August was slightly  higher  than that of the previous
month due mainly to the inflow from postal savings.
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels.
With  respect  to  the  recent  financial  environment,  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  are  permeating
through the economy. This  can  be  observed  such  as  in  the  additional  easing  in  the  money  market
conditions, further decline in short-term interest rates, higher growth in monetary indicators, and the
improvement  in  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  through  the  markets.  However,  against  the
background  of  deteriorating  corporate  earnings  and  the  more  cautious  lending  attitudes  of  financial
institutions,  fund-raising  conditions  of  small  firms  seem  to  be  becoming  more  severe.  Hence,  the
developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing need careful monitoring.
In addition, it is necessary to carefully monitor the effects of the terrorist attacks in the U.S. on global
financial markets and economic activity.
2
BIS Review 77/2001
