Christian Noyer: The euro area: a collection of countries or a single economic
entity?
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  American
Chamber of Commerce in Germany, Stuttgart, 29 June 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be at the American Chamber of Commerce in Stuttgart.
The  question  posed  in  the  title  of  this  speech  can  be  addressed  by  noting  that  the  euro  area
comprises those – currently twelve – Member States of the European Union which have adopted the
euro  as  their  single  currency  and  thereby  irrevocably  transferred  the  responsibility  for  conducting
monetary policy from the national level to a supra-national and independent institution, the European
Central Bank (ECB). Consequently, as regards monetary policy, the euro area is, by construction, a
single entity. This is also the case for many other fields of economic interaction. Most important is the
Single Market, which ensures freedom of movement of persons and free trade in goods, services and
capital  across  the  whole  European  Union  and  therefore  also  in  the  euro  area.  The  single  currency
completes the Single Market. The euro area is thus, to a very large extent, a single economic entity.
Obviously, this answer does not imply that the euro area is also a single political entity. However, and
most importantly, what is crucial is not whether the euro area is a single entity in each respect. From
an economic point of view, the relevant question is whether the political  and  institutional framework
which governs the euro area is designed in such a way as to ensure bright long-term prospects for the
euro area in terms of employment, real growth and, more generally, living standards of its citizens? In
this  respect,  while  I  see  an  urgent  need  for  further  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area,  let  me
emphasise at the outset that I am rather optimistic as concerns the long-term growth and employment
prospects of the euro area. Not least as the euro, together with healthy competition among differing
policy designs of national authorities, will act as a catalyst for further reform and integration.
In my presentation today, I will first briefly address the political and institutional structure underlying
the euro area.  Secondly, I will  discuss  some  features  of  the  ECB,  the  institution  responsible  for  an
area in which full integration has been achieved, namely monetary policy. Thirdly, I will discuss some
of the challenges  which need to be addressed to fully grasp the opportunities offered by the single
currency, thereby further improving the economic prospects of the euro area. Finally, I shall argue that
the unique institutional choice for the euro area brings many advantages and opportunities and thus, if
properly handled and carefully further developed, is a very solid fundament for a substantially more
dynamic long-term development of the euro area than most observers currently appear to expect.
Having  the  honour  of  speaking  at  the  American  Chamber  of  Commerce,  I  will  –  you  will  not  be
surprised – draw some comparisons with the United States of America.
The first is that the euro area is an economically integrated and large economic block that, in many
respects, is similar to the US. These two economies are the two largest economic areas in the world.
In 1999,  the  euro  area GDP (including Greece)  was equivalent to  16%  of world GDP,  whereas  the
share  of  the  United  States  was  22%.  In  terms  of  population,  the  United  States  (with  272  million
inhabitants) is slightly smaller than the euro area (with 302 million inhabitants).
Underlying institutional and political structures
The euro is both a product and part of the process of European integration, which began already fifty
years ago. This is a process that continues to evolve.
The Eurosystem, comprising the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area, operates within
the  broader  underlying  framework  of  the  European  Union.  In  order  to  put  this  framework  into
perspective, allow me to draw a few simple comparisons with the US. Beginning with the similarities, I
should  first  point  out  that  both  the  EU  and  the  US  benefit  from  having  written  constitutions  or
constitution-like treaties. For the US, this is the constitution issued by the Philadelphia convention of
1787,  while  the  EU's  "constitution"  is  set  out  by  the  successive  treaties  which  established  first  the
European Community and later the European Union. Both the US constitution and the EU Treaty were
entered into voluntarily and resulted in the closer union of the participating states. Both serve to lay
down the level at which powers are to be exercised and decisions taken.
BIS Review 61/2001
1
We must understand that the EU's underlying framework, like that of the US, is a product of its times.
When  the  US  constitution  was  drafted,  the  involvement  of  the  state  in  economic  matters  was
extremely  limited. In  fact  it  was  not  until  over  a  century  later  that  the  US  finally  had  a  fully-fledged
central bank, after earlier attempts to establish a national bank had ended in the Fed's predecessors
being dissolved. By contrast, the process of European integration began at a time when the power of
the  state  in  managing  and  intervening  in  the  economy  was  high  and  many  thought  that  this  power
should indeed be used to a large extent.
Let me point out that since the establishment of the European Community, economic integration has
served not only as an end in itself, but also as a means of achieving wider objectives, including greater
political  integration.  Progress  towards  establishing  the  so-called  "four  freedoms",  namely  the  free
movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and  labour,  required,  from  the  start,  the  creation  of  an
institutional system with state-like attributes such as a legislative, an executive capacity and judiciary
functions.  As  economic  integration  has  progressed,  this  institutional  system  has  developed  and
adapted. For instance, what was first a European  Assembly  with  only consultative powers has now
become a European Parliament with legislative responsibilities extended to more and more areas, and
members of parliament who are directly elected by European citizens. Within the Council of Ministers,
majority voting has increasingly become the norm at the expense of unanimity.
Finally, in addition to institutional reform, economic integration has also served to foster progress in
areas  beyond  the  economic  sphere.  In  order  to  effectively  guarantee  the  four  freedoms,  it  has,  for
example, been deemed necessary to grant powers to the EU in fields such as immigration and human
rights.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  a  consequence  of  the  integration  process  that  began  largely  in  the
economic sphere, the EU already exhibits a number of features of existing political unions in terms of
both  its  institutional  structure  and  its  competencies.  However,  it  is  clearly  not  a  complete  political
union. The extent to which further integration is either desirable or necessary is an ongoing debate. It
is  a  debate  that  is  ultimately  for  politicians,  not  for  central  bankers.  Nevertheless,  the  process  of
European integration will undoubtedly also have implications for the conduct of the single monetary
policy. No central bank operates in a vacuum. It needs to be supported by an appropriate underlying
framework. There is no doubt that the overall performance of the euro area economy depends not just
on economic, but also on institutional and political structures.
The European Central Bank
In  this  respect,  judging  by  past  experience,  I  am  confident  that  if  and  when  institutional  or  political
changes do become necessary, the EU is and will be able to rise to this challenge. The introduction of
the euro and the creation of a new institution, the ECB, which is responsible for the single monetary
policy, provide clear evidence that this is already the case. Let me briefly discuss some features of the
ECB, which has a clear mandate to focus on maintaining price stability in the euro area as a whole. In
fact, in the euro area, monetary policy cannot be tailored to the specific needs of a country or region.
The  single  monetary  policy  is  governed  by  the  decision-making  bodies  of  the  ECB.  These  are  the
Governing Council and the Executive  Board. They may  be considered broadly comparable  with the
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  and  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System.
Like  the  FOMC,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  responsible  for  taking  key  monetary  policy
decisions,  including  the  setting  of  official  interest  rates.  Whereas  the  FOMC  is  composed  of  the
members  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  four  Reserve  Bank
presidents, the Governing Council is composed of the members of the Executive Board of the ECB
and the Governors of the national central banks of the euro area. The Governors naturally bring with
them  their  own  country-specific  expertise  and  experience.  However,  they  are  members  of  the
Governing Council in a personal capacity and not as representatives of their countries or institutions.
Their duty is to act in the interest of the euro area as a whole and, judging from my experience, this is
indeed what they are doing.
The  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  consists  of  the  President,  the  Vice-President  and  four  other
members.  It  is  responsible  for  preparing  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council.  It  manages  the
day-to-day activities of the ECB and implements the monetary policy set by the Governing Council. In
order to carry out this latter task, the Executive Board gives the necessary instructions to the national
central banks.
2
BIS Review 61/2001
To recapitulate, the Governing Council sets policy, the Executive Board implements policy; the related
policy operations are then carried out by the national central banks in a harmonised manner. The role
played by the national central banks in the implementation of monetary policy operations represents a
difference  in  organisation  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Fed.  While  the  Fed  operates  primarily
through  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  the  Eurosystem's  monetary  policy  operations  are
carried out in a decentralised manner by each of the national central banks. This reflects possibly the
differences in the operational framework. The ECB policy relies a great deal on the functioning of the
money  market  and  does  not  pursue  daily  interventions  in  the  money  market.  Typically  the  ECB
conducts only one weekly operation. In addition, it is useful for the ECB to draw on the experience of
all central banks in Europe and their long-standing close contacts with the market participants.
In  short,  the  Eurosystem  is  organised  in  a  way  that  ensures  the  efficient  formulation  and
implementation of a single and coherent monetary policy for the euro area as a whole. At the same
time, it draws, to the extent appropriate, on the existing resources and expertise of the national central
banks.
Structural reform needs in the euro area: improving market integration and competition
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now address economic areas where structural reforms are needed to
further enhance the functioning and the economic prospects of the euro area. I should like to start by
referring  to  one  of  the  most  important  structural  differences  between  the  euro  area  and  the  US.
Regarding the degree of regulation, the US is currently more flexible than the euro area. For instance,
higher rates of turnover in the US labour market are a signal that employers enjoy greater flexibility in
tailoring their staff numbers to production needs. Flexibility of factors of production, including labour,
facilitates the introduction of new technologies, allowing firms to organise their production processes
more efficiently and to improve their competitiveness. Moreover, flexibility lowers the adjustment costs
associated with economic shocks.
The greater market flexibility in the US is connected with a relatively low degree of labour and goods
market regulation as compared with the euro area. While important reforms have been introduced in a
number of euro area countries, all in all there is still a long way to go in this respect. This emerges
quite  clearly  from  a  comparison  of  the  costs  and  procedures  associated  with  the  creation  of  new
businesses, to mention just one example.
There is a wide diversity in regulatory arrangements across countries and sectors in the euro area.
This  diversity  emerges  quite  clearly  when  looking  at  product  markets.  Whereas  the  integration  of
goods markets is relatively advanced, major shortcomings exist with regard to the full  integration of
service industries. Most of the barriers to trade in services appear to be due to national regulations, for
example administrative procedures for setting up subsidiaries in other euro area countries. Regulatory
barriers along these lines reduce competition in services, thus keeping the respective prices above the
level that would be expected in a fully integrated market.
Much  of  the  recent  discussion  on  structural  reforms  in  product  markets  has  focused  on  regulatory
reform in network industries, in particular telecommunications, electricity and gas. Following a number
of  important  reforms  in  the  1990s,  market  opening  in  the  telecommunications  market  has  made
considerable  progress,  while  reforms  in  other  network  industries  have  generally  remained  more
limited. The initiatives in the telecommunications sector show how reforms that succeed in increasing
competition  in  previously  sheltered  sectors,  considerably  enhance  productivity,  lower  relative  prices
and lead to new and better products, thereby increasing consumer welfare and job opportunities.
Turning now to labour markets, also here progress has been rather uneven across areas. A number of
countries  have  lowered  marginal  tax  rates  in  order  to  make  their  tax  systems  more  employment
friendly.  Some  progress  has  generally  also  been  made  with  the  introduction  of  more  flexibility  in
working contracts and practices. In many other areas, however, important reforms have not yet got off
the ground. For instance, few changes have been made regarding employment protection policies in
euro area countries, which remain among the strictest in the industrial countries. Also, reforms aiming
to  simplify  and  limit  unemployment  benefit  systems  and  thereby  enhance  employment  growth  have
only slowly progressed in almost all euro area countries. The emergence of skill shortages and tight
labour markets in several euro area countries shows that structural problems still remain and need to
be  solved.  The  euro  area  could  use  its  potential  much  better,  as  is  illustrated  by  its  relatively  low
labour force participation. Whereas, in the euro area, the labour force participation rate was 67% in
1999, it amounted to 77% in the US.
BIS Review 61/2001
3
All in all, we see that some traditional  hurdles to market flexibility  and competition are slowly  being
removed, but as regards the current state of affairs in the euro area there is certainly  still plenty  of
scope and urgent need for improvement. Structural reforms are of paramount importance not only for
raising  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy  but,  most  importantly,  for  increasing  employment
prospects in the euro area.
Reasons to be optimistic regarding the long-term prospects of the euro area
Let  me  now  explain  why  I  am  rather  optimistic  regarding  the  future  development  of  the  euro  area
economy. The euro area is already highly integrated in economic terms owing to the creation of the
single  currency  and  Single  Market  and  further  progress  in  this  respect  is  ongoing.  This  is  a  good
starting point for dynamic economic development.
My optimism is grounded in particular on the transformation we have witnessed over the past years,
following the remarkable decision in favour of the Single Market. The successful establishment of the
euro  and  the  ECB,  which  together  with  the  Single  Market,  have  created  a  new  economic  entity,  is
evidence  of  the  ability  of  Europe  to  implement  far-reaching  reforms  which  are  well-designed  and
underpinned  by  solid  institutional  structures.  This  creation  of  an  entirely  new  economic  entity  is  a
substantial step forward. The euro will act as a catalyst for further reform in many areas.
My  optimism  is  further  underpinned  by  the  fact  that  the  Treaty  sets  out  a  durable  anchor  to  guide
economic decisions and  to  reduce  economic  uncertainty  substantially  by  entrusting  an  independent
institution, the ECB, with a clear mandate of maintaining price stability. Moreover, the Treaty defines a
clear  and  efficient  allocation  of  responsibilities,  where  the  single  monetary  policy  is  primarily
responsible for price stability, while structural and fiscal policies at the national level are responsible
for  providing  the  necessary  framework  for  enhancing  potential  growth  and  employment  in  a  lasting
manner, objectives for which governments, not central banks, have the appropriate instruments. This
clear  allocation  of  responsibilities  ensures  transparency  and  accountability,  further  fostering  good
policies. I do not think that a fully-fledged political union would necessarily guarantee better economic
prospects.
In this respect, it is interesting to note that national governments will increasingly be scrutinised, both
by  the  electorate  and  the  capital  markets,  with  comparisons  being  drawn  between  the  economic
performance of the various countries within the euro area. Also here, it is the single currency which
enhances transparency  and thus leads to  improved competition  with positive effects for all  citizens.
With a single monetary policy, striking cross-country deviations in real growth and unemployment can
no longer be blamed on differences in monetary or exchange rate policies. Over time it will become
increasingly  clear  that  cross-country  differences  in  economic  performance  are,  to  a  considerable
extent, related to national fiscal and structural policies. This will increase the incentives for carrying out
structural reforms.
The general comparison between the euro area and the US presented above, obviously, does not do
justice to the diversity that exists within the euro area. As the responsibility for structural reforms in the
EU  and  in  the  euro  area  rests  with  the  individual  Member  States,  a  wide  variety  of  institutional
solutions and regulatory arrangements across countries and sectors exist. In many areas I consider
this  decentralised  approach  to  be  an  opportunity,  not  a  disadvantage.  It  makes  possible  healthy
competition  between  differing  policy  designs  of  national  authorities  and  enables  solutions  that  are
tailored to the particular needs of a country or region. This fact, which is a clear advantage of the euro
area  economy  compared  with  other  more  centralised  economies,  is  often  not  recognised  enough.
Decentralised policies offer a unique opportunity to explore different solutions in a competitive manner,
allowing the testing of various approaches and, if thought useful, selection of best practices with a high
degree of confidence.
Fiscal  policy  is  a  good  example  of  a  field  where  Europe  found  an  efficient  solution  in  the  form  of
common  rules  which  keep  the  advantages  of  decentralisation  and  subsidiarity.  As  is  well-known,
budgetary  policies  remain  under  national  responsibility,  but  effective  common  rules  have  been
developed  in  the  form  of  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  These
rules are designed to ensure that a high degree of fiscal discipline supports the single monetary policy
in  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  Thus,  while  the  euro  area  shows  a  unique
institutional  setting  –  in  contrast  to  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  is  far  from  being  single  –  national
governments have agreed to common rules which ensure that the euro area remains an efficient and
stability-oriented single economic area.
4
BIS Review 61/2001
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  single  currency  and  the  establishment  of  a  new  European
institution responsible for monetary  policy in the euro area  complemented  the  process  of  economic
integration  that  started  half  a  century  ago  in  Europe.  This  process  and  the  institutional  build-up,
together  with  clear  and  coherent  policy  goals  and  an  efficient  allocation  of  the  respective
responsibilities, are transforming the euro area into an increasingly unified economic entity which, in
many respects, resembles the US. Although most of the required structural reforms still have to be
implemented, it cannot be denied that substantial progress has been made.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  a  powerful  catalyst,  contributing  to
greater competition in the economic and the political sphere, thereby further enhancing the welfare of
the citizens in the euro area.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  political  leaders  throughout  Europe  have  recognised  the  need  for  structural
changes  in  both  taxation  and  expenditure  policies  and  regarding  the  deregulation  of  product  and
labour markets.
In this context, let me point out that the Lisbon European Council in March 2000 emphasised the need
for economic reform, whose implementation is a key condition for the EU to achieve its strategic goal
"to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world". The follow-up
to the Lisbon strategy is ensured by an annual spring  European Council meeting, the first of which
took  place  in  Stockholm  earlier  this  year.  These  follow-up  initiatives  are  also  reflected  in  the
recommendations of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines.
It is sometimes argued that the euro area can only become a very strong and dynamic economic entity
if supported by a fully-fledged political union. I have argued today that there are good reasons that this
may not be true. The current policy constitution in the euro area, despite its novelty and uniqueness, is
a sound and efficient framework which provides a good basis to ensure that, even without full political
union, the euro area can become one of the most dynamic economic areas in the world.
BIS Review 61/2001
5
