Peter Nicholl: Recent banking sector developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Speech  by  Mr  Peter  Nicholl,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  at  the
ceremony of the taking over of Hrvatska Po(cid:154)tanska Bank by Raiffeisen Bank, Mostar, 5 May 2001.
 I want to congratulate the two banks, Raiffeisen and Hrvatska Po(cid:154)tanska, on the step they are taking
today. They are taking part in a process the Central Bank of BH has been promoting for some time
now (cid:150) the consolidation and strengthening of the commercial banking sector in BH.
This  process  is  very  important.  An  efficient  banking  system  is  a  crucial  part  of  market  economy.  It
encourages  savings  and  it  promotes  investment  and  employment  by  lending  those  savings  for
business development, housing and other purposes.
The year 2000 will be seen as the year in which the banking sector in BH finally began to change for
the better. I will mention just a few of the highlights.
First,  the  payments  system  underwent  fundamental  reform.  BH  now  has  a  modern  European-type
payments system.
Second, minimum capital requirements for banks were increased and will increase further.
Third, it become possible for a bank registered in one entity to operate branches in the other entity.
Five banks are already doing so, and more will follow.
Fourth, a limited deposit insurance scheme has started which should help return citizens confidence to
the  banks  that  qualify.  So  far,  only  four  banks  have  been  admitted  to  the  scheme  and  it  is  only
operating in the Federation.
Last, but not least, more foreign banks commenced operations in BH in 2000, either by applying for
licenses directly or by purchasing an existing BH bank. Increased foreign competition will be very good
for the BH economy. It will give depositors more choice and will force the local banks to improve the
range  and  quality  of  the  services  they  provide  if  they  want  to  survive.  One  can  already  see  these
effects occurring.
There is still a long way to go before BH has a banking sector that can play the major role the banking
sector plays in most other countries  in  Europe.  But  2000  will be seen  as the  year  in  which  the  BH
banking sector finally began to move in the right direction. It is certain that the speed of change in the
banking sector will accelerate even more in 2001. The overall winners from the improvement in the
banking sector will be the customers of banks and the economy of BH.
Today(cid:146)s event is part of the acceleration of the transformation of the BH banking sector that I have
refereed  to.  Raiffeisen  opened  in  Sarajevo  just  last  July,  only  nine  months  ago.  They  have  since
opened a branch in Banja Luka and are in the process of opening more branches in the RS, in Brčko
and  in  many  other  towns  in  the  Federation.  Today,  they  are  taking  a  big  step  into  Herzegovina  by
buying Hrvatska Po(cid:154)tanska Bank. They have very quickly become a bank that is operating over the
whole territory of BH as well as in most of the neighboring countries. I congratulate them on the major
role they are playing in transforming and strengthening the banking sector in BH and wish them every
success with their new partner.
BIS Review 36/2001
1
