Christian Noyer: Lessons from the European experience with exchange rate
and monetary policy co-operation
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Third Asia-Europe
(ASEM) Finance Ministers' Meeting, held in Kobe on 14 January 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to be given the opportunity to participate in this ASEM meeting
today  in  Kobe.  This  is  the  second  time  that  the  ECB  is  taking  part  in  this  event  of  increasing
importance for the economic and financial co-operation between Asia and Europe. I will discuss today
with  you  which  lessons  of  relevance  to  Asia  might  be  drawn  from  the  European  experience  in
exchange rate and monetary policy co-ordination.
1. Institutional background
One crucial aspect of the ongoing process of globalisation is that, on average, international trade and
financial flows are growing at a faster, sometimes a much faster pace than world GDP. This has posed
and will continue to pose unique policy challenges. In particular, individual countries are increasingly
susceptible to external developments and shocks. This implies an increased need for international co-
operation,  both  at  the  global  level  and  at  the  regional  level,  in  order  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the
potential negative externalities associated with globalisation.
In this context, the various processes of regional integration (e.g. EU, NAFTA, MERCOSUR, ASEAN)
should be seen as integral parts of broader multilateral co-operation, and not as a weakening of global
surveillance.  In  fact,  the  spill-over  effects  transmitted  from  one  region  of  the  world  to  another  via
interest rates, exchange rates and equity prices, for instance, can be mitigated through closer regional
integration.  By  reducing  the  relative  degree  of  economic  and  financial  openness  of  the  regions
concerned,  such  integration  can  be  an  effective  instrument  to  shield  them  from  external  shocks,
thereby obviating the need for trade or capital restrictions.
The European experience shows that regional integration can be beneficial in this respect. The euro
area weathered well the economic slowdown and financial market uncertainties arising from the series
of  balance  of  payments  crises  seen  between  1997  and  1999.  Likewise,  provided  that  the  current
economic  slowdown  in  the  United  States  does  not  develop  into  a  hard  landing,  the  euro  area  is
expected to record in 2001 above-potential growth for the second year in a row.
To be sure, sheltering domestic economies from external shocks was not the primary consideration of
European integration when it was initiated almost 50 years ago. Nor were the creation of the euro and
the setting-up of the European Central Bank (ECB) objectives at that time. These are, in fact, only the
latest  developments  in  a  long  process  of  regional  integration  that  started  and  is  continuing  with  a
strong political commitment.
This political dimension is essential in order to understand how the momentum was maintained over
an  extended  period  of  time  so  as  to  achieve  gradual  progress  towards  ever  increasing  integration:
from industrial co-operation through a customs union and a single market to Economic and Monetary
Union. Having recalled this institutional background, I will focus in my remarks today on the policy and
operational requirements of exchange rate and monetary policy co-operation in Europe.
2. Policy requirements
Consensus on the main policy objectives to be pursued over time has always been a key requirement
for effective exchange rate and monetary policy co-operation in Europe. The objectives were, initially,
exchange rate stability and, subsequently, the creation of a monetary union based on price stability.
A  need  for  exchange  rate  stability  arose  in  the  1970s,  in  the  wake  of  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton
Woods  system.  Stability  was  needed  in  order  to  minimise  the  risk  of  trade  tensions  within  the
European  customs  union  at  the  time.  This  led  to  the  creation  of  the  European  Monetary  System's
Exchange Rate Mechanism (EMS/ERM) in 1979. The need for exchange rate stability became even
more acute from 1986 onwards, with the move towards the creation of the single market for goods,
services, capital and people.
BIS Review 1/2001
1
The completion of the single market involved the full liberalisation of capital movements within the EU
at the beginning of the 1990s. This gave rise to a new policy requirement resulting from the so-called
"impossible  trinity",  which implies that  autonomous  national  monetary  policies  are  incompatible  with
fixed  exchange  rate  objectives  in  an  environment  of  free  capital  movements.  As  a  result,  national
authorities participating in EMS/ERM had to subordinate monetary and, to a large extent, fiscal policy
to the achievement of exchange rate stability. This led logically to monetary union, with the creation of
the ECB as a supranational institution and the introduction of the euro.
3. Operational requirements
While  consensus  on  the  key  policy  objectives  pursued  over  time  has  been  crucial  for  effective
exchange rate and monetary policy co-operation in Europe, one should not play down the importance
of operational aspects in the day-to-day management of the EMS/ERM. Three main lessons can be
drawn in this regard.
First, the operational framework had to be flexible in order to withstand episodes of tension as well as
to  adjust  to  changing  economic  and  financial  market  conditions.  In  the  European  experience,
examples  of  tension  and  changing  conditions  were  the  episodes  of  US  dollar  misalignment  in  the
1980s and 1990s and the asymmetric shock caused by German reunification in the early 1990s. In the
EMS/ERM,  flexibility  was  ensured  through  fluctuation  bands  around  central  exchange  rates,  which
were  either  narrow  (+/-2.25%)  or  wide  (+/-  6%)  depending  on  the  degree  of  convergence  of  the
countries concerned. The system became even more flexible when a +/- 15% fluctuation  band  was
introduced  following  the  crises  in  1992  and  1993.  The  possibility  of  adjusting  central  rates  through
"realignments" to be agreed by the ministers and governors of the participating Member States added
to the resilience of the system.
Second, arrangements for regular consultations among all parties to the system were used, including
mechanisms for monitoring economic, monetary and financial developments and for assessing policy
responses. In Europe, peer reviews of domestic policies became increasingly demanding over time.
As a result, the provision of mutual financial assistance was increasingly subordinated to compliance
with the policy recommendations made in such reviews or in the context of "realignments".
Third,  the  operational  framework  made  it  possible  to  achieve  exchange  rate  and  monetary  co-
operation  among  countries  with  different  levels  of  economic  development.  Nominal  convergence
proved to be consistent with real convergence, as the countries engaged in the catching-up process
were  committed  to  implementing  the  necessary  structural  reforms  in  addition  to  macroeconomic
stabilisation measures and their economic weight was small compared with that of the so-called "core"
countries.
4. Conclusions
A few conclusions  of direct relevance to our Asian  partners may  be  drawn.  As  experience  with  the
implementation of the ASEAN and APEC arrangements shows, Asian countries are developing their
own  way  of  strengthening  regional  integration.  This  is  the  right  avenue  to  follow.  Indeed,  Asian
countries will succeed only if they set realistic objectives in line with their own regional conditions and
the corresponding level of political commitment. This is what Europeans have done over the last 50
years. At the same time, the European experience could serve as a reference point for assessing the
policy  requirements  and  operational  aspects  of  a  process  of  regional  integration,  possibly  including
exchange  rate  and  monetary  policy  co-operation.  Finally,  the  European  experience  shows  that  a
process  of  regional  integration  can  and  should  be  without  prejudice  to  the  broader  process  of
globalisation  or  to  multilateral  co-operation  within  the  current  institutional  framework  of  the
international monetary and financial system.
2
BIS Review 1/2001
