David Klein: From price stability to financial stability: the situation in Israel
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Klein,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Ninth  Annual  Economic
Conference, Caesaria, 21 June 2001.
     En route to price stability
After a fairly protracted process, we are beginning to grow accustomed to the concept of price stability.
At the outset there were heated discussions on whether it was at all possible to achieve price
 
stability in Israel.
When  we  asked  ourselves  what  were  our  objectives  regarding  inflation,  we  answered,
following the Economic Stabilization Program of 1985: “we will make every effort to lower it.”
Towards the end of 1991 we set out on the path of annual inflation targets without knowing
where it led or what obligations it entailed.
Every  year  we  came  back  to  the  questions  of  what  was  the  appropriate  target  for  the
following  year,  when should  it be decided upon,  and  whether  we could  allow  ourselves  to
look further ahead than the next year.
We debated whether inflation was the be-all and end-all, and whether it was possible to buy
more growth at the price of higher inflation.
We discussed whether inflation in Israel should be the same as that in the OECD, with or
without Turkey.
More than once we were uncertain whether it was right to adjust the inflation target upwards.
We saw almost the  whole world, advanced  and  emerging  economies,  gradually  adopt  the
norm of price stability as a trait of properly run countries wishing to integrate into the global
economy.
On 16 August 2000 the government made the decision: a regime of price stability suits us
too.
As is our wont, we chose a roundabout route to price stability: before we finally come down
to earth in 2003,  the decision said, let’s first fly a  little higher in 2001–02, perhaps  for  old
time’s sake. It is not very clear why we first had to raise inflation before it could come down,
maybe  it  was  a  yearning  for  the  old,  pointless  arguments  about  how  we  may  be  able  to
create a few more jobs by juggling with inflation.
    Price stability does not arrive like manna from heaven, and we must remember that several obstacles
still  obstruct  the  path  to  achieving  it,  and  these  have  to  be  removed.  Some  derive  from  the
arrangements which were intended to make living with inflation more comfortable – these now make it
more  difficult  to  beat  inflation.  Some  of  them  arose  out  of  attitudes  widely  ascribed  to  in  the  past
regarding the effect of the rate of interest on real activity. One obstacle which has attained prominence
recently  is  based  on  the  almost  mystic  belief  that  the  rate  of  interest  has  the  power  to  offset
far-reaching real effects – for example the effects on high-tech and related industries of the slowdown
in  the  US,  and  the  effect  on  tourism,  construction,  and  agriculture  of  the  security-related
events  –  without  our  having  to  pay  the  price  of  a  rise  in  the  balance  of  payments  deficit  and
accelerated inflation. Above all we must bear in mind that price stability is a system based on habit,
and it takes time to acquire new habits.
What is financial stability?
As  awareness  of  the  importance  of  price  stability  increased  in  recent  years,  so  did  worldwide
recognition of the fact that a country aiming for sustainable growth must attain financial stability too.
Financial crises have been a standard feature of advanced and emerging economies in the last two
decades, Israel among them.
BIS Review 57/2001
1
Such crises are characterized by wide fluctuations in prices of assets (real estate and shares) and in
the exchange rate, and by bankruptcies, or severe hardship, of financial institutions. A list of the most
prominent examples of such crises in Israel in the last twenty years includes:
 
Persistent government difficulties in selling bonds at the beginning of the 1980s against the
background of a two-digit deficit in terms of GDP, and three-digit inflation;
The bank shares crisis of 1983;
The  unrestrained  acceleration  of  real  estate  prices  which  accompanied  the  large-scale
immigration of the 1990s;
The bursting of the stock-exchange bubble in 1994;
The imposition of limitations on the old pension funds in 1995 as part of a recovery program,
in the light of their huge actuarial deficits;
The provident-fund crisis in summer 1996.
   
Several smaller crises also occurred en route, such as:
 
 
The banks’ “special offer” of loans for the purchase of mutual funds in 1993;
The  large  devaluation  in  October  1998,  and  the  growing  awareness  of  the  significance  of
exchange-rate risk, which had hitherto been considered a problem for the Bank of Israel to
tackle. This referred to the threat to banks’ stability not as a result of their own exposure, but
of their customers’ unrestrained exposure.
The lack of resources in the mortgage market which added to the problems facing the real
estate industry in trying to adjust in the period following the influx of immigrants.
 The threats to financial stability in Israel
Financial crises occur for two main reasons:
The  first  is  mismanagement  of  financial  institutions.  Dealing  with  this  falls  within  the  province  of
supervision, and I will not here go into the question of supervision of the financial markets, except to
say that a mechanism for proper coordination between the various supervisory authorities in Israel’s
economy is sorely needed, and it is a pity that it has not yet been activated.
The second is artificial restrictions that were imposed by the authorities at some time or other on the
mechanism  of  the market.  The  removal  of  such  restrictions  is  essential  if  financial  crises  are  to  be
avoided. The major ones are:
Earmarked bonds
1. 
The arrangement regarding bonds earmarked for the pension funds provides the clearest example of
such restrictions on the market mechanism. This arrangement systematically destroys the market for
tradable government bonds, the existence of which is one of the preconditions for a market for private
bonds, providing the banking system with a basis for pricing for the system of medium- and long-term
deposits and credit.
This phenomenon of earmarked bonds will spread even more quickly
 
if the required tax reform assigning the tax benefits on pension savings mainly to savings for
retirement is introduced;
if the budget constraint on tax relief requires a distinction to be made between savings which
entitle the member to a pension and lump sum savings for retirement;
if the move from unfunded to funded pensions follows the planned path;
and if a Compulsory Pension Law is passed incorporating the rules which apply currently to
the pension funds.
  The  best  way  out  of  the  earmarked  bonds  arrangement  is  similar  to  the  method  used  in  the  life
insurance  field  in  the  transition  from  guaranteed  yield  life  insurance  schemes  to  profit-sharing
schemes. That is:
2
BIS Review 57/2001
  not  to  change  the  rules  in  the  existing  new  pension  funds,  but  to  close  them  to  new
members;
to ensure that pension funds established from now on are based only on the market. If the
government can support pension savings and wishes to do so beyond granting tax benefits,
it would better do so directly vis-à-vis pensioners, and on a means tested basis.
The crawling exchange-rate band
2. 
The band is intended to contain, currently within fairly wide limits, possible fluctuations of the rate of
exchange.  It  is  well  known  that  the  conditions  which  brought  about  the  creation  of  the  band
disappeared long ago:
 
Initially the band served as an advanced version of the exchange rate, as a nominal anchor
for inflation. The exchange rate has not had this role to play for many years;
Then, with the transition to an upward-sloping band, the slope of the band was defined as
reflecting differences between inflation in Israel and that in other countries; these too have
disappeared;
Next,  in  the  wake  of  the  development  of  high-tech  industry,  capital  import  for  investment
began on a large scale. This capital inflow is not connected with differences in interest rates
or in inflation between Israel and other countries, so that it is illogical to limit exchange-rate
fluctuations because of it;
While these changes were taking place, and as we agreed in 1994 to allow the market to
determine the rate of exchange, a domestic foreign-exchange market developed. It involved
domestic banks and foreign financial institutions. Daily turnover is growing, and the market
has  low  volatility.  The  fact  that  the  Bank  of  Israel  avoids  market  intervention,  and  the
experience of external financial shocks have led to a better awareness among the public of
exchange-rate risk. This had a dual effect:
a.
b.
Speculative activity is a rarity in the market.
When assets and liabilities portfolios are being put together, interest-rate differentials
between  Israel  and  abroad,  which  have  existed  for  a  long  time  and  still  exist  are
outweighed by exchange-rate risk. Consequently, it is difficult to discern a change in
the composition of assets and liabilities portfolios in response to changes in interest-
rate differentials around their current level, so that this component of capital flows has
hardly affected the rate of exchange.
In  other  words,  interest-rate  differentials  do  not  explain  why  the  actual  rate  of
exchange is close to the bottom limit of the band. The main reasons for the closeness
lie in the inflow of long-term capital coupled with the upward slope of the limit of the
band.  For  the  sake  of  accuracy  we  should  add  the  recent  weakness  of  the  euro
against the dollar.
On the other hand, protecting the lower limit of the band will cause financial complications:
 
The  purchase  of  foreign  currency  to  lead  towards  a  new  equilibrium  must  be  undertaken
while prices are falling. The current positive slope, even if it falls to zero, does not allow this
to happen, so that it is a non-stabilizing factor.
The  obligation  to  purchase  foreign  currency  means  that  the  initiative  in  implementing
monetary policy is transferred to the importers of capital, although they have no intention of
participating in such management. They import capital according to their own needs, and not
to inject into the economy in an ordered manner the liquidity it requires. It is clear that under
such conditions monetary control may be affected.
The  instruments  of  absorption  available  to  the  Bank  of  Israel  to  neutralize  the  injection
deriving from the purchase of foreign currency are in the form of the banks’ deposits in the
Bank.  The  banks  already  deposit  about  a  fifth  of  their  unindexed  sources  in  the  Bank  of
Israel as a result of the problematic defense of the lower limit of the band in the years 1995–
97. A recurrence of such an episode would increase the banks’ dependence on the Bank of
Israel, a complete contradiction of the successful policy of deregulation pursued in the first
     BIS Review 57/2001
3
 half of the 1990s. Such increased dependence may raise questions concerning the banks’
stability.
Under such circumstances the Bank of Israel would again have to choose how to deal with
the losses inherent in such an activity. It could transfer them to the banks by paying them a
similar rate of interest on their NIS deposits in the Bank of Israel to the rate it receives on its
foreign-currency investments. The banks would of course pass this on to their customers by
cutting the interest they pay their depositors and raising the interest they charge borrowers.
And then there would be complaints about the high banking spread. Alternatively, the Bank
of Israel could record the losses in its books, as it did on the previous occasion. In the final
analysis this  cost  is  of  course  borne  by  the  taxpayer,  and  I  believe  that  the  last  thing  the
government wants to do is to raise the tax burden in such a roundabout way.
We should bear in mind that we cannot evaluate in advance the importance of such a course of action.
We know that on the last occasion, the Bank of Israel purchased $ 16.5 billion. An increase of only $ 1
billion  in  the  money  supply  would  currently  mean  a  rise  of  about  4  percent,  whereas  an  annual
increase of 10 percent is considered too fast.  The simplest solution is to abolish the exchange-rate
band. If the Bank of Israel has to defend it, the end result would be its abolition in any case, but after
incurring a high and unnecessary price. It is preferable to take such a step on our own initiative, and
not under pressure from the market.
The ceiling on Treasury bills issues
3.
By law Treasury bills are an instrument for carrying out monetary policy, but we cannot fully use them
for this purpose because the creator of the tool also limited its quantity. In other words: Yes, you have
an inflation target. You want tools for the job? Improvise!
The outcome is that instead of implementing monetary policy via the capital market, we do so via the
banks, a more expensive and less efficient method. Why must we act in this tortuous way? To find the
answer to this question we may have to go back to the traditional work methods of the pre-State era.
If  the  story  were  to  end  with  the  improvisations  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  so  be  it.  The  rate  of  interest
would be, all in all, a little higher than it could have been. But this absurd limitation causes consumers
and the economy real harm. In any normal country the Treasury bill market provides the basis for the
government  bond  market.  As  such  it  also  provides  the  infrastructure  for  nonbank  financial
intermediation. In Israel, it strengthens the banks’ monopolistic hold over the money market.
The implications are unequivocal:
 
The banking spread in the unindexed sector is higher than required, to the disadvantage of
depositors and borrowers;
It  is  another  obstacle  to  the  development  of  the  market  for  tradable  securities,  short-term
commercial paper, as an alternative to bank credit;
It  harms  the  economy’s  ability  to  withstand  financial  crises,  as  the  economy  is  totally
dependent on the banks for financial intermediation.
  The Treasury bill ceiling causes persistent damage, and it should be abolished. It increases the cost of
monetary policy, and causes harm to consumers and the economy as it acts as a millstone around its
neck and prevents the development of a nonbank money market.
Can the horizon of monetary policy be broadened?
Price  stability  is  measured  by  changes  in  the  CPI.  The  question  is  whether  there  is  a  connection
between  the  stability  in  the  stock  market  and  foreign  currency  market  on  the  one  hand,  and  price
stability on the other.
It should be emphasized that the question is not whether the central bank should also have objectives
in the securities market (for  example,  to  prevent  sharp  falls  in  the  stock market)  and  in  the  foreign
currency market (for example, to navigate the exchange rate along a particular route). It should not!
As long as the arrangement of earmarked bonds, the exchange-rate band, and the Treasury bill ceiling
exist,  the  central  bank  must  steer  clear  from  any  intervention  in  the  financial  markets,  both  in  its
actions, and in its statements. A similar conclusion applies, and to a similar extent, if fiscal discipline is
4
BIS Review 57/2001
not maintained, and if the performance of the budget does not lead to a lowering of the government
debt/GDP ratio towards the level accepted as the norm worldwide.
When these limitations no  longer  apply,  we  will  have  to  reexamine  the  normal  horizon  of  monetary
policy.  When  there  are  no  restrictions  limiting  the  central  bank’s  choice  of  policy  instruments,  and
when the culture of price stability has taken root, the Bank of Israel will be able to include reference to
the financial markets among its functions, with the aim of contributing to their stability.
BIS Review 57/2001
5
