Jean-Claude Trichet: Preserving financial stability in an increasingly globalised
world
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  at  the  European
Financial Markets Convention (EFMC 2001), Paris, 15 June 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  European  Financial  Markets  Convention.  The
impressively  dense program of the Convention illustrates that the  integration  of financial markets  in
Europe is a major and multi-dimensional challenge. The Banque de France and the Eurosystem have
a strong interest in all these issues. In particular, a safe and efficient functioning of the clearing and
settlement systems of the euro area is crucial for the stability and efficiency of the financial system and
for  the  good  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The  consolidation  of  the  market  infrastructure,
currently underway, will contribute to reaching these objectives through the fostering of market liquidity
and the reduction of transaction costs. There is however no single path for such a consolidation: it will
be up to the market to select the way which best fits its needs, while it will be up to regulators and to
the Eurosystem to make sure that the resulting infrastructure is adequately safe, efficient and reliable.
I would like now to share with you some views from the broader perspective of financial globalisation.
As you know, the globalisation of the world economy and the development of financial markets were
driven by two key factors:
 
firstly, financial deregulation -reinforced in Europe by the setting up of the single market and
subsequently  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union-  which  liberalised  capital  flows  and
enhanced competition among financial sectors;
and secondly, technical and financial innovation, which simultaneously paved the way for the
creation of financial markets that are deep, liquid and interconnected.
 What  is  interesting  to  stress  regarding  financial  globalisation  is  that  the  interaction  of  free  capital
movements  within  interconnected  markets,  increasing  integration  of  market  segments  and  hedging
opportunities provided by new financial instruments have allowed a better fit between the financing
capacities  and borrowing requirements  of governments, households and  companies.  The  use  of
market interest rates, which represent the markets’ consensus on the risk incurred at a moment, as a
driving force is fully beneficial to an efficient allocation of capital.
Lowering  the  barriers  to  entering  the  financial  sector,  the  free  circulation  of  information  and  fiercer
competition  have  also  brought  financial  markets  closer  to  a  situation  of  pure  and  perfect
competition, which is beneficial to all consumers.
Last but not least, the growth of market financing has allowed savings to be channelled directly into
investment.  Reducing  the  share  of  bank  financing,  and  consequently  that  of  money  creation,  has
enabled  a  less  inflationary  financing  of  the  economy.  Thus  increased,  monetary  stability  has
produced tangible and positive effects and contributed decisively to a strong and sustainable growth
of the world economy.
However, while globalisation and financial integration have decisively contributed to improving overall
economic efficiency, experience also suggests that financial asset prices have experienced in some
circumstances somewhat erratic developments. The rapid emergence of the "new economy" bubble in
1999 and early 2000- followed by a series of sharp corrections- illustrated the potential of markets for
providing funding to the real economy, particularly to the most innovative sectors; but it demonstrated
again  the  tendency  of  markets  to  over-react,  moving  from  excessive  optimism  to  disproportionate
pessimism, with the ensuing negative consequences for the behaviour of firms and households.
Thus  financial  authorities  have  been  confronted  with  boom-bust  episodes  which  must  be  carefully
monitored,  since  they  could  affect  global  monetary  and  financial  stability.  I  would  like  therefore  to
consider two issues here:
 
First, some factors encouraging excessively homogeneous market behaviour may hinder a
smooth and efficient functioning of the markets, and
BIS Review 54/2001
1
 Second, the authorities might reflect on some ways of fostering more diverse behaviour on
the markets.
Some factors encouraging excessively homogeneous market behaviour may hinder a smooth
and efficient functioning of the markets
Even  though  fixed  interest  rate  markets  have  a  tendency  to  be  somewhat  contra-cyclical,  financial
asset price have tended to fluctuate widely and sometimes deviate from economic fundamentals for
long periods of time.
Experience suggests that asset price cycles continue to be very substantial
In  the  last  two  decades  market  forces  have  indeed  tended  to  cause  misalignments  between
equilibrium and actual asset prices. Stock markets in particular have experienced this phenomenon.
But  in foreign  exchange markets as well,  prices have also a tendency to  diverge substantially  from
their  “equilibrium  level”,  although  those  divergences  have  been  contained  through  fruitful  G7
co-operation during the last 15 years.
In  addition,  some  markets  have  seen  an  increase  in  volatility  and  frequent  volatility  peaks.
Although  cyclical  moves  should  be  clearly  distinguished  from  volatility,  the  latter  may  in  some
circumstances exceed  what can  be considered optimal, making the  price  determination  mechanism
less efficient and thus contributing to misalignments.
Moreover, as demonstrated by a number of financial crises during the last two decades, contagion
among  countries  and  across  financial  markets  has  been  frequent.  As  a  result,  investors  have
faced asset price fluctuations that might be more synchronised than before.
Lastly, the connections between credit, asset price and business cycles have tended to amplify
cyclical swings. Credit, in particular, is playing an important role in asset price fluctuations. Observed
in particular during the “speculative bubbles” of the 1980s and early 1990s, this trend has persisted.
Another example is provided by boom-bust cycles in asset prices which have often been associated
with sharp economic contractions.
Several factors are in play when financial asset prices experience amplified moves
I shall give a few examples.
Some market participants have become more inclined to engage in "short-termism", that is, they might
be  too  preoccupied  with  their  short-term  results.  This  trend  might  result,  in  particular,  from  growing
pressure to yield immediate financial results that are not necessarily sustainable. Marking-to-market all
assets  and  liabilities  has  also  contributed  to  this  widespread  focus  on  immediate  financial
performances. This focus on short-term performance can translate into additional volatility in the price
discovery process: the shorter the investment horizon of market participants, the bigger the impact of
any new information on prices.
Mimetic behaviour is by no means a new phenomenon on financial markets. However, technological
developments  on  markets  may  have  gradually  reinforced  this  type  of  behaviour.  The  spread  of
benchmarking, which allows fund managers and clients to measure performance against that of other
funds,  together  with  the  growing  competition  within  the  sector,  appears  to  have  increased  such
mimetic behaviour. Some operators have come to the conclusion that it is better to be wrong along
with everybody else, rather than take the risk of being right, or  wrong, alone. A striking example of
rational mimetic  behaviour  is  the  influence  that  hedge  funds  enjoyed,  a  few  years  ago,  as  "opinion
leaders" and trend makers. By its nature, trend following amplifies the  imbalance that may at some
point  affect  a  market,  potentially  leading  to  vicious  circles  of  price  adjustments  and  liquidation  of
positions.
The  spread  of  certain  fund  management  techniques,  in  particular  index  management,  which  has
proven  very  popular  on  equity  markets, may  have  contributed  to  amplifying  movements  in  financial
asset prices. This technique  endeavours to match as accurately as possible developments in stock
market  benchmark  indices.  It  therefore  mechanistically  leads  managers  to  accentuate  current  price
trends by buying stocks that are on the rise and selling those that are falling. It can be argued that
2
BIS Review 54/2001
index funds distort the price of the targeted indexes and that, as a result, the indices might  end  up
creating rather than measuring performance.
The impact of risk management techniques on market dynamics is particularly enlightening with regard
to the question of asset price overshooting. Value-at-risk calculations have become a crucial element
of the standards approach used  by market participants to  evaluate  the  risk  inherent  in  their  market
activities and set up exposure limits. Of course, central banks and financial institutions should continue
to  encourage  the  use  of  these  instruments.  But,  in  times  of  financial  turmoil,  the  growing  use  of
homogeneous risk management techniques by financial intermediaries has had the paradoxical effect
of amplifying the initial shock and the spill-over effect. Regardless of the intrinsic qualities of these risk
management tools, their growing use may have produced some adverse consequences. When market
players rely on converging risk evaluations, they tend to take the same decisions at the same time,
thus amplifying the initial shock to prices and trading volumes.
All  these  factors  have  one  consequence  in  common:  they  encourage  homogenous  behaviour  and
reactions to the detriment of the diversity that is indispensable to the smooth functioning of financial
markets.
For this reason, the authorities might reflect on some ways – in conjunction with the financial
industry – to foster behavioural diversity in global markets
Monetary policy alone cannot guarantee the stability of financial systems, which may be jeopardised
by  shocks  from  both  the  financial  and  the  real  economies.  However,  it  must  be  stressed  that  an
adequate  monetary  policy  is  a  fundamental  prerequisite  to  smooth  the  financial  cycles.  An
appropriate monetary stance is crucial for banks and monetary participants to base their decisions on
solid ground. The objective of price stability lowers economic agents’ uncertainty regarding future price
developments.  In  addition,  by  committing  itself  to  a  long-term  objective,  the  central  bank  reduces
market uncertainty, which can be a source of disruption to the financial economy. Interest rates and
money supply are less volatile as a result, which is of benefit to the long-term growth of the economy.
However important, a sound monetary policy is not enough. To safeguard the smooth functioning of
the  markets,  and  in  particular  an  efficient  pricing  mechanism,  it  is  essential  to  protect,  and  even
reinforce, the diversity of behaviour on the markets. This necessary diversity is merely the echo of
the different time horizons, strategies and reaction functions of market players. On this point, I would
like to explore a few possible avenues for future action.
Strengthen the continuing efforts aiming at market transparency
Experience  shows  that  uncertainty  and  incomplete  information  are  determining  factors  in  mimetic
behaviour. These shortfalls in market transparency make mimetic behaviour seem rational to agents,
who prefer to follow bigger participants, who are thought to be better informed, rather than develop
their own analysis. Strengthening transparency therefore continues to be a priority.
One of the objectives of transparency is to enable better differentiation of borrower creditworthiness. A
key feature of mimetic behaviour is that all borrowers are "tarred with the same brush". So when one
emerging economy encounters difficulties, all neighbouring countries, or countries that share common
characteristics,  are  treated  in  the  same  way  –  regardless  of  their  actual  economic  and  financial
situation. The same applies to businesses operating in the same economic sector. Transparency has
substantially increased since the Asian crisis, thanks to a solid global consensus. Let us continue and
reinforce these efforts.
Take into account the medium and long-term perspective of some market participants
Some investors, such as pension funds and  insurance companies,  have  to  invest  funds  in  order  to
enable their customers to build up wealth over the medium and long term, notably in preparation for
retirement.  Consequently,  these  types  of  investors  are  supposed  to  behave  differently  from  traders
and short-term investors, who are working on a very different time horizon. But at times it seems that
they are all pushed to behave in much the same way, on the basis of a very short-term horizon.
To  preserve,  and  even  restore,  their  specific  investment  approach,  these  investors  might  be  more
shielded from excessive short-term pressures. This objective raises considerable difficulties, because
it touches on the way in which the performances of medium and long-term funds (including pension
BIS Review 54/2001
3
funds)  and  life  insurance  companies  are  assessed.  In  other  words,  this  objective  concerns  the
accounting  standards  and  practices  they  use.  It  implies  that  some  rules  and  standards  would  be
adapted to the medium and long-term horizon used by these entities. I have no answer at this stage. I
am only asking the question.
Diversify the risk management tools of financial institutions
As I mentioned earlier, even the best techniques can have adverse effects when used by too many
participants. To some degree, this is perhaps what has happened to value-at-risk based techniques,
which have been massively adopted by the financial industry. Because they use more or less similar
parameters  and  suffer  from  the  same  weaknesses  –  for  example,  they  took  inadequate  account  of
market liquidity at the time of the 1998 crisis –, such tools tend to give converging signals to those that
use them. They thus encourage the mimetic behaviour that I discussed previously.
The fact that some market participants are more sophisticated than the average is a guarantee that
standardisation will remain limited, since they will develop techniques that are little used by others. In
this  respect,  I  must  stress  that  the  Basle  Committee,  as  illustrated  by  the  new  Capital  Accord,  is
encouraging banks to use more sophisticated and accurate risk measurements techniques.
In addition, supervisors might help –and obviously they are already helping- to spread the idea that
financial  institutions  should  round  out  their  current  range  of  risk  management  tools  to  include
extensive  use  of  stress  testing.  This  technique  offers  a  better  reflection  of  the  varying  situations  of
institutions and of the diverse perceptions that institutions have of exceptional events. The application
of stress testing techniques and their results are thus inherently more diversified than those resulting
from methods based on the value-at-risk approach.
These  are  only  examples  of  options  to  help  improve  the  functioning  of  markets.  There  is  probably
some merit in an overall review of regulatory, accounting and tax rules and regulations, as well as of
codes of good conduct and good practices, and of structural developments of market themselves, to
identify possible amendments and improvements that could help protect and enhance the behavioural
and conceptual diversity of modern financial markets.
In conclusion, let me stress the important role played  by  central  banks  in  preserving  monetary  and
financial stability in an increasingly globalised world.
The  recent  years  have  shown  the  benefits  of  monetary  stability  in  terms  of  growth  in  a  globalised
world.  It  is  of  course  closely  linked  to  central  bank’s  independence,  which  is  no  longer  a  matter  of
debate.
Financial  authorities  are  nevertheless  faced  with  a  new  challenge,  which  is  to  strengthen  financial
stability  in  a  context  of  amplified  financial  cycles.  I  would  like  to  stress  what  I  feel  is  the  highly
complementary nature of price stability and financial stability objectives: price stability is the bedrock
on which financial stability is built.
Central banks have a undoubtedly special responsibility due to their position at the heart of financial
systems:
 
 
they contribute directly to supplying liquidity to the economy,
their close and constant contact with credit institutions gives them a thorough understanding
of banking systems,
they contribute to banking supervision,
last  but  not  least,  central  banks  are  responsible  for  a  safe  and  efficient  functioning  of
payment  systems  and,  at  least  for  some  of  them,  of  securities  clearing  and  settlement
systems.
 I thank you for your attention.
4
BIS Review 54/2001
