Carlos Massad: New economy, old cycle?
Remarks  by  Mr  Carlos  Massad,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  in  a  panel  discussion
organised by the Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland, 10 June 2001.
 Introduction
1.
The new economy involves changes: faster and cheaper communications,  higher  labor productivity,
savings in the supply chain in the business to business sector, and improvements in inventory control.
It also involves growing integration of world markets. As a counterpart, we are experiencing increased
volatility in stock prices and terms of trade. Krugman has gone even further, to assert that “growing
integration does predispose the world economy to more crisis”1. What are the consequences of these
changes  on  emerging  market  economies?  Furthermore,  we  Central  Bankers  have  faced  many
changes,  and  must  be  prepared  for  changes,  whatever  their  source.  How  should  these  economies
respond to those changes? These are critical issues today for almost every emerging economy.
Any impact on the real economy?
2.
Globalization  of  international  financial  markets  over  the  last  decade,  a  by-product  of  cheaper  and
faster communications, has led to an increase in asset return correlation around the world. Swings in
the Dow Jones, NASDAQ and in fixed rate instruments lead to adjustments in portfolio decisions the
world over that have implications for the real economy. The higher the correlation of returns, the lower,
on this ground, the incentive for short-term capital movements.
However other, well-known transmission channels from portfolio adjustments to the real economy are
wealth effects on consumption and Tobin´s q on investment.
Evidence  in  industrial  countries  suggests  that  the  semielasticity  of  consumption  to  a  permanent
increase in stock prices is of the order to 0.04 after two years2. In emerging economies, where only a
limited number of households own stocks in asset markets, the effect of changes in stock prices on
consumption is substantially lower than in the developed world. In addition, as asset prices become
more volatile it becomes more difficult to differentiate between permanent and transitory components.
There is another channel through which the new economy may affect real activity levels, and that is
productivity3. Several academic studies have examined the factors behind the spur in U.S. productivity
during  the  last  decade,  assigning  particular  attention  to  the  new  economy  and  the  effects  of  the
computer revolution. This issue is still under debate4.
The fact is that the internet revolution has increased the speed of information transmission, making
information  cheaper  and  more  widely  available.  This  acceleration  is  quickly  changing  the  business
environment,  leading  to  significant  savings  in  the  business-to-business  supply  chain.  One  of  the
implications  of  this  increase  in  the  availability  of  information  is  a  great  improvement  in  inventory
management. The optimal level of inventories is becoming smaller, so that the real economy reacts
faster  to  demand  and/or  supply  shocks,  reducing  both  the  length  and  the  width  of  the  cycle.  And
shorter cycles make for a more effective monetary policy.
                                                     
1  Krugman, P. “Crisis: the price of globalization?” Paper presented at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2000.
2  World Economic Outlook, May 2001, Chapter III: “Three Current Policy Issues: Impact of the Global Technology Correction
on the Real Economy”, page. 57-66.
3  Brookings 
Institution 
Internet”.  www.brook.edu/es/research/areas/it/ipi-
bisummary.htm. Blinder, Alan (2000): “The Internet and the New Economy”, Brookings Institution Policy Brief N°60, June.
Altig  D.  y  Peter  Rupert  (1999):  “Growth  and  the  Internet:  Surfing  to  Prosperity?”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Cleveland
Economic Commentary, September.
“The  Economic  Payoff 
(2001): 
from 
the 
4  For  instance,  Robert  Gordon  (Does  the  “New  Economy”  Measure  Up  to  the  Great  Inventions  of  the  Past?  Journal  of
Economic Perspectives, Fall 2000) mentioned “the new economy has meant little to the 88 percent of the economy outside
of durable manufacturing; in part of the economy, trend growth in multifactor productivity has actually decelerated, despite a
massive investment boom in computers and related equipment”. Page 72.
BIS Review 53/2001
1
Optimal  inventory  management  in  an  increasingly  open  international  economy  will  not  only  imply
shorter,  but  also,  most  probably,  more  synchronic  cycles.  A  by-product  of  this  development  is  an
expansion of the geographical limits of optimum currency areas à la Mundell.
Terms of trade shocks and emerging economies
3.
The  synchronization  of  the  cycle  increases  volatility  in  commodity  markets,  an  important  source  of
international transmission of the cycle to a good number of emerging economies. The synchronization
and  shortening  of  cycles  will  probably  also  increase  the  volatility  of  international  interest  rates.
Economies with liquidity constraints and limited access to international financial markets will suffer the
most. The policy prescription here is to strengthen fundamentals and open and deepen the integration
of both product and capital markets with the rest of the world.
The effect of synchronization and shortening of the cycle on international interest rates will probably
also  be  an  increase  in  the  volatility  of  those  rates.  Coverage  against  interest  rate  volatility  is  an
additional argument in favor of integrating the emerging country economies with that of the world.
Monetary policy
4.
Another  by-product  of  the  new  information  technology  is  the  blurring  of  the  traditional  definitions  of
money.  It is  now clearly  possibly for the non-banking private sector to create  money  substitutes  on
demand. This development will tend to render inefficient the regulation of limited definitions of money
as a tool to influence economic activity and prices. If this is so, interest rates will reign unchallenged as
a  monetary  policy  tool,  while  inflation  targeting  will  be  in  the  forefront  as  a  nominal  anchor  for  the
economy. By the way, under these conditions it will become extremely difficult to differentiate between
financial and non-financial firms.
Until a greater synchronization of the cycle becomes evident, the need for an independent monetary
policy  will  necessarily  lead  to  floating  exchange  rates.  As  the  cycle,  or  perhaps  I  should  say  if  the
cycle, becomes synchronized all over the world, the need for independent monetary policies may fade
away.  Gradually,  the  number  of  currencies  in  the  world  will  decrease  through  time.  This  is  not
economic  fiction:  a  tendency  in  this  direction  is  already  present  among  smaller  countries  in  Latin
America with large trade and investment relationships with the United States.
However, a world tendency to a significant decrease in the number of currencies is probably a very
long run one, where Keynes’ dictum on the long run comes to mind. In any case, I am convinced that,
as Rogoff argues in a recent paper5, it may not be desirable to pursue currency consolidation all the
way.
Meanwhile, in the short and medium run, the increase in productivity provides more room for monetary
policy  to  maneuver.  Productivity  growth  alleviate  inflationary  pressures  providing  more  room  for
monetary policy to exert its short run influence on the real economy.
Flexibility
5.
The  key  word  for  an  emerging  economy  in  a  changing  world  is  flexibility:  in  exchange  rates  and
interest rates, to accommodate shocks without concentrating their effects in one particular market; in
factor markets, both labor and capital, to minimize the cost of transition from one state of the economy
to another.
The task before us, in an emerging economy like Chile, is to increase flexibility in all markets. We have
been working on that in recent years following a careful, gradual approach, to make sure that we put in
place the necessary prerequisites to introduce additional flexibility with minimum costs. An example of
this approach is the way in which we moved first from limited exchange rate flexibility to a wider band
and then to a full, clean float, at a time of our own choosing, September 1999. This was done only
after the Central Bank had put in place hedging instruments in the market, had stimulated banks to do
likewise, and  had  established currency mismatch regulations in the financial  sector.  Also  incentives
were  provided  to  the  financial  sector  to  take  into  consideration  currency  mismatches  of  their  client
when  evaluating  their  risks.  The  Central  Bank  has  not  intervened  at  all  in  the  forex  market  since
                                                     
5  Rogoff, K “On Why not a global currency”, paper presented to the American Economic Association, January 5, 2001.
2
BIS Review 53/2001
floating,  and  interest  rate  policy  has  not  been  based  on  an  exchange  rate  target  consideration  but
rather  on  the  achievement  of  the  inflation  target.  The  volatility  of  the  peso-dollar  exchange  rate
increased after floating, but it is the second most stable among floaters, after Canada6.
A  clean  float,  once  settled,  makes  removing  exchange  restrictions  easier  and  less  risky,  and  the
remaining restrictions in Chile were eliminated last April.
We are convinced that flexibility is the key policy approach to face a rapidly changing world. However,
flexibility can be made fully operational only on the basis of strong fundamentals. In fact, exchange
rate flexibility implies taxing the capacity of the financial system to adapt, as  well  as  that  of  private
enterprise to adjust. Moving towards exchange rate flexibility implies a structural change, as the costs
of  exchange  rate  risk  coverage  fall  upon  the  private  sector,  rather  than  the  Central  Bank  or  the
government. To be successful, a change of this magnitude requires strong fundamentals.
The role of fiscal policy must be emphasized in this context. Predictability of public sector reactions to
shocks is a must for the appropriate functioning of all markets. Chile has recently moved to a fiscal
policy guided by rules. The budget is planned in such a way that, under conditions of a long-term rate
of growth of the economy and long-term prices for copper, a surplus of 1% of GDP is achieved. The
level  of  expenditures  is  maintained  through  the  cycle  while  government  reserve  moves  with  it,
generating larger surpluses during booms and smaller surpluses, or deficits, in a slowdown.
Today, Chilean macroeconomic policy is defined by a monetary policy based on inflation targeting, the
free float of the Chilean peso and a fiscal policy guided by rules. We expect that this policy set-up,
together with well-established strong institutions in all areas will  help us ride the  waves of a rapidly
changing world. A particularity of the Chilean macroeconomic policy is the fact that the Central Bank
uses  a  real  interest  rate  as  its  policy  instrument,  but  this  is  a  subject  that  require  more  time  for
discussion than is available today.
Pending tasks: further flexibility in factor markets and further integration with the world economy.
My conclusion: the new economy will eventually bring with it a new cycle, more synchronic all over the
world. Preparations for such an environment include additional flexibility in all markets.
 Implied Currency Volatilities. Source: Bloomberg, JPMorgan.
                                                     
6 
Mexican Peso/US$
Chilean Peso/US$ 
Canada/US$
Real/US$ 
Yen/US$ 
US$/Euro 
10.6
9.0
5.6
9.2
9.7
11.2
BIS Review 53/2001
3
