Ian Macfarlane: Statement to House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Economics, Finance and Public Administration
Opening statement by Mr IJ Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Melbourne,
11 May 2001.
 Mr Chairman, a lot has happened in the economy since we last met in Wagga Wagga at the beginning
of December. This has resulted in a significant shift in the stance of monetary policy. I think I owe it to
the Committee to give a full account of these developments and the thinking behind our reactions.
There  were  two  major  changes  to  the  economic  landscape  that  occurred  shortly  after  we  met  in
December. The first was that the outlook for the world economy changed rather sharply in a downward
direction at the turn of the year. This was mainly a result of developments in the United States, but it
was  widespread  enough  to  cause  significant  downward  revisions  to  world  growth  prospects.  The
second major change was that it became apparent that the Australian economy had been a lot weaker
in the second half of 2000 than we had formerly thought. Although this was information about a period
that had by then passed, and was mainly due to a transitory factor, it had significant implications for
the  development  of  the  economy  in  the  period  ahead.  I  would  now  like  to  explain  these  two
developments more fully, then move on to our monetary policy reaction, before concluding with some
comments on the current outlook.
The slowdown in the US economy is something that had been widely expected for a few years, but the
economy kept surprising everyone  by  powering ahead. Almost six months ago, it became apparent
that the slowdown was in process, and had the potential to be very pronounced. The United States
had several economic imbalances that, fortunately, we do not have. Their share prices were (and still
are) very high by historical standards, there  had  been  an  investment  boom  in  plant  and  equipment
(particularly  IT  and  telecommunications)  which  was  probably  unsustainable,  and  the  US  dollar  was
high  and  rising.  The  US  Fed  moved  very  quickly  to  lower  interest  rates.  Such  action  could  not  be
expected to prevent a slowing in the economy, but it would reduce the chances of something more
serious, such as a recession occurring.
The first Fed easing on 3 January was a clear recognition that the world business cycle had entered a
new phase,  and this had implications for  all  countries.  We soon  saw  easings  of  monetary  policy  in
Canada, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Switzerland, Sweden and most Asian countries — and, of
course, Australia — the Euro area was the exception. The slowing US economy, and particularly the
cutbacks in investment in computing and electronics, also has had an impact on exports from Asia,
with the result that aggregate east Asian GDP growth in the final quarter of 2000 seems to have been
about zero (leaving aside the special case of China). The Euro area has been less affected, but there
is  evidence  from  the  manufacturing  sector  and  from  business  surveys  that  growth  is  edging  down
nevertheless.
I turn now to the second factor, namely the weakness in the Australian economy in the second half of
2000,  and  its  flow-on  effects  to  the  first  part  of  this  year.  As  I  have  conceded  before,  we  did  not
foresee the extent of this weakness, and I am not aware of anyone who did, although some probably
got closer than us. If you had told me before the event that the fall in house-building, a sector which
only accounts for 5 per cent of the economy, would be large enough to outweigh reasonable growth in
the other 95 per cent of the economy, I would not have believed you. Our analysis of other countries’
GST experience had suggested a much smaller fall than actually occurred.
I am not saying that the housing contraction was the only thing that happened to the economy; other
things have also clearly slowed. But it was the thing that turned a relatively unexceptional slowdown
into a small contraction. Of course, what we were witnessing was not the normal cyclical development
of  an  economy,  but  the  transitional  effects  of  a  once-in-a-generation  structural  change  to  the  tax
system. The fact that it led to a negative number for the change in GDP had a big effect on people’s
confidence. We saw this most clearly in the reaction to the release of the December quarter national
accounts in early March. The Australian dollar lost 3 US cents over the next ten days to fall below 50
US cents for the first time. At about the same time, consumer confidence, which had until then held
above its long-term average, fell sharply to well below that average. The reaction was so large that a
BIS Review 38/2001
1
number of commentators raised the possibility that the country could "talk itself into a recession". I am
pleased to say that the mood has improved somewhat since that time.
There  were  some  other  signs  of  weakness  during  the  second  half  of  last  year,  such  as  the  fall  in
business  confidence.  This  was  something  we  spoke  about  at  the  December  hearing,  when  I
suggested  it  could  be  largely  due  to  the  fall  in  house-building  and  resulting  reductions  in  sales  by
those parts of the manufacturing sector which service the housing sector.
It was difficult for a while to discern the trend in consumption behaviour because of shifts in spending
patterns caused by the introduction of the GST and the Olympic Games. But now that the dust has
settled, it is clear that consumption, while doing quite well over recent months, is no longer growing at
the heady rates it was a year or 18 months ago. Employment also fell for a few months in the second
half of 2000, and there is no doubt that the labour market has softened following the strong growth
recorded  in  the  middle  two  quarters  of  2000.  Again,  however,  the  construction  sector  is  the  main
explanation for the weakness in the second half of last year. Over the period from August last year to
February  this  year,  construction  employment  fell  by  48,000,  while  employment  other  than  in
construction rose by 41,000.
At  the  same  time  as  we  were  receiving  this  information  on  business  confidence,  spending  and
employment, we were also receiving news on inflation. Here the most important data were the CPIs for
the September and December quarters, both of which were below our expectation. They suggested
that  inflation  was  well under control  — in fact,  we  lowered our  estimate  of  underlying  inflation  after
receipt of the December quarter figure in late January — and they also pointed to the possibility that
business profit margins were being squeezed. They thus reinforced the impression that was building
of an economy that was slowing more than expected, in a world that was slowing more than expected,
and  where  current  inflation  and  future  inflation  were  within  the  target  zone  we  aim  for  under  our
inflation-targeting regime for monetary policy.
The decision to ease monetary policy at our first meeting this year was a relatively easy one, and as
you know, we eased again at the following two meetings so that the cash rate fell by 125 basis points
in  a  little  over  two  months.  Collectively,  this  represented  an  uncharacteristically  large  move  and
deserves some explanation. Basically, we realised that a significantly lower level of real interest rates
was required so that the stance of monetary policy would be clearly expansionary in that it would be
supportive of economic activity. We felt we should, and could, get to such a position relatively quickly
for two main reasons:
(i)
We had undergone a relatively abrupt change in our view of the world. As I said before, it
became clear that the world was entering a new phase of its business cycle – a fact that was
recognised in most countries. The fall in house-building, because it brought forward our own
slowdown, reinforced the message from the world.
Because  inflation  was  not  threatening  to  rise  above  our  target,  we  had  no  conflict  of
objectives, and so could act quickly.
(ii)
In view of the foregoing, you will not be surprised to hear that the forecast of GDP growth that I put
before the Committee six months ago has been well and truly overtaken by events. I said that I would
not quibble with Treasury’s figure of 4 per cent for year-on-year growth in the 2000/01 financial year. It
now looks like being about half of that figure, but we would expect considerably stronger growth in the
following year, probably somewhere between 3 and 3½ per cent. Incidentally, this is only the second
time out of the eight occasions that I have been putting these reviews of forecasts before you that we
have over-estimated the outlook for growth; all the others have been small under-estimates.
On inflation, I said last time that it could be approaching 3 per cent by the second half of 2001, that is
after the impact of the GST has dropped out of the four-quarter-ended growth rate. Our current guess,
now that we have two quarters more of CPI data, is about 2½ per cent for the same period.
So far, I have spent most of my time covering  events leading up to  our decision to  ease  monetary
policy, so it is time I moved on to more recent events. As I said before, March was a bad month for the
economy,  mainly  because  people  received  the  news  that  there  had  been  a  decline  in  GDP  in  the
December  quarter.  This  was  a  great  disappointment  to  most  people,  and  they  could  not  easily
understand how such an outcome could have happened so soon after the buoyant conditions of mid-
year. Inevitably, it affected people’s confidence, and their views of the future.
The area where this lack of confidence showed up most visibly was in the exchange rate. On 6 March,
the day before the release of the national accounts data, the Australian dollar was worth 52.2 cents
2
BIS Review 38/2001
and was 49.1 in trade-weighted terms. By 3 April, it had fallen to an intra-day low of 47.75 US cents
and 46.6 in trade-weighted terms — a fall of 9 per cent against the US dollar and 5 per cent against
the TWI. In the process, the Australian dollar set new low points on both these measures, although
against the TWI it was only by a tiny margin.
I mention these details because I want to make two points. The first is that at a very detached and
macro-economic  level,  we  all  know  that  a  low,  and  hence  competitive,  real  exchange  rate  helps  a
country cope more easily with external adversity. Indeed, a floating exchange rate has as one of its
virtues its capacity to automatically bring this about. This is one reason why our exports have been so
strong,  and  why  there  is  a  widespread  opinion  that  the  exchange  rate  is  a  factor  supporting  future
growth in the Australian economy.
The  second  point  is  that  when  you  already  have  a  low  exchange  rate,  further  falls  can  be  very
unsettling, especially if they are accompanied by headlines about new lows being reached and new
barriers  being  breached.  People  inevitably  see  this  as  a  loss  of  international  confidence  in  their
country, and they in turn lose confidence. The falling Australian dollar was a widely cited reason by
respondents  to  the  consumer  sentiment  survey  for  why  their  confidence  had  fallen.  The  fall  in  the
Australian dollar in March did not do the country any good, and it is pleasing to see that it has been
reversed.
April was a much better month than March, and it is possible to discern some signs that confidence is
returning. Internationally, all eyes are still on the United States, where financial markets have gained
confidence over the past month.  All US share  indices have risen appreciably, as  have  bond  yields,
consumers have continued to spend, and the first quarter GDP figure was better than expected. These
developments  are  good  news  for  Australia,  at  least  in  the  short  term.  On  the  other  hand,  US
employment has fallen over the past two months and businesses do not seem to be as cheerful as
financial markets. There is still a lot of uncertainty overhanging the outlook for the US economy.
Domestically, we have also had some developments indicating greater confidence in the outlook. The
stock market has risen by 7 per cent since late March and is again close to record levels, bond yields
have risen, and we have also had the recovery in the exchange rate I referred to earlier. Here, as in
the  United  States,  greater  confidence  returned  to  financial  markets,  even  if  wider  measures  of
business confidence have not shown it. There are also some indications from banks and the Housing
Industry Association that house-building — which had been the chief contractionary force – is in the
process of turning around, and that its upswing could be very pronounced.
Under  these  circumstances,  it  was  perhaps  not  altogether  surprising  that  financial  markets’
expectations  about  monetary  policy  began  to  change.  They  became  less  sure  that  we  would  ease
again in May and, in fact, by the time of the meeting the majority of economists surveyed expected no
change in interest rates.
In our own thinking, we asked the question "what behaviour of ours can most contribute to building
confidence?" At the April meeting, knowing that we still had some more work to do to get interest rates
down to levels that were clearly expansionary, we had decided that a move larger than some people
expected would probably be preferred to a more cautious approach, and might foster confidence.
By May, we had three moves in quick time under our belt. We knew that interest rates were not acting
as a constraint on the economy, but rather were at levels likely to assist growth. With financial markets
slightly  more  upbeat  about  the  outlook,  we  felt  that  a  steady  setting  of  monetary  policy  would  help
confidence. We were also sensitive to the possibility that, on this occasion, a surprise fall in interest
rates could easily cause people to think that "things must be worse than we thought" and prompt the
question "what does the Reserve Bank know that we don’t?" Such a reaction, had it occurred, would
have been counter-productive.
What can we say about the future? Inevitably, we can say less, I suspect, than you would like! Policy
has been returned to an expansionary setting, with the easing "front-loaded". Interest rates are close
to the low points reached in the two most recent episodes of monetary policy easing. Given that fact,
and  given  that  we  see  some  promising  signs  in  the  economy  and  financial  markets,  there  is  a
reasonable chance  that the current  stance  of  policy  will  turn  out  to  be  easy  enough  to  achieve  the
desired results.
But equally, while it is reasonable to expect that the promising trends of late will develop into stronger
momentum for growth, we cannot as yet be confident. This, in turn, means that we cannot be sure that
further monetary policy easing will not be required. The growth outlook rests on various assumptions,
not least that international conditions stabilise before too long, and improve somewhat during 2002.
BIS Review 38/2001
3
That is a reasonable assumption on which to make a central forecast, but we need to be, and are,
alert to the possibility of a weaker outcome, which would have implications for the Australian economy.
We will continue to evaluate new information as it arrives, particularly as it bears on the outlook for
growth and, of course, inflation as compared with our target. We remain prepared to adjust monetary
policy in response to changes in the balance of risks.
4
BIS Review 38/2001
