Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards gaining the competitive edge
Speech  by  Y  Bhg  Tan  Sri  Dato'  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  at  the
Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), held in Kuala Lumpur, 17 September 2001.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Introduction
It  is  indeed  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  have  this  opportunity  to  deliver  this  lecture  on
"Towards  Gaining  the  Competitive  Edge",  organised  by  the  Chartered  Institute  of  Management
Accountants (CIMA). Our quest to gain the competitive edge in this increasingly more difficult global
environment  is  aimed  at  building  the  foundation  on  which  our  future  growth  can  be  secured.  The
emerging developments in the global economy has brought the  issue of competitiveness into sharp
focus.  Increased  competition  and  higher  standards  of  efficiency  and  quality  amidst  intensified
globalisation  have  heightened  attention  on  how  the  Malaysian  economy  can  remain  viable  in  the
global market place. With the emergence of new economies with lower production costs, the challenge
of the global market place can be expected to be heightened.
The issue before us is how Malaysia can gain a competitive edge so as to sustain our growth
prospects and continue to raise our standards of living. What are the factors that would determine
the  competitiveness  of  the  Malaysian  economy  in  the  future,  in  this  more  competitive  environment.
How  can  Malaysia  effectively  and  efficiently  utilise  its  resources  in  this  more  difficult  environment.
What are the strategies that should be adopted by the authorities and by the private sector to enhance
competitiveness?  Let  me  begin  with  a  discussion  of  what  we  mean  by  being  competitive  and  the
factors  that  determine  competitiveness  and  then  proceed  to  discuss  alternative  strategies  and
approaches that may be adopted to build this competitiveness.
Definition of competitiveness
The  term  competitiveness  has  many  interpretations.  Competitiveness  is  generally  equated  with  the
performance of an economy. As competitiveness relates to competition, it also implies a comparative
element,  with  the  implication  that  competitiveness  is  essentially  about  securing  market-share.  In
practice,  the  alternative  definitions  of  competitiveness  used  depend  on  the  focus  of  interest.  The
OECD has defined competitiveness for a nation as the degree to which a country can produce
goods  and  services  which  meet  the  test  of  international  markets,  while  its  citizens  earn  a
standard of living that is both rising and sustainable in the long run. For a firm, competitiveness
is the ability to produce the right goods and services of the right quality, at the right price, at the right
time. It means meeting customers' demands more efficiently and more effectively than other firms.
Generally,  discussions  on  competitiveness 
to  strengthen
competitiveness, being usually achieved through raising productivity so as to enhance the ability of the
economy to generate more output from a given supply of inputs. However, competitiveness as related
to  increased  output  growth  requires  also  demand  side  measures  to  ensure  a  conducive
macroeconomic environment so that resources are allocated in response to market conditions. This
suggests that the focus of attention should be both on capacity building and on capacity utilisation.
focus  on  supply-side  measures 
The changed environment
Previous economic success cannot be expected to be replicated in the new economic environment.
The  new  environment  is  now  characterised  with  increased  competitive  pressures  and  greater
uncertainty. The globalisation process and the rapid spread of technology has brought about a more
competitive environment as markets become increasingly more open,  with an increasing number of
new  entrants  to  the  market.  In  this  environment,  the  ability  to  compete  is  no  longer  just  based  on
access to raw materials, land, capital and labour. It will demand much more.
BIS Review 80/2001
1
In this new economic environment, businesses can expect to be confronted with increased levels of
uncertainty. Previously, under stable business environment, it was possible to identify distinct business
trends.  In  an  environment  of  greater  uncertainty,  businesses  are  often  caught  unaware  by  sudden
changes. In the new economy, gains are accorded to those who are the fastest to recognise change
and are the first to exploit the opportunity. Businesses that are rigid and too slow to respond to change
can expect to face increasing difficulties in the new economy.
In  the  new  economy,  businesses  also  can  expect  to  face  a  greater  demand  for  better  information,
increased disclosure and for more transparent systems. Businesses will therefore need to cope with
numerous  reporting  requirements.  Global  standards  can  be  expected  to  be  increasingly  rigorous.
Traditional reporting that have tended to be based on current and previous financial statements will
give way to greater emphasis on the future.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Factors affecting competitiveness
In  this  rapidly  changing  economic  and  financial  environment,  a  continual  assessment  of  our
competitiveness is required to provide a basis on how we should respond to the new pressures and
challenges. Survival in the new economy will require new approaches. Previous approaches that have
brought successes may no longer be relevant. While there are many factors that influence a nation's
competitiveness,  allow  me  to  highlight  ten  important  areas  that  are  fundamental  in  affecting
competitiveness.
Firstly, a sound macroeconomic environment and a conducive business environment is essential to
support the economic growth process and to enhance competitiveness. Appropriate macroeconomic
environment  will  help  businesses  to  respond  accordingly  to  the  changes  in  market  conditions.
Macroeconomic stability and a conducive business environment provide enterprises with the platform
to achieve the highest standards of performance. We are only too aware that economic instability and
periods  of  heightened  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  are  not  conducive  for  private  sector
investment decisions.
Secondly, the ability to adapt and adjust and to respond to changing economic conditions, changes in
comparative  advantage  and  to  the  new  opportunities  that  the  new  environment  accords.  This  will
involve having the degree of agility to adjust, to move out of those areas where we no longer have
comparative advantage and to pursue new growth areas. Very often, such adjustments will involve a
contraction in some industries and expansion in others. Economies with a high degree of labour and
capital mobility will facilitate this process. Furthermore, industries which are subject to market swings
need to increase their adaptability to such shocks, to have the ability to shift resources and to shift
from one market to another. The degree of exposure or the degree of concentration of an economy or
of an industry will affect the degree of flexibility to adjust to the changing conditions. Excesses or a
high  degree  of  exposure  will  increase  the  vulnerability  and  risks  to  sudden  shifts  or  shocks  to  the
system and would reduce the ability to adjust accordingly. Countries therefore need to enhance the
degree of resilience to cope with external shocks.
Thirdly,  corporate  resilience.  There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  attention  in  the  recent  years  given  to
micro  reform,  corporate  restructuring,  and  rationalisation,  all  being  part  of  the  process  of  attaining
greater  efficiency  and  becoming  more  competitive.  Other  benefits  arising  from  this  include  better
pricing  structures,  productivity  improvements  and  a  strengthened  ability  to  absorb  external  shocks
more effectively.
Fourth,  a  well  developed  and  efficient  physical 
to  enhance
competitiveness and support the growth process. The cost of infrastructure services will also affect the
competitiveness  of  the  private  sector.  These  include  the  provision  of  the  various  transportation
systems, port facilities, energy, telecommunications, utilities, whether the provision is by the public or
private  sector,  cost  effective  pricing  structures  need  to  be  in  place  to  contribute  to  overall
competitiveness of the economy in general and industries in particular.
Fifth,  Government  regulations  and  procedures  have  a  direct  impact  on  business.  An  effective  and
efficient functioning government will contribute to enhance competitiveness. Bureaucratic red-tape and
regulations  that  cause  long  delays  will  result  in  increased  financial  costs,  opportunity  costs  and
financial risks. The higher levels of efficiency of the delivery of public services will contribute toward
reducing costs to the private sector. Decisions on locating business in the country would depend not
infrastructure  will  contribute 
2
BIS Review 80/2001
only on the cost of doing business but also on the quality of services that contribute to the business
environment.
Sixth,  a  well  functioning  and  efficient  financial  system  is  vital  for  achieving  robust  economic
performance. The financial system including an efficient and resilient banking and payment system is
important in facilitating the overall functioning of the economy. The banking system and capital market
provides an effective and efficient means of financing the appropriate financial structure that meets the
requirements  of  the  economy.  The  financial  system  needs  to  provide  the  range  of  products  and
services  to  support  the  changing  needs  of  the  economy.  Key  is  for  the  financial  system  to  be
competitive and efficient and able to provide financial products and services at competitive rates thus
contributing towards the overall competitiveness of the economy. At the same time, the resilience of
the financial system is key so that it will be in a position to withstand the destabilising shocks to the
system.
Seventh,  having  the  skills  is  crucial  in  achieving  long-term  competitiveness.  Knowledge  in  the  new
economy will become an increasingly important factor in wealth creation. Marshalling knowledge in the
new  economy  is  becoming  an  important  strategy  for  businesses  not  only  to  improve  products  and
services but also to enhance productivity and efficiency. While the education and skills levels of the
work force is an important element, of greater importance is the ability to translate the knowledge into
enhancing  the  capabilities  of  the  business.  Companies  increasingly  will  have  to  compete  by
developing and exploiting skills, knowledge and creativity. In most cases, manpower gaps are found in
the areas of science and technology. Deficiencies in management and work force skills would be a
constraint. In this environment, qualifications acquired during initial education is no longer  adequate
and new skills need to be continually acquired.
Eight,  investment in  technology is  vital  to  improve  competitiveness.  An  important  technology  that  is
crucial  for  future  performance  is  Information  and  Communications  Technology  (ICT).  Not  only  are
investments in ICT important but more importantly that these new technologies are put to their best
use. This can be a major factor elevating the performance and competitiveness of an enterprise.
Ninth,  research  and  development  which  is  important  for  enabling  innovation  to  generate  new  and
improved  products.  Strong  science  and  technology  capabilities,  would  enhance  the  competitive
position. Low levels of  research  and  development  are  usually  due  to  weak  technological  capability.
High levels of expenditure on research  and  development  would  contribute  to  enhance  the  ability  to
compete in the global market place.
Finally,  institutional  developments  will  be  important  in  ensuring  sustainability  of  performance  of  an
economy.  An  important  part  of  this  is  developing  strong  private  and  public  institutions.  It  has  been
recognised that poor systems of corporate governance have contributed to problems that came to the
surface  during  periods  of  slowdown  or  crisis.  Corporate  governance  practices  including  having
effective board of directors, strong internal controls, reliable financial reporting, adequate protection of
minority  shareholders,  audits  and  enforcement  to  ensure  compliance.  Other  important  aspects  of
institutional  development  include  streamlining  the  institutional  structure  and  arrangements  and
ensuring  reliability  of  financial  information.  Also  improving  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for
enforcement of the laws and regulations. All this will contribute to enhance the business environment
and thus enhance competitiveness. Strong  professional  organisations  can  play  an  important  role  to
improve and enforce the standards and practices. This includes that of the code of ethics and code of
conduct of accountants. While these standards may be in place, of importance is to ensure proper and
effective application of these standards.
Programme for competitiveness : a total approach
After  several  decades  of  economic  success,  it  is  recognised  that  a  major  challenge  to  ensure  its
sustainability is to address the issue of competitiveness. This would provide the foundation on which
our aspirations to achieve high quality, broad-based equitable growth can be realised.
Very often the discussion on competitiveness has centred on the promotion of greater competition and
an accelerated pace of liberalisation that will lead to greater efficiency gains and competitiveness thus
enhanced competitiveness. However, the global experience has shown that the liberalisation process
needs to be managed in a manner that is orderly and not disruptive to the overall functioning of the
economy.  It  also  needs  to  be  recognised  that  the  degree  of  economic  liberalisation  and  increased
competitive  pressures  alone,  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  achieve  competitiveness.  Domestic  capacity
has  to  be  built  and  strengthened  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of  the  new  environment.  Thus,  while
BIS Review 80/2001
3
liberalisation  and  the  increased  competition  may  be  a  factor  driving  domestic  firms  to  be  more
competitive, there is the need also to build the capacities and capability for this to be realised.
An issue that has drawn significant debate in relation to the issue of competitiveness is the choice of
exchange rate regime. While Malaysia remains committed to the market mechanism we also want to
be assured that we will operate in an environment of efficient functioning markets. As a small open
economy, we need to be assured that we will not be subject to mis-aligned rates and that the market
forces will ensure a convergence to equilibrium levels that reflect the underlying fundamentals.
An  open  economy  with  the  volume  of  trade  that  is  two  times  the  size  of  the  economy,  Malaysia
requires  a  stable  and  efficient  functioning  exchange  rate  regime  to  facilitate  international  trade  and
investment.  For  over  three  years  now  we  have  operated  with  pegged  exchange  rate  regime.  The
relative exchange rate stability accorded by the pegged exchange rate regime has reduced Malaysia's
vulnerability  to  sharp  short  term movements  in  the  exchange  rate  and  has  contributed  positively  to
economic activity in the country. Experience in the aftermath of the Asian Financial Crisis has shown
that excessive volatility has occurred, with regional exchange rates that have been driven by specific
developments changes in market perceptions and by contagion. This becomes disruptive to trade and
investment  activities.  Relying  on  the  exchange  rate  to  gain  a  competitive  advantage  in  the
international markets will only provide temporary advantages as prices adjust and as others follow with
competitive adjustments.
Gaining competitiveness therefore necessarily requires a total approach, whereby the factors
on all fronts are  addressed  in a comprehensive manner.  Nations  that  are  able  to  provide  more
conducive  macro-fundamentals  environment,  more  efficient  cost  structure,  more  responsive  and
resilient  institutions  as  well  as  strengthening  the  cultural  and  educational  dimensions  would  have  a
greater probability of sustaining competitiveness and economic growth  over the medium and longer
term.
Sustaining macroeconomic fundamentals
Malaysia has over the decades adopted a comprehensive approach. In the changed environment, this
approach  has  been  broadened  further  to  address  the  new  issues  that  have  emerged.  In  terms  of
macroeconomic fundamentals, Malaysia has a track record of  low  and  stable  inflation,  which  has
kept the cost of doing business low and has increased the attractiveness of Malaysia as an investment
destination.  Low  inflation  has  also  encouraged  capital  formation  through  a  high  savings  rate.  In
essence,  macroeconomic  policies  to  address  short-term  concerns  have  been  judiciously
implemented while not creating any long-term risks to the economy. This policy strategy and the
conducive macroeconomic environment is often taken for granted. It has however, enabled Malaysia
to recover rapidly from periods of shocks to the system experienced by the nation. This policy strategy
of  sustaining  macroeconomic  fundamentals  is  an  essential  part  of  the  overall  programme  to
restructure and reform the nation to gain competitiveness.
Restructuring and reform
The  past  strategies  of  economic  diversification  and  structural  reforms  have  also  strengthened  the
underlying structure of the Malaysian economy and has placed Malaysia in a stronger position to meet
the  new  challenges.  Going  forward,  six  areas  have  been  identified  for  improvement  in  order  to
increase  the  nation's  resilience  and  competitiveness.  The  six  areas  are  to  achieve  a  broad-based
diversified  economic  structure;  to  accelerate  the  development  of  financial  infrastructure,  financial
sector restructuring and consolidation; to intensify efforts towards corporate restructuring;  undertake
further  public  sector  reform;  and  to  foster  growth  and  development  of  small-and  medium-scale
enterprises  (SMEs).  The  strategies  to  address  these  issues  have  been  formulated  and  are  well
articulated in the various long-term plans of the Government and key regulatory agencies. The Third
Outline Perspective Plan (OPP3) launched this year in April, the financial sector masterplan and the
capital  market  masterplan  launched  in  early  2001  contain  the  strategies  to  enhance  Malaysia's
competitive strength in the international markets place, in terms of both price and quality.
Strengthening the economic structure
A key policy strategy that has been pursued over the decades is the emphasis on strengthening the
economic  structure  with  increased  diversification  of  the  economic  base.  The  strategy  is  essentially
directed  at  promoting  the  development  of  a  broad-based  economy.  It  was  recognised  that  over
4
BIS Review 80/2001
dependence  on  a  few  export-oriented  industries  increases  vulnerability  to  external  developments.
While  Malaysia  has  reduced  over  the  years  the  concentration  in  the  low-end  electronics  industries,
given its vulnerability to changes in demand and sharp price movements across all electronics goods,
including  the  higher-end  products,  Malaysia  is  still  affected  by  the  recent  electronics  down  turn.  In
order  to  further  reduce  vulnerabilities  to  external  demand  a,  balanced  approach  has  been  taken,
targeted  at  expanding  the  traditional  areas,  whilst  developing  new  sources  of  growth  in  the
manufacturing,  services  and  agriculture  sectors.  In  the  traditional  services  sectors,  issues  being
addressed pertain to the need to raise efficiency and productivity to optimise the use of large capacity
that has been built up as a result of investment in pre-crisis years. The new growth areas will focus on
resource-based  sectors,  services  and  ICT-related  activities.  At  the  same  time,  the  non-traditional
agriculture is targeted to increase its contribution as part of this diversification.
innovation  and  performance 
Development of the financial sector
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The  competitive  environment  in  Malaysia  has  been  enhanced  by  the  development  of  the  financial
system  that  is  able  to  support  and  facilitate  trade  and  investment.  Strategies  towards  developing  a
more competitive, efficient and effective financial sector have been outlined in the Financial Sector
Masterplan  (FSMP).  The  FSMP  includes  specific  recommendations  on  measures  for  building
domestic  capacity  and  enabling  greater 
improvement.  A  key
recommendation to drive the banking sector's competitiveness is the benchmarking exercise. In this
exercise, performance indicators are being developed for monitoring performance over time drive the
capacity enhancement of the banking institutions.
In  the  new  financial  landscape  that  will  be  more  open  and  competitive,  only  a  few  will  emerge  to
compete effectively and efficiently across all banking markets and to provide the full range of banking
services.  As  such,  financial  institutions  must  re-examine  existing  business  models  to  see  where
their strengths lie and to what opportunities these strengths can be applied to enhance returns. In this
regard, the FSMP has outlined specific recommendations that will allow greater flexibility for banking
groups  to  operate  and  build  internal  capacity  to  compete.  Banking  institutions  would  also  need  to
consider new business arrangements and approaches in order to enhance returns.
The broadening and deepening of financial market will provide an efficient and cost-effective source of
funds for corporations. In particular, efforts to develop the capital market especially the corporate bond
market will aid this process.
Restructuring the corporate sector
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In a fast changing economic and business environment, the restructuring of the corporate sector has
also become an increasingly important element of competitiveness in Malaysia. In particular, corporate
restructuring would enhance general corporate sector resilience by ensuring that businesses remain
agile and are able to increase returns to shareholders and investors. The reorganization of business
strategies  and  focus,  rationalization  and  consolidation  of  operations  as  well  as  process
restructuring,  would  all  contribute  toward  the  minimisation  of  duplications  and  overlapping  of
functions  within  the  group,  as  well  as  the  optimisation  of  group  strength  either  financially  or
operationally. From the investor's perspective, this is an encouraging trend that would ultimately result
in enhanced shareholder value.
The sustenance of enhanced corporate sector resilience resulting from corporate restructuring would
be  greatly  facilitated  by  high  standards  of  corporate  governance.  Good  corporate  governance
would also ensure that the management of companies act in the best interest of shareholders, with the
ultimate objective of realising  long-term  shareholder  value  through  enhanced  efficiency,  productivity
and profitability. Evidence of the receptiveness of the market to good corporate governance has been
borne in this respect. The Asian financial crisis has shown that creditors and investors are increasingly
viewing good corporate governance as an essential element in their lending and investment decisions.
As  such,  companies  that  demonstrate  good  corporate  governance  practices  would  find  it  relatively
easier to attract and retain financing and at a lower cost, to effectively and efficiently finance their
research,  development,  innovation  and  capacity  expansion  activities,  that  are  critical  to  ensure
sustainable long-term competitiveness.
BIS Review 80/2001
5
Emerging from severity of the recent economic crisis and amidst the global economic slowdown, the
Malaysian  corporate  sector  is  now  undergoing  major  adjustments  and  restructuring  in  order  to
enhance  its  resilience  and  competitiveness.  This  corporate  restructuring  is  being  undertaken
through  several  avenues.  Under  the  current  economic  scenario,  most  corporate  workouts  and
reorganisations are carried out through structured approach such as section 176 of the Companies Act
and restructurings spearheaded  by  the  Pengurusan  Danaharta  Nasional  Berhad,  the  national  asset
management  company  as  well  as  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  Committee.  Market-driven  or
voluntary corporate restructurings are also taking place which are initiated either at the corporate level
or by the lenders.
In  the  context  of  the  corporate  restructuring  efforts  under  the  ambit  of  the  Corporate  Debt
Restructuring Committee, continuous efforts have been made to improve the efficiency and expedite
the  pace,  completion  and  implementation  of  corporate  restructurings.  Irrespective  of  the  route
adopted, the ultimate end-game is the creation of a robust corporate sector that is responsive to
challenges and changes that are taking place. It is therefore the main vision of all stakeholders to co-
operate and get their act together in ensuring that restructuring efforts are implemented expediently to
preserve the value of the company and more importantly to harness maximum benefits from emerging
opportunities  to  enhance  shareholders  value.  Given  the  paramount  importance  of  corporate
restructuring  in  the  competitive  business  environment,  continuous  corporate  reorganizations  are
envisaged to be a natural process in the business scene in order to remain viable.
Given  its  importance,  the  authorities  have  also  put  in  place  several  measures  to  improve  the
standards of  corporate governance. The release  of the Finance  Committee  Report  on  Corporate
Governance  marked  a  new  beginning  of  our  concerted  efforts  towards  enhancing  the  standards  of
corporate  governance  in  Malaysia.  Since  the  release,  there  has  been  significant  progress  in
implementing the recommendations in the Report. These included among others, the development of
the  Malaysian  Code  of  Corporate  Governance  to  enhance  the  self-regulatory  mechanisms  that
promote good governance. Various changes  have also been effected to the  Securities Commission
Act 1993 and to the KLSE Listing Requirements, to strengthen the statutory and regulatory framework
for corporate governance.
To enhance corporate governance in the banking sector, a number of guidelines and regulations
have been introduced. Among these are, the Guidelines on Duties and Responsibilities of Directors
and  Appointment  of  Chief  Executive  Directors,  the  Code  of  Conduct  for  Directors,  Officers  and
Employees  in  Banking  Industry,  the  Minimum  Internal  Audit  Standards  and  the  Guidelines  on  the
Specimen  Financial  Statements  for  the  Banking  Industry.  Indeed,  according  to  a  2001  survey  by
Political  and  Economic  Risk  Consultancy  Ltd.,  Malaysia's  quality  of  corporate  governance  was
rated the best among 12 nations surveyed in Asia.
While the authorities will continue in its role to promote the standards of corporate governance, it must
also  be  noted  that  the  private  sector  has  an  equally  important  role.  It  is  critical  that  all
stakeholders,  both  public  and  private  sector  participants,  inculcate  a  culture  of  good  corporate
behaviour. With the active participation of the private sector, including the management accountants
present here today, we are confident that these efforts will be able to achieve the desired results and
contribute towards our gaining the competitive edge.
Public sector reform
On  the  public  sector  front,  a  number  of  the  Government  outdated  regulations,  cumbersome
procedures and practices are being reviewed. The review aims to enhance operational efficiency and
transparency as well as to streamline Government's machinery. Efficient and transparent Government
machinery  would  reduce  business  costs  and  financial  risk.  This  would  improve  the  business
environment and thereby contribute towards enhancing competitiveness.
Small and medium enterprise (SME) development
An  important  element  of  strategies  to  enhance  competitiveness  is  the  development  of  small  and
medium  enterprises  (SMEs).  A  holistic  approach  is  required  to  realise  the  potential  of  SMEs  in  the
economy. For SME development it is necessary to move towards a well-planned and comprehensive
strategic  policy  to  ensure  the  orderly  and  systematic  development  of  the  SMEs.  In  this  respect,
currently, initiatives to develop SMEs by a number of agencies with varying degrees of involvement
6
BIS Review 80/2001
are being  reviewed  to  address  the  issues  of  viability  and  survival  of  SMEs  after  the  AFTA.  Moving
forward, the development aspect of SMEs in the areas of finance, research and development, training
and  advisory  as  well  as  marketing  and  distribution  strategies  are  being  addressed  in  order  for  the
SMEs to compete effectively after the AFTA. In this regard, the policy direction is to review the role
and  function  of  the  existing  establishments  to  minimise  destruction  of  value  and  expertise  that  is
already developed, and more importantly to adopt measures to facilitate the future development of the
SMEs.
Closing the knowledge gap
In  order  to  effectively  reap  the  gains  from  the  restructuring  and  reforms  outlined  above,  efforts  to
narrow  the  knowledge  gap  with  the  goal  of  developing  creative  and  competitive  human
resources  becomes  vital.  The  efforts  are  focused  on  upgrading  the  quality  and  relevance  of  the
education system while enhancing the skills of the labour force. In this regard, the Government has
pledged additional resources to the education sector in order to narrow the knowledge and skills gap.
In 8MP, the Government continues to finance and support programmes in education and training, in
which the expenditure allocated amounted to RM22.7 billion or 21% of total allocation during the plan
period  (RM19.7  billion  was  spent  during  7MP).  The  holistic  approach  taken  in  education  will
emphasise  higher  productivity  growth 
IT  and  knowledge-intensive
technologies.  Hence,  measures  are  in  place  to  promote  computer  literacy  amongst  students  and
workers, improve teaching and  learning methods and  review  the  existing  curriculum  in  schools  and
institutions of higher learning in tandem with current developments and needs. By the end of 2001, a
large number of schools are expected to be equipped with computers and software through the Smart
Schools programme, with priority being given to rural schools.
In order to upgrade human resource skills to meet the need of the K-economy, training at every level
will be strengthened to generate well-trained labour to meet industry demand. Opportunities for lifelong
learning after students have completed their  formal  education  are  also  being  created  to  ensure  the
continued  relevance  of  skills.  Whilst  emphasis  will  be  placed  on  intensifying  advanced  skills
development through training, retraining and apprenticeship schemes, efforts to pool the best talents
from Malaysia and abroad have also been intensified. As such incentives have been provided in the
2001 Budget to attract highly skilled Malaysian citizens working abroad to return to Malaysia.
investments 
through 
in 
Emphasis on science and technology
In order to enhance efficiency and productivity gains through restructuring and reform, an increased
focus is on science and technology-related activities. The Government has taken the lead to boost
its investment in IT, leading the way for the private sector to follow suit. As part of these measures,
the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC) was launched in 1996 to propel the Malaysian economy towards
a higher value added and technology driven activities. Similarly, increased in information technology
across all sectors is taking place. The incentive structure in terms of fiscal and financial support have
aided this process. The potential for this however has yet to be realised.
To intensify the attention towards research and development (R&D) activities, the Government has
allocated  RM1.6  billion  for  R&D  under  the  8MP  (RM1  billion  in  7MP).  The  Government  has  also
broadened  the  scope  of  research  under  the  Intensification  of  Research  in  Priority  Areas  (IRPA)  to
include  venture  capital  companies  interested  in  carrying  out  R&D  in  the  MSC.  To  provide  support
services as well as R&D for high technology industries, the Government announced an allocation of
RM16.7 million  in  the  2001  Budget  for  this  purpose.  Besides  IT,  public  investment  in  R&D  in  other
traditional  areas  such  as  agriculture  and  natural  resources  continue  to  be  funded  and  encouraged.
Measures have also been taken to enhance monitoring of R&D activities, including those in the private
sector, to ensure better coordination and track the progress towards achieving targets.
To  further  enhance  the  nations'  capability  in  science  and  technology,  the  promotion  of  strategic
alliances through smart partnerships has been encouraged. Various forms of strategic alliances are
encouraged  between foreign and Malaysian parties, not only  by  way  of  foreign  equity  holdings,  but
also at the management level in sectors such as ICT, energy, ports, financial as well as the nations'
airline  and  national  car  industry.  Foreign  direct  investment  has  an  important  role  in  facilitating  the
transfer of technology. The Government has implemented a number of initiatives to attract FDI into the
country through an incentive structure of packages that are customised to meet the interest of specific
investors. At the same time, the incentive structure has been designed to improve the quality of FDI
BIS Review 80/2001
7
away  from  labour-intensive  to  more  technology-driven  FDI  with  strong  emphasis  on  R&D  and
knowledge content.
Conclusion
In conclusion, it is critical that all stakeholders, both public and private sector participants, including the
management  accountants  present  here  today  to  direct  efforts  to  contribute  towards  our  gaining  the
competitive edge. Malaysia's macroeconomic fundamentals are sound. The public sector also remains
committed to ensure that macroeconomic environment remains favourable to ensure costs remain low.
It is, therefore, important for the private sector to focus on the issue of efficiency to elevate Malaysia to
a higher level of performance and prosperity.
Thank you for your attention.
8
BIS Review 80/2001
