Willem Duisenberg: Hearing before the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Hearing  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament  with
Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, held in Brussels, 5 March 2001.
 Introductory statement
It  is  my  pleasure  to  continue  today  our  regular  exchange  of  views  on  monetary  policy  and  other
activities of the ECB and the Eurosystem. As usual, I shall first present the ECB's analysis on recent
economic  developments  and  its  assessment  of  the  prospects  in  the  euro  area,  focusing  on  how  to
foster  the  continuation  of  non-inflationary  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Then,  I  shall  report  to  you  on
several important decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB with regard to the introduction
of euro banknotes and coins.
Before beginning my speech, I should once again like to take this opportunity to welcome the newest
member of the euro area. By adopting the single currency on 1 January 2001, Greece has become the
twelfth member of the euro area, sharing the rights and obligations of the other Member States which
have already adopted the single currency.
Economic and monetary developments
1. 
Since the last hearing before this Committee on 23 November 2000 the Governing Council of the ECB
has  decided  to  keep  the  ECB's  main  interest  rates  unchanged.  This  was  because,  overall,  recent
developments have pointed towards more balanced risks to price stability than the ones prevailing at
the time of our last meeting. However, some factors still argue for caution. Allow me to comment in
more detail on the Governing Council's assessment of the current economic situation in the euro area.
I should like to start with the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB. On 14 December
2000,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  confirm  the  existing  reference  value  for  monetary  growth,
namely  an  annual  growth  rate  of  4  1/2%  for  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  This  decision  was
taken on the grounds that the evidence continues to support the assumptions underlying the derivation
of the first reference value in December 1998 (and confirmed in December 1999), namely those for
trend potential output growth and the trend decline in M3 income velocity in the euro area.
Turning to recent monetary developments, there  were already  indications  in  November  2000  that  a
moderation in monetary growth had been under way for some months. In late 2000 and early 2001,
these signs of moderation became stronger. According to the latest available data, the three-month
average of the annual growth rates of M3 in the months from November 2000 to January 2001 was
5%, gradually moving into the direction of the reference value of 4 1/2%. All in all, the risks to price
stability from the monetary side have become increasingly balanced.
As regards the second pillar, since my last appearance before this Committee, several developments
have changed somewhat the prospects of economic growth in the euro area. On the one hand, the
slowdown in the US economy and developments in Japan have increased the uncertainty surrounding
the prospects for world growth. On the other hand, the fall in oil prices should have positive income
effects in the euro area.
All the information available shows that euro area real GDP growth declined slightly in the second half
of last year compared with the strong growth recorded in the first half. However, the general outlook
for this year and the next remains positive. Economic activity in the euro area is mainly determined by
domestic factors such as long-term financing costs and disposable income developments, which have
remained favourable. In addition, the euro area's high rates of capacity utilisation, the ongoing growth
in  employment  and  continued  declines  in  unemployment  should  help  to  maintain  solid  growth  in
private  investment  and  consumption.  All  in  all,  the  overall  level  of  confidence  in  the  euro  area  has
remained high. Economic indicators relating to developments around the turn of the year support the
view that economic growth will remain fairly robust for the period ahead. Although the more moderate
BIS Review 18/2001
1
prospects  for  world  growth  might  end  up  being  associated  with  a  certain  slowdown  in  euro  area
exports,  at  present  there  are  no  convincing  signs  that  the  slowdown  in  the  US  economy  is  having
significant and lasting spill-over effects on the euro area economy as a whole. Nevertheless, a close
monitoring of global developments is warranted.
As  regards  recent  price  developments,  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices (HICP) in January 2001 was 2.4%, as published by Eurostat, 0.2 percentage points
lower than in December 2000. Since November 2000, developments in oil prices and the exchange
rate  of  the  euro  have  contributed  to  lower  short-term  inflationary  pressures.  In  January,  the  rate  of
increase in energy prices continued to decline, but other HICP components, notably unprocessed food
and services prices, rose significantly.
As developments in oil prices and the foreign exchange rate in January and February 2001 have been
subject  to  some  volatility,  caution  should  be  exercised  when  assessing  their  likely  impact  on  HICP
inflation in the short-term. Moreover, indirect effects of past oil price increases and euro depreciation
are still coming through as witnessed by the continued rise in producer price increases for consumer
goods. Other short-term factors, such as increases in indirect taxation or in administered prices, may
also prevent consumer price inflation from falling rapidly below 2% over the next few months.
I should also like to emphasise that market participants consider the current level of consumer price
inflation as temporary. Bond yields in the euro area indicate that the general expectation is for inflation
to be within the ECB's definition of price stability in the medium term. The ECB is committed to fulfil
this expectation.
The  current  uncertainty  regarding  the  prospects  for  world  economic  growth  heightens  the  need  to
maintain the foundations for strong non-inflationary growth in the euro area as well as to strengthen
the potential of the economy. The ECB shares the objective of the governments and citizens of the
euro area of a growing prosperity in the euro area. By focusing on the maintenance of price stability
over  the  medium  term,  the  ECB  is  making  an  essential  contribution  to  the  achievement  of  this
objective.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  all  policy  actors  help  to  maintain  the  current
favourable outlook for growth and inflation in the euro area.
First, it is crucial that social partners continue the process of wage moderation seen in the past. This
will not only facilitate the task of monetary policy, but will also contribute to continuing the process of
reducing unemployment in the euro area.
In addition, long-term growth perspectives for the euro area will benefit if governments intensify their
efforts  to  progress  along  the  path  of  fiscal  consolidation.  I  consider  that  budgetary  plans  recently
expressed  in  countries'  updated  stability  programmes  are  not  very  ambitious  as  tax  cuts  are  not
accompanied  by  appropriate  expenditure  restraints.  If  the  macroeconomic  environment  remains  as
favourable  as  expected,  the  envisaged  fiscal  policy  stance  could  add  to  demand  pressures.  Fiscal
policy  could,  thus,  become  an  additional  source  of  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  In  addition,  the
stability programmes do not make the necessary progress in addressing long-term fiscal challenges.
These challenges include, inter alia, the budgetary adjustments needed in many countries to cope with
population ageing.
More efforts are also needed in the ongoing process of implementing structural reforms to foster the
growth potential of the euro area. This is of crucial importance to promote the supply of labour and
capital and to innovate and disseminate new technologies and production methods. More flexibility in
labour markets and reforms aimed at enhancing labour force participation are needed to offset the low
growth in the working age population. Additional measures that are needed are the removal of barriers
to investment and the creation of the institutional structures needed for a rapid and efficient adoption
of new technologies. In this respect, the Governing Council considers that there is no clear indication
yet that these structural factors have led to a measurable and lasting increase in productivity growth in
the  euro  area.  This  notwithstanding,  the  uncertainties  surrounding  estimates  of  the  medium-term
development  of  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area  have  become  skewed  to  the  upside.  This
being  the  case  the  Governing  Council  will  carefully  monitor  further  evidence  of  an  acceleration  of
productivity growth in the euro area. The ECB's monetary policy would naturally take such changes
appropriately into account, if and when they occur.
2
BIS Review 18/2001
Issues relating to the introduction of euro banknotes and coins
2.
I should now like to report on several decisions that have been taken by the Governing Council of the
ECB with regard to the euro cash changeover on 1 January 2002.
Given  the  crucial  importance  of  this  matter  and  the  responsibility  of  the  Eurosystem  as  a  whole  to
achieve  a  smooth  cash  changeover,  the  Governing  Council  has  adopted  an  ECB  Guideline  on  the
2002 cash changeover. The aim of this Guideline is to ensure that the framework of the changeover is
consistently  implemented,  such  as  the  provisions  for  frontloading  and  sub-frontloading  and  the
financial  modalities  for  credit  institutions,  as  well  as  to  provide  a  level  playing-field  for  all  credit
institutions, their agents and sub-frontloaded entities. The ECB Guideline can be viewed on the ECB's
website and has also been published in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
Moreover, the Governing Council considered measures which should help to ensure the availability of
euro banknotes in non-euro area countries, so that customers demanding euro banknotes are able to
obtain them in a timely and efficient manner. This is particularly relevant for countries in eastern and
south-eastern Europe. For example, a significant amount of Deutsche Mark-denominated banknotes
are estimated to be held in these countries, and also some other euro area currencies are held outside
their national borders. Therefore, the Governing Council agreed on the following principles regarding
the distribution of frontloaded euro banknotes outside the euro area:
• 
credit institutions which are counterparties for monetary policy operations within the Eurosystem
will be allowed to distribute frontloaded  euro banknotes to their  branches,  or  headquarters,  as
appropriate, located outside the euro area;
credit institutions with their main place of business inside the  euro  area  will be allowed to sub-
frontload  euro  banknotes  to  their  subsidiaries  that  are  also  credit  institutions  and  are  located
outside the euro area or to other credit institutions  which have  neither  their  registered  nor  their
head office inside the euro area; and
 •  branches, headquarters and subsidiaries of euro  area-based credit  institutions,  as well as  other
credit institutions, located outside the euro area, to which euro banknotes would be distributed or
sub-frontloaded, are not allowed to further sub-frontload euro banknotes to any third party (eg
retailers) whatsoever.
In contrast to the euro area, where frontloading and sub-frontloading may start as from 1 September
2001,  the  distribution  and  sub-frontloading  outside  the  euro  area  will  only  be  permitted  as  from
1 December 2001.
Regarding the Euro 2002 Information Campaign, I should like to report to you that a detailed outline
has been agreed and presented to the media, including the principal slogan to be used throughout the
whole information campaign: the EURO. OUR money.
Moreover,  a  website  dedicated  to  the  campaign  was  launched  in  all  11  official  languages  of  the
European  Community,  and  can  be  visited  at  www.euro.ecb.int.  The  website  contains  a  number  of
sections providing a broad range of information which should help specialist groups and the general
public to prepare for the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins.
The Governing Council also agreed to organise a series of conferences on euro changeover issues
- the  "Euro  2002  Information  Campaign  conferences"  -  which  will  bring  together  the  key  parties
involved in the euro cash changeover process at both national and European level. These events will
be organised in the course of 2001 in all euro area Member States, hosted by the respective national
central bank. The conferences will support the visibility of the Euro 2002 Information Campaign and
prepare the ground for the mass media part of the campaign, which will begin in earnest in the last
quarter of the year. The first conference of this series, to be hosted by the National Bank of Belgium,
will take place tomorrow here in Brussels.
BIS Review 18/2001
3
