Jean-Claude Trichet: Views on recent economic developments in the euro area
and international financial architecture
Address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  at  the  Institute  of
International Finance Spring Membership Meeting held in Hong Kong on 1 June 2001.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It’s a great pleasure for me to share some views with such a distinguished audience on two topics of
great  importance:  the  first  one  deals  with  recent  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  and  the
motivations of the last 25bps rate cut by the ECB on its 10 May’s meeting. The second point deals
with the very important question of international financial architecture.
Let me start with the first topic.
The  global  outlook  for  2001  continues  to  be  characterised  by  sizeable  uncertainties,  amid  the
readjustments taking place in the American and Japanese economies, and their impact on the rest of
the world. In the United States, however, while the GDP growth estimate for the first quarter of 2001
indicates that the slowdown has been substantial, the economy is still driven so far by firm consumer
expenditure.
Economic activity in the euro area in 2000 expanded at an annualised rate of 3.4%, the strongest
growth since 1990, driven by buoyant domestic and foreign demand. The general outlook for this year
and  next  one  remains  positive,  even  if,  clearly,  some  impact  of  the  American  slowdown  is  already
visible. Private investment  and  consumption  are  expected  to  continue  growing  at  a  sustained  pace,
whereas  the  impact  of  slower  world  economic  growth  is  expected  to  weigh  on  exports,  with  also  a
transitory impact on inventories. Indeed, economic activity in the euro area is largely determined by
domestic factors such as long-term financing costs and disposable income developments, which have
remained  favourable.  Furthermore,  the  still  high  rates  of  capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing
sector,  the  ongoing  growth  in  employment  and  continued  declines  in  unemployment  should  help
maintain positive growth in private investment and consumption.
Employment  in  the  euro  area  is  estimated  to  have  increased  by  0.6%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2001,
compared  with  the  previous  quarter,  confirming  continued  solid  job  growth  creation  over  the  recent
months.
Notwithstanding  sustained  reductions  in  the  aggregate  unemployment  rate  and  relatively  rapid
employment  growth,  wage  increases  in  the  euro  area  have  so  far  remained  moderate.  Per  capita
nominal compensation of employees grew by 2.0% in 1999 and by 2.4%  in 2000,  while unit  labour
costs increased by 1.3% and 0.9%, respectively. There are a number of factors that help to explain
why the increases in oil prices and their impact on inflation have not influenced wage developments in
a period of falling unemployment. They include the employers and the general public’s confidence in
the capacity of the ECB to ensure price stability. It is crucial that social partners continue the process
of wage moderation seen in the past. This will not only facilitate the task of monetary policy, but will
contribute  to  the  continued  reduction  of  unemployment  in  the  euro  area.  It  is  the  best  recipe  for
sustainable robust growth.
In  addition,  long-term  growth  perspectives  for  the  euro  area  will  be  strengthened  if  Member  States
intensify  fiscal  consolidation.  All  in  all,  looking  ahead,  GDP  for  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  grow
approximately close to trend potential growth.
In a context of moderate but still substantial economic growth and of inflationary pressures, which are
expected to weaken over the medium run, the Governing Council of the ECB decided on its Thursday
10 May’s meeting to adjust the key ECB rates by 25 basis points. More precisely, as our President
Wim  Duisenberg  explained  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council,  the  decision  was  grounded  on  the
following key monetary, financial and economical developments:
On the monetary side, which constitutes as you may know the first pillar of the ECB monetary policy
strategy,  M3  growth  no  longer  poses  a  risk  to  price  stability.  Such  a  statement  results  from  the
following considerations:
BIS Review 49/2001
1
  M3 growth has been on a gradual downward trend since the beginning of last year, reflecting
the tightening of the ECB monetary policy, which started in November 1999. In the period
from  February  to  April  2001,  the  three-months  average  of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3
adjusted for holdings by residents outside the euro area of money market fund shares was
4.6%, which roughly corresponds to the reference value of 4.5%. Although credit aggregate
figures remained dynamic, some slowdown has also been observed in their case.
in addition, there is now clear evidence that M3 figures are distorted upwards by non-euro
area residents’ purchases of negotiable paper  included in M3. This distortion has become
more sizeable recently and can roughly be estimated to around half a percentage point.
All in all, information gathered from the first pillar pointed out that there were less risks to price stability
over the medium-term emanating from monetary developments.
As regards the second pillar of the ECB monetary policy strategy, upward risks to price stability over
the medium-term also have diminished somewhat.
Still, HICP growth rate has accelerated on a year-on-year basis in April to 2.9% and possibly the figure
for May will not be very  good.  But these  developments mainly seem to be generated  by  temporary
factors that should substantially diminish over next 12 months to permit inflation to go back below the
level of 2% which is our ceiling for the definition of price stability.
However,  evidence  as  well  as  global  uncertainties  regarding  the  international  context  also  require
continuous monitoring of growth trends and wage developments.
Temporary  factors  could  still  affect  price  developments  for  some  months  to  come:  health  concerns
related to meat consumption and the consequences of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease could
continue to affect unprocessed food prices. Furthermore, pass trough of past rises in oil prices and the
depreciation of the euro are likely to affect price developments for some months.
Let me now turn to the question of International Financial Architecture.
Impressive progress has been achieved in the recent years to reinforce international financial stability
and  to  enhance  prevention.  We  must  continue  our  efforts  toward  further  progress  as  regards  the
reform of the financial architecture. I also think that fruitful lessons can be drawn from the assessment
of the new characteristics of financial markets and their impact on financial stability.
1.
We must pursue and reinforce our efforts towards a renewed international financial
architecture.
These efforts should tend to improve prevention and management of financial crises.
Strengthening prevention
1.1
Strengthening  prevention  calls  for  parallel  efforts  from  all  actors,  international  financial  institutions,
investors  and  public  authorities.  Prevention  lays  on  appropriate  surveillance  and  adequate  macro-
economic policies.
1.1.1
 
 2
As regards surveillance, much progress has already been achieved:
In  the  institutional  field,  important  changes  have  recently  occurred:  let  me  mention  the
impressive work carried out by the Financial Stability Forum in 1999 (e.g. reports on Highly
Leverage  Institutions,  Capital  flows,  Incentives  to  Foster  Implementation  of  Standards).  I
could also quote the work of the G20 or the International Monetary and Financial Committee.
Together with the existing institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank and the BIS at the
international  level,  we  have  probably  now  an  efficient  structure  to  cope  with  current  and
future international financial challenges.
The  implementation  of  internationally  acknowledged  standards  will  contribute  to  reduce
emerging  market  economies’ 
together  with  enhanced
transparency, improve market discipline and market participants’ ability to better assess the
risks of their investment decisions.
 
Many efforts have already been achieved with the design of 65 internationally agreed
standards and codes; the Financial Stability Forum identified 12 out of them as key for
financial  vulnerabilities  and, 
BIS Review 49/2001
the international financial stability and suggested incentives to implement them. The
implementation of these standards is in the self interest of all partners in the process
of  economic  and  financial  globalisation.  The  commitment  of  countries  to  implement
Codes and  Standards  is  likely  to  be  reinforced  if  market  participants  actually  reflect
information on observance of Codes and Standards in differentiated credit ratings.
International  Financial  Institutions  have  also  continued  to  proceed  toward  greater
transparency, in particular the participation of 60 countries on a voluntary basis in the
pilot initiative for the release of IMF article IV reports.
As  regards  the  private  sector,  progress  may  take  the  form  of  voluntary  improved
disclosure, more demanding statistical reporting and extended requirements for non-
transparent segments of the financial markets.
  Prevention also lays on sound economic conditions.
1.1.2
A sound macro-economic framework and appropriate macro-economic policies are essential as they
condition the resilience of any economy to external shocks. Three issues are worth being addressed in
that respect:
 
As  far  as  the  choice  of  an  exchange  rate  regime  is  concerned,  the  sustainability  of  any
regime depends crucially on its consistency with a country’s domestic macroeconomic and
structural  policy  framework.  As  a  consequence,  the  so  called  “corner  solutions”  are  not
necessarily  the  only  available  options;  “intermediate  solutions”  remain  relevant  options,
particularly for open  economies  with  close  links  to  a  partner  country  (or  a  single  currency
area) that maintains price stability, or for countries experiencing high inflation anchoring the
currency provides a simple and credible rule for monetary policy; in that regard, intermediate
solutions  might  be  particularly  appropriate  for  countries  which  apply  to  join  the  European
Union.
The soundness of domestic financial systems is a core element in the ability of an economy
to resist external shocks; furthermore, it is clear that weaknesses in the financial system can
lead  to  financial  instability  and  therefore  trigger  capital  outflows,  as  experienced  in  the
context  of  recent  financial  crises.  As  a  consequence,  emerging  market  economies  should
establish  an  appropriate  institutional,  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework,  building  on
international standards, such as the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision issued
by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision.
The  implementation  of  sound  macro-economic  policies  is  also  key  as  regards  crisis
prevention. In that respect, let me just say a few words on reserve and debt management.
To mitigate the volatility of capital flows and especially short term flows and reap the benefits
of capital account liberalization, one should adopt a risk management strategy that involves
a system for monitoring  and  assessing the risks and liquidity of  the  economy  as  a  whole,
including  at  a  sector  level.  The  international  community  may  assist  in  developing  best
practices  related  to  reserve  and  debt  management:  let  me  quote  for  example  the  more
stringent publishing obligations on net foreign exchange reserves adopted within the context
of  the  IMF  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  (SDDS)  or  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank
initiative to promote good practices in reserve and sovereign liability management.
  1.2
Clarify the principles governing crisis resolution and the distribution of roles among
actors
I would like to give you my views on two issues at stake which are of great importance and
strongly inter-related, i.e. the role of the IMF and the involvement of the private sector.
The IMF should remain at the centre of the process for crisis resolution
1.2.1
Whatever the prevention features, crises  will still occur in the future. In that respect,  I  would like to
focus on the roles of the IMF as regards both international lending and crisis management.
 
As regards its lending role, in my view, the IMF cannot act as an international lender of last
resort. First, it has only limited resources that can not match private capital flows; second,
the perception of such a role would increase moral hazard. The IMF should not thus provide
unlimited and unconditional financial support, its catalytic role remaining a core element of
BIS Review 49/2001
3
 financial  crisis  resolution.  As  a  consequence,  IMF  financial  assistance  should  be  ex  ante
limited  in  terms  of  quotas.  Access  above  these  regular  limits  should  be  exceptional  and
allowed only in cases of systemic risks. However, if short-term financing is the bulk of IMF
lending  role,  the  IMF  should  also  promote  macro-stability,  including  structural  matters
relevant for macro-economic policies. As a consequence, the IMF needs a medium and long
term surveillance and medium and long term facilities for adjustments to take hold.
As regards  its role in crisis management,  the  IMF  could  concentrate  on  agreeing  with  the
crisis  country  a  program  which  ensures  adjustment  and  financing  over  the  short  and
medium-term:
 
This means, for example, that IMF conditionality should cover short and medium and
long  term  issues.  The  Asian  crisis  has  led  to  an  extension  of  IMF  conditionality  to
structural  areas,  mainly  as  regards  financial  systems  restructuring  issues.  This
extension was somewhat criticised but I do not share such views: including structural
matters  in  the  IMF  conditionality  is  clearly  in  line  with  IMF  missions  as  regards
financial stability and should reinforce its efficiency. In that respect, the review of IMF
conditionality under process should not mean, in my opinion, that it should necessarily
be weakened, by focusing only on short term macroeconomic variables.
While  facing  a  financial  crisis,  the  IMF  could  indicate  the  relative  contributions  of
official  finance  and  private  sector  finance  as  well  as  the  domestic  economic
adjustments required to fill the gap. Before disbursing its share of financing, it should
review  and  assess  the  country’s  efforts  to  secure  the  contributions  from  private
creditors required to ensure medium-term sustainability; failing to secure the needed
contribution from private creditors could lead to a revision  of the program to require
additional domestic adjustment.
 2.
Changes in the functioning of financial markets in the recent years also raise
important issues that the international community may have to address.
 There is no need to underscore how much financial markets have changed in the last two decades
under  the  combined  impact  of  factors  such  as  financial  deregulation,  technological  and  financial
innovation,  intensifying  competition  among  financial  institutions  and  increasing  demands  for  more
transparency and greater profitability. These changes have enhanced the overall efficiency of financial
markets and, by extension, that of the developed economies:
 
 
Markets have become more transparent and competitive.
Financial innovations have made it easier for both governments and the corporate sector to
raise capital or hedge risks.
Economic  agents  with  funds  to  invest,  in  particular  households,  can  choose  from  a  wider
range of investment vehicles offering better returns.
Growing disintermediation has contributed to less inflationary financing of economies.
 
Despite  all  these  achievements,  there  have  been  some  surprising  developments  on  financial  asset
markets. While the rapid emergence of the "new economy" bubble in 1999 and early 2000, followed by
a series of sharp corrections, illustrated once again the potential of modern financial markets, e.g. to
finance  technological  innovation,  it  also  demonstrated  their  tendency  to  over-react,  moving  from
excessive optimism to disproportionate pessimism, with  the  ensuing  negative consequences for the
behaviour of firms and households.
We should be very attentive to these boom-bust episodes on financial asset markets, since they can
affect  the monetary  and  financial  stability  of  the  world  economy.  I  would  like  to  discuss  two  issues
here:
 
First, some factors encouraging excessively homogeneous market behaviour may hinder a
smooth and efficient functioning of the markets, and
Second, ways of fostering more diverse behaviour on the markets should be considered.
BIS Review 49/2001
 4
2.1
Some factors encouraging excessively homogeneous market behaviour may hinder a
smooth and efficient functioning of the markets
Financial asset prices fluctuate widely and sometimes deviate from economic fundamentals for long
periods of time. Several factors are in play when this happens. I shall give a few examples.
 
Some market participants have become more inclined to engage in "short-termism", that is,
they are too preoccupied with their short-term results. This trend might result, in particular,
from  growing  pressure  to  yield  immediate  financial  results  that  are  not  necessarily
sustainable.
Mimetic  behaviour  is  by  no  means  a  new  phenomenon  on  financial  markets.  However,
technological  developments  on  markets  may  have  gradually  reinforced  this  type  of
behaviour.  The  spread  of  benchmarking,  which  allows  fund  managers  and  clients  to
measure  performance  against  that  of  other  funds,  together  with  the  growing  competition
within the sector, appear to have increased such mimetic behaviour. Some operators have
come to the conclusion that it is better to be wrong along with everybody else, rather than
take the risk of being wrong alone.
The spread of certain fund management techniques, in particular index management, which
has proven very popular on equity markets, may have contributed to amplifying movements
in  financial  asset  prices.  This  technique  endeavours  to  match  as  accurately  as  possible
developments  in  stock  market  benchmark  indices.  It  therefore  mechanistically  leads
managers to accentuate current price trends by buying stocks that are on the rise and selling
those that are falling.
The impact of risk management techniques on market dynamics is particularly enlightening
with  regard  to  the  question  of  asset  price  overshooting.  Of  course,  central  banks  and
financial institutions should continue to encourage the use of these instruments. But, in times
of  financial  turmoil,  the  growing  use  of  sophisticated  risk  management  techniques  by
financial intermediaries has had the paradoxical effect of amplifying the initial shock and the
spill-over effect.  Regardless  of  the  intrinsic  qualities  of  these  risk management  tools,  their
growing use may have produced pernicious effects. When market players rely on converging
risk evaluations, they tend to take the same decisions at the same time, thus amplifying the
initial shock to prices and trading volumes.
   All  these  factors  have  one  consequence  in  common:  they  encourage  homogenous  behaviour  and
reactions  to  the  detriment  of  the  diversity  that  is  conducive  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  financial
markets.
2.2
For this reason, we could reflect on some ways – together with the financial industry –
on possible ways to foster behavioural diversity in global markets.
To safeguard the smooth functioning of the markets, and in particular an efficient pricing mechanism, it
would  be  opportune  to  protect,  and  even  reinforce,  the  diversity  of  behaviour  on  the  markets.  This
necessary diversity is merely the echo of the different time horizons, strategies and reaction functions
of market players. On this point, I would like to explore with you a few possible avenues.
2.2.1
 
 First and overall strengthen the continuing efforts aiming at market transparency:
Experience  shows  that  uncertainty  and  incomplete  information  are  determining  factors  in
mimetic  behaviour.  These  shortfalls  in  market  transparency  make  herd  behaviour  seem
rational  to  agents,  who  prefer  to  follow  bigger  participants,  who  are  thought  to  be  better
informed, rather  than  develop  their  own  analysis.  Strengthening  transparency  therefore  is,
more than ever, a priority.
One  of  the  objectives  of  transparency  is  to  enable  better  differentiation  of  borrower
creditworthiness. A key feature of mimetic behaviour is that all borrowers are "tarred with the
same  brush".  So  when  one  emerging  economy  encounters  difficulties,  all  neighbouring
countries,  or  countries  that  share  common  characteristics,  are  treated  in  the  same  way  –
regardless of their actual economic and financial situation. The same applies to businesses
operating in the same economic sector. Transparency has substantially increased since the
Asian crisis thanks to a solid global consensus – let us continue and reinforce these efforts-
BIS Review 49/2001
5
2.2.2
 
 2.2.3
 
  Take into account the medium and long-term perspective of some market participants:
Some investors, such as pension funds and insurance companies, have to invest funds in
order to enable their customers to build up wealth over the medium and long term, notably in
preparation  for  retirement.  Consequently,  this  type  of  investor  are  supposed  to  behave
differently from traders and short-term investors,  who are  working on a  very  different  time
horizon. But at times it seems that they are all pushed to behave in much the same way, on
the basis of an overwhelmingly dominant very short-term horizon.
To preserve, and even restore, their specific investment approach, these particular investors
might  be  more  shielded  from  excessive  short-term  pressures.  This  objective  raises
considerable  difficulties,  because  it  touches  on  the  way  in  which  the  performances  of
medium  and  long-term  funds  (including  pension  funds)  and  life  insurance  companies  are
assessed.
 Diversify the risk management tools of financial institutions:
As I mentioned earlier, even the best techniques can have adverse effects. To some degree,
this  is  perhaps  what  has  happened  to  value-at-risk  based  techniques,  which  have  been
massively  adopted  by  the  financial  industry.  Because  they  use  more  or  less  similar
parameters  and  have  the  same  features  –  for  example,  they  took  inadequate  account  of
market liquidity at the time of the 1998 crisis –, such tools tend to give converging signals to
those that use them. They thus encourage the herd behaviour that I discussed previously.
Of course, the fact that some market participants are more sophisticated than the average is
a guarantee that standardisation will remain limited, since they will develop techniques that
are little used by others.
However, supervisors are helping to spread the idea that financial institutions should round
out their current range of risk management tools to include extensive use of stress testing.
This  technique  offers  a  better  reflection  of  the  varying  situations  of  institutions  and  of  the
diverse  perceptions  that  institutions  have  of  exceptional  events.  The  application  of  stress
testing techniques and their results are thus inherently more diversified than those resulting
from methods based on the value-at-risk approach.
These are only examples of options to help improve the functioning of markets.
Indisputable  progress  has  already  been  made:  the  generalisation  of  concepts  of  appropriate
transparency since the Asian crisis  and  the comprehensive use  of stress testing are two significant
examples. However, I would like to stress one point. There is probably some merit in an overall review
of regulatory, accounting and tax rules and regulations, as well as of codes of good conduct and good
practices, and of structural developments of market themselves, to identify possible amendments and
improvements  that  could  help  protect  and  enhance  the  behavioural  and  conceptual  diversity  of
modern financial markets.
6
BIS Review 49/2001
