The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Reflections on the UK’s economic performance
over the past year and future challenges
Speech by The Rt Hon  Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England,  at the Lord  Mayor's
Dinner for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, 20 June 2001.
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, my Lords, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is always a privilege, my Lord Mayor, and a pleasure, to be invited to enjoy the splendour, and the
generous hospitality, of the Mansion House on the occasion of this annual dinner for the Merchants
and Bankers of the City of London. You provide us with an opportunity – in an atmosphere of calm – to
reflect upon the events of the year that has gone by and upon the challenges to come.
And the past year certainly has been eventful – though it is notable that some of those events did not
result in particularly dramatic change.
I  think  particularly  of  the  Election  and  I  congratulate  the  Government  on  the  outcome,  and  you,
Chancellor, on your own re-appointment. I very much look forward to continuing to work with you.
But I think, too, of our relatively stable overall economic performance – despite the devastating effect
on many farmers, and on rural communities more generally, of foot and mouth disease; despite the
weather and the floods; despite the disruption on the railways; and despite, above all, the pressures
on the internationally-exposed sectors of our economy as a result of developments abroad.
In this last context, my Lord Mayor, I was struck by a recent newspaper comment to the effect that if
we were living on an island we'd be in reasonably good shape. Now I have to confess that I'd always
been under the impression that we were living on an island, but I let that pass. What I think the writer
was drawing attention to is the fact that despite the recent global economic slowdown – notably in the
United  States, despite the continuing  weakness of the euro,  and  despite the sharp rise  in crude oil
prices over the past year, we have in fact, in terms of our own overall economy, enjoyed another year
of steady progress.
GDP growth in the year to the first quarter – at 2.6% – remained above our longer term trend rate, and
was above the rate of inflation, whether measured by the GDP deflator or our target measure of retail
price inflation (RPIX), for the sixth time in the past eight years. Since the economic expansion began
in 1992, annual output growth has averaged just less than 3% while the rate of inflation has averaged
just under 2 ½%. The number of people in employment last year(on the LFS measure) continued to
rise fairly steadily to an all-time high; the number of unemployed people fell to below one million (on
the claimant count measure) for the first time since December 1975, and the rate of unemployment fell
to its lowest in more than 25 years in the United Kingdom as a whole, and to its lowest for more than
20 years in every individual region.
But, my Lord Mayor, even if – as I at least continue to believe – we are living on an island, that does
not make us immune from developments abroad.
In particular, we are bound to be affected by current developments in the United States, both directly,
and  indirectly,  through  the  knock-on  effects  on  third  countries,  with  those  effects  on  the  Eurozone
particularly important for us.
By  this  time  last  year  it  had  become  clear  that,  even  on  the  most  optimistic  view  of  improving
underlying  productivity  –  as  the  application  of  new  information  and  communications  technologies
spread through the American economy – the rate of growth in the US, of over 5%, was unsustainable
in the light of increasing domestic and external imbalances. The pace of US domestic demand growth
needed to slow – as of course it has.
The big questions now are about the extent of the slowdown and how long it will last.
On  an  optimistic  view  we  may  be  largely  through  the  sharp  downward  stock  adjustment,  and  with
consumption so far holding up better than generally expected, and with the possibility that investment
will recover as the spread of ICT through the economy resumes, US activity may pick up as we move,
say, into next year. But the pessimist can point to the weakness of private sector saving, which could
induce more cautious consumer behaviour; he can point to a  possible overhang of past  investment
excesses; and he can point to the US external deficit which will need to be corrected at some point.
BIS Review 56/2001
1
in 
These  adjustments  might  take  place  gradually  over  time,  implying  a  more  protracted  period  of
relatively  slow  growth  in  the  US  Or,  if  you  are  really  pessimistic,  you  might  anticipate  more  abrupt
adjustment, implying a period of negative US growth and global financial instability.
The recent somewhat erratic recovery of US financial markets from their earlier gloom suggests that
they may have begun to side somewhat tentatively with the optimists; but some of the survey evidence
of consumer and business confidence, on the other hand, supports a more pessimistic view.
The truth is that none of us knows with any great confidence just how the US situation will evolve. For
what  it  is  worth  I  remain  modestly  optimistic,  but  I  am  very  conscious  of  the  downside  risks.  The
outcome is obviously the major uncertainty affecting us all.
The other major external influence on the economic situation in this country is the development of the
exchange rate. Depending on who you speak to sterling is variously described as dangerously weak,
at a 15-year low, against the dollar, or as unsustainably strong, close to its peak, against the euro. The
truth is that sterling's effective exchange rate has been relatively stable for most of the past 2 ½ years
– at about 105 on the standard index, plus or minus 5%. The bilateral rates that are frequently quoted
in fact tell us very little about sterling: they are essentially a reflection of the persistent general strength
of the dollar on the one hand and the persistent general weakness of the euro on the other, resulting
from sustained capital inflows to the United States in large part from the Eurozone.
It was widely expected that, with the slowdown in the US economy, and associated weakening of US
earnings  expectations  and  stock  prices,  these  capital  flows  would  moderate,  causing  the  dollar  to
weaken  and  a  corresponding  recovery 
the  euro.  That  clearly  has  not,  yet,  occurred,
although – given the size of the US external imbalance – it is difficult to see how an exchange rate
adjustment can ultimately be avoided.
In the meantime,  the  stronger  dollar  –  and  higher  oil  prices  –  have  added  to  inflationary  pressures
elsewhere.  But  in  our  own  case  this  effect  has  been  offset  by  the  weakness  of  the  euro  –  or  by
sterling's  bilateral  strength  against  the  euro,  if  you  prefer  –  which  has  dampened  both  external
demand and our domestic price level.
The  result  of  these  external  developments  –  the  global  economic  slowdown  and  the  pattern  of
exchange rates taken together – for us has been that, notwithstanding only a rather modest slowdown
of  our  overall  economy,  we  have  continued 
the
internationally-exposed (particularly the euro-exposed) sectors, which have been having a rather torrid
time, and the more heavily domestically-oriented sectors, which have  been doing rather better. The
weakness of manufacturing alongside continuing growth in the services sectors is a crude reflection of
this imbalance.
With inflation running somewhat below the Chancellor's symmetrical 2½% target, and with developing
uncertainties about the continuing strength of domestic demand, the MPC was in a position to respond
to these developments by reducing interest rates earlier this year.
In fact we cut rates by ¾%, while the  Federal  Reserve  cut  much  more  aggressively,  by  2½%  over
much the same period, and the European Central Bank by just ¼% – reflecting the different overall
monetary  conditions  as  they  saw  them  in  their  respective  currency  areas.  You  might  suppose  that
these relative interest rate movements would have encouraged the dollar to weaken against sterling
and by more against the euro – and given the pattern of international imbalances it would have been
helpful  if  they  had.  But,  in  the  event  exchange  rates  moved  in  the  wrong  direction,  illustrating  the
unpredictable  –  even  perverse  –  relationship  between  relative  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate
movements  at  least  in  the  short  term.  That  ought  to  be  a  salutary  lesson  to  those  who  imply  that
monetary policy can be directed to controlling both inflation and the exchange rate at the same time!
So there is not much that we can do directly, through monetary policy, to affect the various external
influences weighing upon our economy. But we can attempt to offset their effects, by encouraging the
growth of private sector domestic demand to try to keep overall demand in the economy growing in
line with potential supply. And that in effect is what we have done through our recent interest rate cuts.
This  approach  is  not,  however,  without  risks.  It  involves  accepting  –  at  least  while  the  dampening
external  influences  persist  –  a  growing  imbalance  between  the  internationally-exposed  and  the
domestically-oriented  sectors.  If  we  did  not  accept  that,  then  overall  demand  and  output  would  be
lower, and inflation would tend to fall further below target. But the imbalance cannot continue to grow
indefinitely. At some point the elastic is likely to break – quite possibly through a sharp exchange rate
imbalance  between 
to  see  a  growing 
2
BIS Review 56/2001
adjustment. And at that point, having deliberately stimulated domestic demand growth, we would need
to rein it back. But we could then find its momentum hard to stop.
I am not suggesting that we are necessarily approaching that point. Domestic inflationary pressures,
including wage pressures, have so far remained reasonably subdued and it is crucially important that
that should continue. But it does explain our caution in moving interest rates down.
Somewhat similar concerns explain my reaction to recent speculation that the Government would now
make a strong push for early entry to the euro. I take no position on the five economic tests which are
a matter for the Chancellor. But I do see the present external environment – and in particular, as I said
elsewhere last week, the euro's present weakness – as a potentially serious obstacle to early entry.
So I very much welcome the considered and cautious approach to making the assessment of the five
tests, which the Chancellor set out this evening.
Most people agree that sterling's exchange rate on entry to the euro would need to be substantially
lower than our present rate, which few would regard as sustainable in the medium and longer term.
Given the euro's present general weakness, that could come about in either of two ways.
If, achieving what was considered to be an appropriate entry rate against the euro – whatever that was
precisely – involved a substantial depreciation of sterling's overall, effective, exchange rate (that's to
say  sterling's  rate  against  other  currencies  generally),  that  would  be  bound  to  put  strong  upward
pressure on our domestic rate of inflation. That would not only destabilise our domestic economy, it
would also cause the intended euro-entry rate to appreciate in real terms, with adverse implications for
our competitiveness within the Eurozone. These effects would clearly be difficult to contain given the
constraints  on  both  our  interest  rate  and  the  exchange  rate  as  we  moved  towards  entry,  and  very
difficult to reverse once we were inside the single currency area.
This  obstacle  would  diminish  to  the  extent  that  the  euro  itself  recovers  against  other  currencies
generally – as at some point it surely must. In that case sterling might weaken bilaterally against the
euro,  but  it  might  be  expected  to  strengthen  against  the  dollar  and  other  currencies,  leaving  our
overall, effective, exchange rate closer to where it currently  is. That  would have less impact on our
domestic rate of inflation.
There's no question, my Lord Mayor, that what we would like to see, both in the context of our current
monetary  management  and  if  we  are  to  join  the  euro,  is  a  combination  of  a  pick-up  in  the  global
economy and a recovery in the euro exchange rate. That would be in all our interests. But it is not at
all clear what we can do to bring it about.
In  the  meantime,  as  we  sail  out  from  our  island  haven,  through  conflicting  offshore  currents  and
variable onshore  winds,  we may not find it  easy  to  remain  on  the  course  set  for  us  by  Gordon  the
Navigator. We risk either being blown onto the Scylla  of excessive domestic exuberance  or sucked
down by the Charybdis of external weakness. But we remain on watch, ready to tack as conditions
change.
My Lord Mayor, yours is a great office with a great tradition. You – and the Lady Mayoress – have
maintained  that  tradition  this  evening  by  entertaining  us  in  such  splendid  style.  And  you  have
maintained that tradition, too, in your tireless promotion of the City of London – in its civic affairs, in its
business activity, and in its engagement with our surrounding communities. In this  last connection I
look forward to joining with you and Howard Davies next Wednesday at the Heart of the City Carnival
to celebrate, and encourage, the City's community and charitable involvement; and I hope that some
of your guests this evening might care to join us at the Guildhall for that occasion.
But in the meantime I thank you for your gracious hospitality and I would ask all your guests to rise
and to join me in a toast to your good health.
My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen, the Toast is
"The Lord Mayor and the Lady Mayoress, David and Val Howard".
BIS Review 56/2001
3
