Christian Noyer: The ECB and the accession process
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  European
Federation of Finance House Associations (EUROFINAS) conference, Warsaw, 15 October 2001.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
Let me begin by saying that it is a great pleasure for me to participate in this conference, and that I
appreciate the invitation of the "European Federation of Finance House Associations" (EUROFINAS).
The Federation's effort to bring together finance and credit institutions throughout Europe deserves full
merit. The choice of the city of Warsaw for this year's conference seems particularly interesting to me,
as  this  city  is  witnessing  the  far-reaching  links  that  are  currently  being  developed  between  the
countries represented by EUROFINAS' members and the so-called accession countries preparing for
EU membership.
As  a  representative  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  I  welcome  the  EUROFINAS  members'
objective to jointly tackle the challenges faced by the European financial industry at an international
level.  Not  only  is  this  remarkable  in  such  a  competitive  industry,  but  it  is  also  key  to  support  the
development  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  economies  of  central  and  eastern  Europe.  Despite  the
achievements  of  the  past  decade,  the  accession  countries  still  need  to  devote  effort  both  to  the
reinforcement of prudential policies and business practices and to the development of highly valuable
capital and "know-how" in the financial sector. For this reason, I would like to focus my presentation
today on the integration of these countries into the EU and, more specifically, on how the ECB sees
the so-called accession process.
Let me start by saying that the ECB's attitude towards accession is a positive one. In fact, the ECB is
conducting  a  fruitful  and  constructive  dialogue  with  the  central  banks  of  the  accession  countries  at
many levels  and  in  many  areas.  Once  a  year,  the  Governors  and  Deputy  Governors  of  the  central
banks  of  the  accession  countries  and  the  Eurosystem  meet  to  discuss  policy  issues  related  to  EU
accession. This year's meeting will take place in Berlin in December. In addition, these meetings have
been complemented with multilateral seminars to support the preparatory work for the final adoption of
the euro in fields such as statistics, payment systems or legal issues. Central  banking co-operation
between the Eurosystem and the central banks of the accession countries has also been enhanced
through the organisation of bilateral visits and seminars.
To give you an idea of the significance of this co-operation, let me mention that, only last year, around
300 central banking co-operation activities, including technical assistance, were organised throughout
the Eurosystem. The main areas of co-operation have thus far been payment systems, legal issues,
and  statistics,  as  they  entail  the  longest  lead  times. These  activities  are  continuing  apace  also  this
year. Furthermore, the ECB is involved in the recently established "Economic dialogue with accession
countries", launched by the European Council, which includes issues highly relevant to the ECB such
as monetary and exchange rate policies and financial sector developments.
The road towards EU integration and, later, euro area participation is not a single one and, therefore, a
plurality of approaches may well be pursued by accession countries, not only before EU accession,
but also after it. It is true that, upon accession, countries will enter the EU with the status of "Member
States with a derogation", that no "opt-out" clauses will be granted and that countries will therefore be
expected to follow macroeconomic policies consistent with the ultimate adoption of the euro. Indeed,
accession  countries  will  have  to  comply  with  the  well-known  convergence  criteria,  before  they  can
adopt the euro.
It is also true that, with this objective in mind, countries will be expected to join ERM II at some point in
time, and to participate in this mechanism for at least two years, without devaluation of the exchange
rate of their currency vis-à-vis the euro, before they join the euro area. However, ERM II membership
does  not  need  to  happen  immediately  after  EU  accession,  neither  need  ERM  II  membership  to  be
limited to only two years (this is a minimum for adoption of the euro). In fact, the length of the period of
ERM II participation has also varied among current euro area countries; this may be similar for new
Member  States.  Hence,  although  the  process  of  EU  accession  consists  of  three  different  phases,
namely EU accession, ERM II membership and the adoption of the euro, a single common trajectory
cannot be prescribed for all countries.
BIS Review 84/2001
1
Such a plurality of approaches also applies to the economic experiences of accession countries over
the past decade. After the rather abrupt developments at the beginning of the transition, the accession
countries  have  generally  attained  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  and  they  have  done  so  despite
pursuing different policies and strategies. A remarkable process of disinflation, structural reforms and
relatively sound fiscal policies have supported positive growth – which is still moderate in some cases.
Despite the  worldwide  economic slowdown, GDP  in  accession countries is expected to grow at,  on
average,  around  3.2%  this  year.  The  stabilisation  success  has  been  confirmed  by  the  accession
countries'  resilience  to  the  Asian  and  Russian  crises  in  the  past  and,  more  recently,  to  the
developments in Turkey and Argentina. No doubt, the prospect of EU accession has helped to trigger
reform in the accession countries and provided an umbrella to shield them from financial turmoil.
The  challenges  ahead,  however,  are  still  formidable:  the  transition  agenda  has  not  yet  been
completed, reforms have seen major setbacks and substantial structural differences with the euro area
remain both in the real economy and in the financial sector.
Today, I would like to highlight three of these challenges, which are of particular relevance to the ECB.
First, the need for further convergence in real and nominal terms, second, the need to advance on the
compliance  with  the  Treaty  in  the  field  of  central  bank  and  other  relevant  legislation  and,  third,  the
need to strengthen the financial and banking sectors. In addition, I would like to finish my presentation
by  briefly  recalling  how  the  entry  of  new  Member  States  into  the  euro  area  is  likely  to  impact  the
monetary policy of the ECB.
Advancing convergence in real and nominal terms
Advancing  real  and  nominal  convergence  with  the  euro  area  in  a  parallel  manner  should  take  top
place  on the  agendas  of accession countries' policy-makers. This means  that  the  need  to  catch-up
with the EU in terms of both the real economy structures and income levels and the need to advance
disinflation should be pursued as a "dual track". Let me explain why I like to stress the need for this
parallelism.
Very often, higher inflation rates in accession countries have been partly explained by their need to
catch-up with the real income and price levels prevailing in the euro area. This empirical phenomenon
has  been  observed  in  many  fast-growing  economies  and  is  often  referred  to  as  the  Balassa-
Samuelson effect. Although the magnitude of this effect and, thus, its impact on inflation is difficult to
quantify,  most  empirical  studies  for  the  accession  countries  have  estimated  it  at  around  1  to
3 percentage points of inflation.
For  monetary  policy,  this  has  a  double  meaning.  On  one  hand,  it  implies  that  the  speed  of  the
disinflation process may need to take the "catching-up" component into account and that the monetary
policy objectives in accession countries might need to be different from those applied to high-income
countries or to the euro area for some time.
On the other hand, it also means that other macroeconomic and microeconomic factors (including a
relatively loose policy-mix, wage inertia, stubborn inflation expectations) as well as transition-related
factors (price liberalisation, privatisation) continue to play a key role in explaining inflation outcomes in
many accession countries  and  that,  therefore,  the  persistence  of  inflation  differentials  with  the  euro
area cannot be attributed to the Balassa-Samuelson effect alone.
Also  with  regard  to  real  convergence,  the  challenges  are  significant.  Income  levels  in  accession
countries are far below the levels of the euro area, and discrepancies of this magnitude have never
been observed in previous EU enlargements. Moreover, the process of catching-up in terms of real
incomes will be very slow, likely to take many years, if not decades.
Hence, even if different income levels are compatible with Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), it is
desirable that the real convergence of accession countries towards the euro area increases further,
particularly as real convergence will foster economic integration with the euro area and minimise the
risks and effects of asymmetric shocks in an enlarged euro area.
Against  this  background,  the  central  banks  of  accession  countries  should  simultaneously  be
concerned about the need to further advance disinflation and to catch-up with real income and price
levels  in  the  euro  area.  The  strict  respect  of  the  Maastricht  inflation  criterion  should  be  seen  as  a
medium-term  objective  and  not  as  an  immediate  goal,  if  progress  towards  the  achievement  of  this
criterion  would  jeopardise  the  catching-up  process.  Nevertheless,  the  ultimate  fulfilment  of  the
Maastricht  criteria  over  the  medium  term  should  provide  monetary  policy  with  the  appropriate
2
BIS Review 84/2001
framework for gradually lowering inflation rates, thereby contributing to macroeconomic stability and
sustainable growth.
Together with the maintenance of inflation differentials with the euro area, catching-up in terms of real
per capita income and price levels may also imply an appreciation of the real exchange rate. In this
fashion, exchange rate policy should support the convergence process without any constraint to real
sustainable growth. Again, neither the Eurosystem nor the ECOFIN Council can recommend a single
exchange rate policy as the appropriate one to be pursued along the road towards the adoption of the
euro.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  some  accession  countries  will  have  to  modify  their  exchange  rate
strategies to make them compatible with ERM II requirements. This applies mainly to the existing free
floats (e.g. Poland) and pegs against anchors other than the euro (e.g. Latvia and Lithuania); in these
cases, it  will  be  crucial  to  identify  the  optimal  timing  of  the  revision  of  the  different  regimes.  In  this
context, I should also highlight that ERM II membership should not be seen as a mere "waiting room"
prior  to  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  but  rather  as  a  meaningful  and  flexible  framework  for  the
achievement of further real and nominal convergence with the euro area.
Compliance with the Treaty in the field of central bank independence and other legislation of
concern to the ECB
The ECB is not formally associated with the negotiations on accession, and we have no intention to
compete with the European Commission and the other entities involved in this process. On the other
hand, the timely implementation of the acquis communautaire within the ECB's field of competence is
of crucial interest to the ECB for a number of reasons. One reason relates to the new status of the
central banks of accession countries from the date of EU accession. At that point in time, these central
banks  will  become  members  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  Moreover,
commercial banks of accession countries will also be affected by accession, and we need to know that
they operate in a sound and stable legal environment.
For  instance,  the  rules  of  the  internal  market  and  the  "single  financial  passport"  will  allow  credit
institutions  established  in  an  accession  country  to  obtain  indirect  access  to  Eurosystem  facilities
– such as monetary policy operations and payment systems – through branches located in the euro
area.
The interest of the ECB in this process therefore relates especially to the independent status of central
banks  of  the  accession  countries  and  to  the  implementation  of  sound  legal  regimes  in  the  area  of
financial law.
At a later point in time before an accession country adopts the euro, further legislative amendments
will be required in order to integrate the central bank into the Eurosystem and to enable it to fulfil its
part in our monetary policy and other operations.
So,  what  has  been  achieved  in  terms  of  legislative  amendments  in  accession  countries  and  what
remains  to  be  done  before  accession?  The  ECB  co-operates  with  the  legal  experts  of  the  national
central  banks  of  the  accession  countries  in  order  to  follow  the  legislative  developments,  and  I  can
therefore give some indications of the degree of progress. Turning first to the requirement of central
bank  independence,  several  accession  countries  have  amended  their  central  bank  legislation,
although  further  adjustments  are  generally  required.  The  drafters  of  the  Treaty  placed  a  strong
emphasis  on  central  bank  independence  as  a  reflection  of  the  generally  held  view  that  the
achievement of price stability is best served by an independent institution with a precise mandate. In
line with this Treaty principle, the precursor of the ECB, the European Monetary Institute, established a
list  of  features  of  central  bank  independence,  which  will  form  the  basis  for  the  assessment  of  the
compliance of the accession countries with the requirement of central bank independence.
In financial law, the accession countries need to satisfy a number of provisions of the Treaty which
have been applicable to the EU Member States since before the establishment of the ECB and the
start of the third stage of EMU. In particular, statutory provisions  providing credit facilities for public
entities with a national central bank have to be revoked, together with provisions providing access for
public  entities  to  funds  from  credit  institutions  on  terms  which  are  not  market-oriented.  Moreover,
capital movements need to be liberalised and statutory obstacles to the freedom of capital movements
removed.
BIS Review 84/2001
3
Some  of  these  changes  may  be  difficult  to  introduce  before  accession,  and  several  accession
countries will only achieve full compliance at a later stage when accession is imminent. In the area of
banking law, more immediate progress has been achieved.
For instance, several accession countries have introduced completely new banking legislation, aiming
at compliance with the standards for EU financial markets in accordance with EU Directives relating to
credit institutions. A similar need for legal implementation pertains to the areas of capital markets and
payment and securities settlement systems, but in these fields further changes are required. Finally,
the reduction of risks related to central bank operations also requires a legally sound collateral regime,
which  provides  legally  effective  arrangements  not  only  for  repurchase  and  pledge  transactions,  but
also in relation to insolvency proceedings.
Again, this is a technically difficult area where the accession countries still need to catch-up with EU
standards.  All  in  all,  our  initial  findings  demonstrate  impressive  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  accession
countries to achieve satisfactory regulations with regard to their central banks and financial systems in
conformity  with  EU  requirements,  even  if  further  work  is  still  needed.  At  the  same  time,  a  sound
financial legal system requires not only the adoption of the "right" financial laws, but also the support of
an  infrastructure  –  and,  indeed,  a  culture  –  that  ensures  that  the  relevant  laws  can  be  effectively
applied.
The strengthening of the financial and banking sectors
Although the restructuring process in accession countries has made substantial progress, the financial
sectors  of  accession  countries  still  need  to  be  further  developed  in  terms  of  size,  depth  and
functioning. This applies, in particular, to the banking sector that largely dominates the financial sector
of  these  economies.  The  challenges  ahead  are  numerous:  inter  alia,  the  weakness  of  banking
intermediation, reflected in the low level of credit to the private sector, the relatively large proportion of
bad  loans  in  banks'  balance  sheets  in  some  countries  or  the  exceptionally  high  spreads  between
lending and deposit rates that will progressively vanish in the next years.
Fortunately,  the  privatisation  process  and  the  increasing  participation  of  foreign  investors  in  the
banking  system  have  supported  the  rehabilitation  and  transformation  of  formerly  state  banks  into
efficient and profitable banking institutions.
Efforts to strengthen the financial and banking systems need to be made in the next years, also for the
fulfilment  of  the  so-called  "economic"  Copenhagen  criterion,  which  requires  the  existence  of
functioning market economies and the ability to cope with competitive pressures. Compliance with this
criterion for EU accession will require the adoption of EU legislation in the area of financial services,
including those related to banking, insurance and investment firms, as I have mentioned before. All in
all, in order to fully comply with the acquis communautaire, it would be necessary to further advance
institutional reforms related to the applicability and enforcement of laws, in particular as regards the
enhancement of corporate governance and legal frameworks.
Finally the development of a stable and well-functioning financial sector in the accession countries is
also key to the smooth conduct of monetary policy in an enlarged euro area. Efficient and competitive
banking sectors as well as smooth functioning capital markets are needed to ensure macroeconomic
and  financial  stability  in  the  accession  countries  and  to  support  the  convergence  process  of  these
economies.  They  are  also  needed  for  the  proper  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and,  thus,  for  the
successful  participation  of  accession  countries  in  the  euro  area.  Indeed,  deep  and  liquid  capital
markets  are  key  to  enabling  an  efficient  use  to  be  made  of  monetary  policy  instruments,  since
structural weaknesses in the banking sector could  have severe  implications for the monetary policy
transmission mechanism and could affect the responsiveness of banks to changes in the  monetary
policy stance.
The impact of enlargement on the monetary policy of the ECB
Enlargement will imply important new challenges for the monetary  policy  of the  ECB. Nevertheless,
there  is no  doubt that the  ECB  will be  able to  ensure  the  continuation  of  price  stability,  even  in  an
enlarged euro area, in a credible and lasting manner. At the technical level – as was the case when
Greece joined EMU – it will be necessary to employ new monetary and non-monetary aggregates.
4
BIS Review 84/2001
Looking  at  the  broader  picture,  however,  there  are  other  types  of  challenges  that  one  should  also
consider. These challenges are closely related to what are the fundamental differences between the
accession countries and the current euro area members. I have already mentioned what is, perhaps,
the  most  striking  difference:  the  divergence  of  per  capita  income  levels  and,  related  to  this,  the
difference in price levels. Other important factors, however, may also be worth investigating, such as
the different potential vulnerabilities to external shocks.
Some of these 'features' of the  new  Member States  will  probably  not  have  fully  disappeared,  when
these countries will join the euro area.
The successful implementation of structural reforms and the acceleration of the catching-up process of
the accession countries would definitely facilitate the task of integrating these countries into the euro
area. Indeed, the deepening of the integration process between current and new Member States  is
likely to reduce the risks associated with the effects of asymmetric shocks.
Against this background, it needs to be stressed that monetary policy in an enlarged euro area would
not – and could not - include, as an own objective, the promotion of the catching up process of any
participating country. Notwithstanding that catching up is  desirable, it is our conviction that  the  best
contribution the ECB can make to enhancing the growth prospects of current and new participants in
the single currency area is to guarantee stable prices.
Moreover, it should also be realised that the entry of new Member States into the euro area will neither
lead the ECB to redefine the scope for monetary policy, which is the formulation of a monetary policy
for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  If  individual  countries  are  faced  with  an  asymmetric  economic
development,  national  economic  policies  should  be  used  to  tackle  the  problems  that  might  be  the
result of such an asymmetric development.
Concluding remarks
I should like to close my presentation here. Yet, before concluding my remarks, let me stress that we
at  the  ECB,  as  well  as  at  the  Eurosystem  level  at  large,  are  fully  aware  of  the  magnitude  of  the
political, economic and institutional challenges faced by accession countries along the road towards
the adoption of the euro. As central bankers, we are not isolated from the reality surrounding us, and
we  are  committed  to  play  our  role  in  this  historical  process,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  smooth
integration  of  the  central  banks  of  accession  countries  into  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks
and,  later , into  the  Eurosystem. Through ongoing co-operation, the central  banks  of  the  accession
countries  are  being  given  an  opportunity  to  familiarise  themselves  with  the  Eurosystem's  mode  of
operation, and the Eurosystem can gain a better understanding of how these central banks operate
under  their  respective  regimes.  This  exchange,  and  the  resulting  establishment  of  a  common
terminology and understanding of each other's environments, will facilitate the pursuit  of a common
objective in the future.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 84/2001
5
