 Willem F Duisenberg: The introduction of the euro, the regions and the 
accession process 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the plenary session of 
European Union Committee of the Regions, Brussels, 14 November 2001. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here today and to address the plenary session of the Committee of the 
Regions. Like many events in the still young life of the euro and my institution, the European Central 
Bank, this is in fact a premiere. In recognition of the composition of this Committee and its specific 
expertise,  I  should  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  two  key  issues,  which  –  I  believe  –  could  be  of 
particular relevance to regional and local authorities. First, I should like to explore an issue that has 
received  a  great deal  of academic and media attention,  and  which could be considered particularly 
relevant from the perspective of regional and local authorities: the persistence of regional economic 
differences in relation to a single monetary policy in which – so to speak – one size fits all. Second, 
allow  me  to  address  some  of  the  challenges  connected  with  the  forthcoming  enlargement  of  the 
European Union and the eventual entry of the new Member States into the euro area.  
But before doing so, let me emphasise that the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins is – at the 
moment – the most important challenge for the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) of the euro 
area.  The  euro  banknotes  are  currently  being  produced  by  15  different  printing  works  throughout 
Europe, including those of a number of NCBs. By the end of October 2001 over 13 billion banknotes 
had been produced – that is, significantly more than the 10 billion expected to enter circulation at the 
beginning of next year. The printing works are currently producing logistical stocks for the purposes of 
the changeover.  
In  order  to  ensure  the  smooth  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  and  the  efficient 
withdrawal  of  national  banknotes  and  coins,  the  logistics  of  the  2002  cash  changeover  have  been 
determined  well  in  advance.  Within  this  general  framework  the  changeover  scenario  is  a  national 
responsibility, in accordance with the principles of subsidiarity and decentralisation.  
The Eurosystem is well aware of the importance of achieving a smooth cash changeover in order to 
maintain both public and financial market confidence in the single currency. One of the main concerns 
expressed about the cash changeover is the need for retailers to hold large amounts of cash during 
the first few days  of 2002. In  order to address this concern,  a substantial number of measures are 
being implemented at the national level.  
While a successful cash changeover  is an  immediate concern  – and thus naturally at the centre  of 
current public and media attention, – we should also bear in mind some of the longer-term challenges 
involved in making Economic and Monetary Union and the euro a lasting success. In this context, the 
relationship between the single monetary policy and the presence of regional economic differences in 
the euro area is probably of particular relevance and, in my view, also a topic of common interest to 
our institutions.  
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  unambiguously  lays  down  that  the  overriding 
objective of the single monetary policy is to maintain price stability in the euro area. This reflects the 
notion  that  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sustainable  long-run  economic 
growth and rising standards of living is to maintain price stability.  
A single monetary policy which is successful in fulfilling this objective will not necessarily imply that 
euro  area  regions  or  countries  will  always  display  similar  price  developments.  Divergence  in  price 
developments across various regions or countries is a normal phenomenon in monetary unions. Such 
differentials in price developments represent relative price changes, which do not affect – and are not 
affected by – monetary policy.  
Given the existence of a single monetary policy in the euro area, the ECB's monetary policy can only 
have an impact on the price level for the euro area as a whole. This is true irrespective of the number 
of countries or regions that are part of the euro area. This implies that the ECB's monetary policy must 
focus on price stability in the euro area as a whole. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 1
 However, it is important to understand the sources of differentials in the rates of price changes among 
countries and regions in the euro area, since they may affect citizens' welfare and require national or 
regional corrective measures. 
One source of divergence in the rates of price changes across euro area countries or regions, which is 
often  quoted  in  public  debates,  relates  to  the  “catching-up  processes”.  We  can  witness  such  a 
catching-up process when a country or a region starts from a lower level of productivity – and thus 
income  per  capita  –  compared  with  other  economies  participating  in  EMU.  During  the  transitional 
period, there may be faster productivity growth in sectors exposed to international competition in the 
catching-up economies than in the more mature economies. This, in turn, might be associated  with 
faster price increases in the catching-up economies. This is a normal phenomenon within a monetary 
union and is not in itself a cause for concern. In this respect, I should like to stress that a substantial 
process of convergence in per capita income has already taken place in the euro area over the last 
few decades. 
Another source of divergence in the rates of price changes across euro area countries or regions may 
arise when countries or regions are affected by economic or policy shocks which are different in their 
nature or timing, or when, due to different economic structures, local economies respond differently to 
a common shock. One example of this would be a change in the oil price. Although this is a common 
shock to the whole euro area, countries and regions in the euro area can be affected to a different 
extent, depending on their particular demand for (or supply of) energy.  
As differences in economic structures across countries are likely to remain in the future too, the fact 
that  different  regions  in  the  euro  area  will  face  different  economic  shocks  will  be  unavoidable.  It  is 
therefore crucial that national and local authorities have all the measures in place to facilitate a smooth 
and efficient adjustment to economic developments that affect countries and regions differently.  
One  important  equilibrating  mechanism  in  response  to  such  shocks  is  fiscal  policy,  through  the 
operation of automatic stabilisers and the adoption of specific measures in the case of adverse shocks 
at the regional and national level. However, this requires sound budgetary positions over the medium 
term  in  accordance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In  this  context,  allow  me  to  emphasise  the 
responsibility of regional and local authorities to make an important contribution to the consolidation of 
public finances by exercising control over public expenditure. 
Another  important  adjustment  mechanism  is  mobility  in  the  factors  of  production.  The  process  of 
European integration has already led to a significant convergence of financial and capital markets and 
capital is now highly mobile at the international level. However, labour continues to be barely mobile 
within many euro area countries and almost immobile between countries.  
To this end, it is crucial – and I should like to encourage you – to make as much progress as possible 
in  the  introduction  and  acceleration  of  structural  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  mobility,  promoting 
flexibility in price and  wage settings, enhancing competition and reducing distortions in  product  and 
labour markets. Without these reforms, the loss of competitiveness deriving from rigidities will become 
a source of national, or regional, unemployment and inefficient under-utilisation of resources. Stronger 
competition and the removal of structural rigidities will increase the flexibility of the economy and lower 
the  adjustment  costs  associated  with  asymmetric  shocks  affecting  one  particular  country  or  region. 
Although considerable progress has been made, much remains to be done.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to also stress the importance of your role in contributing to informing 
European citizens about the dangers caused by divergences in price developments across countries 
or regions, which might arise as a result of excessive wage increases or the unsustainable expansion 
of profit margins at the local level. The more such developments become entrenched in the economy, 
the  more  they  will  lead  to  a  loss  in  competitiveness  and,  eventually,  to  a  loss  in  output  and 
employment in the respective economies.  
Clearly,  our  efforts  to  make  the  euro  a  success  will  require  all  of  us  to  master  –  at  home  –  the 
challenges  which  I  have  outlined.  However,  the  European  Union,  and  also  the  euro  area,  face  an 
important  external  challenge  –  and  this  brings  me  to  the  second  topic  of  my  presentation:  the  EU 
accession process and the subsequent enlargement of the euro area. The fact that your Committee 
has established a liaison group with applicant countries bears witness to the substantial implications 
which enlargement will have not only for a central bank but also for representatives of regional and 
local authorities.  
As you are well aware, to date 12 countries from central, eastern and southern Europe are involved in 
negotiations to become members of the EU and, ultimately, also of the euro area. The integration of 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2001
 such a large number of new countries into the European Union – which would imply almost a doubling 
of the current number of Member States – will be an enormous task for both sides and be without a 
precedent in history.  
As I have just said, accession to the EU also entails significant implications for the economies of the 
accession  countries  themselves.  For  them,  the  main  priority  is  indeed  to  foster  the  convergence 
process  with  the  EU,  both  in  real  and  in  nominal  terms.  Thus,  accession  countries  are  aiming  to 
achieve the European Union's standard of living, while at the same time seeking macroeconomic and 
financial  stability.  This  process  will  entail  profound  and  comprehensive  adjustments  in  their  real 
economies as well as in the careful design of sound economic policies.  
Undoubtedly, significant progress has already been made in this respect. A substantial reallocation of 
resources, a strong reorientation of trade links towards the EU, a complete institutional overhaul and a 
sizeable development of the private sector are the most obvious signs of systemic change. However, 
these achievements should not give rise to complacency but rather be taken as motivation for further 
structural reforms. These reforms are needed in accession countries in order to further transform their 
economies  into  fully-fledged  market  economies,  so  as  to  enable  them  to  cope  with  competitive 
pressures and provide the conditions for sustainable and non-inflationary growth. Given the positive 
impact  of  structural  reforms  on  those  countries'  disinflation  processes,  there  appears  to  be  no 
contradiction  between  real  and  nominal  convergence.  Thus,  both  objectives  should  be  pursued  in 
parallel and the emphasis should not be focused on one target at the expense of the other.  
In the context of real and nominal convergence, I should like to emphasise the important role played 
by  sound  fiscal  policies.  Although  we  judge  the  overall  fiscal  policy  stance  as  being  broadly 
satisfactory in most accession countries, budgetary consolidation efforts in some countries appear to 
have experienced a recent setback. In these few cases, a strengthening of efforts to return to the path 
of sound fiscal policies is crucial. A determined pursuit of fiscal consolidation is all the more necessary 
as  the  accession  process  and  the  completion  of  the  transition  phase  are  likely  to  place  further 
demands  on  the  budgetary  situation,  for  example  in  relation  to  higher  infrastructure  investments  or 
future reforms of the accession countries' health and social security systems.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  should  like  to  conclude  my  presentation  by  answering  one  of  the  main 
questions  which  usually  arises  when  a  representative  of  the  ECB  talks  about  enlargement:  will  the 
accession process have consequences for the conduct of the single monetary policy? The answer is 
no. As I have already argued with regard to the issue of monetary policy and regional differences, the 
ECB's  monetary  policy  can  focus  only  on  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole, 
irrespective  of  the  number  of  regions  or  countries  forming  part  of  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  the 
definition of price stability,  as adopted by the ECB, should be seen as a lasting quantification of its 
primary objective. The purpose of a definition is that it should remain valid as a consistent and credible 
point of reference over time and in different circumstances.  
Ladies and gentlemen, it has been a pleasure to be able to use this brief presentation to convey the 
perspective of a central bank on topics that are also of great interest to the Committee of the Regions.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS Review 92/2001 
 3
