 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Monetary policy, economic growth and prosperity 
Opening address by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central 
Bank of Iceland, at a conference to mark the 60th anniversary of the University of Iceland Faculty of 
Economics and Business Administration, Reykjavik, 31 October 2001. 
 I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  University  of  Iceland’s  Faculty  of  Economics  and  Business 
Administration  on  its  60th  anniversary,  its  noteworthy  activities  and  its  contributions  towards 
strengthening the Icelandic economy. I also wish the faculty every success for the future. At the same 
time I thank you for the honour I have been shown with this invitation to deliver the opening address at 
this anniversary conference. 
I have chosen to call my talk “Monetary policy, economic growth and prosperity.” I shall therefore focus 
on the role played by monetary policy in economic policy implementation, and its contribution towards 
economic growth and prosperity. And there is ample reason as well, because the most notable events 
in  economic  organisation  this  year  have  involved  precisely  the  monetary  policy  framework  and  the 
Central Bank.  
Price stability  
Important changes have been made to central bank legislation around the world in recent years. There 
has  been  a  gradual  increase  in  support  for  the  view  that  it  is  natural  to  set  central  banks 
straightforward  targets  which  are  suited  to  the  instruments  they  use,  and  to  strengthen  their 
independence  to  take  action  and  their  financial  independence  while  at  the  same  time  making  firm 
requirements  about  transparency  and  accountability  towards  the  government  and  general  public. 
Treasury  access  to  central  bank funding  was  closed.  Simple  target-setting  for  central  banks  largely 
involved  assigning  a  single  main  objective  to  monetary  policy,  i.e.  to  promote  price  stability,  which 
means a low level of measured inflation. In some countries, central banks were assigned the task of 
defining their own main objectives, but elsewhere this was done by  governments, or in cooperation 
between  the  government  and  the  central  bank.  These  viewpoints  are  reflected  in  central  bank 
legislation  of  many  countries  and  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty’s  provisions  for  the  establishment  and 
activities of the European Central Bank.  
Another widespread central bank objective in recent years has been to contribute to the stability of the 
financial system, including  payments systems. Many  central banks have been devoting increasingly 
more scope to this topic, reflecting the need which has been identified following the deregulation of 
international  capital  movements.  At  global  level,  a  much  higher  profile  has  been  given  to  active 
monitoring of financial activities and maintaining an active overview of various risk factors in financial 
systems and the economy as a whole, in order to attempt to prevent serious shocks.  
Persistent inflation is the result of lax monetary stance  
There are good reasons for assigning central banks a single main objective, namely to promote price 
stability. Inflation is primarily a monetary phenomenon. Short-lived inflation can have many causes, but 
persistent  inflation  is  the  consequence  of  a  lax  monetary  stance.  In  the  long  run,  monetary  policy 
therefore primarily has an effect on prices. Under normal conditions it only has a temporary impact on 
economic growth and employment. Since central banks broadly speaking have only one instrument, 
i.e. interest rates, and can therefore only achieve a single long-term macroeconomic goal, it is natural 
to  set  price  stability  as  the  ultimate  monetary  goal.  This  is  not  to  say  that  price  stability  is  a  more 
important goal than, say, full employment, but simply that monetary policy instruments are inherently 
better suited to impacting prices. It is pointless to set objectives for monetary policy which it cannot 
achieve. Through price stability, a forward-orientated monetary policy can contribute towards creating 
a  stable  economic  environment  on  which  the  long-term  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  namely 
growth and prosperity, is based.  
The reason that central banks can have a widespread effect on interest rate formation in the markets 
through  their  interest  rate  decisions  is  that  they  have  the  exclusive  right  to  issue  money  in  the 
economy,  i.e.  base  money.  By  controlling  the  price  of  base  money,  i.e.  the  interest  terms  at  which 
BIS Review 95/2001 
 1
 financial institutions can borrow short-term capital from them, central banks can influence the volume 
and price of liquidity in the financial system. Central Bank interest rate decisions have an impact on 
short- and long-term interest rates, financial system liquidity, money in circulation and bank lending, 
exchange  rates  of  currencies,  other  asset  prices  and,  last  but  not  least,  market  participants’ 
expectations about the future development of all these factors. All this, in turn, influences consumption 
and investment decisions of individuals and businesses, and thereby aggregate demand. The impact 
in individual areas can vary greatly from one time to the next.  
The new Central Bank Act  
The previous Central Bank Act dated from 1986 and was drafted over the period 1981 to 1984. It was 
a product of its time and did not reflect the perspectives that later established themselves. In the early 
1990s the then Minister of Commerce appointed a committee to review the Central Bank Act, chaired 
by  Professor  Ágúst  Einarsson,  the  current  Dean  of  the  Faculty  of  Economics  and  Business 
Administration. Following the committee’s work the Minister of Commerce proposed a bill to parliament 
for a new Central Bank Act which entailed sweeping changes from the 1986 Act, including what are 
now considered to be many of the necessary elements of central bank legislation. However, the bill 
was not adopted by parliament.  
In May this year parliament passed a new Central Bank Act with the approval of all 56 members who 
were present for voting on the bill. A detailed account of the main changes from earlier legislation has 
been given in the Central Bank’s publications. See i.a. the Central Bank of Iceland’s Monetary Bulletin 
2001/3 I shall only mention here that a single target was set for the Central Bank, i.e. to promote price 
stability.  With  the  Prime  Minister’s  approval,  the  Bank  was  also  authorised  to  specify  a  numerical 
inflationary target. The Bank was granted full independence to apply its instruments in order to achieve 
its main objective. Its financial independence was increased by precluding in law treasury access to 
short-term  funding  with  the  Central  Bank,  which  had  previously  been  precluded  with  an  agreement 
between the Minister of Finance and the Bank. Provisions on transparency and accountability towards 
the Government and general public were made more focused.  
As I mentioned before, one of the Central Bank’s main objectives is to contribute towards an active 
and secure financial system, or financial stability as it is often known. In recent years central banks in 
many  countries  have  been  increasingly  devoting  themselves  to  monitoring  financial  stability.  This 
development  is  partly  the  product  of  financial  market  liberalisation  and  the  deregulation  of  capital 
movements, and partly a response to shocks which have struck many countries, both currency shocks 
and  banking  system  setbacks.  Examples  include  the  troubles  encountered  by  banks  in  Finland, 
Norway and Sweden a decade ago and the crises that hit Asia and Latin America in the latter part of 
the  1990s.  The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has  now  built  up  a  new  organisational  department,  the 
Financial  Stability  Department,  which  has  the  main  role  of  monitoring  factors  affecting  financial 
stability. Twice a year the Bank publishes articles on this topic in its quarterly Monetary Bulletin, an 
annual  main  study  in  May  and  a  shorter  account  in  November.  In  addition,  the  Central  Bank  and 
Financial Supervisory Authority maintain close and productive cooperation, each seeking to ensure the 
security of the Icelandic financial system in its respective way.  
Inflation targeting  
To  return  to  monetary  policy  itself,  we  should  recall  the  joint  declaration  on  the  inflation  target  and 
changed monetary policy which was issued on March 27 by the Government and the Central Bank of 
Iceland.  See  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  Monetary  Bulletin  2001/2  With  this  declaration,  the 
monetary framework was changed and inflation targeting was adopted, whereby the fixed exchange 
rate  with fluctuation  limits was replaced  by  a floating exchange rate. The inflation target  was set at 
2½%, measured as the twelve-month rise in the CPI. The declaration stated that if inflation deviated by 
more than 1½% from this target the Bank was obliged to bring it back within the tolerance limits as 
soon as possible. At the same time the Bank would be obliged to submit a report to the Government, 
which would be made public, stating the reason for the deviation, its planned response and the length 
of time that it expected to take to bring inflation back within the range. Since inflation was somewhat 
above the target when the declaration was made, the upper tolerance limit was set for 6% in 2001 and 
4½% in 2002. Despite the abolition of the exchange rate fluctuation range, the Central Bank reserved 
the right to intervene in the interbank market for foreign exchange by buying and selling currency if it 
deemed  this  necessary  in  order  to  contribute  towards  attaining  the  inflation  target,  or  if  it  viewed 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 exchange rate swings as a threat to financial stability. In effect, this new policy was ratified with the 
new Central Bank Act.  
The inflation target policy makes great professional demands upon the Central Bank. Although it was 
introduced at fairly short notice, the Bank had prepared itself for a conceivable change in the monetary 
framework for some time beforehand. An important aspect of the new policy is the Bank’s commitment 
to produce and publish inflation forecasts four times a year, projecting at least two years ahead. The 
Bank already had considerable experience of inflation forecasting and our studies have shown that it 
is no less capable in this field than other central banks that follow comparable policies. This success 
has  been  achieved  through  ambitious  professional  and  theoretical  work  which  is  one  of  the  Bank’s 
main focuses. We became aware that other central banks following the same kind of policy had noted 
and commented on how carefully Iceland had prepared for the introduction of inflation targeting. It is 
aimed  to  strengthen  the  Central  Bank’s  research  and  theoretical  work  still  further,  and  it  is  worth 
pointing  out  that  the  new  legislation  specifically  states  that  it  should  undertake  economic  research 
relating to its tasks.  
Inflation targeting establishes itself  
Inflation targeting policies have established themselves in recent years, with a correspondingly large 
reduction  in  the  number  of  countries  which  apply  policies  based  on  fixed  but  adjustable  exchange 
rates, or exchange rates within a fluctuation range. The reason is not least that it proved increasingly 
difficult to adhere to a fixed exchange rate policy in a world of deregulated capital movements. It could 
be said that prevailing opinion identified only two possible exchange rate options: a floating exchange 
rate  or  a  completely  fixed  one,  for  example  through  membership  of  a  currency  union,  unilateral 
adoption of some other currency or establishment of a currency board. The new policy has produced 
good  results  and  is  applied  in  countries  including  Sweden,  Norway,  the  UK,  Australia  and  New 
Zealand, along with several countries in Eastern Europe, Latin America, Asia and Africa. It can also be 
argued that the European Central Bank partly follows the same kind of policy.  
From all the above it is clear that the Central Bank of Iceland has undertaken the major responsibility 
of  ensuring  price  stability,  which  in  the  sense  used  in  the  joint  declaration  by  the  Government  and 
Central Bank means a twelve-month rise in the CPI of 2½%. It is not the Central Bank’s role to ensure 
a  specific  rate  of  growth  or  level  of  employment,  since  its  instruments  are  incapable  of  having  any 
impact on them in the long run. However, it is acknowledged that ensuring price stability creates vital 
preconditions for economic growth and prosperity.  
Inflation increased substantially this year and in June it passed outside the tolerance limits as defined 
in the March declaration. According to the Central Bank’s inflation forecast published in early August, 
the outlook that inflation would rapidly decelerate towards the end of this year and the beginning of the 
next, then would move inside the tolerance limits in the middle of next year, and the 2½% target would 
be  reached  in  mid-2003.  The  forecast  was  based  on  the  main  assumptions  of  an  unchanged 
exchange  rate  from  the  forecast  day,  a  cooling  of  the  economy  and  no  wage  rises  in  excess  of 
agreements that had already been negotiated. The Central Bank will publish its next inflation forecast 
on November 8.  
Tight monetary stance 
The Central Bank has applied a tight monetary stance for some time now, as reflected in its high policy 
interest rate. The policy rate is the rate of interest applying to the Central Bank’s repo transactions with 
credit  institutions,  i.e.  interest  on  liquid  funds  that  they  borrow  from  the  Bank.  Monetary  policy  has 
been the subject of lively debate in recent weeks and months and the Bank has been under steady 
pressure to cut interest rates. As the Central Bank has repeatedly underlined, its viewpoint has been 
that  lowering  interest  rates  entails  a  greater  risk  than  waiting  for  a  while  for  tangible  signs  that  the 
assumptions  behind  the  August  inflation  forecast  will  hold  good.  It  is  crucial  to  bring  inflation  down 
swiftly,  since  it  goes  without  saying  that  inflation  is  the  worst  enemy  of  both  households  and 
businesses.  A  tight  monetary  stance  inevitably  has  consequences  which  are  sometimes  painful  for 
households and businesses. There is nothing to be done about that. Households and businesses alike 
must accept the consequences of their actions and it is obvious that many of them have simply gone 
to excesses in their consumption, investments and borrowing in recent years. They will need to reduce 
their spending, cut costs and put their finances in order. That cannot be avoided.  
BIS Review 95/2001 
 3
 I also point out that the current account deficit is very large. Even though it has shrunk rapidly this year 
and will foreseeably continue to decrease substantially next year, it is still very large both in a historical 
and an international context. In order to achieve acceptable macroeconomic balance, a contraction in 
national income is unavoidable. Lower inflation and improved macroeconomic balance will also create 
a climate in which the nominal exchange rate of the króna can begin to appreciate.  
Furthermore, I underline that interest rates definitely do have the same effect in Iceland as in other 
countries, and that our research and studies indicate beyond any doubt that the impact of monetary 
policy  in  Iceland  is  similar  to  that  elsewhere.  However,  people  need  to  understand  exactly  what 
monetary policy is capable of, and what it is not.  
Transparency  
Finally, I shall turn to issues which are no less important than those I have already mentioned. Greater 
central  bank  independence  in  recent  years  has  been  accompanied  by  much  more  stringent 
requirements about transparency and accountability towards the government and general public. This 
means that central banks should operate as openly as possible. They must give clear accounts of their 
policies and assessments of the economic and monetary situation and outlook, and explain in detail 
the  assumptions  underlying  their  monetary  decisions.  All  this  serves  the  purpose  of  informing  the 
government  and  public  as  fully  as  possible  about  monetary  policy,  providing  them  with  a  basis  for 
understanding it and, depending on the circumstances, making an independent evaluation of it. One 
way  in  which  the  Central  Bank  fulfils  this  function  is  with  the  publication  of  its  quarterly  Monetary 
Bulletin.  Indeed,  the  new  legislation  states  that  the  Central  Bank  shall,  at  no  less  frequent  than 
quarterly  intervals,  publish  reports  on  its  monetary  policy  and  monetary,  exchange  rate  and  foreign 
exchange  developments  and  its  measures  in  these  areas.  The  Central  Bank  shall  also  issue  an 
annual report in which it explains in detail its activities. In its annual report, the Bank outlines various 
other aspects of its operations and publishes a detailed itemised account of its operating expenses, 
more detailed, I believe, than any other institution in Iceland. To cite an example of the importance of 
transparency  these  days,  in  autumn  1999  the  International  Monetary  Fund  published  guidelines  for 
transparency of monetary policy which it firmly urged all member countries to adopt. The Central Bank 
of Iceland can definitely be said to fulfil these rules. 
By  providing  detailed  descriptions  of  its  policies  and  assessments  of  the  economic  and  monetary 
situation and outlook, the Bank also contributes to professional and informed public debate on these 
issues. By the same token, greater responsibility is imposed on other commentators, since they have 
less scope for claiming lack of information. The Central Bank wholeheartedly welcomes professional 
public debate about the Bank and its policies, and takes part in such dialogue where it sees grounds 
for doing so. Lively, professional dialogue produces even greater understanding of the character and 
objectives of monetary policy. I hope to see students and teachers at the Faculty of Economics and 
Business Administration becoming involved in these issues in the future. There is always scope for 
new  opinions  in  debates  on  current  affairs.  The  debate  in  recent  weeks  partly  reflects  the  fact  that 
people are still absorbing the major changes that were made to the monetary policy framework this 
year.  
A wide range of cooperation has taken place between the Central Bank and the University of Iceland 
in  recent  years.  The  Central  Bank  has  supported  research  projects  in  its  areas  of  activity,  and 
published  the  findings  in  its  journals.  As  the  importance  of  monetary  policy  becomes  increasingly 
recognised in economic policy implementation, it is vital for the University’s Faculty of Economics and 
Business Administration to give a high profile to monetary economics, both theoretical and practical. 
Monetary policy is transmitted through numerous markets and it is vital for people engaged on both 
the analytical and business sides to have a firm grounding in this field. Similarly, it is important for the 
dialogue  on  monetary  policy  to  be  conducted  as  far  as  possible  on  a  firm  professional  basis.  The 
Central Bank is eager to cooperate more closely with the faculty and other bodies on strengthening 
university level teaching in monetary economics and central banking. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In this talk I have described the changes made in Iceland’s monetary policy implementation and new 
attitudes to monetary policy in much of the world. The main task of most central banks is to promote 
price stability, because it is recognised that by doing so they make the best contribution to economic 
growth  and  prosperity.  Under  the  new  monetary  framework,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has  been 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 provided with the same mechanisms as central banks in most industrialised countries for creating such 
an environment. The Central Bank takes this role seriously and will strive to fulfil the conditions laid 
down by the new legislation and in the joint declaration which it issued with the Government on March 
27. 
The global economic climate has been dramatically transformed in recent years and is still changing in 
the wake of the terrorist attacks on the USA on September 11. It is quite obvious that we in Iceland do 
not carry much weight in global economic terms. However, the situation in our immediate environment, 
especially among our main trading partner countries, is crucial to us. At the moment we are having a 
somewhat  stormy  ride.  In  this  new  environment,  the  role  of  everyone  involved  in  economic 
policy-making in Iceland will be to act in a disciplined and responsible fashion. Doing so will be the 
main way to contribute to economic growth and prosperity in Iceland.  
BIS Review 95/2001 
 5
