 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The economic outlook for Malaysia in the aftermath of 
11 September 
Special  luncheon  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  at  the  CFO 
Summit  2001  -  The  Economic  Outlook  in  the  Aftermath  of  11  September,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
8 November 2001. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
Even before the events of 11 September the global economy was already experiencing a slowdown in 
growth. Although there were emerging signs that the downturn was beginning to level off, the events 
of September 11, have increased the uncertainty of this prospect. The issue before us today is thus to 
what  extent  these  developments  affected  our  own  growth  prospects?  To  what  extent  can  we 
mitigate the adverse implications on our domestic sector. And most of all, what can each of us do in 
the current environment to better weather the economic slowdown?  
It is my pleasure to be here today to have this opportunity to share some thoughts with  you on the 
implications of these developments on the Malaysian economy.  
Current global economic environment  
After a decade of rapid expansion, the US economy entered a period of cyclical slowdown beginning 
in mid-2000, with GDP growth in the US slowing sharply from 8.3% in the first quarter of 2000 to less 
than a half percent in the second quarter of 2001. Given that the US absorbs about one-fifth of world 
exports,  the  slowdown  has  had  far  reaching  implications  on  world  growth.  The  sharper  than 
anticipated US slowdown before 11 September was due mainly to the adjustments in the technology 
sector  leading  to  cyclical  declines  in  business  investment  and  the  unwinding  of  inventories 
accumulated during the boom period. However, consumer spending, which accounts for two-thirds of 
GDP  in  the  United  States  and  activity  in  the  housing  sector  generally  was  still  holding  up  prior  to 
11 September.  This  trend  was  supported  by  interest  rate  reductions  by  300  basis  points  between 
January  and  August  2001  and  the  tax  rebates.  In  addition,  adjustments  in  asset  prices  were  seen 
relatively moderate.  
While  the  events  of  11  September  has  affected  business  and  consumer  confidence,  we  need  to 
distinguish  between  the  immediate  term  effects  and  the  longer-term  prospects  for  recovery  and 
growth.  On  an  industry-specific  basis,  the  impact  is  visibly  seen  in  the  tourism  and  travel-related 
industries and in the insurance sector. In the immediate term, it can be expected that activity will be 
dampened and some scaling back of expenditure and activity will take place. The unemployment rate 
has also been seen to rise and the recently released National Association of Purchasing Managers 
(NAPM)  index,  a  short-term  leading  indicator  of  the  US  economy,  showed  a  significant  decline. 
Nevertheless, the preliminary estimates of US third quarter GDP show that the decline was somewhat 
less  than  expected.  This  allows  for  some  cautious  optimism.  The  US  automobile  industry  also 
recorded  its  largest  ever  monthly  sales  in  October  as  consumers  responded  to  promotions  by  auto 
companies, indicating that the events of 11 September have not entirely curbed consumers’ propensity 
to  spend.  Furthermore,  concerns  for  a  sharp  weakening  in  the  US  dollar  have  receded  resulting  in 
relative  stability  in  the  major  exchange  rates.  Amidst  these  developments,  there  has  however  also 
been  a  simultaneous  slowdown  in  the  other  major  industrial  economies  resulting  in  downward 
revisions in the growth for Europe and Japan.  
While these reports are hardly comforting, it is important to keep our assessments in perspective. The 
current external environment reflect reactions in the immediate aftermath of the attacks. Of importance 
will be how the consumers  would  behave  in  the coming months. The answer to this  question is,  in 
large part, still remains uncertain. Much depends on how households in the industrialised economies 
assess their near-term job and income prospects, and how these assessments evolve over time as 
events in global environment continue to unfold.  
BIS Review 94/2001 
 1
 The final outcome would depend not only on analysis of the plethora of economic data before us, but 
also on the policies emerging in the US, Europe and also the regional economies. Of course, the main 
factor would be consumer and investor responses to these policy changes. In the US in particular, the 
Fed has eased monetary policy further immediately following 11 September, bringing interest rates to 
their  lowest  level  since  the  1960s.  The  US  Congress  has  approved  a  series  of  fiscal  packages, 
bringing the total fiscal spending to about 15% of GDP. The prompt and co-ordinated monetary policy 
response across the globe demonstrates the commitment to support global growth and avoid a tailspin 
reaction  that  could  lead  into  recession.  In  this  light,  while  further  economic  weakness  could  be 
expected  in  the  near  term,  positive  consumer  responses  to  policy  changes  would  point  to  more 
positive medium-term prospects.  
Given  these  emerging  indicators,  there  is  a  preponderance  of  views  that  the  current  economic 
slowdown would not be prolonged, that recovery can be expected to occur in the second half of 2002. 
Other positive factors relate to the sharp inventory adjustment that has taken place which will allow an 
upturn  in  demand  to  be  promptly  translated  into  higher  production  activities.  At  the  same  time, 
structural changes at the corporate level including world wide cost-cutting measures would provide the 
foundations for a sustained recovery in global growth.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Weathering the slowdown  
Being a highly open economy, Malaysia will continue to be affected by external developments. While 
we may not be able to directly reduce the impact of these developments on our external sector we can 
compensate for them by encouraging domestic activity. On the domestic front, Malaysia has over the 
years has built strong foundations that places us in a position to weather this current slowdown. The 
events of 11 September have  not altered our positive economic fundamentals and our foundations. 
This will continue to provide businesses with the platform to sustain their activity.  
Firstly,  structural  adjustments  undertaken  over  the  recent  decades  and  the  more  recent  measures 
taken  since  the  crisis  have  resulted  in  a  more  diversified  and  productive  economic  base  that  is 
more resilient to external shocks. The recent strong performance of the services sector and positive 
growth  in  the  agriculture  and  mining  sectors  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  contributed  to  mitigating  to 
some extent the decline in electronics exports. For the services sector the domestic content is high 
and several services sub-sectors are not linked to the manufacturing sector. These sectors continue to 
respond  positively  to  domestic  policies.  Even  within  the  manufacturing  sector,  domestic-oriented 
industries  contribute  about  one-third  of  the  total  output  of  the  sector.  These  sectors  have  benefited 
from the fiscal stimulus package and the low interest rate environment.  
Second, the Government’s fiscal position remains strong, with outstanding debt being contained at 
37% of GDP and the debt service to GDP ratio of 2.8%. The increased fiscal deficit has been financed 
from  non-inflationary  sources.  Expenditure  allocations  have  also  been  targeted  to  projects  with 
immediate and high spin-off effects.  
Third, 
remain 
accommodative.  Our  track  record  of  low  and  stable  inflation  has  also  encouraged  capital  formation 
through a high savings rate.  
Fourth,  the  current  account  surpluses  continue  to  remain  large  thereby  lending  strength  to  the 
balance of payments. The current account of the balance of payments is expected to register a surplus 
of 7.9% of GNP in 2001. The decline in exports has been offset by corresponding reduction in imports 
as well as payments in services. This surplus is expected to continue to serve as a buffer to finance 
volatility in short-term flows.  
Fifth, our external reserves have continued its rising trend and are ample and unencumbered. 
The external reserves level have now breached the end-2000 level. The figures for 31 October shows 
the reserve level is now US$30.2 billion. This reserve position is adequate to finance 4.9 months of 
retained imports and 6.3 times the short-term external debt.  
Sixth, our external debt levels are low, reducing our vulnerability to the current slowdown in external 
demand. Total external debt was equal to 49.5% of GNP as at end-June, significantly lower than the 
peak of 64% recorded at end-1997. The overall debt service ratio is also low at only 5%, even with the 
slower export growth. In addition, the short-term debt component is low, accounting for 11% of total 
inflationary  pressures  are  contained, 
thus  allowing  monetary  policy 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2001
 external  debt  and  18%  of  external  reserves  holdings,  giving  Malaysia  one  of  the  most  favourable 
positions among regional economies.  
Seventh, the Malaysian banking sector has been strengthened and  is more resilient following the 
recent  restructuring  and  consolidation  that  has  been  achieved.  This  is  reflected  by  the  higher 
capitalisation  ratios, 
improved  profitability  and  asset  quality.  The  strong  RWCR  of  12.5% 
(end-September) and core capital ratio of 10.6% provides adequate cushion to absorb increases of 
NPLs  from  the  economic  slowdown.  The  latest  stress  tests  indicate  that  the  RWCR  of  the  banking 
system is expected to remain well above the BIS minimum of 8% in view of the strong capitalisation of 
the banking institutions. Also domestic private  debt to GDP has declined from the peak of 152% in 
1998 to current level of 133% mid-2001.  
Eighth, while we have seen an increase in retrenchment in the labour market, unemployment levels 
remain low. Of importance is that the educated labour force has the mobility to adapt to a changing 
environment. Efforts are focused on upgrading the quality of the education system. While some labour 
dislocation  can  be  expected,  efforts  are  being  directed  to  encourage  redeployment  to  alternate 
activities.  
Ninth,  our  physical  infrastructure  is  one  of  the  best  developed  in  the  Asian  region,  facilitating 
production, trade and communication.  
Tenth, the political stability and institutional arrangements in place allow for rapid, effective and 
co-ordinated decision making to deal with ongoing developments. It allows for prompt response and 
strategic planning in managing the management of the economy. Accelerated corporate restructuring 
involving  some  of  the  largest  corporations  in  the  country  is  also  underway  with  increased  attention 
being focussed on enhancing corporate governance.  
Despite a more difficult external environment, these solid foundations have remained intact and  will 
continue to provide Malaysia the ability to ride out this current phase of slowdown while ensuring our 
long-term growth prospects. More specifically, it will provide us with the agility to adapt, adjust and 
respond  to  changes  in  economic  conditions,  changes  in  comparative  advantage  and  changes  in 
opportunities that the current environment accords. The track record has shown that over the decades 
the economy has been able to shift to new areas of growth with changing opportunities and changes 
in  comparative  advantage.  Prudent  policies  pursued  and  careful  economic  management  have  also 
accorded us with a high degree of flexibility in policy options in responding to the new challenges that 
have emerged. Our resilience is on account of the combination of our strong foundations, and the high 
degree of agility and flexibility of policy to respond to this difficult period thereby enhancing our ability 
to weather the current slowdown. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Of  importances  is  therefore  to  look  beyond  the  immediate  term.  Our  history  shows  that  the 
economic  downturns  in  1985,  in  1998  and  in  the  current  period  have  been  externally  driven.  As  a 
highly open economy we will continue to be vulnerable to external developments. In these periods of 
adverse external conditions, domestic policy responses have however,  been successful in restoring 
growth. The strategy adopted has been to be pre-emptive and to front  load the policy initiatives. In 
addition,  these  efforts  have  generally  been  supported  by  further  efforts  to  strengthen  the  economic 
base further and the restructuring and reform of the financial system. Despite the severity of the 1998 
contraction, Malaysia recovered within a year with strengthened economic fundamentals. All this was 
possible given the strong foundations of our economy and financial system. All too often this has been 
taken for granted.  
In  the  current  period,  the  focus  of  policy  is  on  promoting  domestic  sources  of  growth.  It  has  so  far 
allowed  us  to  mitigate  to  some  extent  the  adverse  effects  on  the  slowdown  in  the  export-oriented 
manufacturing  sector.  In  the  first  half-year,  we  saw  positive  growth  recorded  in  the  agriculture  and 
mining  sectors,  construction  sector  as  well  as  domestic-market  oriented  manufacturing  industries. 
Going forward, pro-growth policies are targeted at improving consumer disposable income, increasing 
expenditure  skills  enhancement  and  improving  infrastructure.  The  impact  of  these  policies  together 
with  low  interest  rates  would  continue  to  filter  into  the  domestic  economy.  Should  global  demand 
strengthen, Malaysia will be well positioned to see a strengthening in the second half of the next year.  
The  Government  has  therefore  directed  policy  measures  to  strengthen  domestic  sources  of 
growth. The expected impact of the US economic slowdown was already built into the fiscal stimulus 
package contained in the 2001 Budget and now in the 2002 Budget. Projects identified under the fiscal 
BIS Review 94/2001 
 3
 stimulus  include  those  with  high  spill-over  effects,  low  import  content  and  short  gestation  period. 
Hence,  higher  allocations  have  been  given  to  social  services,  education,  training,  low  cost  housing 
and health services.  
In  early  2001,  amidst  signs  that  the  slowdown  in  the  US  economy  was  more  severe  than  earlier 
expectations,  further  measures  were  taken  in  March  2001.  The  measures  included  an  additional 
fiscal stimulus of RM3 billion and reduction in employees’ share of EPF contributions by 2% for one 
year are aimed at promoting consumer spending and overall economic activity.  
Following  the  heightened  uncertainty  after  the  events  of  11  September,  an  additional  stimulus 
package  amounting  to  RM4.3  billion  was  announced  prior  to  the  Budget  2002.  This  early 
announcement was aimed at providing enough lead time for higher expenditure to sustain growth. The 
focus  of  allocations  has  also  been  also  skewed  towards  small  projects  for  which  funds  would  be 
promptly be disbursed.  
Most recently, the Budget 2002 presented to Parliament in October reinforced the strategy to diversify 
further  the  economic  structure  by  increasing  the  significance  of  domestic  sources  of  growth.  The 
Budget included measures to further promote economic activity through increasing domestic demand 
while  strengthening  the  private  sector’s  resilience  and  competitiveness.  In  addition,  to  higher 
development expenditure, the focus of Budget 2002 was directed at raising disposable incomes via 
tax  cuts  and  bonuses  as  a  more  direct  measure  to  stimulate  private  consumption.  Other  fiscal 
measures and allowances were also aimed at providing further incentives to businesses.  
The question has often been raised concerns the sustainability of the fiscal deficit and its potential for 
long-term risks to the economy. Previous prudent policies has accorded the Government the flexibility 
for this expansionary policy. The deficits has been financed from non-inflationary sources and the high 
rate of domestic savings has enabled access to such financing without crowding out the private sector. 
Prudent  policies  have  also kept debt levels low.  Debt levels, in particular the  external  debt position 
remains low. This continues to be an important strength of the Malaysian economy. Secondly, excess 
liquidity in the domestic money market and strong demand for Government securities means that new 
issues can be raised at low interest cost. The debt servicing would therefore not be a burden to future 
generations.  Thirdly,  the  expenditure  is  well-targeted  and  has  high  potential  to  achieve  the  desired 
objectives.  And  finally,  the  plan  is  for  a  consolidation  of  the  nation’s  fiscal  position  with  a  reduced 
deficit  in  the  year  2002  with a balanced  position envisaged during the period of the Eight  Malaysia 
Plan.  
On  the  monetary  front,  the  strategy  has  been  to  front  load  the  monetary  measures  to  provide  a 
positive  environment  for  the  private  sector.  During  the  recent  period,  the  already  historically  low 
lending  rates  have  been  effective  in  stimulating  domestic  demand  both  in  terms  of  rising  loans  for 
residential property, passenger cars and consumer durables and for investments in the manufacturing 
and  services  sector.  Interest  rates  were  not  raised  with  the  growth  in  1999  and  when  growth  was 
exceptionally strong in 2000. Monetary  policy  during this period continued to be directed to support 
domestic activity in an environment of low inflation.  
Following the increased uncertainty after the events of 11 September, the 3-month intervention rate 
was reduced by 50 basis points to 5% on 20 September to support domestic economic activities in 
the  light  of  heightened  potential  for  a  more  rapid  economic  slowdown.  Currently,  lending  rates  in 
Malaysia  are  now  among  the  lowest  in  the  region.  In  addition,  specific  measures  have  also  been 
undertaken  to  increase  volume  and  access  to  financing  by  SMEs.  All  these  measures  have 
contributed to positive growth in bank lending.  
While  addressing  short-term  developments,  policy  also  continues  to  focus  on  long-term  areas  to 
strengthen  further  our  foundations  in  the  financial  sector.  With  the  successful  completion  of  the 
consolidation  of  the  banking  sector,  it  became  necessary  to  address  the  remaining  overhang  of 
corporate leverage. In this context, a series of aggressive measures has been taken to expedite 
the  process  of  resolving  the  outstanding  corporate  debt  of  large  corporations.  Important 
changes  has  been  implemented  in  the  management  and  implementation  of  this  corporate  sector 
restructuring.  
Similarly,  the  implementation  of  new  rules  with  regard  to  corporate  governance  has  also  ensured 
improvement  in  standards  and  practices  in  the  corporate  sector.  The  Malaysian  Code  of  Corporate 
Governance  has  been  implemented  and  various  changes  have  been  effected  to  the  Securities 
Commission  Act  1993  and  to  the  KLSE  Listing  Requirements  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and 
statutory framework for corporate governance.  
4 
 BIS Review 94/2001
 These  developments  in  the  economy  and  financial  markets  serve  the  ultimate  goal  to  create  an 
economy  that  is  responsive  to  change  and  resilient  to  external  shocks  thereby  increasing  our 
prospects for long-term growth.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Malaysia  has  a  track  record  of  ensuring  that  the  economic  environment  is  supportive  of  business 
activities. Policies that have been implemented have demonstrated our commitment to preserve the 
value of both domestic and foreign investments in Malaysia. While our foundations have provided us 
with the agility to adjust, and the flexibility of policy to respond the resilience to weather the current 
slowdown,  it  is  recognised  that  we  need  to  continue  to  strengthen  our  economic  structure  need  to 
continue  with  determined  perseverance  so  as  to  enable  us  to  effectively  manage  external  shocks 
without weakening our economic foundation.  
While all these may provide some assurance, this will by no means ensure the desired results. The 
reactions and responses by  the  business and consumers are vital to the success of these policies. 
This  requires  an  ability  for  a  more  balanced  approach  and  distinguishing  the  longer-term  economic 
prospects that are not biased by short-term concerns from the immediate term conditions. Within the 
context of domestic conditions, business must also be aware of global developments and the more 
competitive  external  environment.  In  this  regard,  we  need  to  strive  to  increase  efficiency  and 
productivity to enhance our own competitiveness. Despite the current weaker conditions, businesses 
should  not  hold  back  making  the  strategic  investments  to  ensure  that  they  are  well-positioned  to 
benefit from an upturn when it occurs. Any hindrances to further progress should be eliminated and 
new  business  segments  for  growth  should  be  sought  out.  Research  and  development  expenditure 
should continue as this will be an important true sustainable source of competitive advantage in the 
global economy. An integral part of this strategy is the need for enhanced training and upgrading of 
human resources.  
Bankers,  in  the  meantime,  should  not  overreact  to  the  weaker  short-term  environment,  and  should 
continue  to  provide  access  to  financing  for  viable  projects  to  support  the  growth  process.  A  more 
constructive approach needs to be taken by the financial institutions to assist borrowers, on their own 
initiative, to reschedule and restructure the loans of viable borrowers. Finally, consumers should spend 
productively and contribute to sustain domestic demand.  
To conclude, the Government has acted swiftly to the global slowdown and the recent events in the 
US. The Government has done its part. It is therefore the private sector response that will be the key 
determining element in how Malaysia will weather the current challenging environment.  
BIS Review 94/2001 
 5
