 David Klein: A “package deal”? - the policy changes needed for 2002 and 
thereafter 
Prepared  by  Mr  David  Klein,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  as  background  to  a  meeting  with 
“Haaretz” economic journalists, Tel Aviv, 20 November 2001. 
 Clarification of the term 
The  term  “package  deal”  was  the  name  given  in  the  past  to  a  plan  of  action  agreed  between  the 
government  and  non-government  entities-the  employers’  and  employees  organizations-to  achieve 
certain objectives. The objectives were usually to lower inflation and reduce the deficit in the balance 
of payments. 
Today we are facing a different situation: the economy is in recession, there is high unemployment, 
and there is no significant improvement in sight. In other words, it is clear that the current policy needs 
to be revised. Is a package deal necessary for this, or does the government have the required tools at 
its disposal to act alone? 
It is best to answer this question after identifying the policy changes needed to boost growth and raise 
employment without undermining stability and without increasing the balance of payments deficit. 
What characterizes the current policy? 
Policy is reflected by laws, government decisions, and agreements, some old ones, and some new. 
What set of laws, decisions, and agreements is relevant to today’s objective? 
There are two anchors to macroeconomic policy: 
1. 
Fiscal policy, aimed at reducing the government’s size and debt. The implementation of 
the appropriate policy in this sphere will enable the tax burden and interest rates, mainly the medium- 
and long-term rates, to be reduced. Both of these factors are vital to growth. 
We know that the budget for 2002 is not positioned on the path needed to attain these goals: 
– 
The deficit will be greater than planned because the estimate of revenues is based on an 
unrealistic growth  assumption.  Moreover this  will be the second  year in succession  with  a 
deviation  in  the  deficit,  which  undermines  confidence  in  the  government’s  commitment  to 
return to the downward deficit and debt path from 2003. 
By far the greatest part of additional government expenses is directed to current expenses, 
and  only  a  small  part  (less  than  one  tenth)  to  financing  investments.  What  is  needed, 
therefore, to attain the objective, is: 
– 
To  adjust  the  budget  for  2002  to  ensure  that  the  deficit  set  by  the  government  is 
adhered to;  
To  alter  the  composition  of  government  expenses  so  that  the  addition  directed  to 
investments increases. 
  To do this, another subject must be addressed: 
Private legislation 
It  has  been  shown  conclusively  that  existing  laws  do  not  prevent  private  legislation  from  changing 
government decisions on budgetary aggregates (tax benefits are granted which reduce revenues, and 
laws are passed which raise expenses), imposing an order of priorities on the government different 
from the one it approved, and adversely affecting growth and employment. An amendment to the law 
is required which will ensure that all initiatives by Knesset members will have to be checked in the light 
of the budget policy determined by the government. All the private bills introduced in the last two years 
must be covered by this amendment. 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 1
 Monetary policy, aimed at preserving price stability and supporting financial stability. 
2. 
The more firmly established this stability, the lower the rate of interest needed to maintain it. Stability 
and  low  interest  are  another  essential  key  to  sustainable  growth.  Without  stability,  there  is  no 
investment,  and  without  investment,  there  is  no  growth.  Certain  additional  steps  are  required  to 
complete monetary policy, just as in the case of fiscal policy: 
The abolition of the ceiling on Treasury bills issues. 
– 
The abolition of the exchange-rate band. 
– 
– 
The  abolition  of  the  remaining  foreign-currency  controls,  and  making  the  NIS  fully 
convertible. 
Unification of tax rates on interest income of individuals and mutual funds, without affecting 
total revenue from this source. 
 These adjustments would shift the center of gravity of monetary policy from the banks to the financial 
markets, and enable price stability to be achieved at a lower rate of interest. Furthermore, and no less 
important, these changes would make the financial markets more efficient, improve their competitive 
structure, and thereby encourage savings and support growth. 
In  addition  to  the  two  anchors  mentioned  above,  we  must  give  attention  to  various 
3. 
aspects of the labor market and wages policy in the public sector. The relevant topics are: 
a. 
The law currently in force determines that the minimum wage is updated according to the 
average  wage.  To  avoid  exposing  the  minimum  wage  to  irrelevant  changes  in  the  wage 
structure  in  the  economy,  and  to  comply  with  the  original  concept  underlying  the  Law 
(ensuring a minimum income for workers at low wage levels), it would be better to link the 
minimum wage to the Consumer Price Index (CPI). In order to share the fruits of economic 
growth with those at low wage levels, the possibility of adding the rise in productivity should 
be  examined.  Efficient  methods  of  enforcing  the  Law  should  be  introduced.  At  the  same 
time, the salaries of the most senior public-sector office holders, which are currently indexed 
to the average wage, should also be switched over to linkage with the CPI.  
The policy of reducing the number of foreign workers, in particular the illegal ones, should be 
implemented. 
The policy aimed at replacing income support with a program to increase the participation 
rate in the labor force should be implemented.  
A  special  work  plan  should  be  drawn  up  to  retrain  those  who  have  been  unemployed  for 
more than a year. 
The programs of support for small and medium-sized businesses should  be reviewed  and 
strengthened, with special attention paid to those in outlying areas.  
Wages policy should concentrate on the public sector. To carry out the policy of maintaining 
the  real  wage,  the  rules  for  determining  wage  drift  (compensation  for  seniority;  large 
differentials between grades; the pace of advancement through the grades; and other related 
expenses) should be amended. 
Dealing with factories in difficulties 
4. 
A governmental approach must be determined to deal with the problems of factories in difficulties:  
a. 
b. 
A legal framework is necessary (“Chapter 11”).  
A  process  must  be  instituted  to  distinguish  between  factories  whose  continued  existence 
cannot be justified on economic grounds, and those facing temporary difficulties. 
Any recovery  program for a particular factory should  require the participation of the  owners 
(including  investors  in  the  capital  market),  creditors,  and  employees,  and  not  just  the 
government.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  all,  including  the  government,  entitled  to  some 
benefit if the recovery program proves successful. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
c. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2001
 What is the next step? The professional team and working teams 
In  a  meeting  called  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  which  took  place  on  14  November,  2001,  with  the 
Chairman  of  the  General  Federation  of  Labour  in  Israel  (the  New  Histadrut),  the  President  of  the 
Manufacturers’ Association, and the Governor of the Bank of Israel, a decision was reached to appoint 
a professional team. The team’s role  would be to formulate a  work plan such  as that  which I  have 
outlined  above.  A  work  plan  is  not  the  same  as  an  operative  plan,  and  working  teams  must  be 
appointed to go over the details. Four such teams can work in parallel: 
1. 
One team will be led by the Budget Department, and will include representatives of the Prime 
Minister’s office. This team will formulate the change needed in the budget for 2002, both in 
the aggregates and in the composition of expenses; it will also deal with the amendment which 
will regulate the rules governing private legislation.  
The second team will include representatives of the New Histadrut, and representatives of the 
Wages and Labor Agreements Department of the Ministry of Finance, and will formulate the 
overall changes needed in public-sector wages so that the policy of maintaining the real wage 
can be implemented.  
The third team will include representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the New Histadrut, 
and the manufacturers. Its task is to look into the changes needed in the Minimum Wage Law, 
and ways of reducing the number of foreign workers in Israel.  
The  fourth  team  will  include  representatives  from  the  Bank  of  Israel  and  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  and  its  function  is  to  propose  changes  to  remove  the  obstacles  obstructing  the 
conduct of monetary policy and to boost the development of the capital market.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
The working teams can complete their tasks in a few weeks, so that the professional team will be able 
to submit its proposals to the forum which appointed it by the end of the year. 
Summary 
The main changes required must be instituted as part of the normal process by which the government 
reaches decisions. This necessitates the political agreement of the various members of the coalition, 
but not the agreement of the employees or employers. What is under consideration this time is not a 
package  incorporating  a  wage  and  price  freeze,  a  large  devaluation,  a  change  in  the  short-term 
interest rate, or the adjustment of subsidies, as was the case in the package deals of the 1980s. Some 
of these are not necessary at this time, some cannot be implemented on a practical basis, and some 
would cause more harm than good. In any event, the importance of the required change in fiscal policy 
far outweighs that of the changes mentioned above. In certain areas, mainly those connected with the 
labor market, it would be preferable, now as it was with earlier packages, to arrive at solutions with the 
agreement of the employees and employers. 
The package under discussion on this occasion is thus different from its predecessors. In the past, the 
issue was one of clearly defined, quantified, steps introduced for a specific time period. In the past it 
could  have  been  asked  “Who  is  giving,  and  who  is  receiving?”  Today’s  package  must  incorporate 
changes  in  the  operating  rules-laws,  decisions,  and  agreements-without  time  limits  being  imposed. 
This is an adjustment to the policy path, and not just ad hoc changes, because the problems being 
dealt  with  are  not  ad  hoc  problems.  Investments,  growth,  and  creating  job  opportunities  cannot  be 
realized from today to tomorrow; creating a climate which will encourage them requires a transparent 
and credible long-term policy. 
BIS Review 99/2001 
 3
