Urban Bäckström: The business cycle and interest rate policy
Speech by Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the
Board  of  Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,.at  the  Euroforum’s
Conference, Örebro, 10 October 2001.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to discuss matters to do with the business cycle and interest
rate policy here with you in Örebro. We are living at present in turbulent times. Political events on the
world stage have considerable economic and other repercussions in Sweden. Today I shall be saying
something about my view of the business cycle’s current phase and also try in some measure to look
into the future.
Weaker activity in the rest of the world
Global economic growth slackened appreciably in the first half of this year. The downward phase has
lasted longer and become deeper than many observers had counted on at the beginning of the year.
For the first time in  over a decade  we  are experiencing a synchronous slowdown  in  all  the  leading
economies. The terrorist attacks on 11 September have accentuated the risk of the downward phase
being more pronounced and protracted. At the same time it should be underscored that the attacks
can hardly be expected to disrupt the conditions for growth in the longer run, either in the industrialised
countries or in what are commonly referred to as the emerging markets.
It was mainly rising energy prices, higher interest rates, falling stock markets and a sudden downturn
in  corporate  investment  that  resulted  in  the  almost  simultaneous  and  abrupt  slowing  of  global
economic activity in the latter part of last year. Weaker demand led in turn to stock adjustments and
thereby to  a  further  downward  effect  on  orders  and  production.  At  the  same  time,  the  falling  share
prices muted private consumption. On top of this, the terrorist attacks will entail a short-term loss of
production and probably also postpone an upturn.
The cyclical downturn is following the normal pattern in many respects and is therefore not particularly
surprising. Its course has been accelerated, however, by the collapse of the excessive optimism which
had accompanied the technological breakthroughs that gave rise to the notion of a new economy. For
a time there was no end to the hyperbole about the blessings that the new facilities for information and
telecommunication  had  in  store.  Expectations  of  rapidly  rising  profits  and  incomes  pervaded
households  and  businesses  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  perhaps  above  all  in  the  United  States.
Investment and consumption  rose.  So  did  share  prices.  Production  plans  were  revised  upwards.  In
time, imbalances arose in the American economy between investment and saving, as well as between
current and more fundamental stock market valuations. Although optimism everywhere  else  did  not
become  as  excessive  as  in  the  United  States,  decisions  were  no  doubt  made  about  consumption,
investment  and  shareholdings  that  possibly  would  not  have  occurred  if  more  lasting  economic
considerations and more realistic expectations had prevailed.
Importance of learning from history
History teaches us that in business, euphoric phases tend to be followed by a clear change of mood.
The fact is that a similar wave of over-optimism attended the era of railway-building in the nineteenth
century.  The  invention  of  the  electric  motor  and  the  combustion  engine  likewise  generated  a  high
degree of over-confidence in the early twentieth century. In Sweden it was the possibilities of using the
new technology to reap large profits from such natural resources as hydroelectric power, timber and
ore that were exaggerated. In the late 1990s the jubilance was about the huge profits that were going
to be reaped instead from computer and telecom technology. Once again, the expectations of rising
profits and incomes overshot the mark.
We  should  bear  in  mind,  however,  that  the  major  innovations  did  play  a  tremendous  part  in  the
emergence of industrialised society and the welfare state. Railways have been of lasting importance,
not least in Sweden. Without those investments in the early twentieth century, the mining and forest
BIS Review 82/2001
1
industries could hardly have done what they did to launch Norrland and other parts of our country on
the  world  market.  Sweden  is  one  of  the  world’s  best  examples  of  the  forces  for  growth  that  are
generated  by  innovations,  experimentation  and  creative  processes.  Companies  like  Ericsson,  AGA,
SKF, Atlas Copco and Electrolux are just a number of the instances of inventions that have contributed
to our country’s long-term growth.
The old Austrian school of economics, with its roots in the period before World War I, had an analytical
focus on growth and the business cycle that is relevant for an understanding of the present situation.
One  insight  is  the  crucial  part  innovations  play  for  the  path  of  long-term  growth.  This  has  been
elucidated  not  least  by  Joseph  Schumpeter  and  Erik  Dahmén.  However,  the  significance  of
innovations and technology for growth is not a straightforward matter. They often raise productivity and
generate windfall profits. The new products that result from innovations give some firms a monopoly,
while other firms that are relying on older technology are pushed to the wall. In such a process there
is, of course, a large risk of making the wrong decisions.
The Austrian school also regarded investment as the linchpin of the business cycle. In the event of a
technological  breakthrough,  firms  are  liable  to  overestimate  the  size  and  duration  of  the  resultant
improvement in productivity. That is why an upward phase not infrequently culminates with excessive
optimism and faulty investment. When profit expectations then fall back to more realistic levels, share
prices  fall  and  corporate  investment  takes  time  out  until  capital  stocks  have  adjusted  to  a  more
reasonable view of long-term yields. At the same time, households adjust their consumption, not least
of capital goods, to a more realistic assessment of income’s long-term trend. Seen in the context of
innovations, there is no ready-made pattern for either the occurrence of a cyclical downturn or  how
quickly it can be reversed.
A third basic insight from the Austrian school concerns economic policy’s limitations. If a leap forward
in  technology  leads  to  a  period  of  unsustainable  growth  of  investment  and  consumption,  there  is
bound to be a recoil. As argued in the 1970s not least by Fredrich Hayek, perhaps the foremost of the
Austrians and a Nobel prize-winner, the necessary adjustment after a supply shock cannot be avoided
by trying to bridge the trough with measures of economic policy. As an adjustment to more realistic
expectations must come, a bridging policy will simply postpone it and presumably make it more difficult
when it eventually happens.
But history also teaches us that after a period of what I would call growing pains, optimism about the
new technology’s potential will be restored  in  a more orderly and realistic form. Neither the sudden
downturn in the global economy nor the terrorist attacks on 11 September should have changed the
grounds for a positive appraisal of the new technology in the somewhat longer run.
Signs in the summer of stabilisation in the United States
During the summer there were signs that economic activity in the rest of the world was becoming more
stable. Tendencies in some of the U.S. economy’s leading indictors could be interpreted as heralding
a slower phase in the decline of manufacturing. Firms also seemed to have made some progress with
stock adjustments. The message from financial markets, on the other hand, was that economic activity
would continue to be weak for a time: share prices fell another 20 to 30 per cent during the summer,
mostly in August and September, and long bond rates went on declining.
The human suffering caused by the terrorist attacks on 11 September is really tragic. They are on a
different  plane  from  the  indirect  effects  but  the  latter  still  have  to  be  considered.  As  regards  the
economic aspects, it can be noted that certain activities closed down in connection with the attacks
and  production  was  curtailed  in  others.  This  direct  loss  of  output  occurred  primarily  in  the  financial
sector, aviation and recreation. To this must be added the effects on economic developments in the
coming quarters. The crucial factors here are how consumers and firms around the world perceive the
risk of more extensive conflicts and the scale and duration of the response to the attacks that has now
begun.
Today,  therefore,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  gauge  at  all  precisely  what  the  aggregate  quantitative
effects  of  the  terrorist  attacks  are  likely  to  be.  Global  economic  activity  will  presumably  still  be
determined  by  the  requisite  adjustment  after  the  over-optimism  in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,
economic  policy  in  the  United  States  has  become  increasingly  expansionary.  Sizeable  interest  rate
cuts have been accompanied by large fiscal stimuli. But it does look as though this year’s GDP growth
will have to be revised downwards. The outlook for 2002 is more uncertain but a downward revision is
2
BIS Review 82/2001
most  probable.  An  illustration  of  the  current  uncertainty  is  the  unusually  wide  spread  between
assessments  of  the  American  economy  in  recent  years.  Some  forecasts  envisage  a  very  rapid
recovery, with GDP growth already up at between 3 and 4 per cent next year in the United  States;
others foresee falling GDP.
The picture in Sweden
The  Swedish  economy  is  characterised  by  a  relatively  sharp  slowdown  and  an  appreciable
depreciation of the krona in the past year. Another feature is that inflation is currently above 3 per cent
and thus outside the upper tolerance limit for the Riksbank’s 2 per cent target.
The high inflation at present is mainly, though not exclusively, a consequence of price increases that
can  be  regarded  as  fairly  transitory.  The  causes  include  foot-and-mouth  disease,  higher  electricity
prices and certain changes in the method for measuring electricity prices. Supply shocks of this kind
normally do not have lasting effects on the rate of inflation. There is therefore reason to believe that
when the increased price levels drop out of the twelve-month change figures between now and next
spring, the figures will fall back from the relatively high rates at present. This presupposes that inflation
expectations are not affected and that  other  factors,  for  example  cyclical  activity  and  the  exchange
rate, do not pull in the other direction.
The picture of inflation does, however, include other features that probably have to do with the high
resource  utilisation  during  the  latest  upward  phase.  During  the  past  year  underlying  inflation  has
gradually moved up. But meanwhile, economic activity — here as well as in the rest of the world —
has  been  slowing  markedly.  If  one  is  to  believe  Statistics  Sweden’s  latest  figures  for  the  national
accounts, GDP growth this year will hardly exceed 1.5 per cent. This will probably tend to dampen any
price pressure — as long as nothing  unforeseen has happened to our  economy’s long-term growth
potential.
Before the terrorist attacks there were some signs that manufacturing activity was stabilising, not least
because  the  weak  exchange  rate  has  lowered  relative  costs.  During  the  late  summer  it  looked  in
general as though the inflow of manufacturing orders was falling less steeply than before. In the past,
this has usually been the first sign of a stabilisation. However, the picture varies between industries.
Orders have already turned upwards in some and in others the decline has slowed, while for telecom
products, for example, orders are still falling sharply. That the krona’s relatively large depreciation has
not  yet  led to  an  upturn for total exports  is largely  explained  by the  export product mix and  market
conditions in certain key industries, for example the decline in tele- and data-communication.
With a flexible exchange rate regime, there is nothing new about some depreciation in connection with
a cyclical downturn. Numerous examples can be cited from all over the world. Basically, in a small,
open economy the exchange rate often functions as a sort of shock-absorber. The problem today is
that  the  krona’s  depreciation  has  occurred  from  a  level  that  was  already  weak.  This  amounts  to  a
further  appreciable  lowering  of  Swedish  manufacturing’s  relative  costs  and  thus  an  increased  profit
share. Our experience from the 1970s and 1980s has shown that a weak exchange rate can generate
inflationary tendencies.
Let us not forget what happened in recent  years. When the krona weakened in connection with the
crises in Mexico, Asia and Russia, Swedish exports recovered quickly and strongly. During the autumn
of 1998 exports dropped, order inflows were weak and forecasts where quickly revised downwards;
but just a few quarters later production for export was booming again. So it is reasonable to expect
that sooner or later, although just when is not clear, Swedish exports will pick up this time as well. But
the  terrorist  attacks  have  probably  postponed  the  recovery  and  perhaps  even  accentuated  the
slowdown in the short run. It is important to keep an eye on the exchange rate as well as economic
activity.
On the domestic scene there are some bright spots. Household disposable income, for instance, looks
like rising strongly next year. Contributory factors are a falling rate of inflation, fiscal stimuli and, not
least, a labour market with no dramatic changes, at least at present. Moreover, real interest rates are
low. All this probably reduces the risk of private consumption continuing to weaken. At the same time
there are many indications that the reduction of equity wealth in recent years has had an appreciable
negative effect on purchases of consumer durables. So there are good reasons for supposing that it
will be some time before households are again prepared to invest in new cars and other capital goods.
Consumption may therefore remain  weak  for  somewhat  longer.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  risk  that,
BIS Review 82/2001
3
despite the weak exchange rate and low real interest rates, the Swedish economy will recover more
slowly than expected earlier.
To sum up, a number of factors point to a gradual economic recovery in Sweden in the course of next
year. This picture could still be changed by many things. One factor is the terrorist attacks and their
aftermath.  Another  is,  of  course,  the  extent  of  the  economic  adjustment  that  occurs  in  the  United
States as a consequence of the imbalances that have accumulated in recent years.
Monetary policy
Swedish monetary policy in the past year has had to consider an economic slowdown on the one hand
and a depreciating currency on the other. GDP slowed from rates of 3 to 4 per cent in recent years to
between 1 and 1.5 per cent in the first half of this year. At the same time, since last year the krona has
weakened around 15 per cent.
These  two  forces  have  pulled  the  Riksbank’s  inflation  forecasts  in  slightly  different  directions  at
different times in the past year. Roughly speaking, with a given potential growth rate, inflation tends to
be  subdued  when  economic  activity  slackens,  while  a  weak  exchange  rate  pulls  in  the  opposite
direction and may lead to higher price increases: directly through rising import prices and indirectly by
stimulating  activity  via  export  production.  In  addition,  sudden  exchange  rate  movements  can  affect
inflation expectations.
Here  I  should  like  to  be  precise  and  a  little  formal  and  say  that  it  is  neither  the  current  economic
situation  nor  the  current  exchange  rate  that  constitutes  the  starting  point  for  the  Riksbank’s
comprehensive inflation forecast and monetary policy. What we use instead is an assessment of the
future  economic  situation  and  an  opinion  about  the  exchange  rate’s  future  path.  But  if  economic
activity  slackens  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  it  does  tell  us  something  about  the  strength  of  the
cyclical  path  and  the  probable  future  course.  The  same  applies  to  the  exchange  rate.  A  sudden
depreciation  normally  tells  us  something  about  the  probable  future  path;  it  probably  reduces  the
chances that at the end of a given forecast period the krona will have reached the higher rate that an
earlier assessment indicated; for one thing, that would require a very much faster appreciation than
envisaged earlier.
The appraisal of a given appreciation or depreciation depends on what caused it, partly because this
may  have  consequences  for  its  duration  and  its  impact  on  inflation.  A  weaker  exchange  rate
accompanied  by  an  economic  slowdown  need  not  appreciably  change  the  picture  of  inflation.  A
depreciation that is a step in an adjustment to a higher expected rate of inflation is a different matter.
An upward shift in inflation expectations in a wide sense affects the picture of inflation directly. Various
persistent portfolio adjustments can also give rise to a revision of inflation prospects if the exchange
rate is affected more permanently. A further interpretation of a depreciation arises when it occurs in
conjunction  with  generally  increased  uncertainty  in  the  global  financial  markets;  such  a  situation
usually  involves  an  extensive  flight  to  large  currencies  and  to  currencies  with  a  historical  record  of
stability. This source of exchange rate movements is usually temporary.
The  krona’s  weakening  early  this  summer,  after  the  Riksbank  had  presented  the  year’s  second
Inflation Report, was probably due to a combination of slowing  export activity, portfolio adjustments
and some upward revision of inflation expectations. Current inflation had been notably high in the late
spring.  If  higher  inflation  expectations  are  left  to  root  themselves  and  are  also  manifested  in  a
weakening  exchange  rate,  this  is  a  sign  that  public  confidence  in  monetary  policy’s  systematic
commitment to inflation in line with the 2 per cent target is being eroded. I therefore consider it was
right  to  take  the  precautionary  measure  of  raising  the  interest  rate  in  the  summer.  It  is  better  that
people get to know that at times we raise the repo rate and at times we lower it than that we tamper
with the inflation target.
Conclusion
The  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  have  presumably  had  consequences  for  assessments  of
Swedish  and  international  economic  activity.  Although  the  effects  are  difficult  to  gauge  exactly,  it
seems clear that cyclical developments will be altered. An upturn will be postponed and the slowdown
will be accentuated in the short run. In the aftermath of the attacks there has been some uncertainty in
the financial markets as well as extensive portfolio adjustments. The pattern from similar periods in the
past is clear: some currencies weaken while others, large currencies in particular, appreciate, share
4
BIS Review 82/2001
prices fall, long bond rates are unchanged or rise, short-term interest rates fall and the price of gold
moves up. In order to mitigate the negative effects on the global economy and the financial markets,
the major central banks lowered their instrumental rates and the Riksbank, as you know, did the same.
In  addition,  the  central  banks  have,  for  example,  taken  steps  to  contribute  liquidity  to  the  financial
system.
The  Riksbank  will  be  presenting  a  new  Inflation  Report  next  week.  As  usual  it  will  contain  a  main
scenario and a spectrum of upside and downside risks. Considering the circumstances I have outlined
earlier,  the  main  scenario  is  inherently  uncertain.  The  risk  spectrum  will  therefore  be  particularly
important to monitor in future as new information is obtained and events unfold. Which direction will
cyclical activity take? How will the exchange rate develop? What are the underlying factors here? And
how will inflation expectations move? These are critical questions for the Riksbank’s future action this
autumn and winter. Unfortunately there are no clear answers.
BIS Review 82/2001
5
