 Stephen Grenville: Policy dialogue in East Asia 
What are the criteria for determining the number of groups for policy dialogue in East Asia? And the criteria for 
participation?  
Talk by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve  Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
National  University  Conference  on  Regional  Financial  Arrangements  in  East  Asia,  Canberra, 
12-13 November 2001. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of Australia’s website.  
 it  evolved 
in  the  post-War  period,  was 
I want to begin by clarifying the issues, as I see them. If we can define what we are trying to achieve 
with regional co-operation, then we will be in a better position to determine the nature of the regional 
groupings needed to achieve this. My brief today is to discuss the relevant criteria for groups which 
carry  out  a  policy  dialogue  in  East  Asia.  In  defining  the  area  of  interest,  I  may  widen  this  brief 
somewhat,  because  the  sort  of  regionalism  which  I  hope  will  develop  over  time  goes  well  beyond 
policy dialogue, and indeed policy dialogue in its narrow sense does not seem to me to be the most 
pressing  need.  Policy  dialogue,  as 
largely  about 
macro-economic  policy  co-ordination,  and  this  was  really  only  relevant  for  the  largest  countries  – 
essentially the G3. For the rest of us, this was not a case of policy dialogue, but rather monologue – 
the G3 did what they could in terms of international co-ordination, and we wore the results, principally 
in the form of substantial fluctuation in the G3 exchange rates, which was often inconvenient to many. 
So there certainly remains a major issue of international macro policy co-ordination, and perhaps we 
might  hope  to  have  some  input  to  it  from  the  periphery,  but  this  will  not  be  central  to  our  regional 
arrangements. 
There  are,  however,  important  areas  where  regional  arrangements  have  the  potential  to  be  very 
important  for  the  development  of  policy:  these  are  trade  and  (less  certain)  exchange  rate 
arrangements.  The  first  of  these  seems  beyond  the  scope  and  brief  of  this  paper,  so  I  will  leave  it 
untouched: the second is the focus of discussions tomorrow, so that, too, I leave to others. 
This still leaves important regional policy issues, including the possibility of policy co-ordination in the 
face of a repeat - or variation - of the 1997/98 Asian crisis - I will certainly talk about this. But the much 
more general, wider and perhaps more important issue relates to globalisation – how to maintain the 
momentum which has brought so much benefit (particularly to this region); how to make it work better 
with better rules; and how to get proper representation for our interests in the forums which determine 
the parameters – the “rules of the game” – for globalisation. This, in my view, should be a central focus 
of regional policy dialogue. 
With  this  general  introduction,  let  me  turn  to  the  specifics  of  what  different  functions  regional  co-
operation  might  serve,  grouped  under  the  two  omnibus  headings  of  “policy  co-ordination”  and 
“globalisation”. 
Policy co-ordination 
Having downplayed the centrality of macro policy co-ordination in my introduction, let me now try to be 
more  specific  about  where  a  degree  of  policy  co–ordination  will  still  be  important.  I  have  left  aside 
trade and exchange rates, acknowledging the importance of each of these. But beyond these, I do not 
see a compelling reason why, say, the countries of Asia should be running similar monetary or fiscal 
policies, or even why they should co-ordinate their different macro policies. The heavy-lifting of macro 
policy-making is, broadly speaking, a domestic matter.1 
                                                      
1  
I have argued that there is only a minor role for international macro policy co-ordination (and this largely confined to the G3). 
But as international interdependence increases, the need to know and understand what is happening in the world economy 
increases. The current international conjuncture is perhaps more coincident in its cyclical shape than would be imposed on it 
by globalisation as such – the coincidence of downturns in the G3 is, to a large extent, idiosyncratic. But there can be little 
doubt that the international linkages are much stronger than ten years ago, and in all probability will be much stronger still in 
ten  years'  time.  For  all  of  us,  an  ability  to  forecast  how  the  rest  of  the  world  is  moving  will  be  critical  to  our  own 
policy-making. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 1
 There is, however, one aspect of policy-making where regional co-operation might make a real and 
substantial contribution – i.e. surveillance. Surveillance is, perhaps, an unfortunate way of describing 
the  process,  because  it  has  connotations  of  checking  up  and  looking  over  the  shoulder  of 
policy-making in individual countries, i.e. something more intrusive than is generally acceptable in this 
region.  When  does  “peer  pressure”  become  interference?  The  principal  objective  of  surveillance 
should not be to “catch out” and expose any policymakers who are doing the wrong thing, but rather to 
act as an advocate of good policies and as a catalyst for reform: the context has to be positive and 
supportive, not  negative, proselytising,  and adversarial.2 Reluctance to be too assertive is, to some 
degree, the current characteristic, but the process needs to be given more content if surveillance is to 
have a beneficial effect. Perhaps I can explain the point more clearly by referring to the surveillance 
process as it occurs in the OECD, and in particular as it occurred in relation to Australia during the 
1980s. Each year we faced the interrogation of our peers (the OECD Secretariat and two “examining” 
countries),  who  quizzed  us  on  both  macro  and  micro  policies,  invariably  from  the  viewpoint  of 
hard-edged economic analysis. This is not to say that they were always right, but they were always 
putting forward the viewpoint and input of best-practice economics. Why was this so valuable to the 
policy-making process? It made it easier for the national bureaucrats (who, by-and-large, agreed with 
these policies) to get these policies implemented, within a diverse decision-making framework in which 
other  less-economically-rational  views  might  well  have  prevailed.  The  fact  that  these  surveillance 
examinations received quite  wide  publicity  and added spice  and fire to the policy debate  was  often 
inconvenient  at  the  time  (because  we  bureaucrats  had  to  defend  the  then-current  –  imperfect  – 
policies), but was almost always salutary and useful in moving us towards better policies. 
The  additional  area  where  policy  co-ordination  may  well  be  relevant  is  in  crisis  response.  Other 
sessions at this conference will be looking at this issue in more detail. Specifically, the main area of 
co-operation  here  will  be  in  the  pooling  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Building  up  large  foreign 
exchange  reserves  has  been  the  clearly  demonstrated  response  to  the  crisis:  faute  de  mieux, 
international capital flow volatility will be handled by substantial reserve-holding. This rather inefficient 
response can be made less inefficient by  pooling. It  is also true that regional groups share enough 
self-interest to encourage them to go beyond simple altruism: we are all going to be readier to help our 
neighbours than to participate in some kind of collective action for a more distant region (which argues 
for regional arrangements to supplement the IMF, rather than the more universal approach of the New 
Arrangements to Borrow). Rather than anticipate the later debate on this issue here, let me quote, with 
approval, Yung Chul Park (2000): “One development that has encouraged the regional cooperation in 
East Asia has been the slow progress of the reform of the international financial system. The urgency 
of reform in the G-7 countries has receded considerably with the rapid recovery of East Asia. … As 
long  as  the  structural  problems  on  the  supply  side  of  capital  are  not  addressed,  the  East  Asian 
countries will remain as vulnerable to future crises as they were before. Instead of waiting until the G-7 
creates a new architecture, whose effectiveness is at best questionable, it would be in the interest of 
East Asia to work together to create their own system of defence.”. 
Globalisation 
As I foreshadowed, my feeling is that the issues of globalisation are even more important to regional 
co-operation  than  is  policy  co-ordination.  Let  me  record  briefly  some  of  the  characteristics  of 
globalisation, to try to establish why policy must be attuned to the needs of this new globalised world, 
in order to foster globalisation and – at the same time – ensure that we all get maximum benefit from 
it.  First,  a  point  which  is  close  to  tautology,  but  full  of  policy  implication  nevertheless:  globalisation 
means that an increasing part of our economic relations are with external parties (for many of the East 
Asian economies, foreign trade (exports and imports taken together) far exceeds GDP. 
                                                      
2  As Dobson (2001, p. 26) observes: “Peers must be willing to supply constructive criticism and those in potential or actual 
difficulty must be willing to accept objective analysis. Unless governments are willing to enter into this kind of give and take, 
the regional mechanism will simply become another overlay of officialdom.” 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2001
  Foreign Trade (per cent to GDP) 
Australia 
China 
Hong Kong 
Indonesia 
Japan 
Korea 
Malaysia 
New Zealand 
Philippines 
Singapore 
Thailand 
United States 
36 
42 
255 
79 
18 
84 
202 
54 
99 
296 
108 
20 
 
Domestic trade and investment is subject to myriad controls and regulations, even in the most “free 
market” economies. In contrast, international relations are lightly regulated. “The dilemma we face as 
we enter the 21st Century is that markets are striving to become global while the institutions needed to 
support them remain by and large national.” (Rodrik - quoted in The Economist, 29 September 2001, 
page  19  of  'A  survey  of  globalisation').  Is  this  disparity  in  regulatory  density  reflecting  some  innate 
characteristic – that these  relationships are, say, simpler  – or does it reflect the greater difficulty of 
regulating  across  sovereign  borders?  It  seems  to  me  to  be  the  latter,  and  we  should  address  this 
deficiency. 
The need for “rules of the game” seems, if anything, to be greater in a globalised world than in a less 
integrated  world.  One  of  the  defining  characteristics  of  globalisation  is  the  importance  of  scale,  as 
technology  drives the optimal business units  larger  and  larger in a  number of important areas. The 
other defining characteristic is “winner takes all”, and its related concept of “first mover advantage”. 
These characteristics combine together to produce areas where monopoly or quasi-monopoly will be 
important. The old response to monopoly – to break it up and force competition – will be precluded or 
restricted because of the inefficiencies that would result from this action. So the alternative channel will 
be to achieve a network of rules which addresses the issues raised by these imperfectly competitive 
firms. 
Given  the  increasingly  international  nature  of  enterprise,  what  is  needed  to  complement  this 
development are international rules, not specific to any one country, but developed in a uniform way 
and acceptable to all. These would address issues such as monopoly, intellectual property rights, and 
legal  issues.  Prudential  supervision,  capital  flows,  taxes  and  “industry  policy”  may  also  be  suitable 
cases  for  treatment.  In  short,  as  closer  relations  impose  greater  need  for  uniformity  (e.g.  in  tax  or 
investment regimes), the need is to develop these in a collective international environment. 
Tom Friedman (1999) has called such rules the “Golden Straitjacket”, which captures two important 
characteristics  of  the  process  –  the  degree  of  uniformity  which  globalisation  will  impose;  and  the 
generally beneficial nature of these rules.3 
Rules to govern global relationships will generally need to be on a uniform multinational basis, but this 
does  not  preclude  the  need  for  important  regional  input,  in  order  to  ensure  the  applicability  of  the 
universal  rules  to  all  countries.  A  good  set  of  rules  requires  recognition  of  the  great  diversity  of 
circumstances and institutions between countries. One specific example here is the rules on prudential 
supervision. It seems quite likely  that the rules relevant to banks in this region would be somewhat 
                                                      
3  
It would be easy to exaggerate just how universal and all-encompassing the Golden Straitjacket may be. It does not seem 
true, for example, that tax rates will have to become uniform across countries. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 3
 different (reflecting the different degree of complexity and make-up of banks). We certainly would not 
want a set of international rules which unfairly penalised banks in this region, simply on the grounds 
that they were not the same as banks in London or New York. 
At the general level, the collective wisdom of worldwide experience needs to be incorporated into the 
Golden Straitjacket more effectively than it has been to date. It is now part of the conventional wisdom 
that  there  were  various  deficiencies  of  perception  and  analysis  in  the  international  response  to  the 
Asian financial crisis. The “one size fits all” approach came out of earlier Latin American experience, 
and  was  a  poor  fit  for  East  Asia  in  1997.  To  some  extent  these  deficiencies  were  driven  either  by 
inadequate representation, or by inability to have our voice heard above the confident assertions of 
those whose policy prescription was driven either by doctrinal interests, vested interests, or sometimes 
simple ignorance. 
Regional  groupings  are  the  principal  way  of  addressing  this  “democratic  deficit”.  There  seems  little 
room for debate that this region is inadequately represented in many of the forums which determine 
the important issues of globalisation. There seems little doubt, also, that the region pays a price for 
this. East Asia, with an IMF quota of less than 15 per cent, accounts for more than 20 per cent of world 
GDP, almost a quarter of world trade, and almost half of world foreign exchange reserves. Prominent 
American economist David Hale (2001, p. 8) has observed: “In the past, the U.S. government has only 
supported  major  (IMF)  interventions  for  countries  in  which  the  U.S.  had  a  military  base.  During  the 
Asia  crisis,  for  example,  the  U.S.  acted  aggressively  to  support  Korea,  but  played  a  much  less 
significant role in Thailand and Indonesia.”. 
The case I want to make here is that much of our efforts in regional groups should be directed towards 
correcting  this.  There  have  been  very  important  improvements  in  international  financial  architecture 
since  the  crisis.  The  IMF  has  added  new  lending  facilities  that  should  be  better  able  to  handle  the 
demands of capital account crises. The Fund has also started to pay greater attention in its work to 
financial markets and financial systems and has been critically examining both its policy prescriptions 
and  its  general  approach  to  conditionality.  Representation  has  greatly  improved,  with  an  additional 
eight Asian countries gaining membership of the BIS. The creation of G20 (with six Asian members) is, 
potentially, a good breakthrough. At a more detailed level, the negotiation of Basel II involved a degree 
of consultation entirely missing from Basel I (which had been tailored specifically for G10). There has 
been  a  push  from  the  FSF,  the  IMF  and  the  G20  to  improve  countries'  resilience  to  crises  by 
promoting adherence to standards and codes and there has been much discussion of ways to secure 
a greater role for the private sector in crisis prevention and resolution. 
Within central banking circles, there had been some support for the formation of an Asian BIS given 
the Eurocentric focus of the existing organisation. In the event, this has been satisfied by the setting-
up of a BIS office in Hong Kong and the creation of the Asian Consultative Council (ACC) of the BIS, 
which  will  give  Asian  central  banks  a  greater  say  in  the  operation  of  the  organisation.  Some  Asian 
countries have also been invited to attend some of the Basel/G10 committees associated with the BIS, 
although sadly not on a permanent full-member basis. 
But  the  issue  of  ensuring  that  our  voice  is  heard  remains  unresolved,  with  the  IMF  still  giving 
inadequate place to this region, and other more representative groups (such as the G20) still to find a 
role  for  themselves  in  a  world  which  is  crowded  with  competing  and  overlapping  institutions,  none 
ready  to  diminish  their  own  status  and  power,  and  many  governed  by  inadequately  representative 
views. Who  should  be  represented  in  the  councils  of  the  world?  This  should  not  simply  depend  on 
GDP – this is important, but an equally important issue is what contribution each participant can make 
to the debate, and to the production of a universally acceptable set of rules. To be more specific, the 
G10 representation is deficient not just because of its limited numbers, but because of the uniformity of 
view of its European-dominated membership – too many people with the same viewpoint.4  
The development of the Globalisation Rules should be a two-way process – the regional groups give 
input into the rule-making, and then act to put these rules in place in their individual countries (or at 
least adapt their own rules to fit the straitjacket). The regional groups “spread the word” in order to 
improve  policy.  This  is  closely  related  to  the  idea  that  policy  improvement  can  come  out  of  the 
surveillance process, but it adds the extra point that better policy can also come out of a process of 
swapping ideas and simply observing the way other countries go about doing things. The process of 
globalisation  is  forcing  a  degree  of  uniformity  or  similarity  on  policies,  and  to  the  extent  that  this  is 
“best practice”, the quicker we all adapt to it the better. 
                                                      
4  For more discussion of the role and rationale for regional arrangements, see Grenville (1998).   
4 
 BIS Review 92/2001
 What does this mean for the shape of regional arrangements? 
As  a  preliminary  to  these  issues,  we  need  to  note  that  international  dialogue  takes  place  at  the 
multilateral, regional and bilateral levels. We should not be surprised or concerned at this “layering”. 
Nor should we be overly concerned if there is a fair degree of overlap between groups and meetings. If 
an issue is important, then it probably needs to be discussed in a variety of forums, each of which will 
bring  different  insights  to  bear.  Checks  and  balances  are  important.  Groups  are  not  simply  about 
getting  together  to  make  decisions:  they  are  often  about  getting  together  in  order  to  learn  about 
decisions or discussions which have taken place elsewhere. So we should not be surprised to see, for 
example, Finance Ministers meeting together separately from Central Bankers, and then, separately, 
the two will meet collectively.  
We certainly should not allow some ill-defined principle of “territorial exclusivity” to constrain dialogue 
which would otherwise be useful. When the Asian Monetary Fund was proposed after the onset of the 
Asian crisis, some people argued that it would overlap with the IMF (and this no doubt coloured the 
views not only of the Fund itself, but those who had a more prominent position within the Fund than 
they would have had within an Asian Monetary Fund). We should recall that, in many countries, there 
are three levels of government, each with its own contribution to make, and each interacting with the 
others in ways that should be fruitful – passing up regional issues which have been digested (in the 
sense of having achieved a degree of consensus), and passing down more nation-wide macro views 
to the regional levels. Petty territorial jealousies have no place in working out the proper number of 
organisations  and  their  relationships:  the  issues  should  relate  to  bringing  together  groups  with 
commonality of interest, and ensuring that they are linked (both upwards and downwards) in fruitful 
ways. This commonality of interest is the most important criterion for useful interaction. This does not 
mean that all the participants have to be at the same stage of development, but it probably does mean 
that  they  should  be  travelling  along  much  the  same  path,  albeit  at  different  distances  and  speeds 
along that path. This commonality of interest allows the possibility of an effective consensus, which 
can be passed to the next level, representing the group as a whole. 
What are the right numbers for a group? If the issues revolved around trade or currency unions, then 
economic  analysis  can  offer  useful  guidance  on  which  countries  should  be  included.  Who  are  (or 
potentially  could  be)  good  trade  partners? What  countries  meet  the  criteria  for  an  optimal  currency 
area?  The  original  APEC  membership,  for  example,  makes  economic  sense  as  a  trading  group 
because of established trading ties.5 But we have suggested here that some fruitful dialogue is more 
general and nebulous. At one level, one might ask whether it matters: the membership of European 
single currency was indeterminate until the last minute - it turned out to be much more numerous than 
most people had expected, and looking ahead it  will probably  become far more numerous than the 
original  proponents  envisaged.  That  said,  there  seems  to  be  a  lot  to  be  said  for  keeping  numbers 
down  to  manageable  levels,  which  for  practical  purposes  might  be  defined  in  terms  of  how  many 
people can comfortably sit around the same table (I am tempted to add “and communicate with each 
other without the use of microphones”). What we know is that when we get to the size of universal 
“one  country  one  vote”  representation  (as  seen  in  the  UN),  effective  decision-making  becomes 
extraordinarily difficult and “lowest common denominator” outcomes often prevail. To give a concrete 
example  of  a  response  to  the  vexed  issue  of  numbers:  the  G20  was,  at  one  stage  in  its  evolution, 
rather larger, but it was recognised that it had to be contracted. For surveillance, the relevant point will 
be that smaller groups can have much more candid (and therefore useful) discussion than can larger 
groups.  “Small  may  well  be  beautiful”.  If,  over  time,  the  various  participants  develop  knowledge, 
empathy and understanding of the practical policy constraints, then so much the better. 
When  it  comes  to  the  task  of  developing  rules  (see  the  discussion  above  on  globalisation),  the 
important thing is for the rules to be developed by experts or technicians – those who know the nuts 
and  bolts  of  a  particular  issue  rather  than  the  arm-waving  generalists.  If  the  degree  of  detail  in 
domestic  rules  and  regulations  is  any  indication  of  what  it  takes  to  ensure  good  and  efficient 
commerce  within  countries,  why  should  international  dealings  require  less  complexity?  These  rules 
may well be the same ones which apply in domestic jurisdictions, but it is only the technicians who can 
give  an  accurate  reading  on  whether  this  is  appropriate  or  not.  When  compromise  is  needed,  the 
compromise will be on the basis of technical and expert issues, and not on the basis of voting power at 
the table. 
                                                      
5  See Garnaut (1993, p. 308). 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 5
 Two historical analogies 
The obvious model for policy co-ordination in the broad sense is Europe, which over a period of four 
decades has progressed to economic union despite a history of hostile relations between members. 
Europe's success can be attributed to two main factors. Firstly, the economic dynamic: exploiting the 
obvious economic advantages which follow from geographic proximity. A second important factor in 
Europe's success was the underlying political imperative – a firmly held view on the part of a number 
of politicians of the need to pursue greater integration so as to reduce the prospects of future conflict. 
This was actively supported by the United States. 
The G10 had a much more specific genesis, formed from the countries that agreed to provide a loan 
facility  to  back  up  the  IMF's  resources  in  1962.  These  resources  were  to  be  made  available  in  the 
event  of  potential  impairment  of  the  international  financial  system,  and  therefore  only  to  the  G10 
countries themselves. Over the intervening years, the G10 has come to be central to issues governing 
the  world  financial  system,  both  in  the  context  of  the  IMF  and  the  BIS.  The  enormously  influential 
Basel Rules for Prudential Supervision were developed by (and, initially, for) the restricted club of the 
G10. The point to emphasise here is that groups which form for one purpose can metamorphose into 
new functions – in this case, far more important than the initial function. (We note that the G10 is also 
an illustration of why it is important to gain a seat at the table from the outset, since the incumbent 
members – particularly  the smaller  ones  –  will try to  avoid having their power  diluted.) The  group's 
effectiveness over an extended period probably reflects a relatively small and focused membership. 
However, as the world has developed, the G10 has looked increasingly unrepresentative of the global 
economy,  giving  a  disproportionate  say  to  small  European  economies  and  no  say  to  the  rapidly 
developing countries of Asia and Latin America. 
A couple of lessons might be drawn from the historic experience: 
• 
groups need specific tasks to weld them together – “frank and fruitful exchanges of views” 
are good but not enough. The Europeans started with the Coal and Steel Community: i.e. 
something of real substance; 
patience  is  not  just  a  virtue:  it  is  a  necessity  in  a  world  where  it  takes  time  to  build 
institutions. Progress is not steady: it may stall for a time, and the group has to hold together 
waiting for the tide to turn; 
there is a sense of community and common interest stemming from geographic contiguity, 
which goes beyond simple economic linkages.  
  If  progress  towards  closer  international  relations  is  important,  then  institution  building  will  be  an 
important element. “Virtual” secretariats may have their place, but real bricks-and-mortar institutions, 
with  effective  and  active  secretariats,  will  be  needed.  Charles Wyplosz  (2001)  makes  a  compelling 
case that the progress of European integration was hugely assisted by the presence of Europe-wide 
institutions, which could provide some on-going momentum and in particular could “pull a plan out of 
the drawer” when the country representatives were ready to discuss the next step. It is only if there are 
bureaucrats with an on-going vested interest in pushing forward that such plans will be ready – waiting 
in the “bottom drawer” – to put on the table when circumstances are propitious. 
How well do current groups “fit”? 
In  the  detailed  discussion  here,  I  have  put  to  one  side  the  issues  of  trade  and  exchange  rate  co-
ordination. But now, when we turn to see how the existing regional institutions meet these needs, we 
should put the full range of regional arrangements on the table. 
• 
APEC  is  the  broadest  regional  grouping,  bridging,  most  importantly,  East  Asia  and  North 
America,  but  also  incorporating  the  likes  of  Chile,  Mexico  and  Russia.  Its  predominantly 
trade focus has seen its fortunes wax and wane with developments in global trade, although 
the addition of Finance Ministers' and Leaders' meetings have broadened its coverage. Its 
principal  achievement  to  date  has  been  the  Bogor  Declaration  under  which  developed 
countries agreed to strive for free trade and investment by 2010 and developing countries by 
2020. However, even this has shown the tensions inherent with a relatively disparate group, 
with  initial  calls  by  some  countries  for  a  binding  and  measurable  process  significantly 
watered  down.  The  Finance  Ministers'  process  has  focused  on  encouraging  regional 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2001
     dialogue  and  promoting  capacity  building  and  may  not  be  suited  to  a  more  substantive 
agenda, particularly given political tensions between China and Taiwan.  
The Manila Framework Group has a broadly similar East Asian-North American structure. It 
had its genesis in the push for an Asian Monetary Fund in the midst of the Asian crisis. It is 
seen as proving one of the better surveillance mechanisms among the regional groups and 
also takes an interest in global architecture issues. It could be (but is not yet) the forum for 
developing regional positions which are then taken to world forums such as IMFC and G20. 
One  of  its  main  initial  functions  was  to  provide  a  co-operative  financing  arrangement  to 
supplement IMF resources. This was initially reflected in the second line of defence facilities 
offered to Indonesia and Korea. More recently the idea has been revived, with discussions 
underway on the possibility of a more formal on-going arrangement.  
EMEAP is a narrower group in two senses. It is a purely central bank forum, drawn from the 
East Asian core of the above two groups. EMEAP's stated goal has been to strengthen the 
co-operative relationship among the central banks of the region, although various members 
have held ambitions of the group becoming a more substantial organisation, along the lines 
of  the  BIS.  The  furthest  EMEAP  has  moved  down  this  track  is  a  system  of  bilateral 
repurchase agreements over US Treasuries, to provide short-term foreign currency liquidity 
support.  EMEAP's  strength  is  its  specialist  working  groups,  which  promote  good  practices 
and better understanding at a technical level. This is, potentially, the forum for developing 
regional consensus on such issues as capital flows (Chilean-style inflow taxes: dealing with 
in extremis crisis resolution). The value of the forum at the highest level is now being tested 
by  the  formation  of  the  BIS  Asian  Consultative  Council,  which  has  drawn  Asian  countries 
more into the mainstream of BIS activities. This is already the forum for developing regional 
positions on financial issues, so the close link with the BIS is natural and logical.6  
Compared with other regional groups, there is perhaps a greater uniformity of interests and 
views within ASEAN, and it has been going longest. ASEAN has some runs on the board 
already with the ASEAN Free Trade Area (which has been strengthened since the crisis) and 
a  multilateral  foreign  currency  swap  arrangement.  More  recently,  ASEAN  has  set  up  a 
surveillance mechanism, with the assistance of the ADB, in an effort to foresee and forestall 
crises.  
The  broad  agenda  of  ASEAN+3  covers  economic,  social  and  political  fields.  However,  its 
most important achievement has been the Chiang Mai initiative, which incorporates, among 
other  things,  a  regional  financing  arrangement  (building  on  the  ASEAN  arrangements)  to 
supplement existing international facilities.  
The significant momentum in ASEAN+3 may reflect  East Asia's equivalent to  Europe's “integrate to 
avoid further conflict” imperative. There is also a strong belief that the international institutions are not 
set up to work in Asia's favour and that  Asia must therefore look after itself – particularly  given the 
large proportion of world reserves held in Asia. This has been felt very strongly since the Asian crisis 
and  it  is  no  co-incidence  that  the  Chiang  Mai  initiative  grew  around  those  countries  that  felt  most 
aggrieved.  Similarly,  countries  in  this  group  have  more  in  common  than  the  groups  that  bridge  the 
Pacific. It could also be argued that the size of the arrangement made it a more workable decision-
making entity, although it is difficult to determine whether this reflects physical numbers or simply the 
greater uniformity of country interests embodied in the group. 
Reserve pooling arrangements could have occurred within the Manila Framework Group or EMEAP, 
but  ASEAN+3  seems  to  be  where  the  action  is  at  present.  Just  as  G10  gravitated  from  its  original 
narrow specific purpose to become the centre of prudential supervision, ASEAN+3 might be where the 
more general foreign exchange rate discussions occur. For our part in Australia, we are supportive of 
these moves, regardless of the forum in which they evolve. Obviously, we would like to have a seat at 
the table, since we believe Australia has much to offer from its own experience and resources. We 
also feel our own policy-making has been enriched through our engagement with Asia and we have 
certainly  appreciated  the  input  of  like-minded  countries  from  the  region  in  the  difficult  international 
debates of recent years. 
                                                      
6  SEACEN is a longstanding grouping of central bankers, focused on South-East Asia, but with membership spread as wide 
as Sri Lanka, Korea and Mongolia. One of the initial aims of SEACEN was to establish an ASEAN voting group for the IMF 
and  the  IBRD.  The  voting  group  still  exists  and  SEACEN  Governors  continue  to  meet  annually,  although  SEACEN's 
significant outward contribution appears to be its training and research efforts through the SEACEN Centre. 
BIS Review 92/2001 
 7
 Should the Chiang Mai initiative continue to develop towards an ultimate goal of becoming a regional 
monetary fund, my view is that we should support it. If there were major developments in this regard, 
participants  presumably  would  want  to  assess  whether  the  Manila  Framework  Group,  the  APEC 
Finance Ministers, EMEAP and SEACEN are still playing a unique role. 
The bottom line is that it is probably too early to assess which groups will continue to play a useful 
role,  given  uncertainty  over  a  future  world  trade  round,  G20's  unformed  mandate,  and  the  future 
directions  of  ASEAN+3.  We  should,  nonetheless,  be  critically  watching  developments  among  the 
regional groupings over the next two to three years with a view to making tough decisions when the 
time is right. 
Conclusion 
I have tried  to make the case, here,  that the rationale for regional groupings  will not be to achieve 
macro  policy  co-ordination.  The  powerful  case  is  a  wider  one  –  we  have  a  commonality  of  interest 
because  geography  and  contiguity  still  matter,  even  in  a  world  of  globalisation  (or  even  more  than 
before).  It  is  part  of  a  more  general  view  that  “we  are  not  alone”.  We  can  learn  much  from  the 
experience of those around us, and the gaining of this experience is the often nebulous and formless 
process  of  talking  issues  through  with  people  of  common  interests.  We  meet  to  discuss  a  specific 
topic, and we end up with wider knowledge, and better general understanding, of each other. If this 
view is correct, then regional dialogue is not inimical to globalisation: it is, in fact, its hand-maiden and 
ally. 
8 
 BIS Review 92/2001
