Y V Reddy: Autonomy of the central bank - changing contours in India
The  Second  Foundation  Day  Lecture  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
India, at Indian Institute of Management at Indore on October 3, 2001.
Dr. Reddy is grateful to Shri Indranil Bhattacharyya, Shri Kaushik Bhattacharya, and Dr. A. Prasad for
their valuable assistance.
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website.
 Dear Dr. Saxena, distinguished faculty, respected visitors, and young friends,
I am grateful to the organisers for giving me this opportunity to be here with you today to deliver the
Second  Foundation  Day  Lecture.  The  IIM,  Indore  has  acquired  a  great  standing  and  high  stature
within a short span of four years and the entire credit should go to the support rendered by all, and in
particular, the devotion and dedication displayed by the faculty and students to academic excellence.
It is not easy to select a topic for today’s lecture; a topic that would interest the best and brightest of
young persons, that would be of contemporary relevance and one on which something forward looking
can  be  explored.  After  some  deliberation,  the  subject  “Autonomy  of  the  Central  Bank:  Changing
Contours in India” has been chosen.
During the ten years of economic reform, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has emerged as a respected
and  significant  institution  in  public  policy  and  its  changing  role  as  a  central  bank  deserves  to  be
appreciated. In fact, a historic agreement in 1997 between Government of India and the RBI on the
termination of the system of automatic monetisation and introduction of a system of Ways and Means
Advances constitutes a watershed in public policy governing their mutual relationship. Amendments to
the legislation relating to the RBI and banking announced by Finance Minister in the budget speech for
2000-2001 and subsequent submission of draft legislations by the RBI are indicative of the evolving
institutional changes. The  issues  of  transparency  and  accountability  governing  their  operations  with
each  other  have  been  addressed  by  Advisory  Groups  on  Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial
Policies headed by the former RBI Governor,  Mr. M. Narasimham (September 2000) and  on Fiscal
Transparency by former Finance Secretary, Mr. M.S. Ahluwalia (June 2001). There  have also been
some deliberations on the issue of appropriate provisions relating to the RBI, in the context of ongoing
review of Constitution of India by the Commission appointed for the purpose a year ago. Hence, there
is merit in taking a view on the broader issue of independence of the central bank in India, so that the
process of change is negotiated smoothly and in a consistent form, thus avoiding the danger of what
may be termed as “disjointed incrementalism” in reform through ill-defined goals.
The lecture will be in three parts. The first one defines central banking, and its independence, while
providing theoretical and empirical evidence for and against independence or autonomy (both words
are  used  interchangeably  in  this  lecture  though  autonomy  and  independence  could  have  slightly
different  connotations)  and  explaining  difficulties  in  its  measurement.  The  second  part  reviews  the
Indian  experience  through  recourse  to  periodisation  and  makes  an  assessment  of  the  current
situation. The third section focusses on the emerging issues in India and concludes with some random
thoughts on the autonomy of central banks.
What is central banking?
The central banking functions typically include not only creation of money or more broadly monetary
management, but, also often, management of public debt of Government, regulation and supervision
of banking entities, financing of developmental activities and other associated functions.
While  discussing  the  issue  of  autonomy,  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  that  the  function  of  debt
management is essentially performed by a central bank as an agent of Government and the issue of
autonomy does not arise. In fact,  this  function  could  be  in  conflict  with  autonomy  in  the  conduct  of
monetary policy.
As regards the function of regulation and supervision, the argument for involvement of a central bank
emerges from the role  of lender of last resort and the obligation to smoothly operate the  payments
BIS Review 82/2001
1
system. In this regard, the autonomy that the central bank exercises is no different from autonomy of
any regulator in the financial system.
As far as the developmental role is concerned, close coordination with Government necessarily arises,
which in some ways impinges on autonomy as it is in a way linked to money creation.
What is uniquely relevant for a central bank’s independence is its exercise of the power to modulate
the creation of money and the price of money, which impacts on the value of money, both domestic
and external. In this context, the critical issue relates to the degrees of freedom the central bank has in
deciding whether or not to fund the Government’s expenditure out of created money.
The view that central banks should be largely independent of political power and that the central bank
credit  to  government  should  be  formally  limited  is  generally  believed  to  have  emerged  only  in
20th century.  It  would,  however,  be  inappropriate  to  conclude  that  the  importance  of  central  bank’s
independence was recognised only as recently as 20th century since Napoleon Bonaparte is reported
to  have  commented  in  1806,  on  Bank  of  France;  “I  want  the  bank  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the
Government, but not too much”.
As a result of monetary consequences of deficit financing that had afflicted many countries during the
First  World  War,  the  international  financial  community,  in  a  series  of  Conferences  organised  by
League of Nations recognised such independence as contributing to price stability. The recent revival
of  interest  in  the  subject  is  attributable  to  several  factors  viz.  the  reforms  in  centrally  planned
economies,  the  establishment  of  new  European  Central  Banking  arrangements  and  importance  of
price stability in a world characterised by large cross border financial flows.
independence  and 
literature  has  stressed 
the  difference  between  goal 
What is central bank independence?
Central bank independence generally relates to three areas viz. personnel matters; financial aspects;
and  conduct  of  policy.  Personnel  independence  refers  to  the  extent  to  which  the  Government
distances itself from appointment, term of office and dismissal procedures of top central bank officials
and the governing board. It also includes the extent and nature of representation of the Government in
the governing body of the central bank. Financial independence relates to the freedom of the central
bank to decide the extent to which Government expenditure is either directly or indirectly financed via
central bank credits. Direct or automatic access of Government to central bank credits would naturally
imply that monetary policy is subordinated to fiscal policy. Finally, policy independence is related to the
flexibility given to the central bank in the formulation and execution of monetary policy.
Recent 
instrument
independence. Goal independence refers to a situation where the central bank itself can choose the
policy  priorities  of  stabilising  output  or  prices  at  any  given  point  of  time,  thus  setting  the  goal  of
monetary  policy.  Instrument  independence  implies  that  the  central  bank  is  only  free  to  choose  the
means  to  achieve  the  objective  set  by  the  Government.  In  a  recent  survey  (Fry.  M,  et  al  1999)  of
central  banks,  40  of  the  total  56  central  banks  across  a  broad  range  of  economies  defined
independence predominantly  in  terms  of  instrument  independence.  Of  the  remaining  16  responses,
many highlighted factors that had implications for the relationship between the Government and the
central bank.
Pros and cons in theory
Three different theories, which are by no way mutually exclusive, have been advanced in support of
autonomy  of  central  banks,  viz.,  dynamic  or  time  inconsistency  theory,  theory  of  political  business
cycle and the theory of public choice.
First, the most prominent argument for central bank independence is based on the time inconsistency
problem. Time inconsistency arises when the best plan currently made for some future period is no
longer  optimal  when  that  period  actually  starts.  In  the  context  of  monetary  policy,  the  time
inconsistency problem arises because there are incentives for a politically motivated policymaker to try
to  exploit  the  short-run  trade-off  between  employment  and  inflation.  Expansionary  monetary  policy
may produce higher growth and  employment  in  the short run, and,  therefore,  policymakers may  be
tempted to pursue this policy, even in the short run although there is no guarantee that there would be
a  favourable  output  impact.  In  the  long  run,  however,  such  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  will
necessarily lead to higher inflation with deleterious consequences for the economy. In order to solve
the  time  inconsistency  problem,  two  distinct  approaches  have  been  advanced.  The  'conservative
central banker approach' postulates the appointment of a conservative central banker whose aversion
2
BIS Review 82/2001
to inflation is well known which would result in low inflation because of the economic agents' belief in
the reputation of the central banker. The 'optimal contract approach'  postulates  the  existence  of  an
optimal contract between the central banker and the Government. The central banker's tenure in office
is  conditional  upon  his  performance  of  achieving  low  inflation,  failure  of  which  would  lead  to  the
repudiation  of  the  contract  of  tenure.  Historically,  there  are  successful  examples  of  both  types  of
models of central bank independence – while US is often seen as an example of conservative Central
Bank, New Zealand is characterised as a follower of optimal contract approach.
Second, the political business cycle theory studies the interaction between economic policy decisions
and political considerations. The best known prediction of the theory is that the business cycle mirrors
the  timetable  of  the  election  cycle.  Incumbent  governments,  in  general,  will  use  restrictive  policies
early in their elected tenure raising unemployment to reduce inflation, as the election approaches. The
theory highlights the tendencies of incumbent governments to  generate  pre-election booms through
expansionary  fiscal  policies.  Once  the  incumbents  get  re-elected,  the  policy  priorities  could  change
towards  inflation  control  rather  than  employment  generation.  In  this  respect,  the  theory  in  a  way
highlights the time inconsistency behaviour of governments. As monetary policy affects the economy
with  long  and  variable  lags,  even  if  the  central  bank  nullifies  the  fiscal  stimulus  through  monetary
tightening, its impact would typically be felt during the post-election period when the incumbents may
happen to be back in power.
Finally,  the  fusion  of  politics  and  economics  over  the  last  thirty  years  has  resulted  in  the  theory  of
public  choice,  establishing  itself  as  an  important  proponent  of  central  bank  independence.  In  the
context  of  reducing  budget  deficit,  the  primary  solution  offered  in  public  choice  theory  is  a
constitutional  amendment  for  a  pre-specified  stipulation  on  central  bank  credit  to  government.
Nevertheless,  in  recent  years,  as  a  secondary  solution  to  the  deficit  problem,  some  public  choice
theorists  put  forward  the  case  of  an  independent  central  bank.  The  basic  contentions  of  these
economists are: unless there are constitutional or institutional constraints to the contrary, a democracy
contains  a  bias  towards  deficit  finance;  thus  they  operate  within  the  premise  that  politicians  do  not
necessarily pursue public interest but are more concerned with their personal or political agenda. In
this context, some economists explicitly talk about central bank independence by providing a solution
which will ensure not only low inflation but also act as an effective institutional constraint.
While the above arguments build up a strong case for central bank independence, the issue has not
been decisively settled and there are powerful forces aligned against according such independence to
central banks.
First,  detractors  of  autonomy  argue  that  an  independent  central  bank  lacks  democratic  legitimacy.
Curiously,  such  detractors  derive  strength  from  Milton  Friedman’s  statement  that  money  is  too
important an issue to be left to the whims of central bankers.
Secondly, independence may lead to frictions between the fiscal and the monetary authorities and the
resulting  costs  of  these  frictions  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  may  be  somewhat  costly  for
society, thus inhibiting the development process.
Thirdly,  there may be significant divergence in the preference pattern  of  independent  central  banks
and the society at large. A strong central bank may impose its outlook on society resulting in a sub-
optimal  state  in  terms  of  economic  welfare.  Adequate  sources  of  accountability  can,  however,
counteract  and  circumvent  these  problems.  In  fact,  the  opinions  in  this  context  differ  widely  on  the
relative importance between growth vis-à-vis inflation as objectives of monetary policy.
At a  pragmatic level, the  basic issue is one of reconciling  adequate  independence  with  appropriate
accountability to ensure that central banks are responsive to societal concerns.
Measures of central bank independence
It is difficult to measure the degree of independence of various central banks. It has pointed out that
actual, as opposed to formal independence, hinges not only on legislation but also on several factors
such as informal arrangements with governments, the quality of the personnel in the bank as well as
Government  and  the  personal  characteristics  of  key  individuals.  Obviously,  some  other  factors  are
virtually impossible to quantify. Existing research has, therefore, generally focused primarily on legal
independence, mostly in the industrialised countries. Legal independence measures may be a better
proxy  for  actual  independence  in  some  countries  where  informal  relations  are  not  dominant.  Thus,
BIS Review 82/2001
3
various  proxies  may  be  useful  to  get  a  complete  picture,  since  they  capture  different  aspects  of
independence.
In  quantifying  the  degree  of  independence,  economists  typically  assign  scorecards  on  different
aspects of central  banking. The final  degree of independence is measured as the  weighted sum of
'marks' obtained under different heads such as indices of political and economic independence; index
aggregated  from  a  number  of  basic  legal  characteristics  of  central  bank  charters;  index  based  on
issues relating to composition  of board members, frequency  of  transfers  of  central  bank  governors,
etc. Recent attempts made to construct measures of central bank independence using different criteria
and examine correlations among them reveal that the factors that affect central bank independence
are highly diverse and the importance of each of these factors may have weights that vary markedly
across countries, time and circumstances.
The existing indices of central bank independence are clearly incomplete and at best noisy indicators
of actual independence, though this does not mean that they are uninformative. In brief, it is possible
to differentiate between legal independence, informal independence and contextual independence of
central banks.
Central bank independence and economic performance
An inverse relationship between central bank independence and the level of inflation is supported by
most  empirical  studies  during  the  post  Bretton-Woods  period.  The  proponents  for  central  bank
independence  generally  cite  empirical  evidences  of  negative  cross-country  correlation  between
average inflation and the degree of central bank independence. It is, however, possible to question the
veracity  of  this  relationship.  As  already  mentioned,  there  are  significant  measurement  problems
relating  to  central  bank  independence.  Furthermore,  researchers  argue  that  the  causal  relationship
observed  between  central  bank  independence  and  low  and  stable  inflation  might  be  influenced  by
some  other  common  factors  such  as  the  extent  of  inflation  averseness  and  the  credibility  that  the
central  bank  enjoys.  While  many  Latin  American  countries  changed  the  legal  and  operational
framework, the change was prompted by people's aversion to high and chronic inflation. The causality
between the rate of inflation and the degree of independence of the central bank may be viewed as
bi-directional, since it would be argued that persistent high inflation led to changes in the operational
framework in many countries.
It needs to be emphasised that central bank, independence by itself cannot ensure monetary policy
credibility,  which, to an  extent,  depends  on  the  overall  credibility  of  Government  policy  as  a  whole.
Central  bank  independence  is  a  means,  the  end  being  an  appropriate  division  of  responsibility
between the monetary and the fiscal authority and policy coordination. There is a need to articulate the
division  of  responsibility  and  policy  priorities  to  the  economic  agents.  Such  articulation  reduces
uncertainties often inherent in economic decisions. If an institutional structure is not in place, there is a
chance  that  policy  coordination  would  depend  entirely  upon  the  personal  equations  among
policymakers and the risk of it breaking down subsequently with changes in the persons at top can not
be ruled out.
Indian situation: a review
The  evolving  relationship  between  the  Government  and  the  RBI  can  be  broadly  divided  into  four
distinct phases.
The legislation to set up the RBI was first introduced in January 1927. The enactment, however, was
made after seven years in March 1934. The RBI was set up as a privately owned and managed entity.
The preamble of the Act focused on monetary stability and operations on currency and credit system
in  India.  During  this  phase,  which  may  be  called  infancy  and  uncertainty,  the  RBI  was  virtually
subservient  to  the  dictates  of  the  Government  and  measures  were  taken  to  curb  its  capacity  for
independent actions. In fact, threats were issued to supersede the Bank’s Board should it recommend
monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  incompatible  with  the  Government’s  scheme  of  actions.  No
doubt, the outbreak of war also added to the uncertainties.
Shortly after India’s independence in 1947, the RBI was nationalised in 1948. The early years were
characterised  by  a  good  degree  of  fiscal  rectitude  and  harmony  in  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  with
areas of potential conflict being minimal. The fact that the rate of inflation was modest compared to
other developing countries during this period is indicative of the success of macro-policy management
and facilitated the task of the RBI in pursuing other developmental activities. During this period, the
4
BIS Review 82/2001
RBI was vigorously involved in promoting the institutionalisation of credit to agriculture and industry in
pursuant to the overall objectives of the respective Five-Year Plans. Apart from helping to channelise
credit to agriculture and industry, an important objective of the RBI was the promotion and mobilisation
of savings by reinforcing the foundations of the banking system. This, however, does not mean that
differences  between  the  RBI  and  the  Government  over  economic  policies  were  totally  absent.  For
example,  the  RBI  did  not  approve  of  the  substitution  of  financial  planning  by  a  kind  of  ‘physical
planning’. Once it awoke to the consequences of physical targeting during the course of the Second
Plan,  the  RBI  strove  to  trim  the  size  of  the  subsequent  Plans  to  match  visible  resources.  Another
illustration of differences between the Government and RBI culminating in the resignation of Governor
Rama Rau in 1957 is well documented (Balachandran G, 1998).
Another major area of discord between the RBI and the Government in the late 1950s related to the
financing  of  the  cooperatives  and  the  pattern  of  organisation  of  the  lending  agencies.  Interestingly,
during the early 1960s, Governor Iengar identified four areas of potential conflict between the Bank
and  the  central  government.  These  were  interest  rate  policy,  deficit  financing,  cooperative  credit
policies and management of sub-standard  banks. It may be of interest to note that currently, in the
year 2001, these four areas are still on the top of RBI’s concerns.
This phase, from nationalisation of the RBI in 1948 till nationalisation of major commercial banks in
1969, may  be considered as maturing of the RBI  into a  full-fledged  professionally  managed  central
bank,  perhaps  one  of  the  foremost  in  developing  countries.  The  mid-fifties,  however,  did  see  the
beginnings of serious erosion of autonomy in the monetary policy function due to the emergence of
the  system  of  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  and  automatic  monetisation.  It  was  agreed  that  RBI  would
replenish Government’s cash balances by creation of ad hoc Treasury Bills in favour of the RBI. The
ad hoc Treasury Bills, which were meant to be temporary, gained a permanent as well as a cumulative
character. Indeed, it became an attractive source of financing Government expenditures since it was
available at an interest rate pegged at 4.6 percent per annum since 1974, i.e., actually at a negative
real interest rate.
The third phase that changed the contour of this relationship started with the nationalisation of major
banks  in  1969.  While  the  problems  experienced  earlier  by  the  RBI  persisted  to  some  extent,  the
change brought about a curious situation where the Government became owner of a number of banks,
but the supervision of these banks was, in turn, conducted by the RBI which was also owned by the
Government.  The  situation,  however,  was  not  unique  to  India  and  was  somewhat  similar  to  that  of
France. The fundamental factor affecting the relationship  was the combined  effect  of  Government’s
ownership of major commercial banks and the persistence of high fiscal deficits, which posed serious
problems for prudent monetary management. For easy access of market borrowing, the interest rates
were administered and the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) requirements of the banking sector  were
periodically hiked. In this regard, the nationalisation of banks and transfer of ownership to Government
provided a captive market for the government. Simultaneously, recourse to the RBI credit  was also
high, leading to high levels of monetisation. To neutralise the effect of monetisation on the price level,
the  RBI,  in  turn,  had  to  intermittently  increase  the  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  (CRR)  requirements  of  the
banking sector. This phase was charaterised by several features to indicate considerable influence or
dominance of Government over the RBI.
On  the  basis  of  one  of  the  criteria  (Cukierman,  1992)  to  measure  the  degree  of  independence  of
various central banks during the ‘eighties, the RBI was ranked marginally below the median level of a
list  of  about  seventy  countries  (including  twenty-one  industrialised  countries).  This  represented  a
limited  degree  of  statutory  autonomy  because  in  general,  central  banks  in  developing  countries
enjoyed little independence from the Government at this time. As such, the measurements seem to
reflect the intent of the 1948 nationalisation of the RBI, which was to ensure a greater coordination of
monetary, economic and financial policies.
The fourth phase  or the reforming  phase  in  the  changing  contour  of  this  relationship  approximately
starts from 1990-91. Major changes in the monetary policy framework took place in many countries
around this time. While people in many developed countries were tired of persistent and high inflation
during the earlier years, the journey of the centrally planned economies towards a market determined
system also began around this time. As a result, the relationship between the central  bank and the
government took a new turn in many countries, resulting in the genesis of inflation targeting framework
in a number of economies.
While radical changes were taking place worldwide, the Indian economy during 1990-91 experienced
a severe balance of payments crisis. The crisis was clearly a fallout of the fiscal profligacy during the
BIS Review 82/2001
5
Eighties. During the post-reform period, the relationship between the central bank and the Government
took  a  new  turn  through  a  welcome  development  in  the  supplemental  agreement  between  the
Government and the RBI in September 1994 on the abolition of the ad hoc treasury bills to be made
effective from April 1997. The measure eliminated the automatic monetisation of Government deficits
and resulted in considerable moderation of the monetised deficit in the latter half of the Nineties. At the
same time, with gradual opening up of the economy and development of domestic financial markets,
the  operational  framework  of  the  RBI  also  changed  considerably  with  clearer  articulation  of  policy
goals and more and more public dissemination of vast amount of data relating to its operations.
Partly as a result of such institutional changes in recent years, inflation in India has been moderate
relative to other developing countries despite high fiscal deficit, and most inflationary episodes have
been  caused  by  exogenous  supply-side  factors.  As  far  as  public  finances  are  concerned,  the
Government generally relied on  domestic  sources  to  finance  the  deficit.  It  has  been  pointed  out  by
some experts that the RBI, though not formally independent, has enjoyed a high degree of operational
autonomy during the post-reform period. In fact, during the recent period, the RBI enjoys considerable
instrument independence for attaining monetary policy objectives. Significant achievements in financial
reforms including strengthening of the banking supervision capabilities of the RBI have enhanced its
credibility and instrument independence.
Current status
In terms of redefining the functions of the RBI, enabling a movement towards meaningful autonomy,
Governor  Jalan’s  statement  on  Monetary  and  Credit  Policy  on  April  19,  2001  is  a  landmark  event.
First, it was decided to divest RBI of all the ownership functions in commercial banking, development
finance and securities trading entities. Secondly, a beginning was made in recommending divestiture
of RBI’s supervisory functions in regard to cooperative banks, which would presumably be extended to
non-banking financial companies and later to all commercial banks. Thirdly, the RBI signalled initiation
of  steps  for  separation  of  Government  debt  management  function  from  monetary  policy.  These
measures would enable the RBI to primarily focus on its role as monetary authority and enhance the
possibility of a move towards greater autonomy.
Three  other  developments  in  recent  years  are  expected  to  have  far  reaching  ramifications  in  the
operational framework of monetary policy in India. The first was the tabling of the Fiscal Responsibility
and Budget Management Legislation, which aims at the medium-term management of the fiscal deficit.
The objective of the legislation is to impose fiscal discipline on Government spending and ensure a
transparent and accountable fiscal system.
The second development was the coordinated endeavour of the Government of India and the RBI to
consider the implementation of International Financial Standards and Codes. Among the ten Advisory
Groups constituted for this purpose, the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency (Chairman : Mr. M.S.
Ahluwalia) and the Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies (Chairman :
Shri M. Narasimham) have suggested some important changes in the operational conduct of monetary
and fiscal policies and highlighted the need for better coordination between them.
The third relates to the budget speech in February 2000, wherein the Finance Minister had noted that
in the fast changing world of modern finance, it has become necessary to accord greater operational
flexibility to the RBI for the conduct of monetary policy and regulation of the financial system and that
accordingly, he intends to bring to Parliament proposals for amending the relevant legislation.
In this regard, the RBI constituted an Internal Committee to review the existing legal provisions in both
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act  and  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  so  as  to  bring  about  suitable
amendments  in  them  to  provide  sufficient  operational  flexibility  to  the  RBI  for  conducting  monetary
policy, guiding the development of the financial sector and securing the stability of the financial system
as  a  whole.  The  Committee  made  a  host  of  recommendations  that  include  providing  the  RBI  the
flexibility in respect of monetary policy instruments, supervisory effectiveness, prudential deregulation
and governance of financial markets. It has also recommended further strengthening of institutions in
the  light of structural changes due to ongoing reforms and encourage transparency  and  integrity  of
operations.  Furthermore,  in  a  liberalised  environment,  maintaining  financial  stability  is  an  important
additional objective of policy and the RBI should have the operational maneuverability to manage and
limit the damage on account of volatility/contagion transmitted via the international economy.
6
BIS Review 82/2001
Emerging issues
The emerging issues relating to autonomy of RBI can be addressed at several levels.
First, at the level of the Constitution, the RBI finds a place in Entry 38 of List 1 of Schedule VII of the
Constitution  of  India  “subjecting  the  Bank’s  policies  to  the  wisdom  of  the  executive  and  legislative
wings of the Union” (Prasad. R, 2001). There are only a few instances of references to autonomy of
central bank in the Constitution and obviously such a reference is neither a necessary nor a sufficient
condition  for  ensuring  appropriate  level  of  autonomy.  Yet  there  is  an  influential  view  such  as  that
expressed by Dr. N.L.  Mitra, formerly Director, National  Institute  of  Law  in  favour  of  an  appropriate
provision in the Indian Constitution.
Second,  at  the  level  of  legislative  framework,  several  suggestions  have  been  made  to  ensure
appropriate  autonomy  and  many  of  them  are  under  consideration.  In  particular,  proposed  Fiscal
Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Bill  and  other  amendments  to  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act
would  cover  significant  ground.  Several  other  suggestions  relating  to  legal  framework,  particularly
those  relating  to  defining  the  objectives  of  and  imparting  transparency  in  monetary  policy  as
recommended by the Advisory Groups are yet to be taken up.
Third,  at  the  policy  level,  there  are  three  important  constraints  on  the  operational  autonomy  even
within the  existing legal framework. One, the continued fiscal dominance,  including  large  temporary
mismatches between receipts and expenditures of Government warranting large involuntary financing
of  credit  needs  of  Government  by  the  RBI.  Two,  the  predominance  of  publicly  owned  financial
intermediaries and non-financial public enterprises, which has created a blurring of the demarcation
between  funding  of  and  by  Government  vis-à-vis  public  sector  as  a  whole.  Three,  the  relatively
underdeveloped state of financial markets partly due to legal and institutional constraints, which blunts
the  effectiveness  of  instruments  of  monetary  policy.  These  issues  need  to  be  resolved  to  enhance
genuine autonomy.
Fourth,  at  the  operational  and  procedural  level,  there  is  a  problem  of  “old  habits  die  hard”.  In  a
deregulated  environment,  there  is  considerable  scope  to  reduce  micro-management  issues  in  the
relations between the Government and the RBI.
Fifth, at the level of degree of transparency, there is a temptation to continue, what has been termed
as the “joint-family approach”. The approach ignores basic tenets of accounting principles in regard to
transactions between RBI and Government. It gives satisfaction to all participants that all of them are
working  together  for  growth  and  stability.  In  the  process,  however,  the  integrity  of  the  respective
balance sheets of Government and RBI gets eroded making both autonomy and accountability difficult
to assess.
Random thoughts
In the light of theory, practice and the Indian experience I would like to share with you some of my
thoughts on the subject. These are structured around emerging new realities, issues of coordination,
transparency, accountability and credibility.
Generally,  independence  of  central  bank  is  discussed  in  terms  of  independence,  or  in  a  broader
sense, from political, executive and legislative power. With emergence of powerful economic interests
in the form of multinationals or dominant domestic corporates and their large stakes in capital markets,
in the larger context of powerful influences outside of the executive  wing of Government, it may be
necessary to also ensure independence of central bank operations.
While price stability and availability of credit to meet the needs of the growing economy continue to be
the  twin  objectives  on  a  year  to  year  basis,  as  a  longer  term  and  primary  responsibility,  the  RBI
concerns itself with price stability. There is, however, need to recognise the criticality of financial sector
stability,  especially  of  financial  markets  for  which  the  RBI  is  assuming  increasing  responsibility  and
should exercise its independence from governmental priorities in that direction, whenever warranted.
In other words, while the issue of the central bank’s independence and accountability were debated in
the past in the context of price stability and money creation, the emerging issues warrant a broader
view  of  exercise  of  independence  from  several  sources  to  meet  emerging  challenges  like  financial
sector and markets stability while enlarging the concept of accountability through greater recourse to
transparency.
BIS Review 82/2001
7
With the possible emergence of digital money, significant questions would arise in regard to the power
that central banks would continue to exercise in future and hence the whole issue of its role in creation
of money and consequently its independence may need to be revisited.
In  view  of  the  trends  towards  globalisation  of  capital  flows  and  consequent  emphasis  on  internal
financial  stability,  standards,  codes,  etc.,  the  central  banks  may  gain  independence  from  their
respective  governments  but  in  practice  may  tend  to  be  circumscribed  by  the  compulsions  of
international financial community.
The traditional argument, at a philosophical level, in favour of an independent central bank is that the
power to spend money should be separated from the power to create money. Given the complexities
in separating the two too rigidly and given the advantages of co-ordination, a minimum requirement
should be that their relationships and transactions be reported as transparently as possible, and the
integrity of the two separate balance sheets be maintained.
At  an  operational  level,  it  is  possible  to  ensure  co-ordination  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policies
while maintaining  operational autonomy  if interaction and consultation is ensured  in  three  important
areas  namely  (i)  evolving  macro-economic  objectives;  (ii)  likely  consequences  of  various  options
available for fiscal and monetary actions to realise the evolving objectives; and (iii) sharing and use of
the respective forecasts of the likely state of the economy in the absence of policy interventions under
consideration.  Indeed,  this  interaction  calls  for  a  reasonable  degree  of  intellectual  integrity,
professional competence and mutual respect in both the central bank and the Government.
Accountability can be narrowly defined or approached in a broader as well as longer term perspective.
In  a  narrow  sense,  it  can  be  argued  that  a  central  bank  is  accountable  to  the  Ministry  or  to  the
Parliament through the Ministry. In a broader sense, it can be argued that central bank, as a significant
public institution should be accountable to the public at large, unless there is a constitutional or legal
hurdle. In this sense of broader accountability, in a way transcending political cycles, a central bank
has to be not only transparent but should also effectively articulate its policy. It must be recognised
that  such  a  broader  approach  to  accountability  will  depend  on  the  public  awareness  of  economic
issues and the priority that political leadership accords to public articulation of issues as compared to
closed door consideration of such issues.
Liberalised and developed financial markets, certainly, contribute to greater public-awareness and in
this regard efforts to promote financial markets also contribute to  greater  accountability.  In  the  final
analysis, accountability is a basic principle of democracy.
At  a  pragmatic  level  there  are  two  important  arguments  in  favour  of  autonomy  in  addition  to
transparency.  First,  if  superior  technical  competence  is  demonstrable,  there  is  merit  in  according
operational autonomy to the central bank. Furthermore, to the extent a central bank is likely to carry
greater credibility with the public opinion when it makes a commitment, there is merit in entrusting it
with autonomy. In the years to come, the sheer need to improve the efficiency of operations will thrust
upon the RBI a greater degree of autonomy and, therefore, a greater degree of accountability. In such
a  milieu  it  is  essential  that  the  setting  of  goals  and  the  policy  processes  will  need  to  evolve  in  a
transparent manner. For the central bank, these will be difficult times but also exhilarating times.
Thank you!
8
BIS Review 82/2001
