 Donald T Brash: Monetary policy in “Interesting Times” 
Address by Mr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the managers of 
small and medium-sized businesses, Whangarei, 21 November 2001. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
About  seven  or  eight  years  ago,  I  was  visited  by  a  share-broker  who  told  me  what  a  great  job  the 
Reserve Bank had done in explaining its actions to the banks and the big corporates. I felt good, until 
he  said  “But  frankly,  you  have  done  a  lousy  job  communicating  with  the  small  and  middle-sized 
businesses in New Zealand.” True, I protested, but I can’t even get a good mailing list to cover the 
tens of thousands of smaller businesses. “Fair enough”, he replied, “but every small business has a 
bank account. Put it on the banks to invite their small business clients to meetings which you host, and 
to which you speak.”  
And from that conversation grew the idea of this meeting. We had meetings of this kind for the first 
time in 1995. We repeated the idea again in 1998. And now we are doing it for the third time this year. 
In part, we want to use this meeting to tell you how we see the world. And in part, we want to learn, 
from  your  questions  and  comments  when  I  have  finished,  how  you  see  the  world.  We  are  acutely 
aware  that  the  health  and  vitality  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  depends  to  a  huge  degree  on  the 
health and vitality of the small and middle-sized businesses represented in this room. 
We live in “interesting times” 
You  will  recall  the  ancient  Chinese  curse  “May  you  live  in  interesting  times”.  Sadly,  these  are 
“interesting times” and we all know why. Just one week after the terrible events of 11 September, the 
Reserve Bank made an unscheduled and largely unexpected interest rate cut, from 5.75 per cent to 
5.25 per cent. Within the Reserve Bank, we briefly debated whether I should hold a press conference 
to explain what we had done. We decided not to, in large part because there would have been very 
little I could usefully have said. Essentially, what I could have said at that time was “We don’t know yet 
what the economic consequences of these events will be, and we certainly don’t know what they mean 
for inflation in New Zealand. All we can say is that confidence has taken a huge knock; this is more 
likely to reduce prices than to increase them; and under these circumstances there is scope for lower 
interest rates.” That would not have made for a very productive press conference. 
Time has moved on, and there is more we can say now. Last week, we issued our latest assessment 
of  the  outlook  for  the  economy  and  for  inflation,  and  reduced  the  Official  Cash  Rate  by  a  further 
50 basis points to 4.75 per cent. 
Why did we do that? Interestingly, when we looked over our shoulder at the historical data available to 
us, it was hard to see a justification for any cut in interest rates. The latest comprehensive information 
we had on economic growth showed that, in the first half of this year, the economy grew by 2.3 per 
cent, equivalent to an annual growth rate of more than 4 per cent. The latest information we had also 
showed that unemployment was at its lowest level in 13 years. Job advertisements, as surveyed by 
the  ANZ  Bank,  were  running  at  a  high  level.  Many  businesses  were  reporting  that  they  had  little 
unused capacity to meet increased demand. In some parts of the country, there were reports of great 
difficulty finding skilled and even unskilled staff. The world prices for many of our commodity exports, 
while  lower  than  a  few  months  earlier,  were  holding  up  surprisingly  well.  And  to  top  it  all  off  the 
exchange  rate  was  not  far  above  its  all-time  record  low,  which  meant  that,  in  New  Zealand  dollar 
terms, our exporters and tourist operators were being substantially insulated from the slow-down in the 
world economy.  
To  some  extent,  this  was  the  same  picture  that  we  had  painted  in  our  August  Monetary  Policy 
Statement. There we had suggested that there might have been a case for an early increase in the 
Official Cash Rate were it not for the threatening clouds in the international economy. And that was 
weeks before we knew just how strongly the economy had grown during the first half of the year. 
But three months on, and notwithstanding the relatively robust historical data, we have cut the Official 
Cash Rate by a total of 1 per cent. We have done that because, despite the relatively strong position 
BIS Review 95/2001 
 1
 that the New Zealand economy is now in, we see the real prospect of the economy slowing down quite 
significantly over the next year or so. And if that slow-down occurs, interest rates can be lower than 
previously  without  jeopardising  the  price  stability  objective  which  the  Reserve  Bank  is  required  to 
achieve. 
The basic cause of this rather abrupt change in the outlook for our own economy relates to a fairly 
substantial  change  in  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy.  Back  in  early  August,  as  our  previous 
Statement  went  to  press,  the  Consensus  forecasts  for  the  14  countries  which  dominate  our  export 
trading  suggested  relatively  slow  growth  this  year  but  quite  a  marked  pick-up  in  growth  next  year 
(figure 1). As we went to press with last week’s assessment, the general expectation was for growth to 
be  significantly  slower  this  year  than  previously  expected,  and  growth  next  year  to  be  even  more 
markedly lower than previously expected (figure 2). And this deterioration in the world outlook seems 
to get somewhat worse with every passing week. 
Figure 1 
Export partner GDP growth -  
August 2001 Monetary Policy Statement 
(annual average percentage change) 
Source: RBNZ, Consensus. 
Figure 2 
Export partner GDP growth -  
November 2001 Monetary Policy Statement 
(annual average percentage change) 
Source: RBNZ, Consensus. 
  2 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 Moreover, the deterioration is not confined to a single country. Most economists are now expecting a 
recession in the United States. Almost all economists are expecting a recession in Japan. Several of 
our biggest trading partners in Asia are clearly in recession already. Europe continues to slow down. 
Only Australia, among our main trading partners, seems to be enjoying reasonably robust growth for 
the moment. (Figure 3) 
Figure 3 
Sum of 2001 and 2002 export partner GDP growth  
(annual average percentage change) 
Source: RBNZ, Consensus. 
  And this slowdown in the world economy is bound to have an impact on the New Zealand economy, in 
particular by reducing the demand for our exports and reducing the prices of those exports. We are 
beginning to see that already, and as it occurs we expect to see both some reduction in growth in New 
Zealand  and  some  downwards  pressure  on  prices  -  including  some  reversal  of  the  very  strong 
increase in the price of things like meat and dairy products, which in recent months has done so much 
to push up the price of the average food-basket. So it seems reasonable to believe that inflation will be 
much less of a problem as we look forward 12 months than it has been over the last 12 months. 
Having explained our decision to reduce the Official Cash Rate last week, let me use this situation to 
make four points. 
Price stability means neither inflation nor deflation 
The first point I want to make is that the Reserve Bank is just as serious about keeping inflation above 
zero as it is about keeping it below 3 per cent. Dropping interest rates now is about preventing inflation 
falling too  low.  And if inflation threatened to go negative,  you can be sure  we  would be very active 
indeed in stimulating the economy.  
It’s  been  said  that  any  fool  can  keep  inflation  down,  and  that’s  true,  but  our  task  is  much  more 
demanding than that. I know our rhetoric is mostly about the economic and social costs of inflation, 
rather than about the economic and social costs of deflation. That’s because, at least in New Zealand, 
inflation has been much the more common problem, certainly for the last 60 years. Also, because New 
Zealand went through a period of quite high inflation in the seventies and eighties, we have had to 
work hard to persuade people that we are serious about keeping inflation down, in order to bring down 
inflationary expectations. 
But  make  no  mistake.  Inflation  going  below  zero  would  be  just  as  much  a  breach  of  the  Reserve 
Bank’s  inflation  target  as  having  it  go  above  3  per  cent.  Deflation  causes  its  own  set  of  economic 
problems and distortions, doing social and economic damage. And our policy deliberations are always, 
without exception, mindful of both risks. We are always trying to find the policy setting - the interest 
rate - which will deliver an inflation outcome which is neither too hot nor too cold. 
BIS Review 95/2001 
 3
 Preventing deflation is also part of the law under which I operate. The Reserve Bank Act 1989 makes 
it  clear  that  monetary  policy  must  deliver  “stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices”.  And  the  Policy 
Targets Agreement which I have with the Minister of Finance, a requirement of the Reserve Bank Act, 
defines “stability in the general level of prices” as inflation measured by the Consumers Price Index of 
between zero and 3 per cent. Deflation is not “stability in the general level of prices”, any more than 
inflation is. 
This  means  that,  once  price  stability  has  been  achieved,  and  as  a  very  rough  rule  of  thumb,  the 
Reserve  Bank’s monetary  policy  will be seeking to restrain  inflationary pressures by raising interest 
rates roughly half the time, and will be seeking to restrain disinflationary pressures by lowering interest 
rates roughly half the time - as we did in the second half of 1998 and as we have been doing through 
most of this year. 
New Zealand goes into this world slowdown in a strong position 
Secondly,  although  New  Zealand  will  be  affected  by  the  world  slowdown,  we  are  not  completely 
hostage to external events. It is important that we don’t talk ourselves into a gloomy frame of mind just 
because the slowdown in the world economy could be substantial, and could last well into next year. 
When  the  world  slowdown  began,  many  sectors  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  were  in  rude  good 
health economically, as I have mentioned - and I haven’t even mentioned such other advantages as a 
strongly  capitalised  banking  system  and  a  government  running  fiscal  surpluses.  In  other  words,  we 
start into the slowdown from a good position.  
Figure 4 
Prices of New Zealand’s export commodities  
(denominated in US dollars) 
Source: ANZ. 
 Yes, export prices look likely to fall, and indeed have already done so in a number of cases, but in 
US dollar terms they have, on average, been at relatively high levels for much of the last year or so 
(figure 4), and in New Zealand dollar terms they have been pushed up even further by the low level of 
the  kiwi  dollar  (figures  5  and  6).  This  low  exchange  rate  provides  very  useful  insulation  from  the 
downturn in the world economy, by propping up returns to New Zealand exporters (and indeed returns 
to those competing with imports) despite weaker prices abroad. 
There  has  been  a  sharp  decline  in  net  confidence  in  the  business  sector  in  recent  months,  as 
measured by both the National Bank Business Outlook survey and by the quarterly survey undertaken 
by the Institute of Economic Research (figure 7). And businesses have become less confident not only 
about the economy in general, but also about the outlook for their own businesses. 
 
 
 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 Figure 5 
Prices of New Zealand’s export commodities  
(denominated in US and NZ dollars) 
Figure 6 
NZD/USD exchange rate and the TWI 
Source: ANZ. 
Figure 7 
New Zealand business confidence 
Source: RBNZ. 
Sources: National Bank of NZ, NZ Institute of Economic Research. 
   BIS Review 95/2001 
 5
 But at least as of late last month, more businesses continued to expect an improvement in their own 
business over the year ahead than expected a deterioration. As you can see from the graph (figure 8), 
the National Bank survey for September, taken prior to the tragic events of 11 September, showed that 
only 6 per cent of businesses expected that their own business would deteriorate over the year ahead. 
By the October survey, that had increased to 16 per cent expecting a deterioration. In both surveys, 
roughly  half  of  all  respondents  expected  no  change  in  their  business  over  the  period  ahead.  And 
despite  the  increased  gloom,  roughly  twice  as  many  businesses  were  expecting  their  business  to 
improve as were expecting a deterioration, even in October. 
Figure 8 
Expected business activity 
(September and October 2001 surveys) 
Source: National Bank Business Outlook. 
 Interestingly, surveys conducted in September by both the Employers and Manufacturers Association 
in  Auckland,  and  the  Canterbury  Manufacturers  Association  in  Christchurch,  showed  a  remarkably 
upbeat mood in both cities. And both surveys were conducted after the events of 11 September. A 
survey  conducted  by  Bancorp  in  late  October  found  respondents  (134  in  all)  more  optimistic  about 
general  business  conditions,  and  more  confident  about  increasing  investment  expenditure,  than  a 
similar survey four months earlier. A more limited survey of the top 20 listed companies undertaken by 
the  New  Zealand  Business  Times,  also  in  late  October,  found  that,  with  only  a  single  exception, 
corporates had not changed budget allocations or staff hiring intentions since 11 September - and the 
exception was “a company that is subject to a particular restructuring in its business.”1 
Moreover, if the slowdown in the global economy affects us more adversely than we currently expect, 
there  is  scope  to  stimulate  additional  demand  without  causing  inflation  to  accelerate.  Typically, 
monetary policy is these days the policy instrument of choice for providing temporary stimulus to the 
economy. We have now eased monetary policy by reducing the Official Cash Rate from 6.5 per cent 
early this year to 4.75 per cent currently. There is little doubt that that reduction will help to cushion the 
effects of the international slowdown. But if we need to reduce the Official Cash Rate further, there is 
clearly plenty of room to do so, and in that respect we are in a very much easier position than the one 
in which the Japanese central bank finds itself, with official interest rates already at zero, and with no 
further reductions possible. 
So there is good reason for businesses in New Zealand to be more optimistic about the future than is 
the  case  in  many  of  our  trading  partners:  New  Zealand  starts  from  a  situation  of  relatively  strong 
growth,  and  there  is  ample  scope  for  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  the  economy  if  that  should  be 
needed, without jeopardising price stability.  
                                                      
1   New Zealand Business Times, 2 November 2001. 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 But unfortunately policy is unable to provide complete protection 
But  thirdly,  having  said  that,  it  is  unfortunately  quite  impossible  for  policy-makers,  whether  in  the 
government  or  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  to  protect  your  business  from  all  the  effects  of  the  global 
slowdown. 
In part that is because policy - whether government fiscal policy or Reserve Bank monetary policy - 
works with what in the trade we call a long lag, or delay. In other words, the time between when the 
Reserve  Bank  changes  the  Official  Cash  Rate  and  when  that  change  impacts  your  business  will 
almost  certainly  be  many  weeks  and  probably  many  months.  I  have  heard  that  some  businesses 
believe  that  a  change  in  the  Official  Cash  Rate  can  have  an  almost  instantaneous  impact  in  the 
market,  because  of  the  effect  which  such  a  change  can  have  on  confidence.  But  that  is  surely  the 
exception  rather  than  the  rule.  In  most  situations,  the  lag  or  delay  between  a  change  in  monetary 
policy and the impact of that change on the economy is typically more than a year. 
To make life even more complicated, the lags are not only quite long but are also variable - they vary 
somewhat from situation to situation. 
This means that, if we had to offset the effect of, say, a world economic slowdown on the New Zealand 
economy by easing monetary policy, we would need perfect ability to see the future for more than a 
year ahead, perfect understanding of precisely where the economy is now, and perfect understanding 
of how the economy works. 
Well, we do our best, and I am fortunate to have some of the brightest economists in New Zealand on 
my staff, trying to discern the future. We study 6,000 data series. We look for relationships which look 
realistic in recent history. We talk to businesses up and down the country - about 50 or 60 before each 
quarterly  Monetary Policy Statement. We use some sophisticated economic models, but stir in very 
large amounts of judgement. We are constantly looking to update our assessment of the real economy 
outside  the  Reserve  Bank’s  doors.  We  get  a  steady  flow  of  data  relevant  to  New  Zealand  from 
overseas  economies.  We  believe  we  are  as  well-informed  about  the  economy  as  any  other 
organisation in New Zealand, and better informed than most.  
But  we  can  still  get  it  wrong.  Let  me  illustrate.  One  of  the  most  reliable  relationships  in  recent 
economic history is that the world prices of the commodities New Zealand exports tend to rise when 
the economies of our trading partners are buoyant, and tend to fall when the economies of our trading 
partners  are  subdued.  That  sounds  pretty  much  what  one  might  expect  on  the  basis  of  common 
sense, and that is consistent with the data (figure 9).  
Figure 9 
NZ’s export partner growth and world commodity prices 
Sources: RBNZ, Consensus, ANZ. 
  BIS Review 95/2001 
 7
 Figure 10 
World export price index projections 
(previous Monetary Policy Statements) 
Source: RBNZ. November 2001 is central projection. 
 So since at least the December 2000 Monetary Policy Statement, we have been expecting the prices 
of our commodity exports to decline (figure 10). And we projected the same thing to happen in March 
this  year,  even  though  in  the  intervening  period  prices  had  risen  some  more,  despite  a  steady 
weakening in the world economy. And we projected prices to fall in our May Statement, even though 
they  had  risen  some  more,  despite  still  more  weakening  in  the  world  economy.  And  in  our  August 
Statement, we again projected world prices to fall, even though by August they had risen still further 
and the world economy was looking quite seedy! And in the Statement we issued last week, we still 
projected that the slowdown in the world economy would produce a fall in our export prices! Indeed, 
had we not expected our export prices to fall, the case for reducing the Official Cash Rate last week 
would have been non-existent. Should we have changed our expectation about export prices because 
over  most  of  the  last  year  the  traditional  relationship  between  export  prices  and  the  growth  of  our 
trading partners has broken down? Obviously we don’t think so, but the example is a good illustration 
of the difficulty of forecasting the economy even in “normal” times.  
And of course these are anything but normal times. No economic model, and no economic forecaster, 
could have foreseen the events of 11 September. By definition therefore, given the long and variable 
lags between a change in monetary policy and the impact of that change on the real economy, and the 
inability of even the most experienced central bankers to foresee the future, we will sometimes fail to 
adjust policy sufficiently quickly to protect your business from a sharp downswing - or for that matter, 
from a sharp upswing (though that may well cause fewer complaints!). 
There  is  another  reason  why  monetary  policy  can  not  protect  your  business  from  all  the  adverse 
effects of world events. Even if we had super-human ability to see into the future, the reality is that 
world events have quite different effects on different industries and different regions. Monetary policy, 
with its single interest rate instrument, can only react to the balance of inflationary pressures in the 
economy as a whole, not to the pressures in individual industries. In other words, we can’t have a high 
interest  rate  to  restrain  the  very  buoyant  conditions  in  the  dairy  industry  but  a  low  interest  rate  to 
support the software export sector, which has been adversely affected by the sharp deceleration of 
spending  on  information  technology  in  the  United  States. We  can  only  have  an  interest  rate  which 
seems appropriate to the economy as a whole - and must accept that that interest rate will seem far 
too high for some parts of the economy and will be arguably too low for other parts. 
We  saw  that  situation  rather  clearly  in  the  mid-nineties,  when  the  building  sector  was  experiencing 
quite  strong  inflationary  pressures,  but  many  export  industries  were  experiencing  quite  strong 
disinflationary  pressures.  It  would  have  been  great  to  have  been  able  to  have  a  high  interest  rate 
applicable to the building sector but a low one applicable to export industries. But as long as we have 
a common currency throughout New Zealand, that is not an option. 
So the Reserve Bank can help your business by trying hard to anticipate developments in the New 
Zealand  economy,  and  can  adjust  monetary  policy  quickly  if  it  looks  likely  that  inflationary  or 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2001
 deflationary pressures will emerge. But we can’t provide complete protection, either for the economy 
as a whole or, even more clearly, for each industry and region. 
Monetary policy doesn’t determine the economy’s long-run growth rate 
Finally,  it  is  important  to  be  aware  of  what  monetary  policy  can  and  can  not  do  for  the  economy’s 
long-run growth rate. 
There is now virtually unanimous opinion among economists and policy-makers around the world that 
central  banks  can’t  engender  faster  economic  growth  by  being  more  tolerant  of  inflation.  On  the 
contrary,  there  is  a  virtually  unanimous  view  that  the  best  thing  that  monetary  policy  can  do  for 
economic growth is to keep inflation low and stable.  
It is a myth, though one clearly believed by some New Zealanders, that the United States economy 
has grown faster than the New Zealand economy over the last decade because the US central bank 
has a mandate to encourage growth and maintain  price stability,  whereas the  New Zealand central 
bank has only a mandate to maintain price stability. The reality is that in both countries it is now fully 
recognised that the best thing which monetary policy can do to encourage growth is to keep inflation 
under control. In that respect, the Federal Reserve and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand think and 
operate in the same way. 
This is not the place for a comprehensive discussion on the determinants of trend growth in output. 
Essentially, economic growth depends on growth in inputs of labour and capital, and advances in the 
productivity with which that labour and capital are employed. And most of the things which impact on 
those factors are quite unrelated to monetary policy. Some studies have suggested that high levels of 
taxation discourage growth through their effect on incentives to work, save and innovate. Others have 
pointed to the importance of protecting private property rights if growth is to be dynamic. Still others 
note  the  importance  of  human  capital,  and  highlight  the  role  of  education  as  a  determinant  of 
economic  growth.  And  of  course  there  are  many  other  relevant  factors,  such  as  the  rules  and 
regulations which may make undertaking new investments a slow and cumbersome process. Getting 
policies in all of these areas right is crucial if trend growth is to be increased, and none of them are 
policies susceptible to central bank influence. 
Conclusion 
So in conclusion, in these “interesting times” -  
• 
First, the  Reserve  Bank is as committed to avoiding deflation as to avoiding  inflation, and 
that means that we will always be leaning against the wind to the best of our ability, tending 
to  tighten  policy  if  inflation  looks  likely  to  rise  in  the  future,  and  tending  to  ease  policy  if 
inflation looks likely to fall below the bottom of our target.  
Second,  the  New  Zealand  economy  is  well-placed  to  weather  the  international  slowdown, 
with  moderate  growth,  low  unemployment,  an  exchange  rate  which  is  providing  useful 
support  for  export  and  import-competing  industries,  and  ample  scope  for further  easing  of 
monetary policy if that should prove necessary.  
Third, even with the best will in the world, the best economists in the world, the most regular 
contact with companies up and down the land, monetary policy can never provide you with 
complete protection against the vagaries of life, whether these vagaries come in the form of 
international crises or in the form of some dramatic domestic development. 
And fourth, monetary policy doesn’t determine the economy’s long-term growth rate - that is 
determined by a whole range of factors which have nothing directly to do with the Reserve 
Bank. 
   Sometimes  the  Reserve  Bank  will  need  to  leave  monetary  policy  unchanged  for  months  on  end. 
Sometimes we will need to adjust interest rates in small incremental steps, as earlier in the year. And 
sometimes we will need to adjust rates more aggressively, as over the last couple of months. Different 
circumstances will require different responses. 
But what I can say is that, in “interesting times” as in normal times, the role of monetary policy is to 
help and not to hinder, and that is what we are committed to doing. 
BIS Review 95/2001 
 9
