 Niklaus Blattner: Review of the Swiss economy: end-of-year media news 
conference 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Dr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the End-of-year Media News Conference, Zurich, 7 December 2001 
 from  banking  and 
financial  market  supervisory  authorities. 
11 September 2001: a test for the global financial system 
For  a  number  of  years  now  so-called  systemic  risks  have  received  increasing  attention  from  the 
central  banks  and 
In  extreme 
circumstances, systemic risks may ultimately lead to a breakdown of the financial system. They have 
their  origin  either  in  a  transmission  of  liquidity  and  solvency  problems  between  banks  and  other 
financial service providers or in the fact that numerous market participants are simultaneously affected 
by  the  same  non-diversifiable  risks.  Examples  of  such  risks  are  sudden,  widespread  and  massive 
losses in the value of financial assets (stock market crash), serious malfunctioning of major financial 
market  infrastructures,  large-scale  natural  disasters  or  terror  attacks  which  obstruct  markets  and 
market  participants  in  economic  or  technical  and  physical  respects.  The  consequence  may  be  a 
substantial disruption of economic activity. The damage caused to the affected economies is liable to 
be correspondingly large. 
The terror attacks of 11 September 2001  hit the central nerve of the global financial system - New 
York,  the  major  trading  centre  for  the  world's  leading  currency  and  the  preferred  location  of  the 
international banking and financial services industry. Allow me to recapitulate the consequences in a 
few words: various banks, stock brokerage firms and securities houses lost part or even all of their 
staff,  their  business  premises,  their  backup  facilities  and  their  lines  of  communication.  The markets 
remained  closed  on  the  following  day,  the  equity  markets  even  until  the  end  of  the  week.  From  a 
systemic point of view, of even greater consequence than the closing of the equity market was the fact 
that  the  two  markets  for  US  government  paper  and  for  commercial  paper,  the  main  vehicles  for 
short-term  liquidity  equalisation  between  market  participants,  had  ceased  to  operate.  Payment  and 
settlement systems started to break down. Securities and credit balances totalling billions were thus 
blocked at some banks while lacking at others. Even though the terror attacks were concentrated on 
New  York  and  Washington,  in  the  beginning  they  not  only  paralysed  Wall  Street  but  they  also 
threatened to undermine significant parts of the international financial system. 
It is much too soon, and this is not the proper place, to make an assessment of the profound human, 
social  and  political  implications  of  the  terror  attacks.  The  resilience  of  the  banks  and  the  financial 
markets must be emphasised, however. A week after the attacks, business was almost back to usual 
again.  In  most  cases,  the  banks  and  securities  houses  affected  managed  to  solve  their  problems, 
some of which were immense. Neither a stock market crash nor a breakdown of parts of the financial 
system  set  in  either  in  the  United  States  or  anywhere  else.  It  was  precisely  under  the  extreme 
pressure  that  the  financial  system  proved  its  stability.  The  market  participants  mastered  the  crisis 
situation spontaneously and networked their efforts: for example, the tasks that would normally have 
been performed in downtown Manhattan were carried out in New Jersey or in London. Or they agreed 
to  extend  the  settlement  period  to  five  days  and  to  conclude  general  money  market  trades  at  the 
official Fed rate (instead of fixing prices via brokers, some of whom could not be reached due to the 
collapse  of  technology).  Furthermore,  market  participants  practised  restraint  in  stock  sales  and 
abstained from taking personal advantage of the general state of emergency. Creditors, notably the 
banks,  also  endeavoured  to  fulfil merely  implicit  commitments  as far  as  possible  and  to  ensure  the 
functioning  of  the  markets.  All  this  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  tireless  creative  and 
networked efforts of thousands of shocked and grieving staff of the enterprises concerned and of the 
international financial community. 
The private measures for overcoming the crisis were also actively supported by the central banks, first 
and  foremost  by  the  Fed,  which  had  fully  retained  its  capacity  to  act  from  the  outset  despite  being 
located in the immediate vicinity of "Ground Zero". It injected additional liquidity into the market and 
allowed the rate for one-day repos to fall to 1%. It also opened its counters to foreign banks operating 
in the United States and, when necessary, offered foreign central banks one-month dollar swaps. In 
particular,  the  Fed  communicated  clearly  from  the  very  beginning  that  it  would  meet  the  increased 
requirements for dollar liquidity at any time. 
BIS Review 101/2001 
 1
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
2 
 Against  this  background  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  terrorist  attacks  on  the  United  States  failed  to 
seriously impair the functioning capacity of the financial markets either in Switzerland or in the rest of 
Europe.  Even  though  the  global  financial  system  had  been  hit  in  its  very  core,  the  extensive 
transmission of problems that was theoretically possible did not take place. This is not least due to the 
fact  that  the  institutions  concerned  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  comported  themselves  in  an 
appropriate manner, as did the central banks. The biggest immediate problem for some Swiss banks 
is likely to have been the inability to act of a major correspondence bank in New York that was hit by a 
simultaneous  power  failure  in  the  main  supply  and  the  backup  system.  In  such  cases,  liquidity 
requirements  soar.  The  Fed's  generous  supply  of  USD  liquidity  to  the  market  also  benefited  Swiss 
banks. We did not, however, observe a similarly higher demand for Swiss franc liquidity. Nevertheless, 
the Swiss National Bank was, of course, present in the CHF money market. (Cf. the remarks of Bruno 
Gehrig.) 
For the time being, I would sum up the situation as follows: 
1. 
The terror attacks of 11 September 2001 did not succeed in destabilising either the US part 
of the international financial system or those of the rest of the world. 
The  banks  and  financial  markets  have  overcome  the  shock  of  the  terror  attacks  with 
impressive flexibility, creativity and with a measure of solidarity that commands respect.  
The  central  banks,  i.e.  the  US  Fed,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  all  the  other  central 
banks including the Swiss National Bank fulfilled their task as lenders of last resort in times 
of crisis. 
The crisis management was facilitated by the fact that the banks, the markets and financial 
market infrastructures in general were in a sound condition at the time of the terror attack. 
Their  liquidity  and  solvency  provided  them  with  a  good  basis  for  successfully  passing  the 
extreme  "stress  test"  to  which  the  international  banking  and  financial  systems  were 
subjected.  
This underlines the significance of banking and financial market supervision on both levels of 
intervention  assigned  to  them,  i.e.  both  in  the  micro-prudential  as  well  as  in  the 
macro-prudential field. While the former primarily serves to secure the banks' solvency, the 
latter has the task of upholding the liquidity and functioning capacity of the payment systems 
and of financial market infrastructures in general.  
The  next  step  is  to  work  through  all  the  events  of  11  September  and  their  consequences 
rapidly  and  carefully.  Even  though  we  have  obtained  proof  of  the  stability  of  the  global 
financial system, we cannot simply carry on as though nothing had happened. Lessons must 
be learned and defensive measures, both on the financial industry and central bank levels, 
i.e. in banking and financial market supervision, must be further improved.  
The events of 11 September have strengthened all the parties' awareness of the extent of 
international integration  in  a crisis situation. While the benefits of international  cooperation 
have  so  far  been  undisputed,  at  least  theoretically,  empirical  evidence  has  now  been 
provided. Cooperation among the authorities in the various countries on the level of the Bank 
for International Settlements, the relevant committees of central bank governors of the Group 
of Ten and the International Monetary Fund is to be intensified.  
A current example of such efforts can be found in the payment systems sector. Any strains 
on  the  financial  system  can  spread  rapidly  as  a  result  of  the  international  integration  of 
participants as well as of payment and settlement systems. Increased attention must be paid 
to devising  and  linking systems such as Switzerland's SIC (Swiss Interbank Clearing) and 
the planned CLS (Continuous Linked Settlement) among others.  
Further  problems  which  must  be  dealt  with  in  particular  by  the  private  financial  industry 
concern  the  inadequate  geographic  diversification  of  production  locations  and  backup 
facilities, which have proved less than satisfactory in some cases.  
BIS Review 101/2001
