 Ernst Welteke: On the eve of EU enlargement 
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  Danmarks  Nationalbank, 
Copenhagen, 29 October 2001. 
 I 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to have the opportunity today to present some of my views here at Danmarks 
Nationalbanken. Thank you very much for your warm welcome.  
I have been fortunate to have had the opportunity yesterday to get around a little in Copenhagen and 
in the northern part  of Sealand. Time and again I  note and appreciate the friendly  atmosphere that 
exists in Denmark.  
And time and again, as a European, I experience a real sense of regret that Denmark will not be one 
of the countries to make full use of the common European currency from 1 January 2002. Well, I hope 
you will acquire a taste for the euro later on.  
In  terms  of  economics,  there  are  three  things  that  relate  Germany  and  Denmark  to  each  other. 
Denmark’s most important trading partner is Germany. Denmark’s coasts and islands are a favourite 
destination  for  German  tourists.  And,  of  course,  Denmark  and  Germany  have  a  strong  common 
interest in the upcoming eastward enlargement of the EU. That brings me to why I am here today - to 
discuss this vital topic with you. 
II 
Unfortunately, no discussion of economic issues can take place today without due consideration being 
given to the devastating terrorist attacks on New York and Washington.  
When  the  attacks  were  launched  on  the  United  States  of  America  on  11  September,  the  world 
economy had already weakened significantly. For the first time since the mid-seventies oil crisis, the 
G-7 countries are slowing in step, although the nature of the slowing is country-specific. As a result, 
world trade growth is down to two percent after growth of 12 percent in 2000 [due to a WTO estimate]. 
The economy in the United States had been slowing down sharply, led by lower investment spending 
following  the  IT-investment  boom.  Via  the  link  to  external  demand,  shrinking  US  investment 
expenditure  had  a  negative  impact  on  emerging  markets  in  south-east  Asia.  Japan  has  not  yet 
emerged  from  its  decade-long  slump.  The  banking  crisis  in  the  1990s  and  unresolved  structural 
problems still weigh heavily on the Japanese economy.  
The world economy today finds itself in a state of heightened uncertainty. The events in New York and 
Washington have undermined the confidence of both businesses and consumers. The extent and the 
duration of the military encounter as well as the extent of the anthrax incidents will determine the level 
of confidence among consumers and businesses in the coming months.  
Part of the current uncertainty lies in the fact that indicators refer to the period before the watershed 
date 11 September. This portion of uncertainty will recede as ever more figures cover the post-attack 
period.  
In the euro area, economic growth is currently significantly below potential. The economy grew by only 
half  a  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  and  stagnated  in  the  second  quarter.  Business  and  consumer 
confidence had been falling even before 11 September and the reduction in unemployment has come 
to a halt at 8.3 percent. The return to the presumed potential growth path of 2½ percent a year will be 
delayed.  
There are, however, a couple of reasons to remain optimistic for the economic prospects of the euro 
area  in  the  medium  term.  The  expansionary  effects  of  this  year’s  interest  rate  cuts  are  still  in  the 
pipeline.  It  takes  some  quarters  for  interest  rate  measures  to  start  affecting  the  real  economy.  In 
addition, low real interest rates make for favourable financing conditions throughout the euro area.  
  Increased  use  of  information  and  communication  technology  will  bolster  potential  growth.  In  this 
respect, the euro area is in a rather favourable position. A major portion of potential productivity gains 
of IT investment are yet to be realised. Heavy overinvestment in IT had been avoided in the euro area.  
Definitely good news is on the price front. Inflation in the euro area has been falling since reaching its 
peak in May [3.4%]. In September, consumer prices were 2.5 percent higher than in the previous year 
[August 2.8%]. Early indicators such as producer prices and the prospected German inflation rate in 
October [2.0%] point to a further fall in inflation in the near future.  
Monetary policymakers in the Eurosystem have lowered official interest rates during the course of this 
year  by  100  basis  points,  acknowledging  lower  price  pressure  over  the  medium  term.  The 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy measures are tailored to the medium-term outlook for price stability. If, 
in the Governing Council of the ECB, we see the possibility of reducing interest rates further without 
compromising price stability, we will do so.  
For  fiscal  policy,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  current  situation  be  assessed  in  a  realistic 
manner  and  that  the  instruments  available  are  applied  carefully.  Activism  and  excessive  zeal  are 
perfectly understandable - but detrimental. The appropriate stance for fiscal policy now is to make use 
of  built-in  stabilisers.  There  is  no  room  for  extra  spending  programmes  in  the  euro  area,  as  these 
would  clearly  compromise  consolidation  efforts.  Furthermore,  it  is  plainly  impossible  to  ensure  that 
additional spending is timed precisely to meet the economies’ needs. An extra budget may even turn 
out to have a procyclical effect.  
There is, however, room for structural reforms in the euro area. Higher flexibility of labour and product 
markets can, first, bolster confidence in the euro area. It will, second, enable the euro area to even 
better cope with external shocks.  
Economic and financial links bring economic weaknesses in other parts of the world to our doorstep 
faster now than ever. The euro area, however, is well equipped to weather many a storm. In its brief 
history, the Eurosystem, has already dealt with three external shocks and crises. The keywords are 
“the Asian crisis”, “the oil price shock” and now “terror”. That means that we have withstood what has 
been regarded as the worst case scenario for the new currency.  
Looking  back  on  three  years  of  European  monetary  union  we  can  therefore  safely  say  that  in  the 
Eurosystem  we  have  coped  with  various  forms  of  stress.  Our  success  is  founded  on  the  common 
stability  orientation.  The  Eurosystem  is  obliged  by  the  EC  Treaty  to  maintain  price  stability.  Fiscal 
policy is committed to sound public finances by means of the Stability and Growth Pact. Productivity 
growth is now usually taken into account when wage agreements are negotiated.  
A generally stable currency and markets that trust the stability-orientation of central banks make for 
lower  price  increases  in  times  of  crises.  They  also  anchor  inflation  expectations  at  low  levels  .The 
greater currency area is able to cushion external shocks. Now, with a common currency, Europe is 
taking a more important place in the world arena and will therefore be able to assume a position of 
greater responsibility.  
III 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  attacks  on  New  York  and  Washington  coincide  with  the  intensifying  of  a  debate  about  the 
opportunities  and  threats  of  globalisation.  Both  issues  are  linked  to  some  extent.  Both  lead  to  the 
conclusion that isolationism is not a workable concept in today’s world.  
Therefore, a need arises for us all to get involved in the debate. A broad based appreciation of the 
world  economic  order  coupled  with  the  prospect  of  prosperity  for  developing  countries  will  cut  the 
ground from under the terrorists’ feet in the long run.  
One  of  the  answers  to  the  questions  posed  by  recent  events  is  to  expand  international  trade.  The 
World Trade Organisation - the WTO - is crucial in this respect. At its meeting in the state of Qatar in 
November, the Ministerial Conference will formally confirm China’s admission to the WTO. One billion 
more people will then benefit by trade liberalisation.  
A new round of world trade negotiations must not fail again. In the current situation, it would be wrong 
to restrict openness. Quite the reverse - the opening of the world’s economies must be speeded up.  
  Empirical  research1  confirms  that  if  the  degree  of  an  economy’s  openness  -  measured  by  trade 
volume  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  -  rises  by  one  percentage  point,  GDP  per  capita  rises  by  two 
percentage points. Clearly, this is only a rule of thumb, but these gains would represent nearly one 
trillion of additional world GDP annually. That equals about one-tenth of the US economy.  
Developing countries derive exceptional benefit from free trade. If international trade were liberalised 
completely, they could see an increase of three percent in their annual GDP or - more impressive - 
three times the foreign aid they receive annually. Even if this figures exaggerated the effects, let’s not 
forego that globalisation dividend!  
Higher trade volumes and, of course, inward direct investment provide opportunities to participate in 
prosperity.  Thirty  years  ago,  for  example,  South  Korea,  was  as  poor  as  Ghana.  Thanks  to 
industrialisation, to high internal savings and to its integration into the world economy, it is now as rich 
as  Portugal.  Globalisation  is  not  a  zero-sum  game.  It  is  to  the  benefit  of  all  people.  Therefore  the 
advanced  countries  must  avoid  trying  to  protect  certain  industries.  Isolationism  is  clearly  not  a 
promising alternative.  
Balancing interests internationally cannot stop at world trade. As the emerging markets’ share in the 
world economy increases, they need to be integrated into the institutional arrangements of the world 
economy.  In  1996  the  Bank for  International  Settlement  admitted  emerging  markets  such  as  South 
Korea,  China  and  Russia.  Emerging  markets  play  a  key  role  in  heightening  the  acceptance  of  the 
world economic order.  
As a dedicated European, I would like to see Europe playing a mediating role. Europe does not seem 
to be a superpower destined to attract admiration or envy. Europe is therefore virtually predestined to 
be a mediator in balancing interests in the world.  
Today, looking after national interests is done less and less effectively at the national level. After the 
terrorist attack, this has become obvious for a whole host of policies. Domestic and foreign policy are 
no longer separate issues. A transnational approach is now called for. Again, isolationism is no longer 
an option.  
In Europe, we have already gone a long way towards this new approach. Monetary policy currently 
completes this process. Monetary policy in the euro area is denationalised.  
In Europe we will go further along this path as we advance towards EU enlargement.  
IV 
In  June,  the  European  summit  in  Gothenburg  proclaimed  the  accession  process  “irreversible”.  It  is 
envisaged that negotiations with the first group of countries will be complete as early as the end of 
next year. We can truly say that we are on the eve of the eastward enlargement of the EU.  
Fifty years after the signing of the Treaty of Paris, the European Union is more attractive than ever. It 
is a success. The entire history of the European Union is one of enlargements. In a first sweep the 
Union  extended  northwards  -  Denmark,  Ireland  and  the  United  Kingdom  joined  the  “club”  in  1973. 
During  the  1980s  Greece  and  then  Portugal  and  Spain  became  new  member states  -  in  what  was 
known as the southern enlargement. In 1995 the accession of Austria, Finland and Sweden rounded 
off the picture.  
The  EU  has  some  experience  of  enlargement  already.  In  principle,  therefore,  any  upcoming 
enlargement should be no big deal. In practice, however, it is a big deal. The eastern enlargement is 
special; indeed it is unique for three reasons. 
(1) 
Most of the accession countries are still working on their transition. Former communist states 
have  become  democracies,  state-led  economies  are  being  transformed  into  market-led 
economies. This is a demanding process. For the people that are now reaching out towards 
the EU many things have already taken a turn for the better. Joining the European Union and 
one day becoming full members of European monetary union are the logical steps on a path 
to freedom, stability and prosperity.  
The upcoming enlargement is also special in terms of its scope. Negotiations are currently 
being  held  with  12  countries.  Once  they  have  all  joined  the  EU,  the  number  of  member 
                                                      
1  Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer (1999). “Does Trade cause Growth?” In: American Economic Review 89(3), p 379-399. 
(2) 
  (3) 
states will have nearly doubled. The EU institutions need to be reshaped if they are to be 
appropriate to the larger community. The upcoming enlargement is, therefore, an opportunity 
to  improve  the  functioning,  the  transparency  and  thus  the  acceptance  of  the  European 
Union.  
A further challenge is presented by the substantial heterogeneity which exists between the 
EU and the group of accession countries. The people in the twelve accession countries will 
increase the EU population by roughly one-third. Nominal GDP, however, would rise by five 
percent  only.  The  wealth  gap  between  the  current  member  states  and  the  accession 
countries is larger than that between the countries involved in the earlier enlargements. In 
addition,  there  is  a  striking  degree  of  heterogeneity  among  the  accession  countries 
themselves. GDP per capita ranges from 24 percent (Bulgaria) to 82 percent (Cyprus) of the 
EU average.  
Contemplation of EU enlargement always provides an opportunity to review the benefits of integration. 
Integration is most clearly visible in monetary policy. The single monetary policy is designed for the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  Sharing  a  stable  currency  has  become  a  hallmark  of  European  economic 
integration.  Some  two  months  ago  details  of  the  new  banknotes  and  their  safety  features  were 
presented to the public. We are now halfway through the frontloading phase of distributing the new 
currency. Intensive information campaigns are being conducted. Monetary integration is thus taking on 
shape and meaning for the man and woman in the street.  
The single monetary policy - even during the run-up to EMU - has provided many countries with an 
unprecedented  degree  of  price  stability.  Trade  has  intensified  and  financial  markets  in  Europe  are 
integrating fast. Businesses, consumers and investors alike are seeing the benefits.  
And  even  more  is  to  be  gained.  Three  countries  are  currently  “member  states  with  a  derogation” 
(Article 122 of the Treaty). This basically means that they do not yet participate in European Monetary 
Union, implying that there is still some scope for enlargement within the EU as it is at present. The 
single currency is the consequent development of the common market. The status of “member state 
with a derogation” is designed to be an intermediate stage on the path to full EMU membership.  
V 
EU accession is basically a political process that passes through three stages. Accession partnerships 
prepare accession to the EU which will culminate in full EMU membership. EU accession is conditional 
on the fulfilment of the “Copenhagen criteria”. These encompass, 
first, “the stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and 
the respect for a protection of minorities” - the political criterion; 
second, “the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope with 
competitive pressure and market forces within the EU”; and 
third, “the ability to take the obligations of membership, including adherence to the aims of 
political unification, as well as Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)”. 
The Copenhagen criteria define the common ground of the future European Union.  
Integrating  countries  is,  however,  about  far  more  than  simply  defining  common  ground.  Economic 
integration is crucial, as the very stability of the large monetary union hinges on economic cohesion. A 
monetary union can only be stable over the longer term if - as the Treaty states in Article 121 - “a high 
degree  of  sustainable  convergence”  is  achieved.  I  would  like  to  present  my  view  of  what  a  “high 
degree of sustainable convergence” is.  
“Sustainable convergence” encompasses all three types of convergence: nominal convergence, real 
convergence and structural convergence. Each type is important in its own right.  
The Maastricht “convergence criteria” are set out to measure nominal convergence. These fiscal and 
monetary criteria relate to the inflation rate, capital-market interest rates, sustainable fiscal policy and 
exchange-rate  stability.  They  are,  in  a  way,  both  “stability  criteria”  and  “convergence  criteria”.  They 
ensure that a country is not pursuing policies which might have an adverse effect on the stability of the 
common currency.  
Anti-inflationary monetary policy is at the core of a stability-oriented policy. In most of the accession 
countries the process of disinflation is well under way. Hyperinflation is an issue of the past. This year 
  all  accession  countries  (with  the  exception  of  Romania2),  have  one-digit  inflation  rates.  Expected 
outcomes range from 1.3 percent (Lithuania) to 8.5 percent (Hungary and Bulgaria3).  
Weighted average CPI inflation in the 12 accession countries has been going down since 1999 at a 
rate  of  about  two  percentage  points  a  year  and  will  be  slightly  more  than  8  percent  this  year.  An 
average inflation rate of 8 percent a year is still four times higher than price stability as defined by the 
Eurosystem. Disinflation policies will have to be pursued further.  
The  so-called  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  has  been  given  much  attention  recently.  According  to  this 
theory, countries are expected to have to deal with relatively higher inflation rates during the process 
of  catching  up.  As  they  experience  high  productivity  growth  in  the  tradeables  sector,  wages  in  the 
non-tradeables will tend to go up in sync, leading to a higher overall rate of inflation.  
This  effect,  however,  does  not  suggest  the  Maastricht  criteria  to  be  revised.  The  inflation  criterion 
already  allows  for  inflation  to  diverge  by  1.5  percentage  points  from  the  three  best  performing 
members of the currency  union. Nor does the  Balassa-Samuelson effect suggest to loosen the two 
percent ceiling for price-stability in the euro area, which leaves enough room for price increases due to 
catching up. 
Sustainable convergence  in inflation rates is crucial.  Inflation rates can  be kept at a sufficiently  low 
level only if other policies comply with the stability orientation. Prudent wage policies will contribute to 
containing overall price developments. Structural policy also has a role to play. Currently, 25 percent 
of  prices  in  accession  countries  are  still  administrated.  Microeconomic  reforms  and  further  price 
deregulation  have  to  be  carried  out.  Only  then  can  the  price  mechanism  fully  work  through  to  the 
economy - a defining feature of a fully functioning market economy.  
Fiscal policy is of special importance in this respect. Excessive deficits are to be avoided. The public 
sector deficit is the decisive measure of a government’s demands on the financial markets. It is the 
benchmark  for  its  stability  orientation.  Last  year  general  government  deficits  among  the  accession 
countries ranged from 0.4 percent of GDP (in Estonia) to 7.1 percent of GDP (in Malta). Eight of the 
accession  countries  had  not  yet  met  the  Maastricht  budgetary  criterion.  However,  the  debt  criterion 
- public debt less than 60 percent of GDP - was met by a broad majority of the accession countries. 
There  are  still  a  few  years  in  which  to  pursue  convergence  and  to  prove  its  sustainability.  Nominal 
convergence  is  not  a  goal  to  be  reached  at  a  certain  point  in  time;  it  is,  rather,  the  natural  and 
sustainable state of a stable currency union.  
Apart from nominal convergence, real convergence is of importance in a monetary  union. I use the 
term here in the sense of synchronicity of business cycles. The Governing Council of the European 
Central  Bank  designs  monetary  policy  appropriate  to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  A  country  whose 
business  cycle  gets  grossly  out  of  step  might  suffer  if  it  is  subject  to  a  monetary  policy  that  is 
inappropriate to its national economy.  
However, marching in absolute lockstep is not necessary, as can be seen in the USA, where certain 
regions grow faster than others. Growth rates of states and regions within a currency union may differ 
to some degree. It is the size of the gap between actual and potential growth rates which matters. If 
potential  output  growth  rates  differ,  actual  growth  rates  can  differ  as  well.  They  do  not  necessarily 
indicate a lack of real convergence. 
VI 
In  the  longer  run,  stability  must  be  built  on  economic  integration.  An  extensive  body  of  theory  has 
evolved on the characteristics of optimum currency areas. Most important is, that prices and wages 
must  be  able  to  adjust  flexibly.  Mobility  of  goods,  labour  and  capital  shall  provide  for  market 
integration. Therefore central criteria call for a high degree of structural convergence.  
We  have  to  distinguish  between  different  types  of  structural  differences.  Most  critical  are  structural 
differences that may hamper market integration. These structural differences we must work to abolish 
as  they  may  hamper  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  union.  For  example,  differing  regulatory 
frameworks may prevent financial markets from integrating.  
                                                      
2  Romania has already indicated that it would prefer accession to take place after 2004. 
3  Bulgaria also prefers a later accession date; IMF data. 
  However, there are two other types of structural differences which are not in themselves a problem for 
a monetary union.  
 
First, there are diverse structures of production and consumption. Countries specialising in 
different  areas  will  tend  to  exchange  goods  and  services.  Complementarity  of  economic 
structures entails market integration and is in no way detrimental for a monetary union. 
Second,  there  are  structural  differences  that  help  us  to  cross-check  the  sustainability  of 
nominal and real convergence. The Treaty explicitly quotes the state and development of the 
balance of payments and unit labour costs.  
 Again,  structural  differences  which  hamper  market  integration  have  to  be  removed.  The  degree  of 
market  integration  is  crucial  in  assessing  EU  enlargement.  Much  has  been  achieved  in  terms  of 
market  integration  between  the  15 EU  member  states  and  the  accession  countries  since  the  iron 
curtain  was  lifted  in  1989.  Bilateral  “Europe  Agreements”  with  the  EU  paved  the  way  for  future 
integration.  
Early  on,  reciprocal  free  trade  in  industrial  products  was  complemented  by  steps  towards  the  free 
movement  of  services  and  capital.  The  EU  is  by  far  the  most  important  trading  partner  of  the 
accession countries. Around 65 percent of their exports are destined for one of the 15 EU member 
states.  A  slightly  lesser  share  of  their  imports  originates  in  the  EU.  EU  imports  from  the  accession 
countries grew at an annual rate of 12 percent between 1989 and 1999. If they continue at that pace, 
they will double every six years.  
We  can  see  clearly  why  trade  has  presented  opportunities  for  both  trading  partners.  The  EU  has 
specialised  in  advanced  technological  products.  The  transition  countries  import  these  investment 
goods  in  order  to  revamp  their  economy.  They  have  shifted  their  exports  from  resource-intensive 
goods towards labour-intensive goods, thereby utilising their comparative advantage.  
The  complementarity  of  production  structures  allows  specialisation  gains  to  be  exploited  and  the 
international  division  of labour leaves everybody  better off. At 50 percent,  the share of intermediate 
goods in accession countries’ trade - exports as well as imports - is rather high. This indicates how 
well the newcomers have already been integrated into international production chains.  
With the early liberalisation of capital, market integration has been furthered to a considerable extent 
by foreign direct investment (FDI). During the 1990s some two-thirds of capital inflows in the accession 
countries originated from the European Union. Again, the neighbouring states Austria and Germany 
have been the most actively involved.  
Labour markets are a lot less integrated internationally than goods and capital markets. Freedom of 
movement  is  one  of  the  “four  basic  freedoms”  of  the  single  market  in  the  European  Union.  Labour 
mobility within the EU - that is, both migration and cross-border working in border regions - is possibly 
the most sensitive issue in the current debate on EU enlargement. At least this is true of Germany and 
Austria. Anxieties abound - and they need to be taken seriously.  
Economic integration can only take place if the four basic freedoms are granted. There is neither a 
way  nor  a  need  to  exempt  the  labour  market.  Only  then  can  we  make  full  use  of  the  market 
mechanisms.  Moreover,  a  meaningful  judgement  of  achieved  convergence  requires  all  four  basic 
freedoms to be granted.  
How much migration and cross-border working is to be expected? At the moment labour mobility is 
strictly regulated. Emigration from central and eastern European countries  into  the  European Union 
peaked  in  1990.  Afterwards,  when  things  improved  in  those  countries,  net  emigration  receded. 
Emigration became more costly than staying at home. No serious study predicts that EU enlargement 
will  lead  to  extended  migration.  As  long  as  the  accession  process  is  being  pursued  seriously,  the 
potential for intensified migration looks rather limited. This was also the experience at the time of the 
southern enlargement.  
The financial sector in accession countries still has some way to go. The banking sector in general is 
still tiny, highly concentrated and foreign-owned. Total banking assets in the EU are more than twice 
GDP. Of the transition countries, only the Czech Republic has total banking assets the size of its GDP. 
In all the other transitional economies involved in the enlargement process, the corresponding figure is 
only  one-half.  It  is  foremost  the  private  sector  that  suffers  from  the  low  degree  of  financial 
intermediation.  
  Capital  account  liberalisation  is  a  precondition  for  financial  integration.  However,  fully  liberalised 
capital flows entail certain risks for stability as long as the financial sector is still underdeveloped. We 
should  allow  sufficient  time  for financial  integration  between  the  accession  countries  and  the  EU  to 
take place in order not to destabilise vulnerable financial sectors in the European emerging markets.  
VII 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
We are on the eve of enlarging the European Union eastward. Much has been attained so far - as 
regards the transition to fully-functioning market economies, in terms of macroeconomic stability, and 
in terms of prosperity. 
However, the process of political, economic and financial change is still far from complete. To become 
full members of European monetary union requires accession countries to be fully-functioning market 
economies with a clearly defined stability orientation.  
I  am  strongly  in  favour  of  EU  enlargement.  I  am  strictly  against  setting  up  new  hurdles.  I  am  also 
strongly  opposed  to  the  slightest  compromise  of  the  long-term  prospects  for  a  stable  European 
monetary union. It is in our own best interest and in the best interest of the accession countries for 
nominal and structural convergence to be fully achieved before EMU is enlarged.  
Warsaw,  Prague  and  Budapest  are  essentially  European  capitals.  A  European  Union  is  incomplete 
without the central eastern European countries.  
With  the  eastern  enlargement,  things  will  come  full  circle  in  Europe.  Mutual  understanding  of  the 
people is bound to deepen, as relations grow ever closer in a union sharing basic convictions. A free 
and democratic enlarged European Union is a reliable and a stable partner in the world economy - in 
times of strain or prosperity. 
 