 Klaus Liebscher: Regulatory challenges for European financial markets 
Opening address by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the CEPR/ESI 
Annual  Conference: 
for  European  Financial  Markets”,  Vienna, 
20 September 2002.  
“Regulatory  Challenges 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  conference  “Regulatory  Challenges  for 
European Financial Markets” hosted by Oesterreichische Nationalbank. I am particularly grateful to the 
Centre of Economic Policy Research (CEPR) and Professor Eijffinger, Dr. Hochreiter and Professor 
Koedijk who have organized this academic conference with a highly interesting selection of papers on 
a very important topic.  
The  financial  system  fulfils  several  essential  functions  for  the  performance  of  the  real  economy.  It 
plays a crucial role in the allocation of resources by channelling funds from households to enterprises, 
it provides risk-sharing opportunities for households and firms and it helps agents to economise on 
transaction and information costs. An economic environment in which these functions can be fulfilled 
smoothly and efficiently is therefore essential for the welfare of an economy.  
The  accelerating  process  of  European  integration  has  abolished  various  obstacles  that  were 
previously in place because of national boundaries and different legislations. And the development of 
a single financial market in Europe has led to a situation where the financial system can fulfil its core 
functions much better than it could fulfil them two decades ago.  
This  integration  process  has  been  accelerated  and  reinforced  by  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency. Its success has supported the process of financial market integration and structural change. 
There are good reasons to believe that we are only at the beginning of this process.  
But financial market integration by itself is not enough to guarantee that the financial system can fulfil 
its functions efficiently. It has been clear to economists and policy makers for a long time that financial 
markets  can  only  work  smoothly  and  efficiently,  if  they  can  rely  on  a  complementary  legal  and 
regulatory  infrastructure.  Thus  the  economic  integration  of  European  financial  markets  has  to  be 
accompanied by the necessary adoptions of regulatory frameworks and regimes.  
The topic of the conference is therefore a very important one. The problems that arise in this process 
are  a  big  challenge  for  supervisors  and  regulators.  They  are  also  a  challenge  for  central  bankers 
because central banks are traditionally among the institutions closely involved in the supervision of the 
financial system.  
The  regulatory  challenges  for  European  financial  markets  arise  from  a  combination  of  necessary 
adaptations to general technological developments such as, for instance, electronic money - an issue 
addressed in the lectures of this conference - and the specific problems that arise from the integration 
of  regulatory  regimes  that  have  previously  been  separated  by  national  boundaries  and  different 
legislation into a framework that works efficiently for a newly integrated financial market with a single 
currency.  
The  debate  about  regulatory  issues  has  attracted  much  attention  recently  by  intensive  discussions 
both at the national and the European level. At the national level the focus of the debate has been the 
future role of central banks in the process of prudential supervision of the banking system. The issue 
most  intensively  discussed  at  the  European  level  has  been  the  question  of  a  centralized  versus  a 
decentralized model of supervision. These debates reflect the active response of policy makers and 
the  general  public  to  developments  in  financial  markets  brought  about,  inter  alia,  by  the  process  of 
European integration.  
Let me address these issues in turn:  
At the national level we have been observing various proposals to reorganise and restructure financial 
markets supervision. Some countries have already taken steps of major institutional reforms.  
In the course of this debate the active involvement and the key role of central banks in supervising the 
banking  system  has  repeatedly  been  challenged.  Models  of  new  national  institutions  in  charge  of 
BIS Review 53/2002 
 1
 supervising banks, financial markets and the insurance industry under one roof of a general financial 
service authority have gained some popularity among politicians.  
The  merger  of  various  supervisory  fields,  which  have  technically  quite  different  tasks,  is  a  highly 
ambitious and rather difficult organisational problem. In the same way as with mergers in industry the 
advantages and disadvantages of these organisational forms will have to be assessed in the light of 
practical experience.  
Whatever reorganisation design is under debate, however, it is in any case of crucial importance to 
take  a  clear  position  about  the  role  of  the  central  bank.  It's  historically  intimate  involvement  in 
supervising the banking system has proved useful in many countries around the world and there is a 
strong case for keeping this close involvement under any model of supervisory reorganisation.  
The close involvement of central banks in the supervisory process has various advantages. It gives 
the central bank a much clearer picture of the economic reality that is behind the numbers visible in 
the books of banks. This information facilitates its role in safeguarding financial stability and creates a 
special  advantage  in  spotting  early  warning  indicators  of  financial  crises  and  potential  situations  of 
economy wide financial distress. Moreover, as a part of the Eurosystem central banks are integrated in 
an already functioning network of national and supranational institutions. Such a network is of decisive 
importance in the light of the structural change in European financial markets that already has taken 
place or is likely to come in the near future.  
Let me next turn to the debate about the European regulatory framework. The Economic and Financial 
Committee (EFC) has only recently provided an assessment of existing arrangements in the Brower 
Report.  A  central  result  of  this  assessment  was  that  the  current  framework  that  strongly  relies  on 
national  responsibilities  is  appropriate.  The  report  found  that  there  is  at  the  same  time  a  need  to 
enhance arrangements for cross-border and cross-sectional co-operation, to improve the alignment of 
supervisory  practices  and  to  reinforce  the  collaboration  between  supervisory  and  central  banking 
functions.  
I  want  to  point  out  that  developments  have  already  started  that  implement  some  of  these 
recommendations. Let me just mention the activities of the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) of 
the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). These activities strongly rely on the close cooperation 
between central banks and banking supervision authorities.  
Not only in the area of banking supervision, but also in recent attempts to implement the Lamfalussy 
recommendations  in  the  field  of  security  market  regulation  considerable  progress  has  been  made. 
Consistent  and  efficient  implementation  of  regulatory  rules  has  been  promoted  by  new  institutional 
arrangements delegating rule-making powers to a committee or regulators whereas implementation at 
the national level is undertaken through a committee of supervisors.  
These two examples, which I have briefly touched here, illustrate that initiatives are under way and 
debate  is  ongoing.  However,  not  all  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Brower  Report  have  been 
implemented  and  many  other  issues  still  need  further  investigation  and  debate.  But  developments 
show that we are heading in the right direction.  
I have argued that policy  makers and central banks are well aware of the regulatory challenges for 
European  financial  markets.  They  have  already  tried  to  find  some  practical  answers  to  these 
challenges.  These  answers  are  based  on  the  principles  of  national  responsibility,  transnational 
co-operation and the close involvement of central banks into the supervision of the banking system. 
Clearly, many issues in this process are still open and need further discussion. But I am sure that your 
conference will make an important contribution towards a deeper understanding of those issues and to 
point out directions, where further activities are needed.  
CEPR/ESI Price for the Best Central Bank Research Paper 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure now for me to announce the winner of the newly established CEPR/ESI Prize 
for  the  Best  Central  Bank  Research  Paper.  This  price  shall  promote  high-quality  research  at 
European  central  banks,  both  within  and  outside  the  Eurosystem.  It  is  important  to  acknowledge 
research  papers  by  young  European  central  bankers.  Therefore,  the  CEPR  European  Summer 
Institute has established a special session of its annual conference for the three to four best submitted 
papers and an annual prize for the very best research paper.  
2 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 The paper was selected from twelve central bank research papers by the Programme Committee of 
this year's CEPR/ESI Conference consisting of Professor Sylvester Eijffinger, Eduard Hochreiter and 
Professor Kees Koedijk.  
It  is  my  privilege  to  announce  that  the  CEPR/ESI  2002  Prize  for  the  Best  Central  Bank  Research 
Paper  goes  to  Elena  Carletti  of  the  University  of  Mannheim  and  Philipp  Hartmann  from  the 
European  Central  Bank  for  their  paper  “Competition  and  Stability:  What's  Special  About 
Banking?”.  
They  examine  the  relationship  between  competition  policies  and  policies  to  preserve  stability  in  the 
banking  sector.  The  core  part  of  the  paper  is  an  analysis  of  the  relative  roles  of  competition  and 
supervisory authorities in the review of bank mergers for the G-7 industrialized countries. It turns out 
that  the  widely  accepted  trade-off  between  competition  and  stability  does  not  generally  hold.  The 
paper  is  considered  by  the  Programme  Committee  as  an  excellent  analytical  contribution  to  the 
academic  literature  on  central  banking  and  banking  supervision  with  important  consequences  for 
competition and supervisory policies.  
I wish the winners of this year's prize a lot of success in their very promising academic and central 
banking career!  
BIS Review 53/2002 
 3
