The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Macro-economic policy and monetary stability 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Euromoney Bond 
Investors' Congress, London, 19 February 2002. 
 Thank  you  Padraic  for  that  kind  introduction  and  for  honouring  me  with  the  Euromoney  Lifetime 
Achievement Award. It's nice to be prompted to recall some of the good times - and some of the not so 
good times in the course of my career at the Bank of England which I think of not so much in terms of 
achievement but of lifelong learning. 
We've come a long way since 1962 - both nationally and internationally - from different starting points 
certainly,  and  moving  in  fits  and  starts,  at  varying  speeds  and  to  varying  degrees,  in  a  process  of 
continuing, indeed accelerating, change. But standing back and trying to look through the confusion of 
short-term events, I would pick out three broad trends for comment this morning. 
The first relates to macro-economic policy, where the earlier emphasis was very much on short-term 
demand management designed to manage the perceived trade-off between growth and employment, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  inflation  and  a  manageable  balance  of  payments  position,  on  the  other. 
Monetary policy was used in conjunction with fiscal policy and supported with various forms of direct 
control to pump up demand, when the economy declined and unemployment rose, until inflation and 
the balance of payments threatened to get out of hand, at which point all the policy levers were thrown 
into reverse. It was a recipe for short-termism throughout our economies. 
We gradually learned from experience - perhaps more slowly in this country than some others - that 
there  is  no  trade-off  between  growth  and  stability  in  the  medium  and  longer  term,  and  that,  in 
managing demand - which of course we continue to do - we needed to pay far more attention to the 
underlying, supply-side, capacity of the  economy to  meet that demand. We came to recognise that 
direct  controls  merely  addressed  the  symptoms  of  instability  rather  than  its  causes.  We  realised 
increasingly that fiscal policy was not well suited to the task of short-term demand management, and 
needed to be constrained within prudent limits if debt levels were to be sustainable in the medium- and 
longer-term. And this left a more distinctive and clearly defined role for monetary policy as the primary 
instrument  for  maintaining  broad  balance  consistently  over  time  between  aggregate  demand  and 
underlying supply. 
All this has become the accepted wisdom just about everywhere. "Stability is a necessary condition for 
sustainable growth" has become the universal central-banking credo - though that doesn't necessarily 
make it any easier to achieve! 
This  emphasis  on  macro-economic  stability  -  and  sustainability  -  has  served  to  focus  attention 
increasingly on the supply-side of our economies - on structural reform and supply-side flexibility - as 
the key to raising the underlying rate of growth  which our  economies can maintain. And  that is the 
second general trend I'd like to touch upon. 
It  has  meant  increasing  reliance  upon  free  markets  -  again  both  nationally  and  internationally  -  to 
allocate productive resources to where they can most effectively contribute to meeting demand. The 
collapse of communism is a dramatic example, but the promotion of free trade through the WTO and 
of the free movement of capital  through the IMF, or  the spread of privatisation  and  deregulation all 
around the world, not least in financial markets, can all be seen as aspects of essentially the same 
thing. 
This  emphasis  on  free  markets  cannot  mean  "anything  goes".  Public  policy  concerns,  of  course, 
remain; and we need to have rules to ensure that competition is fair as well as free. But it does mean 
less centralised, bureaucratic, intervention telling people what they may or may not do, leaving them 
much  greater  freedom  to  do  what  they  choose  provided  they  meet  the  necessary  nationally  or 
internationally  agreed  standards.  The  resulting  intensification  of  competition  can,  of  course,  be 
uncomfortable for existing producers - and can lead to protectionist pressures at the micro-economic 
or even the national level - so we still have a long way to go. But it is increasingly accepted as the best 
means we have raising the sustainable rate of growth - and employment - and living standards - at the 
macro-economic, and international, level. 
BIS Review 11/2002 
 1
These  trends  together  have  resulted  in  substantial  economic  progress  in  most  of  the  developed 
economies. But - and this is the third theme I would draw attention to this morning - there was growing 
recognition of the fact that not all countries were equally well-placed to share in the potential benefits 
of  free  markets  within  a  stable  macro-economic  framework,  and  of  the  need  -  as  a  matter  of 
self-interest and not just social responsibility - to help draw other countries in to the global economy. 
Emerging markets and transition economies have increasingly gained access to international capital 
markets.  And  there  is  an  increasing  emphasis  on  the  need  to  help  the  poorest  countries  that  are 
seeking to help themselves to participate. This last concern will be on the agenda of the Monterrey 
conference next month. 
Now,  all  of  these  developments  have  had  -  and  will  continue  to  have  -  enormous  influence  on  the 
evolution of the financial environment, including bond markets internationally. 
Monetary  stability  has  brought  a  sustained  decline  in  nominal  government  bond  yields  in  industrial 
countries, and a narrowing of yield differentials, which was inconceivable during much of the earlier 
part of my working life. And fiscal prudence has brought not just a proportional, but in some countries 
an  absolute,  decline  in  the  amount  of  private  savings  absorbed  by  government  debt.  That  has  left 
room  for  a  rapid  expansion  and  diversification  of  the  corporate  debt  market  to  accommodate 
increasing demand, as the role of the private sector has increased. And the sovereign debt market, 
too, has diversified to include those emerging markets and transition countries that have succeeded in 
accessing the increasingly free international flow of capital. 
These  are  big,  long-run,  changes  which,  are  for  the  most  part  likely  to  continue.  So  your  job  -  as 
investors and investment managers, won't get any easier! 
I have the impression that the investing public is still coming to terms with the lower nominal returns 
that they can expect if we really are in a world of sustained low inflation. So they may be demanding 
quite a lot from you. 
It's true that in an environment of sustained monetary stability you might not see the very large and 
unpredictable swings in interest rates that I grew up with. I don't suggest that that interest rate risk will 
go  away  altogether  -  though  if  I  could  make  just  one  comment  on  the  current  macro-economic 
situation you'll be discussing in a moment, it would be to caution you against placing too much weight 
on the steepness of the short-term interbank interest rate futures curve as an  indicator of the likely 
course of official short-term interest rates - at least in the UK: our impression is that it includes quite a 
significant  term  premium.  But  even  if  interest  rates  are  some  degree  less  volatile,  in  a  context  of 
overall monetary stability, we certainly won't avoid sectoral imbalances such as we have seen over the 
past year or so; nor can we exclude policy failures in individual countries, which can, as we saw in the 
Asia crisis but happily not in the present case of Argentina, have wider repercussions. So I suspect 
you will have your work cut out in pricing and managing credit risk in your necessarily more diversified 
bond portfolios. 
You have a difficult job. But the efficiency with which the market allocates financial resources depends 
upon your doing it well. It is a heavy responsibility. 
But the official community equally has a responsibility to help in so far as it can. And we can help, I 
think, in three main ways. 
The first is through transparency in our macro-economic policies - in the provision of reliable data, and 
through clarity in both our monetary and fiscal objectives, in our analysis and in our decision-making, 
so that you are not exposed to wholly unpredictable behaviour and can make your own considered 
judgements as to how far our policies are likely to succeed. Your judgements, of course, can in turn 
have an important bearing on our policy decisions. 
Secondly  we  can  help  in  providing  robust  infrastructures  -  and  I  have  in  mind  not  just  the  financial 
infrastructure, though sound financial systems are clearly hugely important, but much more widely the 
legal  framework,  accounting  and  disclosure  standards,  and  governance  structures,  for  example,  as 
they apply throughout the private sector, so that again you can base  your assessment of corporate 
credits  on  a  fuller  understanding  of  the  risks.  We  have  been  making  very  considerable  efforts  in 
different international fora in recent years to establish codes and standards of best practice in all these 
areas which can be universally applied, but I don't need to remind you how far we all still have to go. 
And thirdly, in relation to sovereign debt, I think that the international community could, and should, do 
more to clarify the scale of official support that a country running into difficulties might reasonably look 
for,  and  the  kind  of  conditions  that  it  might  expect  to  apply.  As  things  stand  at  present  neither  the 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2002
debtor countries nor their private sector creditors have much idea what to expect, and may be tempted 
to  assume  that  they  will  be  bailed  out  if  things  go  wrong.  Greater  clarity  could  help  to  persuade 
borrowers  to  face  up  to  hard  policy  choices  earlier,  before  things  get  out  of  hand,  and  enable  the 
creditors to make a more objective assessment of the risks. I think, too, that it would be helpful if we 
could at least agree on best practice guidelines for a debtor country's handling of a situation in which it 
could not immediately honour its obligations. That, too, could help creditors better understand the risks 
that they are taking on.  
But while the official community can help in these ways, in the final analysis the buck stops with you, 
the investors. I find it encouraging that so many of you are attending this conference, at which many of 
the relevant risks, and how they can be measured and managed, will be discussed. I'm very tempted 
to remain with you for your discussions, but sadly I have my own job to do, which makes it impossible 
for me to stay. 
But I wish you, Padraic, and everyone here an enjoyable and interesting couple of days in what has 
become the best tradition of this very special event.  
BIS Review 11/2002 
 3
