 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: The Bank of England’s monetary policy objective and recent 
challenges 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Royal Society for 
the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (RSA) Birmingham, 11 April 2002. 
 I've had a long-time interest in the RSA. I was honoured to be elected as a fellow in 1986. But this is 
the first time I've participated in one of your programmes. 
The Society, unusually, brings together people from different backgrounds and disciplines - across the 
arts  to  the  sciences,  but  with  a  common  interest  in  social  and  economic  progress  in  the  broadest 
sense. That diversity, but also commonality, of interest is reflected in the RSA Journal, which I find a 
fascinating  read  -  whenever  I  get  the  time.  It's  reflected,  too,  in  your  lecture  program  so  that  I  find 
myself slotted in between a lecture entitled "The feel good factor", on a medical theme, and another 
entitled "Chaos is good for you!" describing a creative approach to business management! 
In fact I have been invited to talk about the "Monetary Challenges" we are currently facing - and, when 
you've heard what I have to say, you may feel that this juxtapositioning is not wholly inappropriate. 
But let me begin by explaining what it is that we are trying to do through monetary policy at the Bank of 
England, and why. 
For  much  of  the  first  half  of  my  40-year  career  at  the  Bank  of  England,  the  emphasis  of  macro-
economic  policy  as  a  whole  was  on  short-term  demand  management  designed  to  manage  the 
perceived  trade-off  between  growth  and  employment,  on  the  one  hand,  and  inflation  and  a 
manageable balance of payments position, on the other. Monetary policy was used in conjunction with 
fiscal policy and supported with various forms of direct control to pump up demand, when the economy 
declined and unemployment rose, until inflation and the balance of payments threatened to get out of 
hand, at which point all the policy levers were thrown into reverse. It was a recipe for short-termism 
throughout our economy. 
We gradually learned from experience - perhaps more slowly in this country than some others - that 
there  is  no  trade-off  between  growth  and  stability  in  the  medium  and  longer  term,  and  that,  in 
managing demand - which of course we continue to do - we needed to pay far more attention to the 
underlying, supply-side, capacity of the  economy to  meet that demand. We came to recognise that 
direct  controls  merely  addressed  the  symptoms  of  instability  rather  than  its  causes.  We  realised 
increasingly that fiscal policy was not well suited to the task of short-term demand management, and 
needed to be constrained within prudent limits if debt levels were to be sustainable in the medium- and 
longer-term. And this left a more distinctive and clearly defined role for monetary policy as the primary 
instrument  for  maintaining  broad  balance  consistently  over  time  between  aggregate  demand  and 
underlying supply. 
All this has become the accepted wisdom just about everywhere.  
Since  1992  in  this  country  the  explicit  objective  of  monetary  policy  has  been  to  achieve  stability 
defined in terms of a target for retail price inflation. And since 1997 the Bank of England - through the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  -  has  been  delegated  responsibility  for  setting  short-term  interest  rates 
with the consistent aim of hitting the Government's symmetrical 2½% inflation target (on a precisely 
defined measure of retail price inflation - RPIX). 
Now the reason we've been set that task is not - as some people imagine - because either we or the 
Government think that consistently low inflation is the be all and end all of economic life. It is because 
we  learned  from  our  earlier  experience  that  consistently  low  inflation  is  a  necessary  (though  not  in 
itself  a  sufficient)  condition  for  the  sustained  growth  of  output  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  for  high 
levels of employment, and for rising living standards, which are more fundamentally the things that we 
are all seeking to achieve. 
"Stability is a necessary condition for sustainable growth" has become the universal central-banking 
credo.  
So our objective - and the reasons for it - could not be clearer. But meeting that objective is not as 
straightforward as it may sound. The reason, of course, is that there is no simple, direct, link between 
our essential instrument - the short-term interest rate - and our objective, the rate of inflation. 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 1
 Interest rates essentially affect the demand side of the economy. They do not directly influence the 
supply side, which depends upon a whole host of structural characteristics of the economy which are 
largely  beyond  the  direct  reach  of  monetary  policy.  What  we  have  to  do  in  managing  short-term 
interest  rates  is  to  keep  overall  demand  growing  broadly  in  line  with  the  underlying  -  sustainable  - 
supply-side capacity of the economy as a whole to meet that demand. In other words we are trying to 
maintain overall, macro-economic, stability in a much broader sense, in the medium- and longer- and 
not  just  the  short-term;  and  the  Government's  inflation  target  is  the  criterion  against  which  our 
success, or otherwise, in achieving that broader macro-economic stability is to be measured. 
Our problem is that we don't know with any great precision or confidence exactly what is happening on 
the supply-side - that's to say precisely what rate of growth we can hope to sustain. We don't know 
precisely either what is currently happening, or what is likely to happen, looking forward over the next 
couple of years or so, to overall, aggregate, demand. And we don't know precisely what the full impact 
of  a  change  in  interest  rates  will  be  on  aggregate  demand,  or  how  long  it  will  take  before  that  full 
impact is felt. 
Ours is not a precise science. In fact it's more of an art than a science. And, although we bring as 
much economic and statistical science to bear as we can, we know that our forecasts, and indeed our 
policy judgements, are subject to a range  of error. They cannot be  accurate to every  last digit. We 
can't expect to hit the target all the time, but by consistently aiming to do so (and we do consistently 
aim  to  do  so  looking  2  years  or  so  ahead)  we  can  hope  to  get  reasonably  close  to  the  target  on 
average over time. 
I'll come back in a moment to the objective, and to our experience measured against it. But perhaps I 
might  digress  briefly  to  make  a  couple  of  points  about  the  principle  of  delegation  of  operational 
responsibility for monetary policy to the Bank. 
Some people I know had misgivings about that when it was introduced in 1997 on the grounds that 
interest rates are intrinsically a matter for elected politicians. But that neglects the fact that within the 
present framework in this country the Government specifies the objective of policy. That is a political 
decision  insofar  as  there  may  be  a  short-run  trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation  -  and  the 
Government delegates only the technical task of setting interest rates to achieve that objective to the 
Bank. I'm bound to say I welcome that distinction because the fact that the Government sets the target 
for monetary policy means that it is unambiguously committed to what we are tasked to do, and that, in 
turn, helps in some degree to distance the Bank from political debate. 
But there are two necessary consequences of this arrangement. 
The first is that you need independent, technical, experts to do the technical job entrusted to the MPC 
-  not  people  appointed  for  their  political  convictions,  nor  representatives  of  particular  economic  or 
social  interests.  In  that  respect  I  think  we  have  been  extremely  well  served:  the  members  of  the 
Committee have been invariably well qualified for the technical jobs they've had to do; but more than 
that they have typically known enough, including about the inevitable uncertainties I have referred to, 
to know when they could be reasonably confident in their views and when they were guessing - as we 
all have to do at the margin. The Committee has been divided, generally very narrowly divided, in its 
forecasts  and  policy  judgements  more  often  than  not  since  we  started.  That  is  both  natural  and 
healthy.  But  what  is  important  is  that  the  debate  has  typically  been  measured  and  reflective  -  and 
remarkably free of acrimony and dogma. And that to my mind is fundamental to the strength of the 
process. 
The second corollary is that the MPC process should be transparent and that its members should be 
individually  and collectively publicly accountable for their decisions. Transparency is assured by  the 
publication  of  detailed  minutes  of  our  monthly  meetings  just  two  weeks  after  the  event,  and  by  the 
publication of our quarterly inflation report. These publications, and the continuous stream of speeches 
and  interviews  all  around  the  country  by  members  of  the  MPC,  ensure  broad  accountability  to  the 
public at large. We see this as very much in our own interest, as monetary policy is likely to be more 
readily accepted - and more effective - if people generally understand what it is we are doing and why. 
But, beyond this, we publish each individual MPC member's voting decision each month - which they 
can then be expected to explain. Our procedures (though not our decisions) are regularly reviewed by 
the Bank's Court of Directors, and reported on to Parliament through the Bank's Annual Report. We 
regularly appear before the Treasury Select Committee of the House of Commons and the Economic 
Affairs Committee of the  House of Lords. And,  as Chairman of the MPC,  I am required to  write  an 
open  letter  to  the  Chancellor  if  inflation  strays  by  more  than  1%  either  side  of  the  2½%  target, 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2002
 explaining why inflation was adrift, how long the divergence might last, and the action we propose to 
take to bring it back on course. 
So far as I am aware, taken as a whole, these arrangements provide far greater transparency of, and 
greater accountability for, the monetary policy process than anywhere else in the world.  
But let me revert to my main theme of the monetary-policy objective and our performance against it. 
Since  an  inflation  target  was  first  adopted  in  October  1992,  inflation  on  the  target  measure  has 
averaged just 2.6% - and has been more stable than at any time in our history. Since 1997 when the 
present target - and accompanying regime - was introduced, inflation has averaged 2.4% against the 
2½% target. And, on the latest reading RPIX inflation was 2.2% in the year to February.  
Now some people have suggested that, because inflation has recently been fairly consistently below 
target - albeit marginally below, by less than ½% on average over the past two years - monetary policy 
has been unnecessarily restrictive over this period. They've even suggested that we are not behaving 
'symmetrically' - aiming to avoid an undershoot, below 2½% as determinedly as we aim to avoid an 
overshoot, which is of course what we are tasked to do. 
Well, of course, hindsight is a wonderful thing! 
Quite frankly I am amazed that we've been as consistently close to the inflation target as we have, and 
I'm astonished that I have not - or not yet at least - had to write an open letter to the Chancellor. Quite 
apart  from  the  more  general  uncertainties,  there  have  inevitably  been  a  series  of  surprises  (or 
"shocks"  in  the  jargon)  -  including  a  persistently  stronger  than  expected  exchange  rate  against  the 
euro, pronounced swings in the oil price, or varying rates of increase in excise duties, for example, any 
of  which  can  have  a  significant  and  persistent  impact  on  the  out  turn.  That's  not  a  matter  of  self-
justification  -  it  may  well  be  more  by  luck  than  judgement;  to  be  honest  I'm  more  interested  in  the 
result.  But  I  am  concerned  that  people  should  understand  that  operating  monetary  policy  is  an 
inevitably imprecise process, and that they should not expect from it more than it can deliver. 
But  however  that  may  be,  the  even  better  news  is  that  since  1992,  stable,  low,  inflation  has  been 
accompanied by steadily increasing overall output and employment, and by a progressive fall in the 
rate of unemployment. 
Over the same period, to the fourth quarter of last year, GDP growth averaged just under 3% a year - 
which  is  well  above  most  estimates  of  our  trend  rate  of  2¼%-2½%.  GDP  had  in  fact  grown  for  37 
successive  quarters  which  is  the  longest  period  of  sustained  quarter-by-quarter  growth  we  have 
enjoyed since quarterly records began in the UK in 1955. 
Employment has increased steadily from a low point of 25½ mn people in the Spring of 1993 to its 
current  level  of  28  mn.  And  the  rate  of  unemployment  fell  from  a  peak  of  over  10½%  on  the  LFS 
measure to around 5% last summer; on the claimant count measure it fell from some 10% to just over 
3%, which meant that the number of people claiming unemployment benefit, at under 950,000, was 
the lowest for 26 years. 
Short-term interest rates are at a 38-year low. 
All  of  that  it  seems  to  me  gives  the  lie  to  a  view  that  was  quite  widespread  a  decade  ago,  that 
sustained  low  inflation  would  inevitably  mean  continuous  suppression  of  the  real  economy.  I'd  go 
further myself and suggest that it provides considerable positive support for the central bankers' credo. 
Now  some  of  you  -  given  what's  been  happening  to  your  own  businesses,  to  certain  particular 
business  sectors,  and  in  regions  of  the  country  where  those  sectors  are  particularly  heavily 
concentrated - may think that I've been living on a different planet. The problem is - and it is a real 
problem - that with the best will in the world macro-economic stability, the stability of the economy as a 
whole, cannot guarantee stability at the more micro-economic level: it can not guarantee the prosperity 
of every individual business or even of whole business sectors or geographic regions. Once you look 
beneath  the  apparently  benign  surface  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  in  recent  years,  you  find  very 
substantial differences in particular between many  internationally-exposed sectors of the economy - 
including particularly many manufacturing businesses - which have recently been having a really tough 
time, and other businesses largely serving our domestic market which have been doing pretty well. 
Let me assure you that the MPC is only too well aware of the problem. We receive regular monthly 
written  reports  from  the  Bank's  12  regional  agencies  all  around  the  country  on  the  state  of  the 
economy as seen through the eyes of their 8000 or so business contacts. That includes reports from 
John Bartlett our Agent here in Birmingham and Chris Brown, our Agent for the East Midlands based 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 3
 in Nottingham, both of whom will be known to many of you. And about half the Agencies by rotation 
attend our monthly pre-MPC meeting in London to brief us face to face. Beyond that each individual 
MPC  member  makes  regular  visits  to  businesses  located  all  over  the  country  to  see  and  hear  for 
themselves.  All  of  this  plays  a  vital  role  in  informing  our  interpretation  of  the  bare  economic  and 
financial  statistics.  It's  not  that  we  do  not  know  what's  happening  at  the  micro-economic  level,  the 
question is what can we - what should we - do about it in setting monetary policy? 
It has to be said at the outset that some of the pressures businesses are facing are the result of long-
run structural change affecting the global economy. The spread of international free trade under the 
auspices of the WTO is undoubtedly a positive development for all of us at the macro-economic level, 
but it is an added challenge to existing producers at the micro-economic level, and this country is not 
alone in re-sourcing supplies to some of the transition economies in Eastern Europe or to emerging 
markets in Asia and elsewhere. Nor can we - or should we seek to - avoid the impact of technological 
change. 
But  there  are  two  main  reasons  for  the  particular  pressures  recently  affecting  the  internationally  - 
exposed sectors of our economy: the synchronised economic slow down over the past year or so in all 
major industrial countries, on the one hand; and the puzzling and persistent weakness of the euro in 
foreign exchange markets not just against sterling but even more against the dollar, on the other. 
It is a striking fact that world trade in goods, which has grown at an average rate of around 7% since 
1990, and grew by over 12% in the year 2000 alone, hardly grew at all last year! What that has meant 
for the UK manufacturing sector is that output in the year to January (the latest month for which we 
have  internationally  comparable  data)  fell  by  around  6%,  and  employment  in  manufacturing  fell  by 
165,000 people, or by some 4%. (I'm delighted to note, however, that manufacturing output picked up 
modestly  in  February  -  the  first  monthly  increased  since  August.)  For  what  it's  worth,  we  were  not 
alone in experiencing the earlier decline. Comparable figures show that manufacturing output fell by 
over  11%  in  Japan,  and  by  close  to  5%  in  both  the  US  and  Germany,  while  manufacturing 
employment fell by 6½% in Japan and 7½% in the US - that's to say by more than in this country - 
although it fell by less than 2% in Germany. 
The frustrating thing is that, with the best will in the world, there was not much that either we at the 
Bank, or the UK Government, could have done to ward off the pressures on UK manufacturing, which 
had their origins abroad. 
That's fairly obvious where we are talking about the global slowdown - with negative overall growth 
last year of about 2% in Japan (fourth quarter on a year earlier) and close to zero growth in the US 
and  Germany.  This  compared  with  growth  of  just  over  1½%  in  this  country  -  by  some  margin  the 
highest in G7. We can go to international meetings and encourage the respective authorities there to 
stimulate their economies, but there is nothing that we can do about it directly ourselves.  
What we were able to do - given that inflation was marginally below target - was to try to compensate 
for that external weakness by stimulating domestic demand here in the UK. The Bank sought to do this 
by  cutting  interest  rates  to  buoy  up  consumer  spending.  And  the  Government  stepped  up  its  own 
spending, which was helpful given the international environment. Although we couldn't avoid an overall 
slowdown altogether - the economy on the latest data ground to a halt in the fourth quarter of last year 
- we have managed for most of the time to keep the UK economy as a whole moving forward despite 
the recession in the internationally-exposed sectors of manufacturing. 
Of  course  we'd  all  have  been  much  happier  with  better  balanced  growth.  Stimulating  domestic 
demand to offset the external weakness - the only option available to us - was very much a second 
best option. It was not without its own risks including the build-up of household debt and the current 
exuberance in the housing market. But it was better than doing nothing at all. That would have meant 
a  much  sharper  slowdown,  and  probably  recession,  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  And,  given  that 
inflation was well under control, it would have meant a quite unnecessary loss of overall output - and 
income  and  employment.  In  effect  we  took  the  view  that  unbalanced  growth  was  better  than  no 
growth. 
It is perhaps less obvious that we could not have done more to weaken the exchange rate. At around 
$1.40 - 1.50, sterling's value against the dollar through this period was not seen by most people even 
in the internationally - exposed sectors as a particular problem. The problem - for businesses trading 
or competing with firms in the eurozone, our largest trading partner, was the persistent and puzzling 
weakness of the euro. Now many people think that we could have caused the pound to fall against the 
euro simply by cutting our interest rate somewhat further relative to the interest rate in the eurozone. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2002
 But it really isn't as simple as that. The US has reduced its interest rate far more aggressively than the 
ECB over the past year or so, and to well below the ECB's rate (to 1.75% as against 3.25%) but the 
dollar is actually stronger today against the euro than it was at the start of last year. And the same is 
true, though to a lesser degree of ourselves: UK interest rates were reduced by 2% from the beginning 
of 2001 compared with a fall of 1½% in the eurozone, yet sterling is stronger against the euro (though 
weaker against the dollar) than it was to begin with. 
I  don't  think  I  can  offer  you  a  wholly  convincing  explanation  for  the  euro's  weakness  since  its 
introduction. It seems to have been driven by capital flows reflecting expected medium- and longer-
term future corporate earnings growth rather than short-term interest rate differentials, and it is often 
suggested  that  these  expectations  reflect  perceived  supply-side  rigidities  within  the  eurozone.  But 
whatever  the  explanation  the  resulting  strength  of  sterling  against  the  euro  has  contributed  to  the 
pressure on the internationally - exposed sectors of our economy, and a stronger euro would, from my 
perspective, help us towards better balanced growth in this country. It would also incidentally facilitate 
debate  about  sterling's  possible  entry  into  the  single  currency,  in  the  sense  that  the  undoubted 
attraction of nominal exchange rate certainty vis à vis our European trading partners, which is a major 
potential  advantage of our adopting the  euro, must depend to some degree on the likely  exchange 
rate at which we might join. 
These then are the monetary challenges that we have faced over the recent period. 
The question now, of course, is where do we go from here? 
There has recently been encouraging evidence - in the US data particularly but also for example in 
many of the more forward-looking indicators of European economic activity - that we are now in the 
early stages of global recovery. We cannot be sure that the early momentum will be maintained; nor 
do we know just how strong the expansion will prove to be or how long it will last; but the signs are 
promising, and indeed far more positive than any of us would have dared to hope just six months or so 
ago in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington. 
As  it  becomes  clearer  that  the  international  environment  really  is  improving,  and  that  we  really  are 
seeing  a  sustained  pick  up  in  external  demand,  then  we  can  look  forward  to  better  balanced  and 
generally stronger growth in our own economy.  
That  will  in  due  course  mean  that  domestic  demand  growth  -  and  consumer  demand  growth  in 
particular  -  will  need  to  moderate  if  we  are  to  avoid  a  build  up  of  inflationary  pressure.  It's  quite 
possible, even still quite likely, that the necessary moderation of consumer demand - and I emphasise 
the word moderation - will come about of its own accord. 
And that would be the best possible outcome for our own economy. But if consumer spending were 
not in due course to moderate of its own accord, and depending on the timing and the strength of the 
recovery abroad, we would clearly need at some point to consider raising interest rates to bring that 
moderation about.  
But for the time being, and whatever the precise numbers, the overall prospect for the British economy 
over the next couple of years is for output growth picking up to around trend and inflation to around 
target. And if that is indeed how things turn out, we will have weathered the international storm as well 
as anyone could reasonably have expected. 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 5
