 David Dodge: Inflation Targeting During a Difficult Year 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Saskatoon  and  District 
Chamber of Commerce Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 29 January 2002. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you this morning.  
As you may know, the end of this week will mark the first anniversary of my appointment as Governor 
of  the  Bank  of  Canada.  It  was  an  honour  to  be  appointed,  and  it  has  been  a  privilege  to  serve 
Canadians  in  this  role.  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  work  with  an  extraordinarily  talented  group  of 
professionals  at  the  Bank,  as  well  as  a  supportive  Board  of  Directors.  Together,  with  input  from 
Canadians across the country, we have worked hard to conduct monetary policy as well as we could 
during rapidly changing, and increasingly difficult, economic times.  
As I come to the end of my first year as Governor, it seems natural to look back and review some of 
the challenges and changes that have marked the past 12 months. The main economic concern of the 
past  year  was  the  slowdown  that  occurred  not  just  here  in  Canada,  but  in  most  major  economies. 
Compounding the economic concerns were the 11 September terrorist attacks in the United States.  
Inside  the  Bank  of  Canada,  there  were  some major  developments  as  well.  Two  things  in  particular 
stand out for me. We went through our first year with our new system of fixed announcement dates for 
interest rate decisions, and we renewed our inflation-control agreement with the federal government. 
Yesterday  in Winnipeg,  I  spoke  about  our  fixed  announcement  dates.  Today,  I'd  like  to  talk  to  you 
about our inflation-control target system. Then I'd like to take a few minutes to review the current state 
of the economy and touch on Canada's economic outlook.  
Renewing the Inflation-Control Targets  
Last May, the Bank and the federal government jointly announced the renewal of our inflation-control 
agreement.  This  was  an  important  decision.  It  strengthened  a  policy  framework  that  has  given  our 
economy low, stable, and predictable inflation for the past decade.  
One of the main benefits of the targets is that they help the economy to run more smoothly when there 
are surprises in the level of demand for Canadian goods and services. Let me elaborate. Under the 
agreement, the Bank of Canada aims to guide total consumer price inflation towards the 2 per cent 
midpoint of our 1 to 3 per cent target range over the medium term. So when demand for goods and 
services leads the Canadian economy to push the limits of its capacity, and there is a risk of future 
inflationary pressures, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy.  
But  importantly,  inflation  targeting  also  works  the  other  way.  When  the  economy  is  operating  well 
below its production capacity and inflationary pressures are likely to ease, the Bank will lower interest 
rates to stimulate growth. This was the situation we found ourselves in during the past year, as signs 
of the slowdown emerged.  
By  working  in  a symmetrical  way, inflation targeting  helps to  level  out  the peaks and  valleys  of the 
business cycle. It promotes sound growth while tempering economic ups and downs. And this benefits 
everybody.  
But the benefits of this framework go beyond its usefulness in setting monetary policy. It also helps 
reduce uncertainty about future inflation, by giving Canada a credible anchor for its monetary policy. 
Let me explain what that means.  
Once the original agreement between the Bank and the Government came into effect in 1991, inflation 
quickly  came  down  into  the  target  range.  But  more  importantly,  measures  of  inflation  expectations 
began to fall in line with the target range as well. At first, this applied to expectations of inflation over a 
2-year period. But the time frame lengthened gradually, and since 1997, inflation expectations have 
been essentially anchored on 2 per cent for 30 years into the future.  
This  is  important,  because  when  inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored,  the  real  economy  works 
better.  Wage  bargaining  can  become  less  contentious.  And  we  have  seen  a  trend  towards  fewer 
labour  disruptions  and  a  lengthening  of  collective  bargaining  agreements.  With  stable  inflation 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 1
 expectations,  investors  can  better  assess  the  future  value  of  their  investments.  At  the  same  time, 
savers know the future purchasing power of their money will not be eroded by inflation.  
Supporting our inflation-control framework is our flexible exchange rate system. Although from time to 
time  there  may  be  excessive  volatility  in  exchange  markets,  having  a  flexible  exchange  rate  is 
important. This is particularly true for Canada because we are a small, open, and relatively specialized 
economy. The structure of our economy is different from that of the United States.  
Now,  when  we  renewed  the  inflation-control  agreement  with  the  federal  government  last  year,  we 
strengthened  the  framework  in  four  ways. We  lengthened  the  term  of  the  agreement  to  five  years, 
which should reinforce its credibility. We clarified that we are aiming inflation explicitly at the 2 per cent 
midpoint of the target range. This emphasizes that we pay equal attention to the top and the bottom of 
the target range. We committed to providing  an  explanation in our key publications  – the  Monetary 
Policy  Report  and  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update  –  if  inflation  persistently  misses  the  target.  This 
increases our accountability to Canadians. Finally, we refined the way we measure core inflation.  
Refinements to Core Inflation  
I want to take a minute to explain what core inflation is, and why it is important.  
The Bank's inflation-control target applies to the annual increase in the total consumer price index. But 
we use core inflation as a guide to help us predict where overall inflation is likely to be in the future.  
In  calculating  core  inflation,  we  exclude  the  prices  of  those  goods  and  services  that  tend  to  be  the 
most volatile; that is, subject to temporarily wide movements both up and down. Previously, we would 
strip out all food and energy items from the CPI basket of goods and services when we calculated core 
inflation. But not all components of food and energy are volatile. Similarly, there are other prices in the 
economy  that  are  highly  volatile.  So  we  found  it  helpful  to  focus  just  on  the  volatile  components  in 
order to do a better job in predicting the future path of inflation.1  
Let me give you an example that explains why core inflation is important. In late 2000 and early 2001, 
energy  prices  were  shooting  higher.  Anybody  who  drives  can  remember  paying  a  lot  more  at  the 
gasoline  pumps  a  year  ago  than  now.  Natural  gas  and  heating  oil  prices  were  also  rising  sharply. 
These prices were being reflected in the overall inflation rate, which moved above 3 per cent for the 
first time in almost 10 years. This prompted some commentators to call on the Bank to raise interest 
rates.  
But  the  core  rate  of  inflation  was  telling  us  that  these  higher  energy  prices  were  not  significantly 
feeding into other prices. The core rate suggested that inflation would fall back around the midpoint of 
the target range, once the surge in energy prices either levelled off or reversed itself. In fact, this is 
exactly what happened. It would not have made sense for us to raise interest rates in the face of these 
temporarily very high prices for oil and gas. So even though total CPI inflation was high in the first half 
of  2001,  the  weakening  economy  indicated  that  downward  pressure  on  inflation  was  coming.  We 
expected core inflation to fall by the end of the year, as indeed it did, and to fall further in 2002. That 
led to our decision to lower, not raise, interest rates.  
In the last few months, we've seen rapid declines in volatile components, such as gasoline, fuel oil, 
and air fares. This means total consumer price inflation is now well below the core rate of inflation. And 
in  such  circumstances,  it  is  equally  inappropriate  to  base  our  policy  actions  on  swings  in  total  CPI 
inflation.  
The Slowing Economy in the Past Year  
Let me now look back at a rather difficult year for the economy. During 2001, we lowered interest rates 
at every fixed announcement date, in order to adjust to the changing economic circumstances.  
At the beginning of the year, our main concern was the impact that a slowing U.S. economy would 
have  on  Canada.  Although  domestic  demand  in  Canada  was  holding  up,  against  a  backdrop  of 
weaker foreign demand, we lowered our target for the overnight rate through the first half of the year.  
                                                      
1  Both the old and new measures of core inflation also remove the effect of changes in indirect taxes. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 But by mid-summer, evidence began to accumulate that the U.S. slowdown would be more protracted 
than  anticipated,  and  that  economic  activity  outside  North  America  would  be  much  weaker.  At  the 
same time, there were indications that domestic demand in Canada, which had held up well through 
the first part of the year, was softening. So at our 28 August fixed announcement date, we said that we 
had revised down our expectations for growth.  
Then  came  the  terrorist  attacks  of  11  September.  Their  immediate  impact  and  subsequent  fallout 
compounded  the  problems  of  the  economic  slowdown.  And  the  attacks  presented  a  pressing 
challenge  to  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  other  central  banks:  to  keep  the  world's  financial  systems 
operating smoothly.  
One  of  the  Bank's  key  functions  is  to  promote  financial  stability  in  Canada.  That  means  keeping 
markets  functioning  well,  even  in  times  of  extreme  stress,  such  as  the  days  immediately  following 
11 September.  The  Bank  of  Canada,  as  did  other  central  banks  around  the  world,  stepped  in  to 
provide financial markets with ample access to domestic liquidity. And we reached an agreement with 
the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  that  would  have  permitted  us  to  provide  extra  U.S.-dollar  liquidity  to 
Canadian banks had it been necessary. In short, we made sure that the disruption did not turn into 
gridlock.  If  there  was  one  positive  thing  to  emerge  from  this  terrible  event,  it  was  that  the  global 
financial system kept running as well as it did.  
But in the aftermath of these events, we were left with another challenge. That was to try to minimize 
the  economic  impact  of  the  attacks.  It  was  obvious  that  consumer  and  business  confidence  would 
suffer. We needed to do our part to help keep the loss of confidence as small as possible, which would 
help the economy recover as quickly as possible.  
That is why in the days following the attacks, we took the extraordinary step of lowering interest rates 
outside  our  fixed  announcement  dates.  It  then  became  clear  that  the  economy  would  continue  to 
operate  below  its  capacity  throughout  2002,  with  resulting  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  So  we 
sped up the pace of interest rate reduction at the next two fixed announcement dates. We wanted to 
support economic growth, which would help keep inflation within our target range of 1 to 3 per cent.  
The  terrorist  attacks  created  all  sorts  of  uncertainties—economic,  political,  and  military.  So  it  was 
extraordinarily difficult last fall to be very certain about the future track of the economy. Now however, 
a clearer picture is beginning to emerge.  
The Current Economic Situation and Outlook  
One way for us to get that clearer picture is to actually get out across the country to see what is going 
on in Canada's regions. These opportunities to get away from the frenetic world of financial markets, 
and to see what is happening in the real economy, are extremely important to me, and to the Bank.  
Let me focus on this province for a moment. Here in Saskatchewan, the  impact of a slowing  world 
economy was felt mainly through a weakening in commodity prices. This hurt not just the agricultural 
sector,  but  the  important  mining  sector  as  well.  After  posting  very  modest  growth  in  2001, 
Saskatchewan's  economy  is  expected  to  show  an  improvement  this  year.  A  pickup  in  the  global 
economy should boost commodity prices, which would be a big help to the province.  
Saskatchewan's agricultural sector would also be helped by a return to more normal weather patterns. 
There is an old farming saying that you can't lose a crop in January. But there is a clear critical need 
for more moisture in the soil and we all hope it comes soon.  
Of course my predecessor, Gordon Thiessen, has strong roots in this province and he understood well 
the difficulties faced by farmers year in and year out. But I want you to know that I too can relate to the 
trials  of  farming.  I  have  a  small  cow-calf  operation  outside  Ottawa,  and  I  know  how  difficult  this 
business can be. We can try to do something about the economy at the Bank of Canada, but sadly, 
we can't do anything about the weather.  
One clear positive for Saskatchewan has been the fiscal record of the provincial government, which is 
currently projected to post an eighth consecutive surplus. This strong fiscal record can only help the 
province deal with the sort of negative shock we experienced in the past year.  
In  looking  at  the  country  as  a  whole,  some  sectors  of  the  economy  have  recovered  smartly  from 
11 September,  but  in  other  areas  the  adverse  effects  have  persisted.  Certainly  air  travel,  both  for 
business and tourism, continues to be weak.  
BIS Review 7/2002 
 3
 Last week, we published our Monetary Policy Report Update. In it, we said that the economy looked 
increasingly  likely  to  find  itself  between  the  two  extreme  possibilities  we  had  sketched  out  in  last 
November's  full  Monetary  Policy  Report.  On  the  plus  side,  geopolitical  developments  have  been 
positive. Indeed, consumer confidence seems to be recovering in the absence of new terrorist attacks. 
But it is difficult to pinpoint the exact moment that the economy will begin to recover or precisely how 
strong that recovery will be. What I can say is that the conditions for strengthening world economic 
growth are in place. Excess capital stock is being worked out of the system, leading to expectations of 
greater investment ahead. And low commodity prices should rebound as global demand picks up.  
All told, we see Canadian growth in the first half of 2002 averaging between 1 and 2 per cent on an 
annualized basis. But growth should accelerate in the second half, with an average in the range of 3 to 
4 per cent on an annualized basis.  
What  does  this mean  for  inflation? We  saw  total  consumer  price  inflation  dip  sharply  in  November, 
then stabilize in December. At the same time, core inflation also fell during those two months. This is 
consistent with an economy operating below its capacity.  
With the economy growing more slowly than potential output through the first half of the year, excess 
supply will continue to build. So both total and core inflation are expected to remain near current levels 
for the next few months. But by lowering the target for the overnight rate, the  Bank of Canada has 
taken vigorous action to stimulate domestic demand. We expect that as this excess supply begins to 
be taken up, both core and total CPI inflation should move back up close to our target of 2 per cent in 
about two years.  
Businesses of all kinds are still adjusting to the security risks that the events of 11 September have 
shown to us. In our view, this should be a one-time adjustment. But it probably means that there will 
be a small reduction in the level of our economy's potential output.  
I would now like to say a few words to reinforce our views about recent exchange rate developments 
that are a source of concern.  
Over  time,  exchange  rates  should  reflect  underlying  economic  and  financial  developments  and 
prospects. But in the short run, there can be volatility as markets gauge those prospects.  
As I have already noted, it is becoming clearer that our economy will strengthen as we go through this 
year  and  into  2003.  Recent  data  increasingly  support  the  view  that  a  recovery  is  taking  hold. 
Household spending in Canada, particularly on interest-sensitive purchases, has been stronger than 
expected. The latest data on exports and manufacturing activity show signs of recovery. The inventory 
adjustment is progressing. And with early evidence of a revival in the U.S. economy, the world prices 
of non-energy commodities appear to have bottomed out.  
These signs of a pickup in economic activity in Canada are encouraging. But the recent movements in 
the  Canada–U.S.  exchange  rate  do  not  appear  to  have  reflected  those  developments  and  the 
depreciation we saw over the last couple of weeks is not helpful for the economy. Economic recovery 
in Canada does not hinge on the current low levels of the Canadian dollar against its U.S. counterpart.  
 So to conclude, this past year has certainly  been full of challenges. I know, however, that  we have 
done the right things to get the economy growing strongly again, and that we are in good shape to 
take advantage of better times when they arrive. I feel confident in predicting that one year from now, 
when  I'm  looking  back  over  my  second  year  as  Governor,  I'll  be  looking  back  over  a  recovering 
economy, one that is much stronger than it is today.  
4 
 BIS Review 7/2002
