 Eva Srejber: A reunited Europe – the roles played by Sweden and the Riksbank 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Baltik  Financial 
Network, Stockholm, 13 February 2002. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  to  speak  of  and  discuss  this  important  subject  with  such  a 
knowledgeable public. 
The enlargement will change Europe and Sweden and will also affect the Riksbank. For those of us in 
western  Europe,  this  is  an  important  opportunity  to  regain  the  right  geographical,  economic  and 
historical perspectives. We talk about "eastern Europe", despite the fact that Prague and Ljubljana lie 
west of Stockholm, we forget that Riga and Tallinn are actually closer to Stockholm than Gothenburg. 
We often still have a mental curtain where the iron curtain once prevailed. 
Now this division will soon be at an end. A hundred million Europeans, who lived under a totalitarian 
Communist dictatorship for half a century, can now finally return to a single European community. The 
political dimension is undoubtedly the most important. The new community confirms democracy and 
thereby  guarantees  peace  and  stability  throughout  Europe,  which  will  in  turn  provide  a  good 
foundation for growth and development. Today I intend to say a few words about an important facet of 
the EU enlargement, namely the economic consequences, which will affect the work of the Riksbank 
more directly. 
Before I go into the major socio-economic contexts, I thought I might begin with an anecdote from a 
smaller  context,  a  personal  experience  from  one  of  my  most  recent  visits  to  Hradec  Králové,  in 
Bohemia, Czech Republic, the region where my relatives come from. Every time I return there I am 
pleased and surprised at the changes that have taken place, but during my most recent visit last year I 
was quite astonished. There, in the small provincial town of Hradec Králové, with only around 100,000 
inhabitants, they now have a shopping mall worthy of Stockholm's smartest shopping area, as well as 
a couple of large discount stores and a D.I.Y. store, all selling goods of better quality but a fraction of 
the price of those in Sweden, and all full of shoppers. When I left the shops loaded up with shopping 
bags to take home to Sweden, I remembered how things used to be, when we in Sweden sent parcels 
to family and friends containing clothing, medicine and even decent soap and washing powder, along 
with various other things that weren't available in Czechoslovakia then. And here I was doing all my 
shopping there! 
This  is  just  a  fragment  from  daily  life,  but  to  me  it  illustrates  two  things  that  are  typical  of  our 
relationship  to the coming  new members of the EU.  One thing is how quickly these countries  have 
changed, how rapidly they are integrating with and moving closer to western Europe. The other is how 
difficult  most  of  us  in  western  Europe  find  it  to  understand  how  rapidly  things  are moving  and  how 
much has already occurred in these countries. The image of a west European with shopping bags full 
of aid to the poor neighbours in the east still remains, while we are incapable of seeing how much we 
can pick up from the new member countries. 
How poor are the candidate countries? 
I  should  like  to  begin  with  a  critical  examination  of  the  picture  we  normally  give  of  the  applicant 
countries.  Two  common  illustrations  of  the  economic  side  of  the  EU  enlargement  eastwards  are 
graphs showing the development of production since the fall of Communism and a table of the income 
differences between east and west. 
If we look at the statistics summed up in the European Commission's reports, GDP per capita adjusted 
for  purchasing  power  (PPP),  the  gap  certainly  looks  huge.  The  riches  of  the  10  central  and  east 
European candidate countries, Slovenia, with 72 per cent of the EU average, and the Czech Republic, 
with 60 per cent of the EU average, are around as poor as countries like Greece, Portugal and Spain 
were before they joined the EU. However, the poorest countries in the applicant group, Bulgaria and 
Rumania, have only approximately 25 per cent of the EU average. The graphs for production levels 
since 1990 look equally gloomy, only at the end of the 1990s do they reach the same level as at the 
fall of the Berlin Wall. The conclusion is, according to these figures, that the candidate countries will 
not catch up to the EU countries for a long while yet. 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 1
 These  figures  reflect  partly  real  poverty,  particularly  in  regions  beyond  the  cities  and  regions  that 
already  have  an  intensive  exchange  with  the  EU.  However,  a  considerable  part  of  the  statistical 
comparison  is  misleading.  This  is  partly  because  the  statistics  were  often  rigged  under  the 
dictatorship, which makes it difficult to reconstruct proper data, and partly because production in 1989, 
at the end of the Communist regime, contained a large percentage of heavy military equipment as well 
as  inferior  machinery  and  consumer  goods  that  never  came  anywhere  near  marketing  or  market 
valuation. Much of this would probably be impossible to sell in a market economy, and much would be 
unusable even in a planned economy. It was necessary to adjust this production, close down parts of it 
and it is quite impossible to compare it to what these countries are manufacturing today. As the official 
figures  for  GDP  from  before  the  changeover  were  exaggerated,  the  decline  in  GDP  is  also  an 
exaggeration, while the improvement in quality in recent years is underestimated, as are the growth 
figures. 
Given  that  the  candidate  countries  have  nevertheless  shown  high  growth  figures  during  the  late 
1990s, this would indicate a revolutionary changeover that makes the structural transformation in the 
OECD  economies  pale  in  comparison.  The  creativity  that  was  suppressed  during  the  time  when 
standard  of  living,  work,  education,  housing  and  travel  depended  on  the  grace  or  wrath  of  the 
Communist  party  has  now  been  released  to  create  new  ideas.  For  each  part  of  the  GDP  that  has 
declined, another part has grown, for each old, heavy industry that has closed its doors, a dozen new, 
small businesses have started up. Let me give some examples: in 1991 the private sector accounted 
for 10 per cent of GDP in Estonia, today it accounts for 80 per cent. Manufacturing, which stood for 47 
per cent of GDP in the Czech Republic in 1992, now accounts for 42 per cent, while services have 
increased their share from 44 to 54 per cent. 
In addition, the development of eastern Europe has proved that wise economic policy and improved 
institutions have a real importance in liberating human creativity. This is actually more important than 
the Communist inheritance and the pre-war traditions that some analysts said would predetermine the 
countries'  economies  in  the  new  capitalist  era.  Few  believed,  for  instance,  that  "agrarian"  Poland 
would  grow  much  more  quickly  during  the  1990s  than  the  former  GDR,  which  boasted  of  its  old 
industrial traditions during the Communist days, but thanks to Poland's more efficient economic policy, 
this is exactly what has happened. Unfortunately this dynamism of creative destruction and renewal 
does not show very clearly in the figures for GDP per capita. 
A remarkable growth in trade 
However, in one area the figures show clearly how great the changeover has been: trade. Many who 
have not had the opportunity to study the former planned economies in central and eastern Europe 
believe  that  they,  for  historical  reasons,  are  fairly  closed  and  that  their  trade  is  relatively  Russia-
oriented.  In  actual  fact,  the  candidate  countries  are  among  Europe's  most  open  economies,  with  a 
larger percentage of trade in their GDP, and a larger percentage of this trade with EU countries, than 
many  EU  countries  have  themselves.  The  EU's  trade  with  the  10  candidate  countries  is  increasing 
more rapidly than that with any other geographical area in the world. During the period 1995-2000, i.e. 
in  just  five  years,  this  trade  has  doubled.  The  percentage  of  intermediate  goods  (components)  for 
western companies is growing, as is the percentage of goods with a high technology content. There 
are  numerous  examples  of  how  eastern  European  companies  are  specialising  to  adapt  to 
sophisticated co-operation with western European companies. Hungary is now competing with Ireland 
to  attract  the  assembly  of  computers  and  cars,  Estonia  is  a  large  sub-contractor  to  both  Swedish 
clothing firms and to Ericsson, Nokia and their suppliers. 
Eastern Europe may be Europe's major opportunity at the beginning of the 21st century, after having 
trailed behind the USA in terms of growth at the end of the 1990s. The USA's increase in growth in the 
1990s  was  partly  due  to  the  US  economy  being  internationalised  more  rapidly  than  before,  with  a 
larger percentage of GDP exposed to international competition than the EU. If eastern Europe is now 
integrated more closely with western Europe, this could create a more efficient division of labour and 
raise  productivity  in  western  Europe.  The  challenge  of  EU  enlargement  eastwards  could  rouse 
decision-makers in western Europe to a more intensive reform effort so they can fully take advantage 
of what will, in total, be the world's single largest market. There are parallels here to Japan's success 
story  in  the  1970s  and  1980s,  when  Japanese  industry,  which  had  not  yet  subsided  into  its  own 
structural  problems,  benefited 
that 
complemented the Japanese companies. Just as the dynamic Asian economies additionally formed a 
bridge to China, the candidate countries comprise a bridge to Russia (particularly the St Petersburg 
the  dynamic  Asian  economies 
interplay  with 
from 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2002
 region where Sweden is concerned), the Ukraine and the other CIS countries – areas that should also 
become a growing part of the EU's trading sphere. Moreover, unlike many dynamic Asian economies, 
the candidate countries' populations have always had a very high level of education; in science and 
technology it is fully comparable with the level in the current EU member countries. 
The east European trade is particularly important to the Swedish economy, which is already one of the 
most open and trade-dependent economies in Europe, at the same time as we have strong historical 
ties  to  several  eastern  European  countries,  particularly  the  three  Baltic  states  and  Poland.  Already, 
central and eastern Europe as a whole is a larger market for Swedish foreign trade than, for instance, 
Japan or East Asia. When the Riksbank makes its inflation forecasts, central and eastern Europe will 
move  gradually  from  being  a  brief  footnote  to  becoming  an  important  area  in  the  international 
forecasts. 
The importance of membership 
The recipe for success behind the trade integration  between the EU and eastern Europe  is a little-
known international trade agreement. While the WTO and NAFTA steal the headlines, few people are 
aware of the agreement that created the boost in east-west trade in Europe, the “Europe agreement” 
between  the  EU  and  the  eastern  European  countries.  There  are  major  shortcomings  in  this 
agreement,  but  it  includes  free  trade  for  almost  all  industrial  goods  and  thereby  enabled  the  rapid 
changeover to become reality. 
However, a decisive factor for the success of the Europe agreement is that all of those involved knew 
that  actual  membership  of  the  EU  would  come  in  the  near  future.  Membership  is  that  major  and 
important  step,  when  the  rules  of  the  game  are  confirmed  and  investors  know  that  the  institutional 
conditions are stable and up to EU standards. This assurance is accentuated in many studies of the 
enlargement  and  said  to  be  the  most  important  individual  factor  for  continued  strong  growth  in  the 
eastern European countries.1 It is also at the point of actual membership that the final trade barriers 
will be abolished and the investment channels will be fully opened. We can make a comparison with 
the  countries  that  entered  the  EU  earlier  with  income  levels  way  below  the  average,  i.e.  Spain, 
Portugal and Ireland. For these countries membership meant a large inflow of capital and technology 
as well as a further increase in trade. The economic policy of the new member countries became more 
stable. Rapid growth and a convergence in the standard of living followed. This led to major gains for 
both the richer, existing member countries and for the newcomers. 
It would therefore be regrettable if the candidate countries' membership were allowed to delay or be 
diluted. Fortunately, there is now a clearer timetable and a strong probability that 8 of the 10 countries 
will  become  members  in  the  coming  years.  However,  after  the  enormous  efforts  made  by  the 
candidate countries in recent years, their actual membership must not be blocked by internal power 
games and ultimatums between the existing EU members. 
However,  the  attempts  in  recent  years  to  create  transition  periods  before  candidate  countries  can 
enjoy the EU's free mobility for labour are worrying. This would probably also prove counterproductive, 
as many studies show that the exemption for labour would not reduce, for instance, cross-border black 
market  crafts  and  services  –  what  a  special  transition  period  creates  are  barriers  to  mobility  for 
qualified, professional workers for which there is often a large demand. At the same time, there are no 
signs,  in  the  studies  made  by  the  European  Commission,  and  others,  that  free  mobility  for  labour 
would lead to mass immigration from the east. Although the comparison is slightly lame as we now 
have  the  Schengen  Treaty,  there  was  no  mass  immigration  to  Germany  from Portugal  and  Greece 
when  they  became  members  of  the  EU.  If  there  is  an  opportunity  for  improvements  in  their  home 
country, most people prefer to stay there. 
There is also a risk that we are exaggerating the costs of allowing the new countries to be part of the 
EU's agricultural and regional policy. The high costs and peculiar incentives of the EU's agricultural 
policy are a problem in themselves, which require a new way of thinking, but in my opinion it is not the 
actual enlargement eastwards that is the major stumbling block. According to the Commission's most 
recent calculations (based on a gradual increase in the support to the new member states), the total 
budget  cost  of  the  enlargement  would  be  equivalent  to  only  around  0.15  per  cent  of  the  EU's  total 
                                                      
1  The  Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research  presented  the  first  major  study  in  1997  by  R.  Baldwin,  J.F.  Francois  and  R. 
Portes  (Economic  Policy  24,  1997)  emphasising  the  importance  of  institutional  assurance  for  investors.  The  European 
Commission also highlights the importance of this in its study published in May 2001. 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 3
 annual GDP over  15  years. If the  EU's GDP  during  the corresponding 15-year period increases by 
only 0.2 per cent a year thanks to the integration with central and eastern Europe, the enlargement 
would involve socio-economic gains. 
The remaining obstacles 
Having  said  this,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  enlargement  process  will  be  simple  and 
painless, for either the new members or the old. 
Despite  all  of  the  changes  the  candidate  countries  have  undergone  over  the  past  decade,  EU 
membership  will  involve  a  period  of  major  new  upheavals.  Many  countries  still  have  remnants  of 
unprofitable state-owned industries that are propped up by central government finances. The banking 
system is still undeveloped – lending still corresponds to only a fraction of the countries' GDP, while in 
countries like Sweden it is roughly the same size as GDP. A properly functioning housing market and 
housing financing does not yet exist. The actual EU entry requirements involve extensive changes in 
legislation, administration and the implementation of regulatory frameworks, in addition to the weighty 
but necessary investments that are required to bring environmental protection and infrastructure up to 
EU standards. 
It is precisely because there are already so many requirements made of the countries, that the  EU 
process  should  not  further  burden  them  with  informal  requirements  and  expectations.  Perhaps  the 
biggest danger for the candidate countries is that they will come under too much pressure. 
One  such  risk  is  the  exchange  rate  regime.  From  the  point  of  view  of  foreign  investors,  the  years 
immediately  before  and  after  membership  run  the  risk  of  being  characterised  by  unwarranted 
euphoria. The inflow of capital to equity and real estate markets in these countries can be so large that 
asset prices and real exchange rates become overvalued. When the capital flows then wane slightly 
and  some  capital  leaves  the  countries  again,  this  may  come  as  a  surprise.  In  connection  with  EU 
membership,  with  fixed  nominal  exchange  rates,  even  within  a  fairly  broad  band,  pressure  on  the 
exchange rate can arise. The best thing then is to have clear regimes with a clear target. Several of 
the large countries now have inflation targets with a floating exchange rate, which is not as exposed to 
speculation attacks. Other smaller and very open candidate countries have currency boards in euros 
and  have  shown  that  they  can  adapt  flexibly  to  both  shocks  such  as  the  Russian  crisis  and  rapid 
fluctuations in investment flows. 
The  choice  of  an  exchange  rate  regime  can  affect  flows  of  foreign  capital.  But  it  does  not  in  itself 
change  the  pressures  for  real  appreciation  and  depreciation  created  by  large  capital  inflows  or 
outflows. However the actual effect will vary depending on the regime. 
Under a fixed exchange rate regime the real appreciation takes place through higher inflation and real 
depreciation  through  lower  inflation,  while  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  it  occurs  through  nominal 
appreciation or depreciation. A tight fiscal policy can counteract the extraordinary real appreciation due 
to  capital  flows.  A  strong  central  government  budget  also  makes  it  possible  to  respond  with  an 
expansive fiscal policy if the capital flows are turned into outflows. However, this requires that fiscal 
policy has ample reserves. 
The convergence criteria for public finances in the EMU, particularly the target for a budget deficit no 
greater  than  3  per  cent  of  GDP,  therefore  function  as  sound  targets  for  the  candidate  countries. 
Despite the recent criticism vis-à-vis the budget criterion I believe that 3 per cent is a sufficient margin 
for fiscal policy, as long as it is in balance over the cycle. Yet there are still risks in rushing to meet all 
of  the  convergence  criteria  –  especially  if  EMU  membership  cannot  realistically  occur  for  several 
years. There is a discussion in academic circles on whether very low inflation figures, that is to say, 
much lower than most candidate countries have now, are really compatible with rapid growth and a 
fixed  exchange  rate.  The  export  sector's  rapid  growth  creates  pressure  on  the  domestic  economy 
through  the  'Balassa-Samuelson'  effect  and  raises  domestic  prices,  creating  a  'natural'  inflation.  To 
then artificially press down inflation to very low levels could be overly ambitious. 
An  even  greater  risk  for  both  candidate  countries  and  the  EU  could  be  to  try  to  transfer  the  entire 
system of subsidies and taxes applying in several richer EU countries to central and eastern Europe. 
Most of the candidate countries already have higher tax levels and a greater degree of state influence 
in the economy than the majority of countries in the world at their welfare level, and much more so 
than in countries such as Taiwan and South Korea, which have succeeded in rapidly attaining a higher 
standard of living. To further increase the tax pressure and subsidy levels would risk subduing growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2002
 Here I should like to highlight a warning example and a good example. The warning example is the 
former East Germany. It is often said that it was the fact that the East German mark was replaced at 
parity by the West German mark that led to the economic difficulties in the former GDR. This perhaps 
was not the decisive factor; rather it was the fact that wages and subsidy levels, together with the rest 
of the West German system, were transferred to a much poorer economy, which needed much greater 
room for manoeuvre. Despite massive investments, the new eastern länder suffered a recession and 
mass  unemployment.  The  positive  example  is  actually  none  of  the  strong  economies  in  eastern 
Europe, not Estonia, Poland or Hungary, but Ireland – which made good use  of all opportunities to 
compete  with  its  cheaper  and  increasingly  well-educated  labour  force  after  EU  membership,  while 
gradually reforming its tax and subsidy system. During the 1990s, Ireland doubled its growth rate from 
just over 3.5 per cent a year to over 7 per cent – well in line with the most dynamic Asian economies – 
and GDP per capita, which was 40 per cent below the EU's average as recently as in the 1970s, is 
now  above.  We  must  hope  for  the  sake  of  both  the  EU  and  the  candidate  countries  that  the  new 
members will follow the example of Ireland and not that of the former GDR. 
It  is  important  to  focus  the  enlargement  process  on  what  is  relevant  to  the  real  economy.  What  is 
important  for  the  candidate  countries  and  the  current  EU  economies  is  that  the  new  members  are 
given the chance to catch up with the EU. Free trade (as in the Europe agreement), stable institutions 
(adopting and applying the EU's fundamental regulations, what is known as the "acquis") and a wise 
macroeconomic policy are the things we should hope for and expect – no more than that. 
The EU's institutions 
There was a discussion at the European Council meeting in Nice in December 2000 on the shaping of 
the EU's decision-making processes when the union is enlarged to include many more members than 
it  has  today.  With  regard  to  the  ECB,  the  current  regulations  would  lead  to  a  situation  where  34 
persons would have the right to vote on monetary policy in the ECB Council, if all of the candidate 
countries were also to take part in the monetary union. The Council of Europe therefore decided to 
introduce a clause into the regulations enabling the rules in the ESCB charter for participation in the 
Governing Council to be changed without having to call an intergovernmental conference. However, a 
change  would still require  unanimous support from all member countries and ratification by  each of 
them. A proposal for a change in the voting right could be put forward by the ECB or the European 
Commission. The new clause will come into force together with the Treaty of Nice when it is ratified by 
all of the current member countries. 
There is no given method of organising decision-making in a monetary union with many participants. 
An attempt to analyse the decision-making process in an enlarged ECB Governing Council has been 
made by the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) in a report published in October 2001. The 
report discusses three models for improving the efficiency of the ECB Councils' decision making in an 
enlargement  of  the  number  of  participants  in  the  monetary  union:  rotation,  representation  and 
delegation. That is to say, a rotating voting right between a number of central bank heads, similar to 
the  Federal  Open  Markets  Committee  in  the  USA,  the  formation  of  constituencies  of  central  bank 
heads  with  joint  representatives  on  the  ECB  Council,  rather  like  at  the  Bundesbank  following  the 
German  reunification,  and  finally  delegation  to  a  small  group  of  experts,  roughly  like  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  in  the  UK.  The  CEPR  report  then  gives  an  account  of  the  advantages  and 
disadvantages of the three models. The discussion will probably intensify when the Nice Treaty comes 
into force. 
The roles played by Sweden and the Riksbank 
Sweden as a country plays an important role in the whole of this enlargement process, because of the 
support from both politicians and the general public  for our neighbouring countries in the east. The 
Riksbank tries to contribute where we can. We share our experiences regarding monetary policy and 
financial stability, particularly with the three countries that, like Sweden, have inflation targets; Poland, 
the Czech Republic and Hungary, as well as, of course, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The latter are 
particularly important, bearing in mind Swedish banks' large ownership in the Baltic banking system. 
Economists from the Baltic and central European central banks visit the Riksbank regularly  and  we 
visit them. The Riksbank is also involved when the candidate countries present their "Pre-accession 
Economic Programmes" (PEP) for the EU countries. These PEP programmes are exercises where the 
countries attempt to analyse and present their economic challenges in the way they will in future, as 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 5
 EU members, present stability and convergence programmes and consult on economic policy within 
the  framework  of  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines.  Hopefully,  the  Riksbank  will  be  able  to 
contribute with analysis of economic activity and structural issues in these countries, not merely for our 
own forecasts but also in relation to the EU and ECB. 
What we can learn from the candidate countries 
Before I finish, I would like to go from speaking of what the candidate countries can learn from us to 
pointing out what we can learn from them. Several of the former planned economies are now in some 
areas  better  adapted  to  the  EMU  than  today's  EU  countries.  Several  of  them  have,  for  instance,  a 
flexible  labour  market  and  wage  formation.  This  appears  to  have  contributed  to  enabling  the  Baltic 
states to cope with the Russia crisis and the breakdown of the Russian market, without their reform 
efforts and growth coming to a standstill. This flexibility also makes them extremely well suited in this 
respect for a monetary union like the  EMU. The preparedness to implement structural reforms also 
appears  greater.  First  Estonia,  Latvia,  Lithuania  and  Hungary  and  now  most  recently  Poland,  have 
implemented fundamental pension reforms similar to the Swedish reform with a partly funded system. 
In addition, Estonia has had a very consistent free trade policy, which has benefited the country during 
the  transition  to  a  market  economy.  The  country  has  been  so  free  trade  friendly  that  it  is  now 
unfortunately  forced  to  raise  the  customs  duties  on  certain  goods  against  some  countries  in 
preparation for EU membership. It is in areas such as this that the EU can learn something from the 
candidate countries (and countries like Ireland) rather than the other way round. 
The  new  candidate  countries  can  enrich  the  EU  in  this  way  and  many  others,  not  merely  in  a 
pecuniary  sense,  but  also  institutionally  and  in  a  cultural  and  humane  sense.  The  enlargement 
eastwards will send new stimuli to the EU, not merely for trade and economic integration, but also with 
regard to the EU's institutions and the current member countries, just as the candidate countries have 
received  stimuli  from  the  EU  during  the  process.  This  means  not  only  that  a  reunited  Europe  can 
become richer, but also that the EU can, hopefully, become even more successful and function even 
better. 
 
 
Swedish trade with candidate 
countries as % of Swedish GDP
P
D
G
 
f
o
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
p
Swedish trade (export + import) with different regions
as percentage of Swedish GDP
96
97
98
99
00
01
4,5
4,0
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
4,5
4,0
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
 Candidate countries
 Japan
 France
 Dynamic Asian economies
Sources: Statistics Sweden and Sveriges Riksbank
  6 
 BIS Review 9/2002
  GDP per capita in candidate countries
GDP per capita in per cent of EU average 2000
European Commission estimates
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Bulgaria
Rumania
Latvia
Lithuania
Estonia
Slovakia
Poland
Hungary
Czech rep.
Slovenia
Source: European Commission, Strategy paper 2001
Openness of candidate countries
Trade as share of GDP 2000
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
0
Bulgaria
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Rumania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Czech rep.
Hungary
Source: EBRD transition report 2001
  BIS Review 9/2002 
 7
 Orientation of candidate country 
trade towards EU market
EU share of export and import 2000
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
0
Bulgaria
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Rumania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Czech rep.
Hungary
EU share of exports
EU share of imports
Source: European Commission
 8 
 BIS Review 9/2002
