 John Hurley: Economic developments in Ireland and other issues 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the presentation of 
the Annual Report 2001, Dublin, 10 June 2002. 
 You are all very welcome. 
As  you  know,  this  is  my  first  press  conference  as  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank.  Today,  we  are 
publishing the Bank’s Annual Report for 2001. 
I  want  to  focus  briefly  on  seven  issues  -  economic  growth,  inflation,  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy, 
supervision, the Bank’s financial results and financial stability issues. 
Economic growth 
1. 
The  Economic  Overview  in  the  Report  reflects  our  concerns  after  a  challenging  year.  We  saw  a 
marked slowdown in growth in the world economy and also here at home, for reasons that are well 
known. Export volumes were seriously affected, the IT and tourism sectors suffered particularly and 
the  growth  in  capital  formation  was  much  reduced.  However,  a  strong  positive  factor  was  the 
continuing growth in consumer demand. 
Looking  ahead,  the  Bank’s  view  of  the  economy  remains  positive  but  depends  on  the  pace  of 
international recovery. We expect growth of about 3 per cent this year. Our continuing potential is for 
growth of some 4½ to 5 per cent per year. 
Inflation 
2. 
Undoubtedly  a  key  risk  to  growth  is  inflation,  with  its  potential  to  seriously  impact  on  the  country’s 
competitiveness. Our consumer price inflation has been consistently higher than the euro area for two 
and half years - to the order of 2 percentage points above the average. 
Fiscal policy 
3. 
You will not be surprised therefore that we are advising prudent fiscal policy and attention to wage and 
other  cost  developments.  Fiscal  policy  should  aim  to  ensure  a  neutral  stance  in  its  impact  on  the 
economy. The Bank is also advising wage moderation, so as not to damage our competitive position. 
We will have more to say on these issues in our Summer Bulletin, which is due out later in the month. 
Monetary policy 
4. 
I  would  now  like  to  comment  briefly  on  the  European  scene,  in  the  light  of  last  week’s  Governing 
Council Meeting. 
As  you  know,  at  our  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates 
unchanged.  The  economic  outlook  in  the  euro  area  is  still  subject  to  uncertainty.  We  decided  that 
further evidence is needed before we can fully assess the risks to price stability over the medium term. 
However, the outlook remains less satisfactory than originally expected some months ago. The recent 
appreciation of the euro will contribute to containing inflationary pressures if it is sustained. However it 
is still too early to assess the impact of these developments on the outlook for prices. 
The Governing Council’s expectations for a gradual recovery in growth in the  euro area  have been 
confirmed by recent Eurostat estimates. These show an improvement from negative growth in the last 
quarter of 2001 to moderately positive rates in the first quarter of this  year. Forecasts all point to a 
continued strengthening in demand. 
BIS Review 40/2002 
 1
 Supervision 
5. 
The Bank’s extensive regulatory tasks were further increased in 2001 when we took over responsibility 
for  more  than  2000  insurance  intermediaries.  In  consultation  with  the  industry,  and  with  consumer 
interests, we developed an effective regulatory system and tackled the re-authorisation process - no 
small task. 
Following the losses incurred at the AIB subsidiary, Allfirst, we requested an independent verification 
of all financial institutions’ controls and risk management procedures. This is an important exercise, 
which involves a lot of work for the institutions concerned and indeed for the Bank; however, I think it 
will  be  a  very  worthwhile  exercise.  We  expect  the  overall  review  process  will  be  extended  over  a 
number of months. As  you know,  we have also entered into a Written Agreement with AIB and the 
Federal Reserve Bank in the US to address the specific issues that arose from the events in Allfirst. 
This was a first in international supervisory co-operation for both the Fed and the Central Bank. 
A  fundamental  change  arose  from  the  publication  in  April  this  year  of  the  Bill  on  the  structure  of 
financial  regulation. We  expect  its  passage  to  implementation  will  be  given  priority  by  the  incoming 
government.  We  are  already  working  closely  with  the  Interim  Board  of  the  Irish  Financial  Services 
Regulatory Authority and its Chairman, Brian Patterson. We want to ensure a smooth transition to the 
re-structured organisation. I am very encouraged by the progress made in the short time that we have 
been working together. 
Financial results 
6. 
It  was  a  good  year  for  our  financial  results  with  profits  of  €563  million.  This  was  despite  the 
exceptionally high costs we faced with the euro changeover. 
The successful management of our investment assets of €8.7 billion played a significant role in this 
performance. The return on these assets was 6.74%, or 16 basis points above the benchmark set by 
Merrill Lynch. 
Financial stability 
7. 
Responsibility  for  financial  stability  is  a  core  Central  Bank  function.  As  was  the  case  last  year,  the 
report contains a lengthy chapter on financial stability. The key messages from our report on financial 
stability are: 
• 
• 
The Irish banking system is stable, well capitalised and profitable. 
The main risks to global and, therefore, Irish financial stability are the well-known imbalances 
in the US. The overriding concern would be a very sudden and large depreciation of the US 
dollar, as distinct from an orderly exchange rate adjustment. However, we conclude that the 
US economy is sufficiently resilient to avoid such an eventuality. 
Here  at  home,  risks  to  financial  stability  from  excessive  credit  growth  and  property  prices 
have eased but these have not been eliminated. 
 The central lesson is that there is a need for caution, but there is no major concern. This translates 
into  a  need  for  continuing  prudence  by  the  banking  sector  and,  at  the  national  level,  for  careful 
management of wages, other costs and the public finances. 
That  concludes  my  opening  remarks.  My  colleagues  and  myself  are  now  available  to  answer  your 
questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2002
