 Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and wealth management 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Board of 
Directors of the National Insurance Fund, Oslo, 14 March 2002.  
This  address  is  based  on  assessments  presented  at  the  press  conference  following  the  monetary 
policy meeting of Norges Bank’s Executive Board on 27 February 2002, and on previous addresses. 
Accompanying charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website (www.norges-bank.no). 
 The  guidelines  for  economic  policy  were  revised  last  year.  The  expected  real  return  on  the 
Government  Petroleum  Fund  is  hereafter  to  be  used  over  the  central  government  budget,  and 
monetary policy is to be oriented towards low and stable inflation. 
Economic agents can act on the assumption that low and stable inflation will be a constant feature of 
economic policy. Wide variations in the price level make it more difficult to predict the real content of 
agreements and budgets. Unexpected fluctuations in the price level may easily lead to fluctuations in 
the  real  economy  and  instability  in  financial  and  property  markets.  High  and  variable  inflation  also 
leads  to  an  arbitrary  redistribution  of  resources  and  income.  Hence  price  stability  is  the  best 
contribution monetary policy can make to economic growth, prosperity and appropriate distribution. 
Low inflation is the objective, and the interest rate is the instrument. Commercial and savings banks 
have accounts  with Norges Bank, and the Executive Board decides the interest rate  on these. The 
deposit rate forms the floor for the shortest money market rates. 
Transparency about intentions, strategies and the implementation of monetary policy makes it easier 
for economic agents to assess monetary policy. If monetary policy is predictable, an important source 
of uncertainty is reduced, and – other things equal – the interest rate required to achieve the inflation 
target will be lower. 
If  economic  agents  are  to  have  confidence  in  monetary  policy,  transparency  regarding  the  central 
bank’s response pattern is probably a precondition. 
The interest rate affects inflation through a number of channels. An increase in the interest rate will 
normally  contribute  to  reducing  inflation  by  curbing  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  by 
strengthening  the  krone  exchange  rate  against  other  currencies.  An  interest  rate  reduction  has  the 
opposite effect. 
Monetary  policy  influences the economy  with considerable and variable lags.  Our analyses indicate 
that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change occurs within two years. Two years is 
therefore a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. Interest rates are 
set with a view to achieving an inflation rate of 2½ per cent two years ahead. 
Norges Bank’s views on the inflation outlook are presented three times a year in the Inflation Report. 
Our projection for inflation in the period ahead is presented as well as our assessment of the balance 
of  risks  surrounding  this  projection.  The  Executive  Board’s  updated  assessments  are  presented  in 
connection with the monetary policy meetings every six weeks. Immediately after each meeting, the 
Bank issues a press release and holds a press conference. 
The key interest rate is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook two  years 
ahead.  Our  inflation  projections  and  our  views  on  the  balance  of  risks  associated  with  these 
projections provide a summary of these assessments. 
Norges Bank’s inflation projection is our assessment of the most probable outcome of the rise in CPI 
two years ahead. In setting interest rates we also place emphasis on the probability distribution – or 
the balance of risks – surrounding the projection. Therefore, we also publish our judgement of the risk 
associated with our own projections. 
The phasing in of petroleum revenues has to be counteracted by a tighter monetary policy than would 
otherwise  be  the  case.  This  may  be  accomplished  through  an  adjustment  of  the  interest  rate,  an 
appreciation of the krone or both. 
Small  countries  have  experienced  fairly  wide  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  The  Swedish  krona  has 
depreciated by more than  10 per cent since summer 2000. The Australian dollar has  weakened  by 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 1
 over 30 per cent since spring 1997. The UK, Canada and New Zealand have also experienced wide 
exchange rate fluctuations. The Norwegian krone, on the other hand, has been relatively stable. 
A  monetary  policy  that  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation  will  contribute  to  stabilising 
aggregate demand and output. As a result, the central government budget will not normally have to be 
used actively to stabilise the economy. An increase in unemployment that is due to a higher rate of 
increase in labour costs than implied by productivity growth cannot be offset by low interest rates or 
higher public spending and tax cuts, but requires changes in the functioning of the labour market. 
The  planned  use  of  petroleum  revenues  implies  that  the  sheltered  sector  will  lay  claim  to  a  larger 
share  of  the  labour  force.  This  will  probably  cause  a  decline  in  manufacturing  employment.  The 
ensuing  deterioration in competitiveness may  lead to restructuring. In  the long  run, monetary  policy 
cannot influence overall employment or its distribution across industries. 
Norway’s  terms  of  trade  flucture  widely.  This  is  largely  attributable  to  variations  in  the  oil  price. 
However,  a  substantial  portion  of  petroleum  revenues  is  invested  in  foreign  equities  and  bonds 
through the Government Petroleum Fund. Changes in the oil price influence the size of the Fund, but 
have  little effect on the domestic use of petroleum revenues. The Petroleum Fund acts as  a buffer 
against fluctuations in the oil price, which stabilises the krone exchange rate. 
The  Norwegian  economy  may  nevertheless  be  exposed  to  disturbances  of  a  type  that  cannot  be 
absorbed by the Petroleum Fund. We have to be prepared for fluctuations in the value of our currency 
that  are more in line  with the fluctuations observed in other countries. The exchange rate  will vary. 
This means that economic agents cannot assume that the krone will be stable against the euro, the 
US dollar or a weighted average of foreign currencies. It is the inflation target that is the economy’s 
nominal anchor. 
The  future  size  of  the  Petroleum  Fund  depends  on  oil  price  developments.  The  fiscal  guideline 
ensures that we only use the return on wealth that has already been accumulated. This makes policy 
robust to changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today and in 
the future. 
The  government  invests  petroleum  wealth  in  foreign  securities  through  the  Petroleum  Fund. 
Government wealth is thereby more diversified. These investments have no impact on the Norwegian 
capital market. 
The Norwegian government’s most important assets are the Government Petroleum Fund, assets in 
the National Insurance Fund and government direct ownership interests in enterprises. The Petroleum 
Fund’s equity investments are distributed across many countries, and all equity holdings are less than 
one per cent of a company’s total value. 
The National Insurance Fund's investments are mainly confined to Norway. As a result, changes in the 
value of the Fund's equity portfolio primarily reflect developments in Norwegian business and industry. 
The Fund has larger ownership interests in individual companies than the Petroleum Fund, and wider 
fluctuations  in  value.  The  government  has  substantial  direct  holdings  in  individual  enterprises.  In 
general,  concentrated  ownership  requires  a  more  strategic  ownership  approach  and  gives  rise  to 
higher risk than diversified ownership. 
The  capital  market  serves  as  an  intermediary  between  the  government  as  investor  and  enterprises 
seeking capital. This market makes it possible to separate the government's choices from companies' 
choices. The distribution of the government's financial investments and the choice of corporate funding 
structure should not be based on the notion that we are living in a barter economy. The government 
can choose the composition, required rate of return and risk profile for its financial investments without 
regard  for  the  funding  requirements  of  Norwegian  enterprises.  By  the  same  token,  Norwegian 
companies  can  choose  their  debt  and  equity  structure  independently  of  the  government's  financial 
investments. 
Both mainland private saving and business fixed investment have been high in recent years. Thus a 
possible  weak  capital  market  has  not  been  reflected  in  a  low  level  of  investment  and  saving.  As  a 
result  of  developments  in  the  late  1990s,  equities  and  funds  make  up  an  increasing  share  of 
households’ total assets. The equity ratio of enterprises1 strengthened in the 1990s, with a rise in new 
equity capital from the markets in particular. 
                                                      
1   Norwegian limited companies excluding petroleum companies, financial undertakings and government activities, and groups 
and holding companies. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2002
 The Norwegian loan and capital market probably  has weaknesses nevertheless, with thin securities 
markets and little breadth in investor and owner environments compared with some other countries. 
The  reasons,  and  hence  the  solutions,  can  probably  be  found  in  the  structure  of  the  taxation  of 
dwellings, property and financial assets, in a high level of government ownership of enterprises and in 
the  organisation  of  pension  saving  in  Norway.  Investing  even  more  government  capital  in  Norway 
would reduce the return on investments in the Norwegian business sector and prompt other investors 
to invest elsewhere. Using even more capital in the Norwegian economy would probably also lead to a 
rapid relocation of jobs to other countries, as the krone would tend to appreciate. 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 3
