 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: A brief comment on credit risk analysis 
Opening address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the APEC 
Financial  Regulators  Training 
Initiative  Regional  Program  -  Credit  Risk  Analysis,  Bangkok, 
26 August 2002. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here at the opening of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) 
Financial  Regulators  Training  Initiative  Regional  Program  on  Credit  Risk  Analysis.  The  Bank  of 
Thailand is indeed privileged to have the opportunity to host this distinctive event initiated by APEC. I 
also  wish  to  personally  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  the  participants  and  to  express  our  deepest 
appreciation  to  the  distinguished  speakers  who  have  kindly  agreed  to  come  to  share  with  us  their 
knowledge and wisdom on various aspects of credit risk analysis. 
Needless  to  say,  amongst  other  risks,  credit  risk  or  the  possibility  that  a  borrower  will  default, 
represents a key risk in the banking business. The example of the Thai financial system where roughly 
400  billion  baht  of  non-performing  loans,  commonly  known  as  NPLs  still  remains  since  the  1997 
financial crisis shows the  painstaking effect of credit risks at the national  level. Global  trends  along 
with advance technology and financial innovations have further added complications to the matter by 
enabling financial  institutions to change their  activities and risk profiles at a speed  and scale  which 
could not be imagined a few years ago. 
These developments have spurred the necessity of our having to better understand and perform more 
analysis on banking risks. After all, banks do live and prosper by accepting risks, but these risks have 
to  be  managed  with  proper  care.  As  we  have  all  seen,  well-managed  banks  have  tended  to  stay 
resilient to the banking crisis and provided a backbone for restoration of financial stability. We must 
therefore, continuously adopt new techniques and technologies in risk analysis to ensure appropriate 
risk management of all financial institutions in the future. Of course, prevention is always better than 
the cure. 
As financial regulators, one of our main tasks is to provide a prudential framework ensuring the overall 
improvement  of  risk  management  of  financial  institutions.  In  the  case  of  Thailand  consolidated 
supervision as well as prompt corrective action will be introduced under the new Financial Institutions 
Act.  Study  is  also  on  the  way  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the  implementation  of  the  BIS  New  Capital 
Regime, and  we  look forward to their conclusion for an explicit framework that will complement our 
current practices  where  we ask the Board to understand the nature of their organization’s business 
activities  and  risk  appetite  in  order  to  provide  an  adequate  internal  control  system  to  monitor  and 
mitigate risks. Risk-based supervision represents yet another endeavor to tackle the effectiveness of 
risk management of financial institutions as transaction testing may no longer be an effective approach 
to examine the ever-more complex financial institutions of today. 
I  must  therefore,  commend  APEC  for  this  initiative  in  bringing  together  bank  supervisors  across 
countries within the Asia and the Pacific region to learn and to share views and wisdom on this very 
important topic. It is my hope that all of you would take this opportunity to learn as much as possible 
from  our  highly  experienced  and  knowledgeable  speakers  as  well  as  from  one  another  on  the  key 
issues  relating  to  credit  risks,  but  most  importantly  to  reinforce  supervision  standards  in  order  to 
enhance financial stability under your jurisdiction. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to declare open the APEC Financial Regulators Training Initiative 
Regional Program on Credit Risk Analysis. I wish you every success and a pleasant stay in Bangkok. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 1
