 Donald T Brash: Inflation targeting 14 years on 
Speech  by  Mr  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  the  American 
Economics Association conference, Atlanta, 5 January 2002. 
 Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great honour to participate in this session on inflation targeting this morning, and to share the 
platform with such distinguished practitioners of that art. 
I was asked to speak first because my name comes first, by a rather narrow margin, when the four 
speakers are lined  up alphabetically. It  also  happens that  New Zealand  was the first country  in  the 
world to adopt a formal inflation target,  in the sense  that  we understand  the term today,  in the  late 
eighties. Both of these facts give me some latitude  about  what  to  talk about,  although  when Jacob 
Frenkel invited me to participate in this panel discussion he stressed that I was not being invited to 
address the theory of inflation targeting so much as to talk about some of the lessons we have learnt 
from experience over almost 14 years. And that is what I propose to do. 
Bernanke et al have defined inflation targeting as  
"a  framework  for  monetary  policy  characterised  by  the  public  announcement  of  official  quantitative 
targets  (or  target  ranges)  for  the  inflation  rate  over  one  or  more  time  horizons,  and  by  explicit 
acknowledgement  that  low,  stable  inflation  is  monetary  policy's  primary  long-run  goal.  Among  other 
important features of inflation targeting are vigorous efforts to communicate with the public about the 
plans and objectives of the monetary authorities, and, in many cases, mechanisms that strengthen the 
central bank's accountability for attaining those objectives."1  
I am very comfortable with that definition. 
Has inflation targeting met its objectives in New Zealand? 
Countries usually adopt inflation targeting for one or more of the following reasons: 
• 
A  desire  to  find  some  credible  anchor  for  monetary  policy,  often  after  a  period  of  high 
inflation and/or the loss of a previous anchor (perhaps an exchange rate target which proved 
impossible to maintain  or a money aggregate target  which proved both difficult to achieve 
and less closely connected to the inflation rate than hoped for).  
A desire to give the central bank instrument independence, but to balance that with some 
clearer  specification  of  what  the  central  bank  should  seek  to  achieve  with  that  instrument 
independence  -  in  other  words,  to  make  it  possible  to  balance  independence  with 
accountability. 
A  desire  to  reduce  the  social  and  economic  costs  of  disinflation  by  reducing  the  inflation 
expectations of both financial markets and agents in the real economy. 
  In  New  Zealand's  experience,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  helped  to 
provide  an  anchor  for  monetary  policy.  Certainly,  there  had  been  important  progress  in  reducing 
inflation between the mid-eighties and the time a specific target was first discussed in April 1988, but 
in the year to March that year CPI inflation was still 9 per cent, and predictions by the Reserve Bank 
that inflation would fall below 4 per cent within two years were widely ridiculed. 
                                                      
1   B.S. Bernanke et al., Inflation targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press, 1999, p.4. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 1
 By 1991, inflation was under 2 per cent, and inflation has averaged around 2 per cent over the last 
10 years.  Of  course,  lots  of  other  countries  have  also  achieved  low  rates  of  inflation  over  the  last 
decade, so it is impossible to be dogmatic about the extent to which inflation targeting helped in the 
case of New Zealand. But in my own judgement the single focus which inflation targeting required of 
the central bank was a material factor in focusing the Bank on that objective. Beyond the first year or 
two,  we  did  not  spend  a  lot  of  time  debating  what  the  optimal  inflation  rate  might  be.  In  terms  of 
making the decisions about monetary policy, that was irrelevant because the target had been agreed. 
The  only  debate  was  about  what  degree  of  monetary  policy  pressure  was  needed  to  achieve  that 
objective.  
In  the  seventies  and  eighties,  during  most  of  which  period  New  Zealand  did  not  have  an  inflation 
target, New Zealand's inflation was not only markedly higher than it was in the nineties, it was also 
higher  than  inflation  in  other  OECD  countries.  Inflation  targeting  helped  us  to  achieve  a  substantial 
improvement in our inflation performance in absolute terms; it helped us to reduce inflation relative to 
inflation in other developed countries; it helped to reduce the volatility of inflation; and it helped us to 
maintain that improved performance.  
 Interestingly, and perhaps contrary to some impressions both in New Zealand and abroad, achieving 
this marked improvement in inflation performance was not bought at the cost of an increase in output 
volatility. Yes, output volatility was higher in New Zealand during the nineties than in, say, Australia or 
the United States, but that is hardly surprising: one would expect to see rather more output volatility in 
a very small, commodity-dependent, economy than in a much larger and more diversified economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 But  the  nineties  saw  both  a  decline  in  inflation  volatility  and  a  decline  in  output  volatility  in  New 
Zealand, as compared with the two previous decades.2  
Inflation  targeting  has  also  come  to  be  seen  as  an  important  aspect  of  the  Reserve  Bank's 
accountability. New Zealand had no tradition of central bank independence prior to the late eighties. 
Although  more  and  more  people  could  see  the  cynical  way  in  which  monetary  policy  could  be 
manipulated  by  politicians  who  gave  greater  weight  to  their  own  re-election  than  to  preserving  the 
purchasing power of the currency, it  was always going to be a challenge to get substantial  political 
buy-in to full central bank independence. One of the things which made that political buy-in possible - 
to  the  extent  that  both  major  political  parties  voted  for  the  legislation  giving  the  Reserve  Bank 
instrument  independence  late  in  1989  -  was  the  fact  that  it  was  Parliament  which  mandated  price 
stability  as  the  Bank's  objective,  and  what  that  meant  was  to  be  formally  and  publicly  agreed  in  a 
Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) between the Governor and the Minister of Finance. In other words, 
there  was  to  be  full  instrument  independence  but  not  full  goal  independence.  The  legislation  was 
drafted in such a way that the PTA could have been based around exchange rate targeting, nominal 
income  targeting,  or  conceivably  even  money  aggregate  targeting,  but  in  the  context  of  the  time 
everybody  understood  that  the  PTA  would  be  based  around  the  inflation  target  which  had  been 
announced more than 18 months earlier. The Bank was to be accountable for delivering that agreed 
inflation target, and the legislation made it clear that the Governor could lose his job for "inadequate 
performance" in achieving that objective. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  a  desire  to  change  inflation  expectations  was  an  important  part  of  the 
motivation  in  the  adoption  of  an  inflation  target  in  New  Zealand.  Then-Minister  of  Finance  Roger 
Douglas was very concerned in March 1988 that, with inflation moving into single figures for almost the 
first time in 15 years (with the exception of a brief period during which all prices, wages, interest rates, 
dividends and rents were subject to tight administrative control), the public would expect the monetary 
authorities to ease up, and settle for inflation in the 5 to 7 per cent range. It was in that context that the 
Minister announced, during the course of a television interview on 1 April 1988, that he was thinking of 
genuine price stability, "around 0, or 0 to one per cent".  
It is less clear that the adoption of an inflation target was in fact successful in reducing the costs of 
disinflation by reducing the inflation expectations of financial markets and the public - and this despite 
the fact that my senior colleagues and I devoted an enormous amount of effort to convincing the public 
of  the  seriousness  of  our  intent.  Guy  Debelle  has  done  a  study  of  the  sacrifice  ratio  involved  in 
reducing  inflation  in  Canada,  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  For  New  Zealand  (which  had  a  specific 
inflation target) and Australia (which did not, at least until after its disinflation had been completed), 
that study suggests that the sacrifice ratios were similar.3  
I would not myself want to put too much store by that result. New Zealand's inflation performance had 
been rather worse than Australia's for some years by the late eighties, and one would therefore expect 
to find inflationary expectations more deeply entrenched in New Zealand. Moreover, just two years into 
the disinflation process in New Zealand the Government introduced a 10 per cent Goods and Services 
Tax, which increased the CPI by an estimated 8 per cent. Then, in mid-1989, that tax was increased 
from 10 per cent to 12.5 per cent. Both moves presumably had some effect in maintaining inflationary 
expectations at a relatively high level.  
Although I can not prove it, I believe that the inflation targeting regime did help to change expectations 
and behaviour at the margin.  
I well recall that, in late 1990, not many months after the Policy Targets Agreement had seen the 0 to 
2  per  cent  inflation  target  formally  agreed  between  Governor  and  Minister,  the  head  of  the  New 
Zealand Council of Trade Unions, Ken Douglas, wrote an article which appeared in one of the major 
newspapers.4  The  article  argued  that  the  Reserve  Bank  was  focused  on  an  undesirably  narrow 
objective  (namely,  low  inflation),  but  that,  as  long  as  that  was  the  case,  unions  would  need  to 
moderate  wage  demands  to  avoid  increases  in  unemployment.  In  the  weeks  which  followed,  he 
actively, and with very considerable courage, campaigned for moderate wage settlements as a way of 
reducing  unemployment.  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  inflation  target  played  a  part  in  encouraging 
                                                      
2 
"Output volatility in New Zealand", in Independent Review of the  Operation of Monetary Policy: Reserve Bank and Non-
Executive Directors' Submissions, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, October 2000. 
3   Guy Debelle, "The Ends of Three Small Inflations: Australia, New Zealand and Canada", Canadian  Public Policy, March 
1996. 
4   The Dominion, 31 October 1990. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 3
 employers and unions to adjust their wage settlements to levels which were quite quickly consistent 
with the inflation target.  
There was also a very large reduction in the spread between the yield on New Zealand government 
New Zealand dollar long-term bonds and that on US Treasuries. In the mid-eighties, that spread had 
peaked  at  around  1000  basis  points.  By  early  1990,  that  spread  had  reduced  to  around  400  basis 
points, and it has been well under 200 basis points for most of the last decade. Of course, most of that 
reduction  in  spreads  was  presumably  simply  the  result  of  New  Zealand's  greatly  improved  inflation 
performance, but that improved performance was, as I have argued, in part attributable to the inflation 
targeting framework, while that framework probably also helped, at the margin, to convince markets 
that low inflation was likely to endure. 
An inflation target agreed by Governor and Minister 
In  New  Zealand's  experience,  the  fact  that  the  inflation  target  was,  and  still  is,  formally  agreed 
between the Governor of the central bank and the Minister of Finance on behalf of the Government 
has  been  unambiguously  positive.  And  I  make  this  point  because  some  observers  have  suggested 
that  this  need  to  agree  the  inflation  target  between  central  bank  and  executive/legislature  is  an 
undesirable restraint on central bank independence. 
There is no question that it is, in principle, a restraint. In our framework, the inflation target is formally 
agreed between Minister and Governor, and can be changed either by mutual agreement or by the 
Minister unilaterally (if the Governor does not agree to a change) by the use of the so-called override 
provision in the legislation. 
But,  in  a  world  of  open  capital  markets,  the  fact  that  the  legislation  requires  the  Policy  Targets 
Agreement, or any override of that Agreement, to be in the public domain means that no Minister can 
manipulate the target for cynical  political ends. On the contrary, the  Minister  has every  incentive to 
make it publicly clear that the inflation target he wants the central bank to deliver is consistent with 
price stability and a stable currency. Indeed, it is this obligation to be transparent about the objectives 
of policy, and about the modus operandi of policy, that is one of the most important aspects of the New 
Zealand inflation targeting  framework, arguably  as important as  instrument independence  itself. If a 
Minister were, say, to instruct the Bank to ignore the inflation rate and focus instead on increasing the 
growth rate - as he could do by invoking the override provision - markets would almost certainly deliver 
an immediate increase in interest rates across almost the entire yield curve (the Bank would still, of 
course, be able to anchor the overnight rate), together with a sharp fall in the exchange rate. The need 
to  be  transparent  ties  the  hands  of  both  government  and  central  bank  unless  there  are  good  and 
explainable reasons for change. 
The  fact  that  the  inflation  target  is  a  matter  agreed  between  Minister  and  Governor  has  effectively 
protected the Bank from criticism by the government, and in the almost 14 years during which inflation 
targeting has been in place, the number of government ministers who have attacked the Bank can be 
counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand.  Given  that  the  Minister  of  Finance  is  involved  in  agreeing  the 
inflation target, it is not easy for him or other ministers to attack the Bank for having policy too tight 
unless inflation is, or looks likely to be, below the target. Of course, we are not fully protected from 
criticism, even from the government: given the long lags with which monetary policy operates, and the 
inherent uncertainty, we may still be criticized for the timing or magnitude of policy moves, though in 
practice that has been a very unusual event in our experience. 
Moreover, agreeing the target between the Minister and the Governor has the important indirect effect 
of improving the consistency of monetary  and fiscal  policies  while still leaving the central bank with 
instrument independence. By agreeing the inflation target with the Governor, the Minister of Finance is 
implicitly agreeing that if fiscal policy is changed, monetary policy may need to change also, potentially 
offsetting any stimulus (or restraint) emanating from fiscal policy.  
We saw this most dramatically in mid-1990 when the Minister announced an expansionary Budget just 
months before the general election scheduled for late that year. Markets were concerned about the 
loosening in fiscal policy, and became uneasy about the future direction of policy. This was reflected in 
a rise in long-term interest rates and a fall in the exchange rate, to which we responded by tightening 
monetary policy. Immediately, an editorial in New Zealand's largest daily paper noted that the Budget 
had  "rekindled  inflationary  expectations.  The  (Reserve  Bank)  was  bound  to  lift  interest  rates.... 
Electors  are  frequently  bribed  to  their  ultimate  cost.  This  time  the  independence  of  responsible 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 monetary  control  quickly  exposes  a  fiscal  fraud."5  The  main  Opposition  party  campaigned  in  the 
election  on  a  commitment  to  get  interest  rates  reduced,  not  by  leaning  on  the  central  bank  but  by 
"giving  monetary  policy  some  mates"  through  tighter  fiscal  policy  and  deregulation  of  the  labour 
market. 
Five years later, with several  years of fiscal surplus behind it, the Government undertook to reduce 
income taxes subject to several conditions being met, one of which was that the Reserve Bank was 
satisfied that such tax cuts would not require a significant tightening of monetary policy. 
To  me,  these  are  good  illustrations  of  the  benefit  of  having  the  specification  of  the  objective  of 
monetary policy a matter for formal and public agreement between government and central bank. It 
forms a kind of pre-commitment strategy. 
The pre-conditions for inflation targeting 
There is another issue related to inflation targeting on which I would like to comment, and that relates 
to  the  pre-conditions  which  must  be  met  before  a  country  can  sensibly  embark  upon  it.  It  has 
sometimes  been  suggested  that  inflation  targeting  is  such  a  complicated  undertaking  that  only 
countries  with  lots  of  economists  with  PhDs  from  good  American  schools,  several  sophisticated 
econometric models, and a good understanding of how the monetary transmission mechanism works 
dare to undertake it.  
On  the  basis  of  New  Zealand's  experience,  I  would  argue  that  this  is  quite  incorrect.  Of  course, 
operating  any  monetary  policy  is  easier,  and  more  likely  to  be  successful,  if  the  central  bank  has 
access  to  competent  people  and  has  a  good  understanding  of  how  the  transmission  mechanism 
works. But the core elements of inflation targeting are not particularly complex, or rather are no more 
complex  than  operating  other  approaches  to  monetary  policy.  When  we  embarked  on  inflation 
targeting,  we  had  our  fair  share  of  competent  staff, but  we  had  no  clear  understanding  of  how  the 
transmission mechanism worked and a rather inadequate economic model. Indeed, the economy had 
been  subject  to  such  dramatic  change  over  the  previous  few  years  that  no  model  based  on  past 
relationships would have been of much use to us. Notwithstanding those deficiencies, we have little 
doubt  that  inflation  targeting  has  been  successful  in  New  Zealand. We certainly  have  no  reason  to 
believe that we would have been more successful if we had been trying to target nominal income or a 
money aggregate. 
Evolution has been significant 
Perhaps  because  we  began  inflation  targeting  at  a  time  when  the  New  Zealand  economy  was 
undergoing so much structural change, it was probably inevitable that our approach to the task would 
evolve quite significantly over the years after 1988. 
In the early years, we assumed from international experience that raising interest rates would tend to 
reduce  inflationary  pressures  and  that  reducing  interest  rates  would  tend  to  increase  inflationary 
pressures. But we had no reliable evidence, indeed no evidence at all, which might guide us on the 
extent  to  which  an  interest  rate  change  in  New  Zealand  would  change  the  inflation  rate.  For  this 
reason,  and  perhaps  because  some  of  us  retained  deeply  monetarist  sympathies,  we  began  the 
process of reducing inflation by adopting a very "quantitative" approach to the task - we determined to 
hold the liquidity in the banking system stable, something made relatively easy by the clean float of the 
exchange rate (in place since March 1985) and by a government commitment to fund any fiscal deficit 
by the sale of bonds. Interest rates across the whole  yield curve  were completely driven by market 
pressures, and fluctuated considerably. 
In the late eighties, we realised that, while we did not know in any specific sense what effect a change 
in interest rates had on  inflation,  we did  have a reasonable  estimate of the effect of exchange rate 
movements on the inflation rate. We estimated that a 1 per cent movement in the exchange rate, as 
measured by a trade-weighted index, produced a change in the Consumers Price Index of about 0.4 
per  cent  over  the  following  year  or  so.  And  from  this  fact  we  developed  an  implementation  regime 
which was for a time rather heavily oriented to the exchange rate.  
                                                      
5   New Zealand Herald, 3 August 1990. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 5
 At  no  time  did  we  have  an  exchange  rate  target  in  the  conventional  sense.  But  we  did  derive  a 
"conditional comfort zone" for the trade-weighted measure of the exchange rate which seemed to us, 
given all the other factors affecting the inflation rate, to be consistent with progress towards, or later 
maintenance of, the inflation target. In other words, the comfort zone was moved up (an appreciated 
New  Zealand  dollar)  when  domestic  inflation  was  projected  to  rise  towards  the  top  of  the  inflation 
target,  and  down  (a  depreciated  New  Zealand  dollar)  when  domestic  inflation  was  projected  to  fall 
towards the bottom of the inflation target.  
We  still  set  no  interest  rate,  but  rather  made  small  adjustments  to  the  target  for  the  quantity  of 
settlement cash in the banking system, with the aim of tightening or easing monetary conditions. And 
while we did not announce our comfort zone for the exchange rate, the financial markets usually had a 
very clear understanding of where that zone was, both because we were open about the exchange 
rate "pass-through coefficient" (0.4) which we were using in our inflation forecasts and because from 
time to time we would "clear our throat" to draw attention to the fact that monetary conditions were in 
danger  of  becoming  inconsistent  with  the  inflation  target.  We  referred  to  our  use  of  OMOs  in  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  -  not  so  much  "open  market  operations"  as  "open  mouth 
operations". 
We  discovered  that  occasional  "open  mouth  operations"  were  actually  all  we  needed  to  implement 
policy most of the time, and we left the target for settlement cash unchanged for years at a time. In 
other words, the mere fact that the financial markets understood that we could adjust the quantity of 
settlement  cash  in  the  banking  system,  thereby  tightening  or  easing  monetary  conditions,  was 
sufficient  to  produce  a  change  in  monetary  conditions  consistent  with  our  objective  of  meeting  the 
inflation target,  without the need for any  actual change in settlement cash. It  was in one sense the 
ultimate "no hands central banking", where we set no interest rate and no exchange rate, and left the 
target  for  settlement  cash  unchanged  for  many  months  on  end.  In  time,  what  moved  monetary 
conditions  was  our  quarterly,  published,  inflation  forecasts,  and  the  widespread  knowledge  that,  if 
push came to shove, the central bank was able to inflict financial pain on banks if monetary conditions 
did  not  move  in  a  way  consistent  with  the  inflation  target.  This  system  also  imposed  an  absolutely 
miniscule "monetary policy tax" on the financial system, since the amount of settlement cash in the 
system  (on  which  we  paid  a  below-market  interest  rate  to  discourage  banks  from  holding  excess 
balances) was never more than 0.1 per cent of banking system deposits, and was normally well below 
that.  
As  time  went  by,  we  moved  away  from  a  focus  on  the  direct  price  effects  of  movements  in  the 
exchange rate. In part, that was because these price effects became progressively more muted, as 
several  other  inflation  targeting  countries  also  found  in  the  nineties.  In  part  too,  it  was  because  we 
developed a better understanding of the inflation process in New Zealand. We moved our forecasting 
horizon  out  somewhat,  beyond  the  direct  price  effects  of  exchange  rate  movements  to  the  more 
medium-term effects of the real exchange rate and real interest rates on inflation through their effect 
on the output gap. But we continued to implement policy through our ability to move the quantity of 
settlement cash in the banking system, and through making our views about the appropriateness of 
monetary  conditions  known  through  our  quarterly  inflation  forecasts  and  occasional  "open  mouth 
operations ". 
This worked effectively as a system for keeping inflation under control, but it had disadvantages from a 
public relations point of view. Occasionally, monetary conditions would become a bit too easy to be 
consistent with our inflation target, and we would draw attention to the fact that conditions should be 
somewhat tighter. And conditions would tighten, usually through an increase in market interest rates 
and some appreciation in the exchange rate. But we had no quantitative way of informing the market 
about how far conditions should tighten, with the result that we often had to make a "that's about far 
enough" statement a week or 10 days later. The financial market understood this system, but to the 
general public it sometimes led to the perception that the Reserve Bank was having difficulty making 
up  its  mind  whether  conditions  were  too  loose  or  too  tight.  We  needed  some  kind  of  quantitative 
indicator. 
So in June 1997, we started expressing our views on the appropriateness of monetary conditions in 
terms  of  a  Monetary  Conditions  Index.  We  announced  that  we  would  use  an  MCI  based  on  a 
movement of 100 basis points in 90 day interest rates being equivalent to a movement of 2 per cent in 
the  trade-weighted  measure  of  the  exchange  rate,  with  the  average  conditions  prevailing  in  the 
December quarter of 1996 being  equal to 1000. Had this experience been  a total success, I  would 
have been happy to acknowledge our debt to the Bank of Canada for this experiment!  
6 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 The experience was not a total failure. In particular, it finally persuaded financial market participants, at 
home and abroad, that we had no exchange rate target in the conventional sense. Prior to that time, 
and related no doubt in part to the "conditional exchange rate comfort zones" which we had used in 
the  late  eighties  and  early  nineties,  there  had  been  quite  a  widespread  perception  that  we  were  in 
some sense "putting a floor" under the exchange rate, with the result that investing in New Zealand 
dollars was a "one way bet".  
I well recall a conversation with a fund manager in New York late in 1996, at a time when almost all 
observers felt that the New Zealand dollar was considerably over-valued. Referring to the action by the 
Swedish central bank to drive overnight interest rates to 500 per cent to defend the krona some years 
earlier,  he  asked  me  whether  we  would  have  "the  courage"  to  do  the  same,  to  defend  the  New 
Zealand dollar. I assured him that there was absolutely no way that I would push New Zealand interest 
rates to 500 per cent to defend the New Zealand dollar. "Why not?" he asked. "Because we do not 
have an exchange rate target; we have an inflation target", I replied. "Clearly, if the New Zealand dollar 
falls sharply, this may have implications for the future inflation rate, and this might require us to push 
up interest rates somewhat, but the mere fact that the exchange rate declines does not require us to 
push rates to 500 per cent." He was appalled, and warned me that if my views became known on Wall 
Street, the New Zealand dollar "was done". I urged him to spread the message since, as indicated, the 
currency was almost certainly well over-valued by almost any measure at that time. 
Adopting the MCI in June 1997, and expressing our views about monetary conditions in terms of a 
"desired" level of the MCI, finally ended the view that the Bank had a covert exchange rate target. It 
also  gave  us,  for  the  first  time,  a  quantitative  way  of  telling  the  market  by  how  much  we  wanted 
conditions  to  tighten  or  loosen.  But  the  MCI  was  quickly,  and  to  some  extent  unfairly,  discredited, 
partly because it was introduced at the very outset of the Asian crisis. That crisis hit demand for many 
of  New  Zealand's  exports  very  hard,  and  it  was  appropriate  that  the  New  Zealand  exchange  rate 
declined to reflect that external shock. We recognised that, and gradually reduced our "desired" level 
of the MCI through the second half of 1997 and the first half of 1998. But we failed to recognise the 
extent to which the external shock had affected the appropriate exchange rate, with the result that we 
reduced the MCI too slowly through that period. Even though we were still not setting any interest rate 
directly, the result  was a sharp increase in 90 day  interest rates to "offset" the sharp decline in the 
exchange rate, and we have acknowledged elsewhere that that probably exacerbated the short and 
shallow recession which took place in the second part of 1997 and the first part of 1998. 
We relaxed the "bands" around the "desired MCI" in the second half of 1998, and in March 1999 finally 
moved to a conventional implementation regime, abandoning both the quantity target for settlement 
cash and, as a signaling device, the MCI, and adopting instead an Official Cash Rate, whereby the 
interest rate on overnight money in the system is kept within a range of plus or minus 25 basis points 
from the nominated rate. 
Our approach to the inflation target itself evolved somewhat over the 14 years. In 1988, the target was 
simply expressed as "0 to 2 per cent". When the first formal Policy Targets Agreement was signed 
early in 1990, the target was still 0 to 2 per cent, and there was explicit provision for renegotiating the 
target if the inflation rate was affected by what we referred to as "caveats" - large external shocks to 
the price level (such as a big change in the international oil price), changes to indirect tax rates, and 
similar. The second Policy Targets Agreement, signed shortly after the general election in late 1990, 
extended the date by which inflation of 0 to 2 per cent had to be achieved from the end of 1992 to the 
end  of  1993,  and  removed  the  need  for  renegotiation  of  the  Agreement  if  the  inflation  rate  were 
affected  by  "caveatable"  items.  Instead,  the  Bank  was  to  ensure  that  CPI  inflation  excluding  such 
"caveatable" items was within the target. This led us to calculate and publish what we referred to as 
"underlying  inflation",  which  was  CPI  inflation  less  "caveatable"  items.  But  this  had  all  sorts  of 
problems associated with it, not least a perception problem, with the Bank calculating the underlying 
inflation rate on which the Governor's performance was to be judged. Now we have a target of keeping 
the CPI  between 0 and 3  per cent (the target  was  widened after the general  election of November 
1996) and a need to have a good explanation if inflation diverges from that target. The Policy Targets 
Agreement  makes  it  clear  that  external  shocks,  changes  in  indirect  tax  rates,  and  similar  factors 
constitute  valid  reasons  for  the  inflation  rate  to  diverge  from  the  target  for  a  time.  (The  latest  PTA, 
signed on 16 December 1999, is attached.)  
We characterise ourselves as "flexible inflation targeters" rather than "strict inflation targeters", in Lars 
Svensson's  terminology.  But  there  is  debate  even  within  the  Reserve  Bank  itself  whether  we  have 
always been flexible inflation targeters or whether perhaps we have evolved to greater flexibility than 
we had earlier in our inflation targeting history. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 7
 There is little  doubt that in the early  years our rhetoric was rather  "strict". We had the challenge of 
convincing  a  sceptical  public,  made  cynical  by  years  of  broken  political  promises  about  keeping 
inflation under control, that this time there was going to be a serious commitment to keeping inflation 
under  tight  control.  So  we  emphasised  that  monetary  policy  had  been  given  only  a  single  goal  by 
statute, namely "stability in the general level of prices", and I as Governor was liable to be dismissed 
for failing to deliver that objective. And we repeated that message, again and again. We recognised 
that the more quickly we could convince both financial markets and the general public that we were 
absolutely committed to achieving the inflation target, whatever the cost in terms of unemployment and 
lost output, the smaller that cost in employment and output would be. Allowing people to think that we 
were  "soft-hearted",  and  would  back  off  the  inflation  target  as  soon  as  unemployment  started  to 
increase, seemed a certain way to increase unemployment. (Having said that, and as indicated earlier, 
it is not unambiguously clear that demonstrating a strong commitment to a particular inflation target 
was  in  fact  successful  in  improving  the  inflation/unemployment  trade-off  during  the  period  of 
disinflation, though my personal view is that it helped.)  
In  those  early  years,  it  is  probable  that  none  of  my  colleagues  themselves  really  believed  that  we 
would be able to get inflation within a 0 to 2 per cent target and keep it there.6 But in 1991, two years 
ahead of the deadline imposed by the Policy Targets Agreement, inflation fell within the target for the 
first time, to the considerable surprise of many people both inside and outside the central bank. And in 
1992, inflation was again within the target. And in 1993. And in 1994. By this time, many people, again 
both inside the central bank and outside it, were coming to believe not only that inflation could be kept 
inside a 0 to 2 per cent target, but also that keeping inflation within the target was not such a difficult 
job after all. Economic growth was among the fastest in the OECD; inflation was within the target; New 
Zealand dollar 10 year bond rates were marginally lower than the yields on 10 year Treasuries (in the 
first part of 1994). It all seemed pretty easy. 
In the year to June 1995, underlying inflation increased to 2.2 per cent, outside the target for the first 
time since 1991. But that result was influenced in part by an adverse weather pattern in May 1995, 
which  had  sharply  increased  the  price  of  fresh fruit and  vegetables. We still  thought  that  we  would 
quickly  return  to  within  the  inflation  target.  In  the  event,  we  were  close  to  the  top  of  the  target,  or 
marginally  above  it,  from  the  June  1995  year  to  the  December  1996  year.7  We  had  all  learnt  that 
keeping  inflation  within  such  a  narrow  range  was  a  major  challenge,  and  could  probably  be 
accomplished  only  at  the  cost  of  undesirably  high  volatility  in  the  real  economy.  We  began  talking 
about  the  inflation  target  as  something  to  which  we  would  be  constantly  aiming,  but  not  something 
which we could or should deliver at all times, and that is how we regard the target today. We recognise 
that there is a trade-off, not between growth and inflation, but rather between the volatility of growth 
and the volatility of inflation, and we are prepared to accept some degree of inflation volatility to avoid 
throwing the real economy around too violently. 
Of  course,  we  have  been  immeasurably  helped  in  doing  this  by  the  fact  that  inflation  expectations 
have become more firmly anchored on the target. Were inflation expectations to become dislodged, 
we would be obliged to return to a stricter and more vigorous pursuit of the inflation target, even at the 
expense of some short-term output volatility. 
Single decision-maker or committee? 
In  the  New  Zealand  central  bank,  all  important  decisions  are  vested  in  the  Governor,  not  in  the 
Monetary Policy Committee or in the Board, even though we have both. We are by no means unique 
in this structure - laws in both Canada and Israel vest similar powers in the Governor. But the pattern 
is unusual internationally. 
There  are  clearly  advantages  and  disadvantages  in  all  decision-making  structures.  When  Lars 
Svensson conducted a review of the New Zealand monetary policy framework for the New Zealand 
government  last  year,  he  recommended  moving  from  the  present  structure  to  one  where  monetary 
policy decisions are made by an internal committee of five, chaired by the Governor.8 Interestingly, the 
                                                      
6 
I was sufficiently new in the central bank, and sufficiently naïve, to assume that it could be achieved, and did not hesitate to 
sign the Policy Targets Agreement. 
7   Underlying inflation peaked at 2.4 per cent in the year to December 1996. 
8 
Lars Svensson, Independent Review of the Operation of Monetary Policy in New Zealand: Report to the Minister of Finance, 
February 2001. 
8 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 New Zealand Treasury, the non-executive directors of the Reserve Bank, and most of my colleagues 
argued against changing the structure in this regard. And the Government also decided not to change 
the decision-making structure, after consultation with other political parties in Parliament. 
The arguments in favour of having  a single decision-maker related essentially to accountability and 
communications.  
The legislation under which the Bank currently operates was passed into law during the late eighties, 
when there was a heavy emphasis on improving the quality of public sector administration. Devolving 
more authority to public sector chief executives, and holding them responsible for their outputs, was 
central to that approach. So when I expressed surprise to the Minister who was responsible for the 
Reserve  Bank  legislation  that  the  Bill  envisaged  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  being  between  the 
Minister  and  the  Governor,  not  between  the  Minister  and  the  Bank,  he  explained  nonchalantly  that 
"We can't fire the whole Bank. Realistically, we can't even fire the whole Board. But we sure as hell 
can fire you!" So leaving the Governor in sole charge of monetary policy decisions makes it very clear 
who is to blame if inflation falls outside the agreed target. 
Having  a  single  decision-maker  also  makes  communicating  the  Bank's  monetary  policy  message 
relatively  easy  also.  Several  of  my  colleagues  take  an  active  part  in  helping  to  take  the  Reserve 
Bank's  message  to  the  general  public,  but  the  message  is  the  Governor's,  not  their  own.  And  this 
consistency of message is, I believe, helpful. 
Having  a  single  decision-maker  is  also  helpful  in  the  context  of  the  way  in  which  we  publish  our 
inflation forecasts. New Zealand is, to the best of my knowledge, the only country where the central 
bank publishes economic forecasts based on endogenous monetary conditions. In other words, our 
published  forecasts  attempt  to  answer  the  question:  "What  monetary  conditions  will  be  required  to 
move the inflation rate back towards the middle of our 0 to 3 per cent target range over the one- to 
two-year horizon?" So the forecasts reveal not only where we think the Official Cash Rate is likely to 
be  in  the  immediate  future,  but  where,  on  the  basis  of  present  information  and  clearly  specified 
assumptions about the exchange rate and other variables, it is likely to move over the next couple of 
years. There are pros and cons of this approach to forecasting - though we are convinced that there 
are more pros than cons - but I have been told by some of those who have served as members of 
monetary policy committees in other central banks that such an approach would be virtually impossible 
where decisions are made by committee. It is often hard enough to reach a decision on what the policy 
interest rate should be tomorrow without having to work out where it should be over the next year or 
two. 
There are,  of course, risks in having monetary  policy decisions  vested  in a single individual. In our 
case, we believe that these risks are substantially mitigated by the clear specification of the target for 
monetary policy in both legislation and the Policy Targets Agreement; by the high level of transparency 
required by the legislation; by the way in which the Governor is appointed (by the Minister of Finance, 
but only where the individual concerned has been recommended by the Board); by the longstanding 
tradition of open discussion and debate in the Bank; and by the fact that the Bank's Board is charged 
with  the  primary  responsibility  of  monitoring  the  Governor's  performance,  with  an  obligation  to 
recommend  the  Governor's  dismissal  if  directors  are  not  satisfied  with  his  performance  under  the 
Policy Targets Agreement.  
Single mandate or dual mandate? 
Finally, let me briefly touch on the vexed subject of  the central bank's mandate. We clearly  have a 
single  mandate:  monetary  policy  was  required,  by  the  1989  legislation,  to  "achieve  and  maintain 
stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices".  Period.  There  is  no  reference  to  other  objectives,  and  I  am 
entirely  comfortable  with  that  mandate,  notwithstanding  my  healthy  regard  for  New  Zealand's  most 
famous economist, the late Bill Phillips. In other words, I am entirely comfortable with the proposition 
that  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation;  and  that  the  best  contribution  of 
monetary policy to economic growth is the maintenance of low inflation.9  
But I do want to suggest that those who make a major distinction between central banks with a single 
price  stability  mandate  and  those  with  a  dual  mandate,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
exaggerate the difference. Yes, there will be differences in the policy reaction to some kinds of shock - 
                                                      
9  
I do not propose to get into a discussion at this point about whether bias-adjusted zero inflation is better or worse than some 
very small amount of positive inflation. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 9
 for example, a central bank with a dual mandate might ease policy in response to a sharp increase in 
oil prices because of the adverse effects of such an event on real income, and therefore on demand, 
whereas a central bank with a single price stability mandate may well leave policy unchanged, or may 
even tighten somewhat, depending on circumstances.  
But  the  reality  is  that  both  kinds  of  central  bank  regard  price  stability  as  the  best  contribution  that 
monetary policy can make to economic growth. And once price stability has been reached, the actions 
of a single-mandate central bank will often appear identical to those of a dual-mandate central bank. 
(Of course, the rhetoric will often be different.) This is because most central banks these days focus 
their  monetary  policy  attention  on  some  concept  of  core  or  underlying  inflation,  and  ignore  the 
transitory  impact  on  prices  of  exchange  rate  movements,  movements  in  international  oil  prices, 
changes  in indirect taxes,  and so on. And focusing  on core or underlying  inflation means to  a  very 
large  extent  trying  to  assess  whether  there  are  unused  resources  in  the  economy.  In  other  words, 
keeping core inflation under control once price stability has been achieved  is to a very large extent 
about  keeping  the  estimated  output  gap  as  close  to  zero  as  possible.  Is  the  central  bank  output-
smoothing, or focused exclusively on maintaining price stability? It may be very difficult to tell unless 
the central bank explains itself, and I would argue the two approaches are often very similar. 
Even where inflation has been pushed away from target, it will often be difficult to tell the difference 
between the actions of a central bank with a single mandate and the actions of a central bank with a 
dual mandate. Yes, in theory there may be a difference, but in practice that difference may be very 
small or irrelevant. We saw that in 1996, when inflation in New Zealand was slightly above the then-
target of 0 to 2 per cent. We chose to move back to the target over a number of quarters rather than 
more quickly, partly because we did in fact make the judgement that the economic costs of moving 
back to the target very quickly would have been unjustified, but also because we recognised that to 
have achieved a very early return to target would have required a drastic tightening of policy, with the 
severe  risk  that  further  down  the  track  the  inflation  rate  would  have  gone  below  the  bottom  of  the 
target. 
Personally,  I  am  very  comfortable  with  our  single  mandate,  especially  in  the  New  Zealand  context 
where we have had a long history of believing that monetary policy can do a whole range of things 
which we now realise have very little to do with monetary policy.  
The end of history? 
Is inflation targeting "the end of history" from a monetary policy point of view?10 Certainly, I believe it 
has a huge amount to commend it, and the arguments against its adoption seem, in most situations, to 
be rather weak. 
But  there  remain  a  number  of  important  unresolved  issues,  in  inflation  targeting  as  in  other 
approaches to monetary policy. How best should central banks communicate the conditionality of their 
inflation forecasts, while still conveying useful information? Why do movements in the exchange rate 
now seem to be having such small effects on inflation - does this reflect something about the nature of 
inflation targeting, or perhaps just some peculiarity of the most recent economic cycle? To what extent 
can  central  banks  make  sufficiently  reliable  estimates  of  the  output  gap,  and  to  what  extent  do 
changes in the output gap now affect the inflation rate? 
And  perhaps  the  most  troubling  question  for  us  all,  inflation  targeters  and  others:  is  there  more  to 
achieving monetary stability than calibrating the central bank's interest rate to keep the prices of goods 
and services purchased by the household sector stable? During the last decade or so, consumer price 
inflation  has  been  exceptionally  well  behaved  in  most  major  economies.  But  at  the  same  time,  we 
have experienced episodes - indeed some severe episodes - of monetary instability in other guises, 
including  asset  price  instability,  financial  system  instability,  and  exchange  rate  crises.  These 
experiences leave us with plenty of unanswered questions. What might Japan have done differently to 
avoid  the  bubble,  and  subsequent  collapse,  in  asset  prices  -  a  collapse  which  has  done  so  much 
damage  to  the  Japanese  monetary  system  and  the  Japanese  economy  more  generally?  And  what 
might Japan do  now, facing more generalised deflation?  Are  we  entirely confident that, in 10  years 
                                                      
10   The suggestion that monetary policy might have reached the "end of history" in the sense that Francis Fukuyama had in 
mind was first raised, and rejected, by Stephen Grenville, then Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, in an 
address to the 30th Anniversary Conference hosted by the Monetary Authority of Singapore on 20 July 2001. 
10 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 time, we will be looking back at the recent episode of asset price inflation and deflation in the US with 
complete satisfaction? 
We know that monetary policy can keep consumer price inflation under control, and we believe that 
inflation  targeting  has  been  an  effective  way  of  achieving  that.  But  clearly  there  are  plenty  of 
challenging issues for our successors to deal with.  
BIS Review 5/2002 
 11
