 Otmar Issing: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by  Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive  Board of the European 
Central Bank, in Brussels, 20 March 2002. 
 Today, I would like to review economic developments in the euro area in the context of the monetary 
policy strategy of the ECB. Before doing this, allow me to mention that we are extremely pleased to 
see that the euro cash changeover went so smoothly. There were no significant technical problems in 
this complex logistical process and the fact that national banknotes were largely withdrawn well before 
the final deadline of their ceasing to be legal tender confirms that the European public became familiar 
with  the  new  banknotes  and  coins  very  quickly.  The  Governing  Council  would  like  to  express  its 
gratitude once more to all those who helped to make the euro cash changeover such a success. 
Turning to monetary policy, let me start with some remarks on the first pillar of the ECB's monetary 
policy strategy. In 2001, the annual rate of M3 growth doubled from a low of almost 4% in March to 8% 
in November, before declining slightly in January 2002. From June 2001 onwards, M3 growth stood 
clearly above the reference value of 4½%. However, the Governing Council has so far assessed that 
these developments do not imply risks to price stability over the medium term. Let me explain in some 
more detail this assessment. As you are well aware, the Governing Council of the ECB does not react 
in  a  mechanistic  way  to  deviations  of  M3  growth  from  its  reference  value.  Rather,  it  conducts  a 
thorough analysis of monetary analysis with a view to derive information about the outlook for price 
stability in the medium term. This analysis is based on clear evidence of high M3 growth leading to 
inflation over the medium term in the euro area. However, in addition, we need to take into account 
that monetary developments are at times affected by a number of temporary factors such as changes 
in  tax  regulations  or,  as  has  been  the  case,  turmoil  in  financial  markets.  Hence,  an  appropriate 
assessment  of  monetary  developments  always  needs  to  take  a  medium-term  perspective  and  in 
addition requires a detailed knowledge of their underlying factors.  
The year 2001 highlighted the importance of taking a broad-based approach to monetary analysis. M3 
growth in 2001 was driven to a significant extent by a number of factors which we continue to judge as 
not indicating upward risks to price stability over the medium-term. Let me just point to one important 
factor, namely the fact that M3 growth was significantly influenced by portfolio decisions of economic 
agents.  Initially,  the  relatively  flat  yield  curve  until  August  2001  and  the  persistent  decline  in  stock 
prices  until  September  seemed  to  induce  many  investors  to  shift  parts  of  their  portfolios  out  of  the 
capital  markets  and  into  shorter-term  assets,  such  as  those  included  in  M3.  Subsequently,  in  the 
aftermath of the events of 11 September, the exceptional rise in economic and financial uncertainty led 
to further shifts out of longer-term assets and into low-risk, liquid instruments included in M3.  
In addition, let me point to the substantial decline in the growth of loans to the private sector in 2001. 
This  contrasting  development  of  money  and  loans  is  a  feature  which  clearly  distinguishes  the 
monetary situation in 2001 from that in 1999, when the strengthening of M3 growth was accompanied 
by very strong loan dynamics. Hence, our overall assessment was that monetary developments in the 
euro area in 2001 have so far not indicated risks to price stability. 
However,  this  assessment  needs  to  be  continuously  checked,  because  what  matters  in  monetary 
analysis are the medium-term trends. It will therefore be crucial to monitor how M3 develops this year. 
Should a moderation in monetary growth not materialise the implications of monetary developments 
for  risks  to  price  stability  may  need  to  be  reassessed,  in  particular  in  conjunction  with  a  stronger 
economic recovery in the euro area. On the basis of the available evidence on the fundamental long 
run stability of money demand in the euro area, which has not been affected by the events of 2001, 
the  analysis  of  monetary  developments  over  the  medium  term  thus  remains  crucial  for  assessing 
future inflation. It is also worth pointing out that the strong increase in liquidity in 2001 was not specific 
to the euro area but was a global phenomenon which pointed to the existence of common (financial 
market) factors influencing monetary developments as well as reflecting the stance of monetary policy 
in the major economies in 2001. 
Turning now to the second pillar, recent data releases have been providing further evidence on the 
improvement of economic conditions in the euro area. This has in turn increased the likelihood that the 
economic cycle reached a trough at the end of last year.  
BIS Review 20/2002 
 1
 Starting  with  external  developments,  there  are  indications  of  a  gradual  firming  of  economic  activity, 
which should in turn lead to a gradual strengthening of the external demand for euro area products 
and services. These developments certainly reinforce the expectation of an upturn in economic activity 
in  the  euro  area  in  2002.  The  recovery  should  be  supported  by  continuous  favourable  financing 
conditions and the significant positive impact of past and expected future declines in inflation on real 
disposable  income.  In  addition,  the  recovery  should  not  encounter  any  fundamental  impediments, 
given  the  lack  of  major  economic  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  which  require  a  longer  adjustment 
process.  Recent  data  point  to  a  recovery  starting  moderately  in  early  2002  and  accelerating  in  the 
course  of  the  year,  an  assessment  that  seems  to  be  shared  by  expectations  formed  in  financial 
markets. Our expectation is that real GDP growth might be in line with potential towards the end of 
2002. Overall, however, we still face significant uncertainty as regards the strength of the economic 
upswing this year. 
Turning to price developments, the current outlook for a gradual economic recovery in the euro area 
should imply that inflationary pressures stemming from economic activity are likely to remain subdued 
for  some  time.  In  fact,  the  downward  trend  in  annual  HICP  inflation  observed  since  May  2001  is 
expected  to  continue  in  the  coming  months.  However,  annual  inflation  rates  are,  as  expected, 
undergoing some volatility in the first few months of this year. The pick-up in HICP inflation in January 
2002 has to be seen in this light. It was partly due to base effects stemming from falling energy prices 
in early 2001 and to higher indirect taxes in some euro area countries early this year. The increase 
also  reflected  a  considerable  rise  in  unprocessed  food  prices  due  to  adverse  weather  conditions  in 
some  parts  of  Europe  and  a  slight  increase  in  energy  prices  at  the  start  of  2002.  In  the  next  few 
months, the effects of past increases in energy and food prices should gradually subside, as the data 
for February 2002, when annual HICP inflation declined to 2.4% from 2.7%, have already indicated, 
and annual inflation rates should fall to below 2%.  
It is now well known that there is no evidence that the euro cash changeover has had a significant 
upward effect on the average price level in the euro area. While we have observed some significant 
increases in some sub-components of service price inflation, we have also seen other prices rounded 
down in the context of the cash changeover. In our view, and also replying to one of the questions 
addressed  to  the  ECB  in  the  letter  of  the  Chairperson  of  this  Committee  a  few  weeks  ago,  it  is 
expected  that  the  greater  transparency  resulting  from  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  move  to 
exclusive  euro  pricing  will  strengthen  competition  in  the  retail  sector  and  thereby  support  the 
maintenance of price stability in the euro area.  
Besides uncertainty about the oil price, a key factor in the current assessment of risks to price stability 
is  the  development  of  wages.  The  Governing  Council  will  closely  monitor  forthcoming  wage 
negotiations  and  analyse  their  implications  for  future  price  developments.  A  favourable  outlook  for 
price  stability  in  the  euro  area  rests  fundamentally  on  the  assumption  that  wage  moderation  will 
continue. This is also a major condition for employment growth and decline in unemployment. 
In this respect, and following up to the letter from the President of the ECB to the Chairperson of this 
Committee, let me briefly recall that the Governing Council is very satisfied with its definition of price 
stability,  which  –  by  the  way  –  is  fully  consistent  with  the  goals  pursued  by  the  most  successful 
national central banks in the euro area prior to Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union. It is 
worth pointing out that this quantitative definition, namely an annual increase of below 2% in the HICP 
for the euro area, is symmetric, i.e. it is also definitely not compatible with deflation. Furthermore, by 
also  stating  that  price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  "over  the  medium  term",  the  Governing  Council 
acknowledges the existence of shocks to inflation  which monetary policy cannot control and makes 
clear  that  the  ECB  intends  to  pursue  its  objective  by  responding  differently  to  different  economic 
shocks. This consideration may lead, in some cases, to a gradual response by monetary policy to risks 
to  price  stability.  Our  forward-looking  strategy  with  its  medium-term  orientation  towards  maintaining 
price stability thus helps to avoid harmful trade-offs with growth and employment. Most  importantly, 
our  definition  of  price  stability  has  contributed  to  anchoring  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area, 
thereby  reducing  risk  premia  and  ultimately  supporting  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and 
favourable long-term financing conditions for the economy. For all these reasons, the maintenance of 
price stability over the medium term is the best contribution of monetary policy to sustainable growth 
and employment creation. 
Turning to the main challenges that the euro area faces at present, let me start by mentioning that 
stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  require  further  steps  towards  fiscal  consolidation.  The 
recently reaffirmed commitment of the governments of the euro area countries with fiscal imbalances 
to avoid breaching the 3% deficit limit this year and to adhere to the objective of achieving balanced 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 budgets by 2003-2004 is the appropriate policy to pursue. The Governing Council supports the actions 
taken  by  the  European  Commission  in  the  context  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the 
subsequent  outcome  of  the  ECOFIN  Council  meeting  last  month.  In  this  same  vein,  vigilance  is 
necessary  to  ensure  strict  adherence  to  the  medium-term  plans  and  implementation  of  the  existing 
procedures. In particular, countries that still have sizeable fiscal imbalances should take advantage of 
the coming upswing to strengthen their budgetary positions and attain the targets presented in their 
stability programmes. 
Finally,  in  order  to  put  the  expected  recovery  on  a  broad  and  sustainable  basis,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  euro  area  countries  now  strengthen  their  efforts  to  implement  comprehensive 
structural reforms. Over the past few years, considerable progress has been made in enhancing the 
flexibility  of  the  euro  area's  product  and  capital  markets,  as  well  as  in  improving  the  way  its  labour 
markets operate. These reforms, together with moderate wage developments, have contributed to the 
strong employment growth and the considerable reduction in unemployment witnessed in many euro 
area countries in the last cyclical upswing. However, unemployment is still intolerably high and much 
more remains to be done.  
In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  make  headway  with  the  reform  agenda  put  forward  in  the  Lisbon 
strategy. We should just not accept that the recovery might again be constrained by the unsatisfactory 
potential growth level. The sound macroeconomic situation which can be expected presents a perfect 
opportunity  to  accelerate  badly  needed  reforms.  This  requires  the  acceleration  of  financial  market 
reforms as well as product markets reforms, such as those related to network industries. As regards 
labour market reforms, it is worth noting that despite the continued high level of unemployment in the 
euro area significant mismatches between labour supply and demand in a number of areas in euro 
area  countries  are  still  reported.  As  concluded  in  a  recent  report  prepared  by  Eurosystem  experts, 
published on 11 March, this provides evidence that despite some improvements, there is still much 
work to be done in the labour market reform process. With respect to reform on the financial markets, 
the ECB very much supports the implementation of the procedures suggested in the Lamfalussy report 
on securities regulation. The ECB believes that the procedures suggested in this report will allow for a 
swift  implementation  of  the  priorities  set  out  in  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  relating  to  the 
integration  of  securities  markets. The  reform  of financial  market  regulation,  also  including  the  other 
measures foreseen in the Action Plan, will complement and enhance the effects of reform in the labour 
and product market. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 3
