 Niklaus Blattner: Review of the Swiss economy 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Dr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 14 June 2002 
 Gold sales 
Since  May  2000,  the  National  Bank  has  been  selling  gold  that  is  no  longer  required  for  monetary 
policy purposes. A total of 1,300 tonnes of gold is planned to be disposed of under the agreement on 
gold sales concluded on 26 September 1999 between fifteen European central banks. This agreement 
limits  the  total  quantity  of  gold  that  can  be  sold  by  the  signatories  until  September  2004  to  2,000 
tonnes. 
To  date,  we  have  sold  almost  520  tonnes  of  gold,  which  corresponds  to  40%  of  the  total  quantity 
earmarked  for  sale.  As  shown  in  our  periodic  Bank  returns,  we  are  conducting  regular  sales  of 
approximately one tonne a day. We consider this method more flexible, less costly and better suited to 
the characteristics of the market than the strategy chosen by the Bank of England, which is holding 
gold auctions of its own. 
Our average selling price has by now reached USD 279.4 per ounce (level of 31 May 2002), which is 
USD  2  higher  than  the  average  London  gold  fixing  price,  the  benchmark  price  for  gold.  This 
performance has, to some degree, been realised thanks to the National Bank having been allocated a 
somewhat higher portion of the central banks' total annual quota of 400 tonnes since September 2001. 
Due  to  the  bullish  gold  market,  this  slight  increase  in  our  sales  quota  has  had  favourable  effects. 
Translated into Swiss francs, the average selling price has settled at over Sfr 15,140 per kilogram. 
Since  the  sales  began,  the  price  per  ounce  has  fluctuated  between  USD  256  and  USD  330  (see 
graph). Recently, it has again surpassed the level of USD 320 per ounce. Such high levels had been 
recorded only during short periods in recent  years, for example in reaction to the central bank gold 
sales agreement of September 1999. What is striking about the current gold rally is how persistent it 
has proved so far. Several factors have contributed to this new trend: 
• 
A key factor supporting the high gold price is the mines' changed hedging policy. In order to 
reduce part of the price risk on their future production, the mining companies may engage in 
forward  sales  of  gold  and  in  similar  hedging  transactions.  The  commercial  banks,  in  turn, 
which act as counterparties in these transactions hedge against the risk by borrowing gold 
from  the  central  banks  and  reselling  it  immediately.  This  increases  the  amount  of  gold 
offered directly on the market. The gold lent by the central banks flows back to the lender 
upon expiration of the forward contract. If the mining companies hedge less, the gold on offer 
is  reduced  correspondingly.  In  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  gold  producers  massively 
expanded their hedge positions, which led to an increase in supply and thus contributed to 
depressing  the  gold  price.  Since  2000,  and  especially  in  recent  months,  the  picture  has 
changed. The mines have opted for another strategy and have cut back on price hedging. 
This  strategy  change  can  be  partly  attributed  to  more  positive  expectations  regarding  the 
gold price. As a result of the central bank agreement on gold sales, producers no longer fear 
large-scale  sales  by  the  central  banks.  Moreover,  it  seems  that  producers  have  recently 
become more upbeat in their assessment of private investment demand. It is interesting, in 
this respect, that gold producers' hedging activity tends to accelerate market trends. When 
they expect price decreases, prices do in fact decrease faster as a result of hedging, and 
when they expect price rises, prices do rise faster owing to the decrease in hedging. Such 
strategy  changes,  which  are  always  due  to  changed  market  expectations,  have  to  be 
reckoned with in future as well.  
Reviving private  investment demand in the  industrialised countries has also contributed to 
giving the gold price a boost. This phenomenon has been particularly pronounced in Japan, 
but  Europe  and  the  United  States  have  also  seen  gold  demand  booming.  Economic 
imponderables,  concern  over  the  financial  health  of  some  companies,  heightened  political 
tension  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  the  terror  attacks  of  September  2001  and 
concomitantly subdued stock markets have caused investors to increase their holdings of the 
 BIS Review 39/2002 
 1
  yellow metal. It seems as if gold is, for the time being, once again assuming its role of a safe 
haven investment.  
Fabrication  demand  for  gold,  by  contrast,  for  jewellery  as  well  as  for  industrial  uses,  has 
contracted  in  recent  months.  In  the  industrialised  countries,  this  decline  has  been  mainly 
brought about by the economic slowdown. The high gold price, however, has also played a 
role,  especially  in  developing  countries.  In  countries  such  as  India,  which  accounts  for  a 
quarter  of  gold  demand,  the  precious  metal  is  held  in  the  first  place  for  saving  purposes. 
Investors use a more or less fixed portion of their disposable income to purchase gold. In 
times of rising gold prices, investors buy correspondingly less gold.  
From these developments we can draw two conclusions: 
• 
 In  the  long  term,  the  main  elements  influencing  gold  price  expectations  are  changes  in 
private investors' demand, mines' production costs as well as the central banks' fundamental 
attitude towards their gold reserves.  
In the short and medium term, any change in producers' hedging policies and in the central 
banks' gold holdings, as well as speculative demand can trigger noticeable shifts in the gold 
price.  These  price  movements,  both  upward  and  downward,  may  be  relatively  significant 
because  the  gold  market  is  not  very  liquid,  as  experience  has  shown.  Under  this  point  of 
view, the central bank gold sales agreement of September 1999 has had a stabilising effect, 
since it has made the operations of central banks transparent and eliminated an important 
source of uncertainty.  
Our sales will continue until we have completed our programme, i.e. until we have sold 1,300 tonnes 
of gold. I will not take the risk and predict the development of the gold price, but one thing is certain: it 
will remain volatile. 
Our possibilities to actively hedge the gold risk are restricted by the agreement of September 1999. In 
particular, we may conduct hedging transactions only in the amount of the sales quota allocated to us 
for the current year. We are therefore all the more convinced that our strategy of regular sales remains 
appropriate. The principles that have guided our operations for the past two years – namely fulfilment 
of our commitments under the central bank agreement, transparency in communication and situation-
adapted handling of day-to-day business – remain relevant. 
Management of the free assets 
The  market  value  of  the  free  asset  portfolio  –  consisting  of  the  as  yet  unsold  portion  of  the  1,300 
tonnes of gold and the proceeds from the already effected gold sales – amounted to Sfr 21 billion at 
the  end of May. The free  asset portfolio is managed separately from our other reserves,  which  will 
facilitate its transfer to the future beneficiaries once the legal framework has been put in place. 
As I mentioned earlier on, our possibilities of actively hedging the gold risk against an unfavourable 
development  of  the  gold  price  are  restricted  by  the  agreement  on  gold  sales  of  September  1999. 
However, we limited the risks of a weak US dollar that might reduce the value of our future sales by 
hedging 35% of the future proceeds in US dollars against the Swiss franc. 
The proceeds from the gold sales are placed in a bond portfolio, whose composition differs from that 
of  our  currency  reserves.  Approximately  65%  of  the  portfolio  is  invested  in  Swiss  franc  bonds  or 
hedged  against  exchange  rate  risks.  The  rest  consists  of  bonds  denominated  in  euros  (25%),  US 
dollars (3%) and other currencies (7%). The average duration of the portfolio is about three years. This 
investment profile takes account of the SNB's legal framework and of the fact that future beneficiaries 
will want their return denominated in Swiss francs. The market value of the gold proceeds amounts to 
approximately  Sfr  8  billion.  Since  it  was  created  in  May  2000,  this  portfolio  generated  an  average 
annual yield of 4.3%. The legal provision still prohibiting the National Bank from acquiring equities has 
in fact rather well served the interests of the future beneficiaries of the free assets, as stock markets 
have been on a decline since May 2000. 
Next September, the Swiss people will have to decide on the appropriation of the free assets. There 
are  several  conceivable  scenarios:  either  the  so-called  gold  initiative  is  accepted,  or  the  counter-
proposal  of  the  Federal  Council  is  accepted,  or  both  proposals  are  rejected.  Each  scenario  has 
different implications for the date of transfer of the free assets and for the SNB's balance sheet. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 Whatever the outcome of the vote, we believe that the funds allocated to the free assets are no longer 
needed  for  conducting  monetary  policy  and  that,  therefore,  they  have  to  be  assigned  for  other 
purposes. As soon as one of the proposals put to the vote is accepted and the operational framework 
allowing  such  a  transfer  has  been  put  in  place,  the  National  Bank  can  transfer  these  assets  to  the 
future beneficiaries. Should both proposals be rejected, this will not be interpreted as a mandate for 
the SNB to reintegrate the free assets into its monetary reserves. In this case, we will instead continue 
to manage the free assets separately until a new allocation has been decided on. The income from 
this portfolio  will be recorded in the SNB's ordinary income statement and will become distributable 
only once the profit distribution agreement between the SNB and the Confederation has been revised. 
In this case, the income might lead to an increase in the SNB's annual distribution of currently Sfr 2.5 
billion. 
 BIS Review 39/2002 
 3
