 Masaru Hayami: Remarks on the Bank’s view of Japan’s recent economic and 
financial developments 
Statement by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control  (before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Representatives, on 19 July 2002), Tokyo, 5 August 2002. 
 Introduction1 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2001 to the Diet in June 2002. I appreciate this opportunity to present an overall review of 
the Bank's recent conduct of monetary policy.  
Today,  I  would  like  to  make  some  remarks  on  the  Bank's  view  of  Japan's  recent  economic  and 
financial developments and on the thinking behind our recent conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan’s Economy 
I. 
Japan's economy continued to deteriorate  throughout 2001  and into early 2002, reflecting the rapid 
deceleration of the world economy due to adjustment in IT-related industries. After the spring of 2002, 
however,  the  pace  of  the  deterioration  moderated,  reflecting  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies. 
Recently, Japan's economy has almost stabilized as a whole with an increasing upward impetus from 
exports and production, and an improvement in corporate profits and business sentiment. Employment 
conditions continue to  improve,  albeit marginally,  with an  increase  in  overtime hours  worked and  in 
new job offers. In contrast, private demand, a key factor for a sustainable recovery of the economy, 
has  not  displayed  any  clear  movement  toward  recovery.  Business  fixed  investment  continues  to 
decrease, and private consumption remains weak as a whole. 
As for the economic outlook, if overseas economies continue to recover, the stabilization of Japan's 
economy will become more secure as the increase in exports and production will underpin domestic 
private  demand  through  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits.  However,  considering  that  forces 
restraining  the  economy,  such  as  excessive  employment  and  debt,  are  still  persistently  at  work, 
momentum  for  a  self-sustaining  recovery  will  be  subdued  for  some  time.  In  addition,  uncertainty 
regarding external conditions which supported the recent economic recovery is rising somewhat amid 
a fall in stock prices in the United States and worldwide as well as depreciation of the U.S. dollar. 
Regarding prices in Japan, domestic wholesale prices have been generally leveling off, due partly to 
the effects of the increase in import prices in the past and of the completion of inventory adjustment. 
The pace of  year-on-year decline in domestic wholesale prices has been slowing gradually. On the 
other hand, consumer prices continue to decline at a moderate pace. With regard to the outlook, the 
slower growth in imports of consumer goods is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices 
to  some  extent.  However,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  momentum  for  a  recovery  in  domestic  private 
demand  is  expected  to  be  weak,  and  factors  such  as  technological  innovation,  deregulation,  and 
streamlining  of distribution channels  will continue to  restrain prices. Given  the  situation, prices as  a 
whole are expected to follow a moderate downtrend for the time being.  
Financial Developments 
II. 
Financial  markets  were  unstable  toward  the  end  of  March  2002,  reflecting  market  participants' 
nervousness  due  to  growing  concern  about  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  the  period 
immediately  before  the  removal  of  blanket  deposit  insurance.  Regarding  corporate  financing,  the 
lending attitude of private banks became more cautious, and the financing conditions of firms with high 
credit risks, especially small firms, gradually became more severe. 
                                                      
1   Governor Hayami made a statement regarding the Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2001 before the Committee on Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, on July 4, 2002. 
BIS Review 46/2002 
 1
 Financial  markets  have  gradually  regained  stability  on  the  whole  since  April  2002,  as  the  economy 
improved  slightly.  In  the  corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing  environment  has  been 
improving recently. This suggests that investors' stance toward taking credit risk is starting to improve. 
Financing  conditions  of  firms  with  relatively  high  credit  risks,  however,  remain  severe.  Hence, 
developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing continue to require close 
monitoring. 
Japanese  stock  prices  have  been  somewhat  weak  since  mid-June  2002,  reflecting  the  fall  in  U.S. 
stock prices. The yen has become stronger against the U.S. dollar. If these developments go so far as 
to  cause  financial  markets  to  become  significantly  unstable,  Japan's  economy,  which  is  on  an 
improving trend, will be negatively affected. Thus, developments in financial markets also require close 
monitoring.  
Recent Conduct of Monetary Policy 
III.  
The Bank adopted a new framework for money market operations at the Monetary Policy Meeting in 
March  2001.  The  main  operating  target  was  the  "quantity"  of  liquidity,  i.e.,  the  amount  of  the 
outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  as  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  had 
declined to low levels close to zero percent and there was hardly any room left for further easing using 
orthodox monetary policy measures. Under the new framework, the Bank has been conducting drastic 
monetary easing, unprecedented in the history of central banking at home and abroad.  
The Bank has devised means of funds provision and broadened the range of eligible collateral with a 
view to making the effects of monetary easing permeate into corporate financing.  
As a result, interest rates have been at extremely low levels. For example, in addition to overnight call 
rates, short-term interest rates  with relatively longer  maturity  declined to close  to  zero percent. The 
year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base increased considerably, by 20-30 percent. 
The Bank's conduct of monetary policy has played an important role in preventing further deterioration 
of the economy by securing stability in financial markets when Japan's economy was under significant 
stress due to adjustment in IT-related industries worldwide, the terrorist attacks in the United States, 
and increasing concern about the stability of the financial system.  
However, it is also true that business fixed investment and household spending have not been fully 
revitalized  in  a  situation  where  Japan's  economy  is  facing  various  structural  problems.  In  order  to 
make the monetary easing fully effective and achieve a full-scale economic recovery, it is essential to 
accomplish the following. Private demand must be generated by advancing structural reforms on the 
economic  and  industrial  fronts  through  tax  reform  and  implementation  of  concrete  measures  to 
revitalize the economy. At the same time, it is also vital to strengthen the financial system and ensure 
its stability by resolving the nonperforming-loan problem.  
Conclusion 
Japan's economy is about to undergo its third cyclical recovery since 1990. In the past two recovery 
phases, the economy lost its momentum due to the slowdown of overseas economies and concern 
about the stability of the financial system. As a result, private demand could not expand autonomously 
and sustainably on the whole. Bearing that experience in mind, the Bank strongly hopes that action to 
tackle structural reforms will be pursued tenaciously in a variety of fields to establish a basis for the 
sustainable growth of Japan's economy. 
The Bank is determined to continue to do  its utmost from the both of the following  viewpoints as a 
central  bank.  First,  it  will  make  efforts  to  stabilize  financial  markets  and  ensure  permeation  of  the 
effects of monetary easing through provision of ample liquidity so that Japan's economy will exit from 
deflation.  And  second,  the  Bank  will  endeavor  to  prevent  systemic  risk  from  materializing  as  "the 
lender of last resort."  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2002
