Jean-Claude Trichet: The Euro and the monetary union 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at the Society of Business 
Economists Annual Dinner, London, 12 February 2002 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure and an honour to be with you today, in the occasion of the 
Annual Dinner of the Society of Business Economists, in front of such a distinguished audience. I am 
particularly pleased to express my views on the euro and its prospects following the successful launch 
of the notes and coins on 1st January 2002. 
I am happy to have an opportunity to present my views on the successful set-up of the euro, on the 
economic and financial integration of Europe and on the challenges that the euro-zone has to cope 
with. 
independence, 
the  Eurosystem: 
The Euro: built on a successful set-up 
Set-up of the Eurosystem 
The single monetary policy is formulated and implemented within a sound institutional framework, the 
Eurosystem, comprising the European Central Bank and the twelve national central banks of the euro 
area.  Three  principles  are  shaping  up 
transparency  and 
decentralisation. 
The  independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  national  central  banks  is  enshrined  in  the 
Treaty. When exercising their powers and carrying out their tasks and duties, neither the central banks 
of the Eurosystem nor any member of its decision making bodies shall seek or take instructions from 
Community  institutions,  from  any  government  of  a  Member  State  or  from  any  other  body. 
Independence  means  institutional,  operational  and  financial  independence.  We  consider  that 
comprehensive  concept  as  an  essential  contribution  to  the  clarity  and  the  credibility  of  the  single 
monetary policy. 
Transparency and communication: elected authorities, key economic players, as well as all citizens 
must be fully informed on the conduct of the single monetary policy. At the European level, the ECB 
maintains a permanent dialogue with the European Council and the European Parliament, as national 
central banks do with national institutions. The ECB was maybe the first central bank in the world to 
introduce,  on  1st  January  1999,  the  concept  of  regular,  frequent,  real-time  communication  in  the 
domain  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  once  a  month,  immediately  after  the  meeting  of  the  Governing 
Council, the President of the ECB holds a press conferences. 
The independence of a central bank and its democratic accountability are two sides of the same coin. 
In this respect, both public speeches and testimonies by the president of the European Central Bank 
and  by  the  Governors  of  national  central  Banks,  to  the  attention  of  institutions  as  well  as  public 
opinion, are significant, and an important part of our collective duty consists in tirelessly explaining the 
reasons and the arguments that underpin the decisions of the Governing Council.  
Lastly,  decentralisation:  as  the  subsidiarity  principle  underlies  the  whole  European  construction, 
decentralisation is a major principle guiding the architecture of the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem is a 
team  whose  members  work  in  close  co-operation,  and  the  team  spirit  is  really  strong  and  fruitful. 
Monetary policy decisions are taken, at the centre, by the Governing Council, but are implemented by 
the national central banks in a closely co-ordinated way. 
Strategy of the single monetary policy 
The Maastricht Treaty clearly defines the ultimate objective of the single monetary policy, that is to say 
maintaining price stability. However, for this it is essential to have a clear definition of price stability: we 
define it as a year-on-year increase in the overall Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) of 
below 2% in the whole euro area. 
Bearing in mind this objective, our monetary policy strategy is based on two “pillars”. 
We have first assigned a key role to the monetary aggregate M3. This “pillar” is based on a reference 
value  which  we  set  at  4.5%  for  the  annual  growth  rate  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  The 
  1
concept  of  a  reference  value  does  not  imply  a  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  Eurosystem  to 
automatically  correct  deviations  in  monetary  growth  in  the  short  term.  Naturally,  we  also  follow  the 
counterparts of M3 closely, that is to say the sources of money creation, and especially lending to the 
economy, the evolution of government finance and capital flows with the rest of the world. 
However,  it  is  common  sense  to  say  that  monetary  developments  alone  do  not  allow  for  a 
comprehensive assessment of the risks to price stability. This is why we have defined a second “pillar” 
for our monetary policy strategy, consisting of a broad range of variables that act as leading indicators 
of the outlook for euro area price developments. 
In fact, we consider the maintenance of price stability over the medium term to be the Eurosystem’s 
greatest  contribution  to  fostering  an  environment  which  is  favourable  to  sustainable  growth  and 
employment in the longer run. And, it is also its greatest contribution to limiting unnecessary volatility 
of output and employment in the short run.  
The relatively  low  yields on long-term euro-denominated bonds confirm investors’ confidence  in  the 
new currency. This was not the case four or five years ago, before the setting up of the euro, when 
financial markets were convinced that the euro would be the weighted arithmetic mean of its legacy 
currencies and would not inherit the level of confidence and credibility of the strongest of these, such 
as the Deutsche mark, the Dutch guilder, or the French franc. The euro has actually been founded on 
a benchmarking principle, not on a convergence towards an average. That may explain why the euro’s 
interest rates were the lowest in Europe from the outset. 
Successful technical framework 
However, even the best monetary strategy needs an efficient technical framework. The launch of the 
euro  on  the  financial  markets,  on  1  January  1999,  has  also  been  an  indisputable  success  from  a 
technical point of view. In this respect, three points are worth mentioning: 
   the monetary policy framework contains a wide set of instruments chosen with a view to 
observing the principles of market orientation, equal treatment, simplicity, and transparency. 
The decentralisation of the operations of national central banks has undoubtedly contributed 
to the smooth functioning of the framework. Maintaining a close contact between commercial 
banks and their national central banks has helped the financial markets to quickly adopt the 
harmonised  practices  relating  to  open  market  operations,  eligible  collateral  for  credit 
operations and minimum reserve systems. 
operational  efficiency  is  highlighted  by  the  precise  adjustment  of  banking  liquidity  and 
effective  steering  of  short-term  interest  rates;  the  Eurosystem  has  demonstrated  this 
efficiency, in the days after the tragic events of 11th September 2001, by acting quickly and 
by ensuring a smooth and orderly functioning of the European financial markets. 
security is provided by the procedures and systems implemented, both for the execution of 
interbank transactions, and vis-à-vis large-value payments. The inter-bank market became 
integrated thanks to the setting up of the Target system for the real-time transfer of large-
value payments throughout the euro area and in other EU countries. 
Let me turn now to the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, which has been the last step of a 
now more-than-twenty-year process of monetary integration. 
The euro changeover 
On  1  January  2002,  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  were  issued  and  became  legal  tender  in  the 
countries participating in the euro area. This is a unique and highly symbolic event for Europe. 
As regard France, the early changeover of non-cash payments in 2001, and the rapid introduction 
of  banknotes  and  coins  in  euro  in  early  2002,  proved  to  be  a  success  and  entirely  in  line  with  the 
scenarios  devised  in  consultation  with  all  the  involved  parties  (the  banking  sector,  cash-in-transit 
companies, the Police and the Army, retailers and the general public). 
In  France,  almost  70%  of  non-cash  payments  were  in  euro  at  the  end  of  December  2001.  Since 
1 January, all transactions have been conducted in euro, and no major incidents came to light, thanks 
to the early use of non-cash payments by the general public throughout the second half of 2001. This 
was also a key factor in the rapid acceptance of the banknotes and coins by the public. 
Similar  success  has  been  witnessed  in  all  European  countries,  thanks  to  national  efforts  and  the 
co-ordination  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  Eurosystem;  a  month  and  a  half  after  the 
introduction of euro banknotes and coins, more than 95% of cash transactions in the euro area are 
now being carried out in euro.  
Although the practical changeover to the euro might be considered as an outstanding achievement, 
we should nevertheless remain vigilant on the following issues: 
  First, price  stability. Although some increases in prices of a certain number of consumer 
goods  have  been  reported,  it  is  likely  that,  overall,  the  effect  on  price  stability  will  be 
marginal.  But  consumers  have  to  be  vigilant,  companies  and  retailers  must  remain 
responsible as regards price setting, and competition will play its part in lowering the prices 
in the short-to-medium term. 
Second,  we  must  closely  monitor  the  risks  of  counterfeiting  of  notes  and  coins  :  the 
communication  campaign  of  the  Eurosystem  “The  euro.  Our  money”  was  aimed  at 
familiarising all the European citizens with their new banknotes and coins (and their security 
features) and, by doing so, it helped them to easily identify the obviously fake banknotes. All 
institutions concerned, both national and European, are co-operating closely to prevent and 
fight counterfeiting. 
The credibility of the Eurosystem and of the single monetary policy, and the successful changeover to 
the euro are a major achievement. They certainly contribute to the efficient functioning of EMU and to 
European economic and financial integration, as I will explain now.  
EMU is a balanced concept fostering economic and financial integration  
 EMU is an economically sound and well-grounded concept 
The usual criticism … 
A few years ago, it was necessary to convince a great number of sceptics, in Europe as well as in the 
rest of the world, that the euro would really be launched. The opinion that the single currency would 
never exist has of course been disproved by the facts. Nevertheless, objections are still being raised 
from time to time, on the alleged grounds that the euro area economy is full of major inconsistencies 
that could endanger and challenge the viability of EMU. 
Some observers thus claim that the lack of co-ordination between European economic policies, in the 
absence  of  a  political  federation,  is  likely  to  deprive  the  area  of  an  appropriate  policy-mix.  Others 
blame  the  lack  of  instruments  allowing  us  to  tackle  any  asymetric  shocks  that  may  emerge,  and 
underline the poor flexibility or the absence of mobility of the European labour force. Others claim that 
the presumed economic divergences and structural gaps among euro area countries are too large to 
ensure a viable monetary union. 
…appears invalid from an economic standpoint 
How can we address these important objections? 
It is not disputable that for EMU to function well, Member States, especially the major ones in terms of 
GDP, must be aware of the spill-over effects of all their national budgetary policies. The existence of 
spill-over justifies the implementation of close co-ordination between national economic policies. This 
is contained in the Treaty itself, which obliges Member States to treat national economic policies “as a 
matter of common concern” and subjects them to a multilateral procedure. 
In  this  regard,  we  have  seen  that  for  EMU  to  be  successful,  an  appropriate  level  of  co-ordination 
between  economic  policies  is  needed.  To  this  end,  Member  States  have  designed  institutions  and 
mechanisms  to  promote  the  level  of  co-ordination.  We  can  now  say  that  EMU  has  in  turn  been 
beneficial  to  the  European  economic  and  financial  integration  as  a  whole.  Indeed,  a  coherent 
operational  framework  has  been  provided  for  the  co-ordination  of  economic  policies  through  close 
mutual  surveillance  (under  the  responsibility  of  the  "Euro  Group"  and  the  Ecofin  Council)  and 
through the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact, as I mentioned earlier. Moreover, the 
Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, discussed each year by the Heads of States and Governments, 
help monitor macroeconomic and structural developments in the Member States. 
  3
I will recall some Treaty provisions that gave rise to the Stability and Growth Pact’s importance: 
  By supervising the fiscal policies of the euro area Member States, the pact  together with the 
Broad Economic Policy Guidelines ensure the appropriate policy mix within the euro area. 
This is essential for monetary policy, to counterbalance the fact that Europe does not have a 
significant federal budget, just as it has no federal government.  
The pact also helps prevent well-managed economies from having to bear an unjustified risk 
premium by setting up a penalty system for excessive deficits. 
As  regards  the  second  common  reproach  against  EMU,  that  is  to  say  the  lack  of  instruments  to 
respond to asymetric shocks, I would like to stress that the Stability and Growth Pact itself allows us to 
disprove this assertion. Indeed, by urging governments to aim at a fiscal position "close to balance or 
in surplus" in the medium term, the pact enables them to let fiscal deficits increase providing that they 
do not exceed the 3% reference value. In short, it allows them to create a fiscal buffer during normal 
economic periods that can be drawn on to counter economic divergences or asymmetric shocks 
The  last  set  of  criticisms,  as  mentioned,  focuses  on  presumed  economic  divergences  between 
economies within the euro area. To answer this last objection, I would like to put forward a few ideas: 
  Firstly,  monetary  union  does  not  necessarily  imply  that,  at  any  given  point  in  time,  all 
participating countries will have the same rate of inflation or growth, even though the creation 
of the euro was based on the successful completion of a convergence process. For example, 
inflation  divergences  across  countries  or  regions  may  be  accommodated  in  a  monetary 
union as part of the process of convergence of productivity and living standards. 
Secondly,  I  would  like  to  quote  Professor Mundell  in  support  of  EMU,  who  made,  at  the 
beginning  of  1998,  an  interesting  clarification  of  the  Optimal  Currency  Area  theory,  and 
demonstrated that in the event of a shift in demand from one member country to another, 
creating unemployment in the first and inflationary pressure in the second, flexible exchange 
rates would not be able to solve the problem. I quote: “If the argument for devaluation were 
valid, it could be applied to every state or sub-region in any country, with a proliferation of 
new currencies, so they could be devalued!”. 
The co-ordination between economic policies is on the authorities’ initiative. But EMU also means the 
harmonisation  of  goods  and  services  markets  as  well  as  financial  markets.  In  these  areas,  the 
integration process is well on track. 
EMU fosters economic and financial integration 
Financial Europe under construction: the reorganisation of capital markets 
In  1999,  as  soon  as  the  euro  was  launched,  one  of  the  expected  advantages  was  the  prospect  of 
deeper,  larger  and  more  integrated  capital  markets  contributing  to  reducing  the  cost  of  capital  for 
businesses and giving European savers a greater range of saving options. These expectations have 
become realities in both the money market and longer-term capital markets. 
On the euro money market, the unsecured deposit interbank market is highly integrated. EONIA and 
EURIBOR have provided  the market with uniform benchmarks that are fully  accepted  by  all market 
participants.  This  is  reflected,  for  instance,  in  the  huge  development  of  the  euro  interest-rate  swap 
market.  These  changes  have  prompted  market  participants  to  concentrate  their  euro  cash 
management activity in order to take advantage of the higher liquidity levels on the secondary market.  
On the euro bond market, the integration process has registered three main developments: 
  a  rapid  internationalisation:  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  fostered  euro-denominated 
private  bond  market,  by  enlarging  the  potential  pool  of  investors,  notably  international 
investors.  During  the  period  1990-98,  the  legacy  currencies  accounted  for  10%  of  all 
corporate bonds issued by euro area borrowers and only 2% of those issued by companies 
outside  the  area;  these  ratios  have  risen  to  75%  and  20%  since  1999  [Galati  and 
Tsatsaronis, 2001]. 
increased  competition  between  issuers,  which  has  encouraged  the  standardisation  of 
sovereign  bonds, the gradual convergence towards “best practices”, the development of a 
range of attractive and actively traded benchmark issues (especially for sovereign bonds). 
 Besides, competition has also enhanced liquidity as issuers have increased the average size 
of outstanding bonds. 
the modernisation of market structures: besides the rapid development of electronic trading, 
the  consolidation  of  Central  Securities  Depositories  is  also  paving  the  way  for  a  more 
efficient functioning of Delivery-versus-Payment procedures, and easier and safer channels 
of settlement of cross-border securities transactions. This last point is of particular relevance 
for 
functioning  of  European  securities  settlement 
infrastructure is key for the practical implementation of monetary policy. 
the  Eurosystem,  as 
the  smooth 
On the equity market, the elimination of the currency risk within the euro area has led investors to 
shift from a domestic orientation to a more international, sectoral one. The creation of a wide range of 
pan-European  sectoral  indices  was,  thus,  a  direct  consequence  of  these  changes  in  investor 
strategies.  
Additionally, the introduction of euro has been a strong catalyst for mergers and acquisitions in the 
financial  sector.  For  instance,  in  this  respect,  we  can  stress  current  trends  in  mergers  or  close 
co-operation between banks, stock exchanges, securities settlement systems, clearing houses. Had 
the  euro  not  been  created,  would  it  have  been  thinkable  that  the  Paris,  Brussels  and  Amsterdam 
exchanges merge to create EURONEXT ? 
The large European goods and services market. 
Such  changes  in  the  European  financial  scene  have  significantly  improved  the  efficiency  of  capital 
allocation.  The  euro  contributes  to  enabling  European  savers  to  easily  select  the  most  efficient 
investments. It also helps  the productive sector and  companies to achieve significant economies of 
scale, enhances the transparency of the market and boosts competition and innovation to the benefit 
of consumers.  
Moreover, the pace of internationalisation of the euro area economy has been further spurred by the 
euro. Allow me to give just one example, the level of French accumulated foreign direct investment 
abroad since 1999 has been of the order of magnitude of EUR 380 billion (a pace four times as rapidly 
as  before  the  setting-up  of  the  euro,  and  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  United  States’  FDI 
abroad). 
The international role of the euro 
The euro has become a major currency in the world. As an official reserve currency, it is the second 
most widely used. As a bond issuance currency, according to the most recent statistics from the BIS, 
the euro has played a substantial role since the end of 1998 and accounted for around 35% of total 
issuance in 2001. The share of the euro in international bank assets has also increased significantly 
over the past two years.  
Furthermore, the euro constitutes a major reference currency for exchange rate regimes adopted by 
third countries. Over 50 countries in the world, mainly in Europe and Africa, are managing exchange 
rate arrangements that include a reference to the euro. The intensive trade and financial links with the 
euro area are the main factors behind this choice. Of course, the adoption of a euro-based exchange 
rate arrangement is a unilateral decision, and does not involve any commitment from the Eurosystem. 
However, this growing use of the euro as a reference currency, and also the use of euro banknotes 
and  coins  outside  the  euro-area,  may  be  seen  as  a  sign  of  confidence  in  the  stability-oriented 
macroeconomic policies of the euro area. 
The internationalisation of the euro might develop further, thanks to an established track record of the 
Eurosystem  with  reference  to  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability  and  continuing  integration  of 
financial markets in the euro area. But the Eurosystem does not pursue the internationalisation of the 
euro as an independent policy goal: this implies that it neither fosters nor hinders this process. It does 
not  mean  that  the  international  dimension  is  irrelevant  for  the  Eurosystem.  Of  course,  we  take  into 
account potential spillover effects on monetary policy. However, the impact of the internationalisation 
of the euro on monetary policy should not be over-stressed, as the Eurosystem’s monetary policy is 
sufficiently robust to take into account and accommodate its potential implications. 
At this point, one may ask what conditions are required to complete the success of the euro and EMU 
in the medium term. In my opinion, the metaphor of rugby is appropriate: by introducing banknotes and 
coins in euro, we have scored a try. Now, we must convert our gains. I believe that we have to deal 
  5
with three main challenges: structural reforms, financial stability and the accession to the EU of new 
Member States. 
The challenges ahead 
 Structural reforms 
The first challenge is beyond dispute to implement structural reforms in the euro area’s economies. 
Structural reforms were crystallised at the European level in what is called the Lisbon strategy. The 
first  objective  of  this  strategy  is  to  substantially  raise  our  potential  output  growth.  The  second  is  to 
make our economies more competitive. 
Implementing the reforms: the Lisbon strategy 
The European Council meeting held in Luxembourg in December 1997 explicitly mentioned structural 
policies among the items selected for strengthened co-ordination. The Lisbon European Council, held 
in  March  2000,  further  enhanced  the  medium-term  strategy  to  introduce  structural  reforms  in  the 
Union.  This  strategy  aims  at  making  the  European  Union  the  world’s  most  dynamic  knowledge 
economy by 2010. It has since been rounded out to include social issues (at the Council of Nice) and 
environmental issues (at the Council of Gothenburg).  
Work to date in the field of structural reforms is quite encouraging. Noticeable successes have already 
been registered  with regard to certain policies, such  as new rules  in telecommunications, electricity 
and gas markets. Before reviewing the priority areas where fresh impetus is required, I wish to briefly 
make two remarks:  
First, the responsibility for structural reforms in the European Union rests with the individual Member 
States.  Consequently,  there  is  a  wide  variety  of  institutional  solutions  and  regulatory  arrangements 
across countries and sectors. I nevertheless consider that such a decentralised approach should be 
considered as  an  opportunity, rather than  a disadvantage. It  encourages  "cross fertilisation"  of best 
practices through increased co-ordination of Member States’ structural policies.  
My second remark concerns the changeover to the  euro. This  event is  a major structural reform in 
itself, a powerful  drive towards restructuring  the  European  economy. It constitutes a strong  lever to 
facilitate the comparison of prices, taxes and incomes.  
An important objective consists in raising the potential output growth of the European economy 
If France and Europe want to secure sustainable growth at levels that are as high as possible, the key 
variable is potential output growth. There are three ways of raising the level of potential output growth:  
First, boost investment: business leaders are completely free to invest wherever they want in France, 
Europe  or  elsewhere  in  the  world.  It  is  thus  important  that  we  create  economic,  legal  and  fiscal 
conditions  that  are  as  favourable  as  possible  to  investment  in  Europe.  The  investment  appeal  of 
Europe is crucial in this respect: the more we invest, the fewer inflationary pressures we will have, and 
the stronger potential output growth will be. 
The second way of raising potential output growth is to increase the quantity of available labour: The 
European  Council  of  Lisbon  fixed  as  a  central  objective  increasing  the  employment  rate  of  our 
populations from 60 to 70 % in 10 years. As a comparison, the same rate stands at 75% in the USA. 
The  necessary  reforms  aim,  in  particular,  at  eliminating  unemployment  and  poverty  traps.  For 
instance, in France, some useful steps have been taken: for example, a series of cuts to employer 
social  security  contributions  has  been  implemented  in  order  to  reduce  labour  costs.  We  must  also 
continue to step up efforts in training and education. 
The  third  way  of  raising  potential  output  growth  is  to  promote  ways  to  boost  gains  in  labour 
productivity:  The  rapid  transformation  of  information  systems  is  likely  to  accentuate  the  structural 
transformation  of  the  economy.  Although  the  euphoria  of  entering  a  new  economic  era  has  faded 
somewhat,  remarkable  potential  for  economic  change  remains.  This  may  help  to  boost  labour 
productivity significantly and on an ongoing basis. 
That strategy should be pursued whilst increasing the overall competitiveness of our economy 
If I refer to what we observed in the past, the French strategy of competitiveness, which was based on 
limiting  increases  in  the  unit  costs  of  production,  gave  us  a  very  important  advantage.  And  this 
competitive advantage for the French economy was transformed into growth, into job creation and into 
solid  external  accounts.  Thus,  in  the  present  situation,  it  is  vital  to  continue  in  this  direction  and  to 
maintain a multi-partisan consensus on this competitive disinflation process.  
Competitiveness is also linked to European harmonisation in other fields, for example in the service 
industries. Most of the barriers to trade in services appear to be due to national regulations and should 
be abolished or alleviated. 
While the Eurosystem acts mainly as a stimulus in the process of structural reforms, it does play a 
leading part in ensuring financial stability. This brings me to the second challenge that EMU will have 
to take up. 
Financial stability 
Like every modern and independent central bank, the Eurosystem and its individual components, 
the national central banks of the euro area, have to fulfil two main functions: firstly, ensuring 
price stability, a key condition for sustained growth, and secondly, preserving financial stability, a 
growing challenge in a context of globalisation of the world economy, of amplification of financial and 
economic cycles, of instant access to information. I insist on the highly complementary nature of these 
two objectives: price stability is the bedrock on which financial stability is built. 
The adequacy of European institutional arrangements for financial stability 
The adequacy of European institutional arrangements for financial stability has been reviewed in depth 
at the EU level. In two reports, in April 2000 and April 2001, the Economic and Financial Committee 
(EFC) took stock of the supervisory and regulatory mechanisms in the EU and examined the issue of 
financial  crisis  management.  It  concluded  that  the  current  arrangements  provided  a  coherent  and 
flexible  basis  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  recommended  a  further  strengthening  of 
cross-border and cross-sector co-operation. 
I fully share the assessment put forward in these reports and I would like to stress here the special 
responsibilities of central banks, due to their position at the heart of financial systems: their role as 
liquidity  supplier  to  the  economy,  their  close  and  constant  contact  with  credit  institutions,  their 
contribution to banking supervision and to the safe and efficient functioning of payment systems, and 
at least for some of them, their contribution to the safe and efficient functioning of securities clearing 
and  settlement  systems.  To  sum  up,  an  institutional  framework  in  which  the  Eurosystem’s 
responsibilities  for  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  are  coupled  with  extensive  supervisory 
responsibilities of NCBs in domestic markets, and with reinforced co-operation at an area-wide level, 
seems appropriate to tackle the changes triggered by the current financial trends and the introduction 
of the euro. 
Two points of particular relevance for the financial regulatory framework 
Let  me  conclude  on  this  important  topic  by  stressing  two  points  of  particular  relevance  for  the 
European financial regulatory framework: 
   There are still some barriers to further integration of EU capital markets. In this regard, the 
Eurosystem  welcomed  the  objective  of  the  European  Council  meeting  in  Lisbon  in  March 
2000, to accelerate completion of the internal market for financial services, and to set a tight 
timetable so that the Financial Services Action Plan can be implemented by 2005. This Plan 
is  regularly  reviewed  by  European  authorities,  and  progress  is  being  made.  I  welcome 
especially  the  intention  of  the  Spanish  EU  Presidency  to  lend  impetus  to  this  ongoing 
process. The Eurosystem also supports the strategic conclusions of the Committee chaired 
by  A. Lamfalussy  on  the  integration  of  the  European  securities  markets,  ratified  by  the 
European  Council  meeting  in  Stockholm  in  March  2001  and  approved  by  the  European 
Parliament in early February 2002. We are convinced that the implementation of these broad 
guidelines  and  the  new  cooperation  structures  at  the  European  level  will  help  make  it 
possible to take full advantage of the introduction of the euro. 
7
 Since the tragic events of 11 September and their impact on financial stability, concerns over 
the potential abuse of the financial system for the financing of terrorism have received top 
priority  in  international  and  European  regulatory  discussions.  The  international  community 
and, within it, the financial community, should step up its efforts to hunt down money used by 
organised crime and terrorism. We shall not be successful overnight, but, today, there is a 
strong political determination on the part of the international community to cooperate on this 
issue.  As  far  as  the  fight  against  organised  crime  and  terrorism  is  concerned,  we  can  no 
longer accept that certain players are not prepared to observe the rules of international legal 
cooperation.  
Beyond structural reforms and financial stability, the accession of new Member States to the European 
Union and to EMU is the third challenge that I have identified. The last challenge but not the least. 
Accession of new Member States to the EU and EMU 
Twelve countries from central, eastern and southern Europe are currently negotiating accession to the 
EU. According to the calendar endorsed by the European Council, new accessions will take place as 
from the 1st of January 2004. It provides further evidence, if such were necessary, of the attractiveness 
of the European framework, which has provided us with both political stability and economic progress 
for almost half a century.  
The accession countries have accomplished significant progress in stabilising and strengthening their 
economies and institutions. Observing the accession countries since the beginning of the nineties, we 
see the huge improvements that these countries have made, in barely 10 years, on the road towards 
convergence with the EU.  
Nevertheless, there is also a general agreement on the fact that the gap in terms of average GDP per 
capita  between  the  accession  countries  and  the  euro  area,  although  diminishing,  still  remains  quite 
significant. On average, GDP per capita in terms of purchasing power parity is around 44% of that of 
the euro area, while in terms of current exchange rates it is only around 22%. The size of the gap, 
combined with the limited growth differentials between the two groups of countries, suggests that the 
process of real convergence will be very  gradual and will have to continue far beyond the tentative 
dates  for  EU  accession.  Indeed,  real  convergence  is  essential  to  create  economic  cohesion  within 
EMU and promote integration between Members States, thereby helping to minimise the risk and the 
effects of asymetric shocks. 
The Eurosystem, and notably the Banque de France, is following the enlargement process with a great 
deal  of  attention.  Let  me  stress  a  few  points  of  particular  relevance  for  the  Eurosystem  and  for 
accession  countries  themselves,  on  the  road  towards  catching  up  with  the  EU  and  achieving 
convergence. 
   Firstly, nominal convergence with the EU constitutes a medium-term objective. The strict 
compliance with Maastricht criteria will be key for joining the euro area, but should not be 
seen  as  an  immediate  requirement  to  join  the  EU.  Indeed,  the  EU  Treaty  calls,  as  a 
prerequisite  for  adopting  the  euro,  for  a  high  degree  of  sustainable  convergence,  which 
presumes  that  sufficient  preliminary  progress  has  been  made  towards  real  and  structural 
convergence. Therefore, nominal and real convergence should be pursued in parallel, and 
are not conflicting. 
Secondly, I noted that many accession countries have already expressed their intention to 
join ERM II as soon as possible after EU entry. This intention is to be welcomed, although it 
should  be  clear  that  ERM  II  membership  needs  neither  to  happen  immediately  after  EU 
accession in all cases, nor to be limited to only two years, which is the minimum for adoption 
of  the  euro.  It  would  be  misleading  to  consider  ERM  II  as  a  mere  “waiting  room”  before 
joining the euro. On the  very contrary, ERM II  offers a meaningful, partly flexible, credible 
framework for increasing convergence with the euro area on the road towards the adoption 
of the euro. 
Thirdly,  a  sound  and  efficient  banking  and  financial  system  is  essential.  Significant 
progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  few  years  in  rehabilitating  the  banking  sector  and 
encouraging foreign ownership, which has also contributed to greater integration into the EU 
financial system. The intermediation role of the banking sector remains fundamental for the 
efficient  use  of  capital  and  sustained  growth.  Progress 
in  corporate  governance, 
enhancement of the legal and supervisory frameworks that support the banking sector, and 
the fight against money laundering, are also crucial.  
In conclusion, let me make three remarks: 
    First, you might remember that two months ago there still were a lot of opinions and articles 
forecasting enormous difficulties associated  with the  Euro changeover. These catastrophic 
predictions proved wrong again. The Euro notes and coins changeover has not only been a 
great  technical  success,  but  it  has  also  been  accompanied  and  illuminated  by  genuine 
popular enthusiasm. In my view this is a very important and positive phenomenon which has 
to be reflected upon thoroughly all over Europe, including in the UK. 
Second,  the  assessment  produced  by  some  economists  on  the  international  economy  is 
today as bleak as it was buoyant yesterday, both postures being equally excessive. Let us 
try to remain serious, lucid, serene and balanced in our analysis, in our judgements, in our 
decisions. Let us all beware of the herd instinct which is always a very bad counsellor. Let us 
beware of fashion. As regards the present situation, we must remain prudent and cautious, 
but we have some signs indicating a bottoming out in the US and in Europe, including in my 
own country. And I see absolutely no reason why the European economy pick up would not 
be as early as in the US, taking account of the strong European fundamentals. 
Third,  confidence  is  of  the  essence  in  the  present  situation.  Confidence  in  our  currency, 
confidence  in  its  capacity  to  be  a  good  store  of  value,  confidence  in  its  medium  and 
long-term  solidity,  confidence  in  the  capacity  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
Eurosystem as a whole to deliver price stability. This confidence – which is warranted by the 
central bank – is a very precious asset for the Europeans. It is a very important ingredient for 
fostering  growth  through  consumer  confidence  and  therefore  consumer  demand  which  is 
presently the main driving force behind the European economy. 
I thank you for your attention. 
 
  9
