 Koh Yong Guan: Risk management development in Singapore 
Opening address by Mr Koh Yong Guan, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the first MAS Risk Conference, Singapore, 31 January 2002. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
It is my pleasure to address the first MAS Risk Conference. I will cover two areas : 
• 
First, the changing financial landscape and the challenges they pose for risk management; 
and 
Second, the introduction of three risk management initiatives. 
 Changing Financial Landscape and Challenges  
Over the last few years, there has been a fundamental change in the volatility of financial markets. The 
frequency and the contagion effects of crises affecting financial markets have also risen. 
The volatility of financial markets has increased. The lowering of regulatory barriers to capital flows 
has  integrated  global  financial  markets.  This  has  increased  the  correlation  and  the  transmission  of 
volatility  from  one  financial  market  to  the  next.  As  a  result,  the  diversification  benefits  derived  from 
investing in several markets have dissipated, leaving market participants exposed to greater financial 
risks than before. 
The  emergence  of  complex  derivative  instruments  has  increased  market  liquidity,  but  also  financial 
risk  for  those  who  are  not  well  acquainted  with  the  use  of  these  instruments.  While  these  new 
instruments have allowed market participants to transfer their credit risks and enhanced the efficient 
pricing of such risks, the use of derivatives for speculative purposes can result in large losses. 
The  Basle  Capital  Accord  of  1988  was  a  landmark  document  for  the  banking  industry.  It  helped 
increase  the  capital  held  by  internationally  active  banks,  and  created  a  more  level  playing  field  for 
banks under different jurisdictions. However, there were some weaknesses in the Accord. The most 
important  of  these  was  the  practice  of  assigning  the  same  risk  weight  to  all  counterparties  in  each 
class, irrespective of the differences in their credit-worthiness. These issues led regulators to propose 
a more risk sensitive framework. The proposed new Capital Accord will have a great influence on the 
risk management practices of banks. The new Accord, however, poses challenges to Asian banks and 
regulators  alike.  Banks  will  have  to  develop  more  sophisticated  risk  management  capability  while 
regulators  will  need  to  build  up  technical  knowledge  as  well  as  supervisory  resources  to  validate 
banks’ risk management systems. 
As financial markets progress towards greater transparency, the market disciplinary mechanism will 
reward  banks  that  manage  their  risks  effectively,  and  penalise  those  that  do  not.  Good  risk 
management practice is thus even more essential for banks to maintain their competitiveness over the 
long run. 
The frequency of shocks has increased. In the past 10 years there has been an average of one shock 
every year starting from the Gulf War in 1991 to the Latin American crisis of the early nineties and so 
on  down  to  the  Asian  Economic  Crisis  in  1997,  the  Russian  Bond  Default  Crisis  in  ’98  and  most 
recently last month, Argentina’s default. The causes of these stress events are wide-ranging. 
In addition, these shocks have shown a greater tendency to spread rapidly to other financial markets. 
The rapidity with which the Asian crisis spread across East Asia in ’97-’98 is a good example. 
Many of us here today may wish that we have the ability to predict with certainty when the next crisis 
will strike. It is, however, far more fruitful to adequately prepare ourselves for the inevitable. And that, 
in short, means enhancing our risk management capability.  
BIS Review 7/2002 
 1
 Risk Management Initiatives in Singapore 
MAS will introduce three risk management initiatives to help financial institutions in Singapore better 
manage the challenges ahead. 
The first initiative is a MAS guideline that aims to help banks prepare themselves to meet the ill effects 
of  financial  crises  and  shocks.  One  of  the  ”defining”  features  of  a  financial  crisis  is  that  it  strikes 
suddenly and once it has struck, it gives very little time for financial market participants to react. How 
then can we better prepare ourselves for a crisis? 
Stress  testing  offers  financial  institutions  a  systematic  methodology  to  prepare  for  financial  crises. 
Stress testing is based on the old military saying, “the more you sweat in peace the less you bleed in 
war”. That is, financial institutions that have a comprehensive programme to stress test their portfolios 
will be better prepared when a stress event occurs. 
Stress testing consists of assessing the attributes of a portfolio, assessing the scenarios that are likely 
to occur and calculating the stress loss should a crisis come to pass. With a rigorous stress-testing 
programme, a bank can alter the composition of its portfolio, if preset stress loss limits are exceeded 
during stress tests, thereby limiting its losses should a stressful event actually occur. Stress tests are 
fairly  common  for  market  portfolios  but  are  still  not  widely  used  to  assess  stress  loss  of  credit 
portfolios, particularly, loan portfolios. 
We  are  releasing  on  our  website  today  a  consultative  paper  on  credit  portfolio  stress  testing.  The 
paper will be further developed with your inputs before we release it as a formal MAS guideline. We 
invite you to send in your comments by May 2002. 
In  the  coming  months,  financial  institutions  in  Singapore  can  also  expect  to  receive  the  MAS  risk 
management guidelines for market risk, credit risk and liquidity risk management. These guidelines will 
spell  out  the  key  principles  for  sound  risk  management  which  banks  are  encouraged  to  follow. 
Improvements made to risk management in order to comply with these risk management guidelines 
will  help  banks  develop  prudent  and  understandable  policies,  and  improve  their  methods  for 
measuring and managing firm-wide risks. 
These guidelines will incorporate comments from industry practitioners and other experts in the field of 
risk management. 
Next,  there  will  be  a  significant  addition  to  Singapore’s  risk  management  infrastructure.  To  help 
financial institutions mitigate credit risk through information pooling, the Singapore Consumer Credit 
Bureau will be launched in September this year. MAS welcomes this joint-venture initiative between 
the  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore  (ABS)  and  a  consortium  comprising  Dun  &  Bradstreet 
International and Baycorp Advantage, among others. 
With the rising popularity of consumer credit across Asia and the likely increase in credit risks due to 
the  difficult  economic  conditions,  financial  institutions  are  increasingly  faced  with  the  challenge  of 
improving the quality of their consumer credit portfolios while increasing their market share in the face 
of  global  competition.  Take  for  example  the  credit  and  charge  card.  In  2001,  total  card  billings  in 
Singapore were S$11 billion and bad debt written off by financial institutions was S$79.5 million. Over 
the past year, the personal bankruptcy rate has risen by 19%. Credit and charge cards approval rate 
has risen by 14.4% over the same period.  
The availability of timely and reliable customer credit information is therefore vital in banks’ decisions 
to grant or sustain credit facilities. The establishment of a credit bureau in Singapore is timely and will 
enhance the reliability of banks’ internal credit rating systems. Participating banks will disclose and in 
turn  receive  credit  information  from  the  credit  bureau  for  the  purpose  of  assessing  the  credit 
worthiness  of  their  retail  customers.  Credit  information  will  include  both  positive  and  negative  data1 
and  access  to  the  bureau’s  database  will  initially  be  restricted  to  the  participating  banks,  banks’ 
customers and the bureau itself.  
The establishment of the credit bureau is likely to increase credit business, lead to more competitive 
pricing  of  credit  facilities  and  lower  credit  loan  defaults  and  delinquency  rates.  To  address  the 
concerns over the treatment of credit data, MAS would follow two broad principles.  
                                                      
1   Refers to the submission of customer’s payment histories on their credit facilities. Positive data refers to timely payment (i.e. 
a good customer) and negative data refers to overdue payments. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2002
 First, it is important that individuals have access to their own credit files and to have any inaccurate 
information corrected. Any dispute resolution process should be timely and effective, and should also 
be  covered  in  the  Consumer  Banking  Code  that  ABS  is  currently  working  on.  Second,  it  is  also 
important that individual privacy is respected and customer data are not misused for purposes other 
than what they were originally intended for. A good starting point is the principle of reciprocity on data 
usage,  which  all  participating  members  to  the  bureau  will  need  to  adhere  to.  High  standards  of 
confidentiality is also expected of both the bureau operators and participating members. The ABS will 
continue to work with MAS to ensure that these principles are observed. 
The launch of the consumer credit bureau will mark the beginning of a new risk management process 
in Singapore. It will further bolster the integrity and transparency of Singapore’s financial sector.  
Apart from ensuring that our regulatory framework is progressive and our infrastructure is world class, 
MAS is also taking an active approach to promoting industry best practices in risk management. The 
guidelines that we have introduced are steps in this direction. This Risk Conference is another such 
initiative.  The  objective  of  organising  such  a  conference  is  to  highlight  emerging  fields  in  risk 
management  by  bringing  together  risk  practitioners  and  academics,  to  share  their  experiences  and 
exchange  ideas.  Such  a  forum  will  help  the  industry  and  regulators  keep  abreast  of  the  latest 
developments in financial risk management  
I hope you will find this first Risk Conference that MAS has organised useful and fruitful.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 7/2002 
 3
