 Vahur Kraft: Challenges facing Estonian economy in the European Union 
Speech by  Mr Vahur Kraft, Governor of the Bank of Estonia, at the Roundtable “Has social market 
economy a future?”, organised by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, Tallinn, 19 August 2002. 
 A. 
Introduction, review of the early 1990s and comparison with the present 
day 
First  of  all,  allow  me  to  thank  Konrad  Adenauer  Foundation  for  the  organisation  of  this  interesting 
roundtable and for the honourable invitation to speak about “Challenges of Estonian economy in the 
European  Union”.  Today’s  event  shows  yet  again  how  serious  is  the  respected  organisers’  interest 
towards the EU applicant countries. 
I  personally  appreciate  highly  your  support  to  our  reforms  and  convergence  in  the  society  and 
economy. From the outside it may seem that the transformation and convergence process in Estonia 
has been easy and smooth, but against this background there still exist numerous hidden problems. 
One  should  not  forget  that  for  two  generations  half  of  Europe  was  deprived  of  civil  society,  private 
ownership, market economy. This is truth and it has to be reckoned with. 
It  is  also  clear  that  the  reflections  of  the  “shadows  of  the  past”  can  still  be  observed.  They  are  of 
different kind. If people want the state to ensure their well-being but are reluctant to take themselves 
any responsibility for their own future, it is the effect of the shadows of the past. If people are reluctant 
to pay taxes but demand social security and good roads, it is the shadow of the past. In brief, if people 
do not understand why elections are held and what is the state’s role, it is the shadow of the past. 
But, of course, in ten years a lot has been achieved. We have built up democratic institutions. Market 
economy functions. Private ownership has a solid foundation. Banks provide credit to people for new 
housing developments. But our current success should not be taken for granted. And we should also 
bear in mind that much needs to be done yet. The public has to understand the role and possibilities of 
the state and the government in the market economy. Everybody should feel responsible for their own 
welfare as well as their family’s and the state’s well-being. Our new generation should be able to cope 
with the complicated processes of the modern society much better than we did. 
In  our  efforts  to  achieve  this  goal  it  is  impossible  to  underestimate  the  support  provided  by  our 
partners. The Estonian society and politicians need partners with whom to exchange experience and 
from whom still to learn the fundamentals of the functioning civil society. At that, I would like to thank 
Konrad Adenauer Foundation for the work it has done and is doing in Estonia and elsewhere for the 
promotion of political co-operation, preservation and support of free democracies throughout the world, 
development and consolidation of the social market economy and respective values. 
Allow me to express in my address also full recognition to Prime Minister Mart Laar who has been the 
leader  of  the  Estonian  government  during  several  critical  periods.  Mart  Laar  was  the  head  of  the 
Estonian government during one of the most difficult periods - from the autumn of 1992 to November 
1994. This was the turbulent period of initial reforms not only in the economy but the entire society, 
immediately after the monetary reform and adoption of the constitution. But, with your kind consent, I 
shall hereby focus on economic issues. 
These were the times when Estonia’s foreign reserves, in the current denomination, could have been 
expressed in hundreds millions of euros, the average monthly wage was slightly above one thousand 
kroons and, by the end of 1992, three big banks had collapsed. These were the years just after the 
monetary  reform  when  the  question  “for  how  long  this  kroon  is  going  to  last”  was  often  asked  in 
Estonia, but even more frequently abroad. 
The  central  bank  has  always  stressed  the  essential  backing  provided  to  the  stability  of  the  kroon’s 
exchange rate and the financial system by the economic reforms at large  and a stable, predictable 
budget  in  particular.  We  have  repeatedly  stressed  that  the  foundation  for  our  relative  economic 
success was laid in 1992 and 1993. Our banks would not be so strong to date without solid customers 
-  private  enterprises,  individuals.  The  quick  and  resolute  privatisation  of  former  state-owned 
companies in the beginning of 1990s was a decisive factor in the establishment of a sound and strong 
customer  base.  Due  to  that  Estonian  banks  have  been  able  to  extend  credit  to  the  strong  private 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 1
 sector, in particular. Thus  we managed to avoid the  situation that many former socialist  economies 
were  forced  to  experience  -  floating  of  problem  loans  directly  or  indirectly  to  state-controlled,  often 
corrupt industry. 
In  the  course  of  the  reorganisation  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  early  1990s  we  did  not  hesitate  to 
liquidate  badly-managed,  insolvent  banks  in  the  first  half  of  1990s.  Neither  did  the  government 
hesitate  when  it  was  necessary  to  liquidate  badly-managed,  insolvent  enterprises  that  were 
manufacturing for stock. Privatisation of state-owned companies for real money to core investors, and, 
if necessary, liquidation of state enterprises that were operating in the red, created a good basis for 
the emergence of a strong and free competition-driven business sector. Without it the real wages in 
Estonia would not have increased by almost one-third in the second half of 1990s, without it we would 
not  be  approaching  the  finish  line  in  our  EU  accession  process.  Steps  taken  ten  years  ago  for  the 
demolition of the old, impotent and perspective-lacking system and for the building up of a new, viable 
and future-oriented economy are now bearing fruit. 
The basis of the economic reforms undertaken by the government in the early  1990s  was a strong 
fiscal policy. Let’s be honest, at that time none of us knew exactly what a national budget really means 
and how the amount of state-collected taxes and public expenditure in practice affect the economy. 
One thing was clear - public expenditure should not exceed public income or the value of the Estonian 
kroon would immediately be put at stake. The 1992-1993 strictly balance-oriented strategy helped to 
create the social foundation that would even to date be suitable for developing a fiscal policy capable 
of even better supporting the balanced economy. 
I touched upon the economic policy key issues of the past decade because the same issues that were 
topical then are on today’s and tomorrow’s agendas. How to achieve better economic efficiency and 
improve competitiveness? How to avoid the deterrent impact of local lobby-groups on the economic 
policy  and  ensure  a  truly  effective  and  free  market?  How  to  develop  a  truly  balanced  and  forward-
looking fiscal policy? These issues are in the focus not only in Estonia but also in the European Union. 
Naturally, today’s problems - like the society itself - have a completely different look than 10 years ago. 
It is not only Estonia that has changed, it is the entire world. However, the key questions - likewise the 
optimum solutions to them - are, in essence, the same. 
I would like to offer just a few examples for the illustration of the above-said. In the beginning of 1990s 
we  created  in  Estonia  conditions  for  truly  free  competition  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  entire 
economy. Estonia abandoned all possible barriers to import and export of goods and services, created 
equal opportunities to all investors and privatised state-owned banks. These steps laid the foundation 
for  our  current  success. To  date,  10  years  later,  Estonia  like  the  European  Union  discusses  widely 
how to create a truly free market of infrastructure services which until now have been either directly or 
indirectly  protected  by  the  state.  And  principal  solutions  to  this  problem  shall  not  differ  from  the 
decisions made in the first half of 1990s. 
It is true that, for example, opening up of the electricity market to free competition is definitely more 
time-consuming  than  privatisation  of  many  industrial  enterprises.  But,  surely,  restructuring  of  the 
electricity sector does not differ in principle from the reform in the banking sector. In both cases the 
state must ensure the availability of the critical infrastructure in Estonia and communication with the 
external markets - in one case, it means payment systems, in the other case interconnections with the 
European and Scandinavian grids. In both cases the government has to ensure supervision over the 
market actors’ behaviour and establish clear rules. In both cases the government must have action 
plans or guidelines for crisis management. And when these guidelines and relevant national policies 
are  in  place,  there  will  be  no  impediments  to  the  complete  opening  of  the  market.  The  task  of  the 
government is not to delay the opening of the market but rather to speed it up. I am positive that, like 
in the banking sector, the society will benefit from this. It will result in more efficient production, lower 
prices, better service quality and curb the power of the monopolistic producers. 
To date, as in the early 1990s, we again face the question of what is the right fiscal policy. Of course, 
today this problem is raised in a slightly different way. But, in essence, it is the same question - what 
fiscal policy shall ensure the stable development of the Estonian economy within the fixed exchange 
rate  regime  and  as  part  of  the  euro  area.  I  shall  return  to  this  question  towards  the  end  of  my 
presentation. Thus the economic policy key issues we are facing in the beginning of the 21st century 
resemble  in  many  aspects  the  problems  we  tried  to  resolve  in  the  beginning  of  1990s.  We  have 
achieved  progress  in  finding  solutions  to  some  of  the  problems,  others  have  remained  unresolved. 
One  thing  is  clear  -  undue  postponement  of  tough  issues  is  no  good  to  anybody.  If  we  want  to  be 
treated  as  equal  partners  in  the  European  Union,  if  we  want  to  sustain  the  rapid  growth  rate  and 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 growing  income  level,  we  must  tackle  these  problems  with  similar  resolution  and  energy  we  did 
10 years ago. 
B. 
Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union 
- internal policy 
So - what are today’s and tomorrow’s challenges facing Estonian economy? Filled with pride for the 
economic development of our country over the past decade, we must now concentrate more on the 
future. Estonia’s goal is not only the sustainable economic growth target of 5.5-6 per cent per annum 
but  also  the  preparedness  to  join  the  European  Union  and  to  make  maximum  use  of  the  opening 
opportunities. What should we then focus on especially? 
B.1 
Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union - overall 
economic policy stance 
Estonian  economy  is  already  strongly  integrated  into  the  European  economic  area.  From  the 
perspective  of  the  central  bank  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  clear  convergence  of  the  interest  rate 
fluctuations and inflation cycles in Estonia and the European Union. 
The share of current and future EU member states in Estonia’s export is about 81%. In 1994-2001 
Estonia’s export to the European Union increased on the average 25% per annum. Our exports to the 
European Union have steadily grown quicker than imports from the European Union. It means that we 
have  been  steadily  increasing  our  market  share  in  the  European  Union  -  although  it  is  small.  The 
export  structure  also  characterises  our  competitiveness  -  exported  goods  reflect  changes  that  have 
taken place in the economy. Our traditional export items are timber, textile and foodstuffs, but also, for 
example, parts and components of electric motors, cables, mobile phones, antennae and the like. We 
export not only goods but also services - primarily transport and travel services - also computer and IT 
services and the volume of these services has been increasing rapidly during the last three years. 
The  FDI  inflow  that  has  reached  the  9  billion  kroon  level  in  recent  years  proves  our  competitive 
position in the Baltic Sea region as well as a broader region. Equal distribution of investments between 
the  main  sectors  of  economy  is  an  indication  of  the  balanced  economic  development  (in  2001,  for 
example,  manufacturing  industry  -  20%,  transport  and  communications  -  23%,  wholesale  and  retail 
trade - 14%). It is also important to note that the FDI inflow was not contingent on the privatisation of 
former SOEs. And finally, our competitiveness is demonstrated by the  yield of investments made in 
Estonia  and  reinvesting  of  substantial  part  of  annual  profits  which  in  2001  amounted  to  3,8  billion 
kroons. This is also shows our competitiveness. 
The  readiness  of  Estonian  economy  for  the  integration  with  the  European  economic  system  is 
demonstrated  especially  well  by  such  key  sectors  of  our  economy  as 
financial  and 
telecommunication sectors. Here we talk about the complete opening of the market to domestic and 
foreign  competition,  strong  state  supervision  and  integration  of  Estonian  enterprises  in  the  big 
multinational corporations. 
the 
What should we focus on in the future? 
Estonia is no longer a catching-up candidate country as it was three-four years ago. However, we still 
cannot  say  that  the  restructuring  of  our  economy  has  been  completed.  On  the  contrary,  the 
forthcoming member status in the EU will mean many more responsibilities. Our goal is not simply to 
be ready for the EU accession but to ensure maximum use of the opportunities concurrent with the 
membership. What should we focus most on? 
First, a clear vision of the state’s role in the organisation of the economic system. The task of the state 
is not to produce goods or services - be it in such specific areas as energy or rail transport. The task of 
the state is to ensure the functioning of the market wherever it for some or other reason requires its 
support. 
Secondly, unemployment has become a problem in Estonia. Without dwelling on concrete statistics, I 
would like to emphasise that labour market is subject to the same set of rules as all other markets. If 
labour is too expensive, entrepreneurs will not recruit new workers. I stress this fact because in recent 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 3
 years our political measures for the mitigation of unemployment have, as a rule, been driven by the 
so-called active labour market strategy - focusing mainly on retraining and further education. Although 
an active labour market policy is necessary to increase the mobility of the labour force, it can reduce 
unemployment  only  if  the  legislative  regulatory  framework  and  the  overall  structure  of  the  labour 
market foster the creation of new jobs. I think that we should in Estonia seriously and comprehensively 
analyse factors that influence employment, including absolute or relative taxation of the workforce and 
costs related to hiring and layoffs. 
Thirdly,  the  balanced  growth.  Reforms  are  not  an  objective  per  se,  we  undertake  them  with  the 
assumption that they will lead to a higher economic growth rate, higher income and improved living 
standard. 
Leaving aside the turbulent  years of economic reforms immediately after the 1992 monetary reform 
which  lasted  until  1995,  the  average  annual  economic  growth  rate  in  Estonia  has  been  above  5%. 
Between 1995 and 2001 the average salary increased from 2086 kroons to 5721 kroons. During the 
same time period real wages increased by one-third. We believe that our mean economic growth rate 
will continue to be about 6% per annum. The quality of the economic growth in Estonia is consolidated 
by growing productivity - in 1995-2001 the GDP per capita (in fixed prices) increased by almost 40%. It 
is  also  demonstrated  by  the  remarkable  interest  of  the  private  sector  and  its  readiness  to  invest. 
Structural  changes  in  the  economy  can  also  be  regarded  as  quality  indicators  -  changes  in  the 
distribution between the industrial, agricultural and service sectors. 
Still,  in  the  forthcoming  years  we  must  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  the  external  equilibrium  of  our 
economy, 
the  productivity  and 
competitiveness. It is obvious that no country, not even Estonia, when planning its economic policies 
should assume, for example, a 8-8% current account deficit spanning several years. Even if the latter 
is  in  the  initial  years  financed  through  foreign  direct  investments,  the  adaptation  of  the  economy  is 
inevitable. The slower the economic growth is during the adaptation period, the more painful it is for 
the society. The goal of the economic policy should be the prevention of the internal demand-driven 
boom  immediately  prior  and  after  the  EU  accession  which  will  be  followed  by  a  significantly  slower 
growth phase. 
the  current  account  deficit  and 
financing,  changes 
its 
in 
Pre-accession economic programme and macroeconomic risks 
All  these  important  issues  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  reflected  in  Estonia’s  pre-accession  economic 
programme  which  was  recently  approved  by  the  government  of  the  republic.  I  stress  that  the 
projections  which  form  the  basis  of  the  national  pre-accession  programme  and  the  premise  that  in 
Estonian  economy  the  real  total  output  is  going  to  increase  at  the  rate  of  about  6%  per  year  are 
attainable  only  if  the  current  economic  policy  continues.  Keeping  of  the  macrobalance  is  of  critical 
importance for sustaining the economic growth and credibility of the monetary policy. The kroon’s fixed 
exchange rate and the forthcoming entry into the euro zone are by no means “free lunches”. 
B.2 
Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union - internal 
policy - joining the EMU 
Estonia’s entry into the euro zone is contingent on the fulfilment of economic criteria applicable to the 
single currency countries - on the other hand, one can say that only these economies that meet the 
requirements  can  benefit  from  the  transition  to  the  single  currency.  And  Estonia’s  monetary  and 
exchange rate policy during the pre-accession period and immediately after the EU accession should 
be considered against this background. 
First, the fixed exchange rate of the Estonian kroon against the euro and the currency board system 
will  remain  unchanged  before  and  after  the  accession  to  the  European  Union.  The  adoption  of  the 
euro will take place in three stages in accordance with the acquis - joining the European Union, joining 
the ERM2 exchange rate mechanism and, once the Maastricht criteria are met, joining the euro area. 
The  condition  of  the  Estonian  economy  and  financial  system  as  well  as  integration  with  the  EU 
markets that I commented upon earlier in our view fully support this principle. 
Also the European Commission and the European Central Bank have affirmed us that the euro-based 
fixed  exchange  rate  and  currency  board  regime,  in  principle,  are  in  harmony  with  the  acquis  and 
conform to the requirements set for the monetary policy of the non-euro zone economies. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 Secondly, ERM2 provides to the new member states a necessary and useful interim stage between 
the EU accession and the adoption of the euro. The choice of monetary and exchange rate policies in 
new member states has been diverse. ERM2 is a suitable and flexible means for the harmonisation of 
varied monetary policies and applied tools. 
The post-accession period will most likely be a serious test phase to most member states - definitely 
Estonia  -  in  elaboration  of  their  economic  and  fiscal  policies  and  relevant  co-operation  with  the  EU 
institutions.  Participation  in  the  development  of  economic  policy  guidelines  sets  relatively  high 
demands  both  on  actual  policy  formulation  and  institutional  co-operation.  Naturally  this  process  will 
have two parties - the present applicant countries will have joining in the EU processes whereas the 
“old”  member  states  will  have  to  study  the  key  problems  the  new  members  states  face  in  their 
economic development. The post-accession ERM2 phase is an appropriate time for the establishment 
of  the  comprehensive  co-operation  in  the  economic  policy  area  on  the  national  as  well  as  the 
European Union level. 
The “testing” of the economies’ competitive abilities will also be crucial - not by means of the exchange 
rates but interest rates. 
Maastricht criteria 
For Estonia like for all new member states the only possible way to join the euro system is to do it in 
full compliance with the letter and spirit of the EU Treaty. As we well know, the key issue here is the 
fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria. Most new member states, Estonia included, will obviously have no 
great difficulties in meeting the sovereign debt and budget deficit criteria. The remaining two criteria - 
low inflation and exchange rate stability - are connected with some specific problems. 
The fulfilment of the inflation criteria might not in reality be as difficult as is feared - and achievable in 
not so distant future. However, in the context of rapid accession, the meeting of the inflation criteria 
becomes a main issue. This is due to the interaction of the so-called real and nominal convergence. 
Together with the rapid growth of productivity and earnings, prices are going to rise quicker in the new 
member states. Considering great price gaps in applicant countries v?s a v?s present member states, 
one can assume that price equalisation will take time. Thus we can conclude that inflation rates in the 
new member states will for several years stay higher than the mean rate of the three lowest inflation 
economies in the European Union plus 1.5 per cent. We have estimated that for Estonia the “optimum” 
pace  for  streamlining  of  prices  would  be  ca  2  to  3  per  cent  points  per  year.  In  our  opinion  this 
difference reflects the quicker productivity increase trend in Estonia. 
In conclusion, a few comments on the main economic policy issues that the European Union faces. 
After  the  introduction  of  the  euro  the  issue  of  potentially  new  co-operation  modes  has  been  raised 
repeatedly, This is also discussed at the Convention on the Future of Europe. Figuratively speaking, 
the question means which policy measures foster the best utilisation of the possibilities offered by the 
single currency. 
C. 
Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union 
- the EU perspective 
The  first  priority  issue  is  naturally  the  further  improvement  of  the  EU  internal  market. The  on-going 
convergence and improved operational efficiency of the internal market will make prices more flexible 
and  allow  better  use  of  resources.  It  is  extremely  important  to  develop  the  common  market  for  all 
goods and services, including telecommunication services and other utilities - also financial services in 
order  to  ensure  free  competition  and  price  formation  based  on  the  demand  and  supply  on  the 
Pan-European market. A well-functioning common market should help to reduce transaction costs, by 
offering more and more services via the internet, for example. A common innovation policy, system of 
business  support  measures  and  dissemination  of  experience  of  different  businesses,  availability  of 
start-up capital - all this is deemed to promote productivity and further convergence. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 5
 Flexibility and mobility of production factors 
Another  set  of  critical  issues  is  related  to  flexibility  and  mobility  of  production  factors.  Here  I  must 
stress the importance of capital and labour market flexibility. Both need all possible support in order to 
increase  the  efficient  use  of  resources  in  the  common  market  economies.  In addition  to  the  unified 
money  market  in  the  euro  zone,  we  should  aspire  towards  the  full  integration  of  capital  markets. 
Simplified  procedures  for  the  adoption  of  secondary  legislation  that  regulates  the  financial  services 
area are an important step forward. The convergence of financial markets calls for a more extensive 
harmonisation of the legal  environment in various countries. But it also requires closer co-operation 
between  various national supervisory  authorities and/or better co-ordination of supervision functions 
on the EU level. In addition, it should be taken into account that capital transfers between the member 
states would be easier if business laws and regulations of different countries are harmonised. Here I 
could mention rules governing companies’ mergers and takeovers, bankruptcy procedures, state aid 
distribution terms and conditions. 
A flexible labour market is extremely  important for the effective common monetary policy purposes. 
However, it is unlikely that in the near future Europe will see any notable crossborder migration of the 
labour  force  -  it  is  not  expected  to  happen  before  or  after  the  EU  enlargement.  Therefore,  limited 
flexibility of the labour market should be offset by an efficient internal market, high capital mobility and 
greater flexibility of the domestic labour market. 
Fiscal policy - fiscal federalism 
In addition to the above-mentioned supply-related issues, the EU and its member states’ fiscal policy 
principles in the context of the common monetary policy have been under special scrutiny. It has been 
stated that enhanced co-operation within the fiscal policy area will allow to mitigate potential economic 
difficulties  in  various  countries.  In  principle,  the  question  is  whether  and  to  what  extent  automatic 
balancing mechanisms should be invoked on the EU general fiscal stance level and be targeted at the 
smoothing of regional disparities with automatic income transfers from the wealthy to the less-wealthy 
regions - thus, in fact, compensating for the lack of the exchange rate mechanism within the single 
currency regime. Also in recent months the question has been raised whether or not the requirements 
of the Stability and Growth Pact are too rigid. 
By way of general comment, I should say that there are sufficiently many examples of great disparities 
between different regions of a federal state. Regional policy is crucial also for states with high labour 
mobility.  Ultimately,  the  success  of  regional  economies  depends  primarily  on  the  efficient  resource 
management and extensive income transfers can even slow down the adjustment process. 
In my view it is obvious that as long as the European Union remains to be the alliance of independent 
member  states,  there  will  be  neither  need  nor  possibility  for  any  additional  communitisation. 
Exceptions could include precisely defined circumstances when an intervention on the EU level would 
be justified in order to ensure the uninterrupted functioning of the internal market. Harmonisation of the 
fiscal policy on the macro level would be automatically accompanied with the tax rate equalisation. At 
that, taxation policies of any given member state reflect principal choices of their internal policy and 
preferences of the entire society. 
Stability and growth pact 
With  the  regard  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  it  is  assumed  that  automatic  stabilisation 
mechanisms shall function smoothly within the 3% GDP scale. This threshold could be exceeded only 
in case of an abrupt or unexpected shock situation. Additionally, the Stability and Growth Pact aims at 
a balanced budget during the economic cycle. Thus it presumes that one should not look for structural 
reasons if some member state experiences a long-term budget deficit or surplus. In my opinion, the 
Stability and Growth Pact has performed its function very well in recent years. This is proved by the 
fact  that most  of  the  EU  member  states  now  have  a much  stronger  fiscal  position  than  in  previous 
years. 
Any  major  changes  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  likely  to  cause  additional  insecurity  and 
significantly  affect  the  credibility  of  the  entire  framework.  Therefore  I  believe  that  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  should  remain  a  cornerstone  of  the  EU  economic  policy  also  in  the  years  to  come. 
Further convergence of markets and various national economies should by itself prop the framework 
of the Stability and Growth Pact. In addition to the potential approximation of the business cycles, the 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 common  market  should  create  preconditions  enabling  each  country  to  invest  its  savings  effectively 
within the Union. And even more importantly, harmonised and flexible commodity markets will help to 
reduce adjustment costs - and thus minimise the need to use budget stabilisation mechanisms during 
the short-term adjustment period. 
D. 
Concluding remarks 
To date the European Union faces several complicated but well-known economic policy problems from 
the recent past. Estonia as the future EU member state must take this into account. It is not enough to 
be able to overcome challenges on the WAY to the European Union. We must become equal partners 
to other European states,  be able and  willing to participate in the discussions on the monetary  and 
fiscal policy issues, perceive Estonia in Europe and Europe in Estonia. Today the European Economic 
and Monetary Union within which 12 states have adopted the single currency, offers a historic chance 
to  create  a  truly  strong,  flexible  and  efficient  economic  area.  I  believe  that  potentials  of  the  single 
currency will be exploited in the best possible way. It would serve the interests of the current as well as 
future member states and the whole of Europe. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 7
