 Lars Nyberg: Financial disturbances and the real economy 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to Danske Securities, Stockholm, 
11 March 2002. 
 I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here to Danske Securities and speak to 
you, who are at the real heart of the financial sector, but also heavily dependent on occurrences in the 
real  economy.  In  my  speech  today  I  intend  to  concentrate  mainly  on  the  relationship  between 
developments in the real economy and financial developments, as it has looked in the past and as it 
may look in the future. 
The Riksbank's two objectives, maintaining price stability and promoting efficiency and stability in the 
payment system in a broader context, have both real economy and financial aspects. The objectives 
are  more  closely  linked  than  might  be  thought  initially.  Turbulence  on  the  financial  markets  has 
repercussions for economic activity and developments in the real economy and thus great significance 
for  the  shaping  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  pursue  an  effective  monetary 
policy  when  the  financial  markets  are  functioning  inefficiently.  At  the  same  time,  price  stability  and 
stable, low inflation expectations help to create security and stability in the financial markets. 
This far  it  is  quite  simple.  It  is  rather more  difficult  to make  an  in-depth  survey  and  understand  the 
relationship  between  the  financial  and  the  real  economies.  Moreover,  developments  in  the  financial 
markets are very rapid and there is every reason to believe that the relationship changes over time. 
If  one  looks  back  at  global  developments  over  the  past  year,  the  financial  markets  appear  to  have 
coped  with  more  and  greater  shocks  than  many  would  have  thought  possible.  The  IT  and  telecom 
bubble burst, a simultaneous international slowdown in economic activity began, Turkey experienced a 
financial  crisis,  the  USA  suffered  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  and  began  a  war  against 
Afghanistan and the American energy company, Enron, collapsed. Finally, Argentina suffered a severe 
crisis. The private market operators were not saved by further measures from the IMF, as many had 
expected. However, not even all of these events together appear to have had any serious long-term 
effects on the global financial markets. 
In  addition,  it  now  seems  as  though  the  repercussions  for  the  real  economy  were  relatively  slight, 
despite the fact that households and companies, particularly in the USA, were heavily indebted when 
the  economic  upturn  began.  Does  this  mean  that  we  can  now  write  down  the  risk  of  financial 
imbalances  and  crises  delaying  the  economic  upturn most  analysts  predict  to  be  on  its  way?  Have 
economic policy, the financial infrastructure and the behaviour of market operators been adapted to 
the globalised, technologically well developed financial markets to the extent that the contagion effects 
on  the  real  economy  of  financial  disturbances  has  declined  significantly  during  the  past  decade? 
These are questions I wish to discuss now, however more with the aim of provoking some interesting 
ideas rather than providing any ready-made answers. 
Are the markets more robust? 
Let me begin with the question of whether the markets have really become more robust, in the sense 
that they are now less sensitive to disturbances. There are some arguments in favour of this theory. 
One  of  these  is  directly  linked  to  monetary  policy  and  inflation.  This  is  namely  that  an  increasing 
number of countries have abandoned the ambition of maintaining a fixed exchange rate and chosen 
instead to focus their monetary policy directly on an inflation target. Openness and transparency have 
increased  as  a  result  of  this,  which  in  itself  has  probably  improved  the  functioning  of  the  markets. 
Inflation  rates  and  inflation  expectations  have  fallen  and  become  more  stable,  which  has  led  to 
significantly lower nominal rates. Uncertainty with regard to the future has thereby declined and the 
conditions  for  making  the  right  investment  and  savings  decisions  have  improved.  All  of  this  should 
have increased the stability of the markets. 
However,  there  are  other  arguments.  Greater  awareness  of  the  need  for  maintaining  central 
government finances under control has increased budgetary discipline and led to reductions in central 
government debts in most countries. It could possibly be claimed that the stricter budgetary discipline 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 1
 is a rather last-minute conversion, as countries with large deficits are often forced to borrow on the 
international markets and there submit to the requirements made, in only to keep down the loan costs. 
Large,  growing  budget  deficits  also  reduce  the  possibilities  for  parties  other  than  the  central 
government  to  assess  the  future  and  increase  their  costs.  Borrowers  are  forced  to  pay  high  and 
varying risk premiums to borrow on the bond markets, as financial investors want to be paid for the 
uncertainty regarding the inflation rate or exchange rate. In addition, there is always a risk that if the 
debt becomes too large the central government will be forced to implement large savings that will in 
themselves  lead  to  increased  unemployment  and  poor  profitability  for  domestically  oriented 
companies. 
Large  international  efforts  have  been  made  and  are  being  made  to  create  new  regulations  and 
standards  that  will  reduce  the  risk  of  financial  instability  in  a  deregulated  environment.  The  Basel 
Committee's new capital adequacy rules are an example of this. Financial supervisory authorities in 
most countries have been strengthened considerably, although the complexity of the markets always 
threatens to increase more rapidly than the competence to supervise them. 
Quantitative deregulation of the financial markets is largely complete and the adaptations have been 
made. Increased experience of acting in a deregulated environment should in itself have reduced the 
risk of financial crises. The banks, which are particularly important because of the role they play in the 
payment  system,  are  better  capitalised  than  they  were  a  decade  ago.  Credit  risk management  has 
also  improved  considerably.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the  Swedish  banks,  which  are  now  much 
better equipped to manage risks than they were prior to the bank crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
Central  banks  and  financial  supervisory  authorities  have  also  become  better  at  assessing  risks. 
Looking  back,  the  really  devastating  bank  crises  have  stemmed  from  a  combination  of  soaring 
property prices and rapid growth in bank lending, and they have often taken place in countries with a 
fixed exchange rate.  A growing number of central banks now closely follow macroeconomic factors 
that  could  lead  to  a  build-up  of  imbalances  in  the  financial  system  and  publish  their  conclusions  in 
special stability reports. The Riksbank is one of the forerunners in this field, based on the experiences 
gained from the Swedish bank crisis. 
For some years now, the IMF has carried out assessments of the functioning and safety of the entire 
financial  sector  in  both  developing  countries  and  industrial  nations.  Sweden  was  subject  to  one  of 
these  FSAPs  (Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programs)  last  year  and  this  year  it  will  be  the  turn  of 
Japan and the United Kingdom. These assessment programs compare the entire financial systems of 
the  countries;  banks,  clearing  houses,  payment  systems,  legislation,  supervisory  authorities,  central 
banks, etc. with the "best practice" in the world and any shortcomings are pointed out. Each country 
can  then  choose  whether  or  not  to  publish  the  results  of  the  assessment.  A  summary  of  the 
assessment is included in the IMF's annual assessment of member countries' economies. 
Dependence and complexity are increasing 
While the markets have thus (hopefully, I should perhaps add) become more robust, our use of them 
has  grown.  Households  and  companies  have  become  operators  on  the  financial  markets,  mainly 
because  these  offer  better  and  cheaper  services  than  those  traditionally  offered  via  the  banks.  An 
increasing percentage of the investments made are financed on the market through shares and bonds 
in other countries than the USA. This has become possible because households' savings are to an 
increasing degree channelled into shares and mutual funds. We use the financial markets much more 
than  we  did  just  ten  years  ago.  This  means  that  we  have  good  reason  to  be  concerned  over  their 
functioning.  It  has  also  meant  that  questions  regarding  financial  stability  have  acquired  greater 
importance on the international political agenda. 
At  the  same  time  as  use  of  the  markets  has  grown,  new  instruments  are  being  traded  that  are 
increasingly  complicated  in  structure  and  their  risk  content  has  become  more  difficult  to  assess. 
Various forms of derivative have been developed, for instance, to spread risks more efficiently. This in 
itself creates conditions for reducing the vulnerability of the banks as well as the financing costs of the 
investments. Essentially, this development benefits long-term growth. In recent years, the use of credit 
risk  derivatives  and  securitisation  has  increased,  for  instance.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that  the 
complexity of these instruments will increase the difficulty of seeing to which credit risks companies 
and banks are actually exposed. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2002
 The complexity of the financial instruments and the fact that they are often found, in various forms, on 
both the asset side and the liability side of companies' balance sheets as well as "off balance sheet", 
makes it difficult to detect the financial risks within banks and companies. This is particularly serious 
as an increasing number of households have their savings in these companies' shares, but nor is it 
easy for professional analysts and portfolio managers to see. 
The collapse of the American company Enron can serve as an example of the problems connected 
with the development of complicated financial instruments. A lack of understanding of the instruments 
used and a lack of transparency  in the company's  accounting meant that directly  after the collapse 
there  was  considerable  concern  over  possible  contagion  effects.  Here  I  do  not  mean  the  evident 
breach of the regulations in force, where auditors burn documents and senior managers sell shares in 
the company prior to publishing negative information. Enron raises a number of other, in the long term 
more fundamental, issues. Today, I shall limit myself to discussing three of these. 
Firstly, Enron was basically an energy company, which in time came to pursue financial operations on 
a  large  scale,  but  without  coming  under  the  supervision  to  which  financial  companies  are  normally 
subjected.  The  lack  of  supervision  also  applied  to  Long  Term  Capital  Management,  LTCM,  some 
years earlier. One might wonder whether function rather than company type might not be a better base 
for  supervision.  There  is  otherwise  a  risk  that  functions  essential  to  society  and  thus  needing 
protection  will  be  transferred  to  companies  not  subject  to  supervision.  At  the  same  time,  the  public 
sector is in practice forced to intervene if the failure comprises a threat to the system, regardless of 
whether it has been able to exercise supervision. To what extent Enron was involved with functions 
that can be assessed as worth protecting is a question for discussion, but it is an important question of 
principle. We cannot and should not regulate all companies involved with financial operations, e.g. in 
managing their own funds. 
Secondly, it appears obvious that accounting regulations, at least those in the US, have not developed 
at  the  same  rate  as  the  instruments  and  forms for  capital  acquisition  on  the  financial  markets.  Is  it 
really  reasonable  in  the  long  term  for  an  increasing  number  of  companies'  risks  to  be  reported  off 
balance sheets? In the case of Enron, it also appears that there were risks that did not need to be 
reported at all, according to the regulations in force, such as liquidity risks that were triggered by a 
down-rating. 
Thirdly, it is educational (and frightening) to see exactly how the shortage of liquidity brought about 
Enron's  downfall  when  questions  were  raised  regarding  the  quality  of  the  balance  sheet  and  the 
market  lost  confidence  in  the  company.  Enron's  balance  sheet  had  some  similarities  with  that  of  a 
bank, in that the liabilities side consisted of borrowing that proved to be rather short term, while the 
asset side was difficult to value and had much poorer liquidity. A bank that found itself in an equivalent 
situation  could  face  a  run,  with  customers  withdrawing  their  deposits,  and  this  was  really  what 
happened to Enron. This makes some form of liquidation necessary, even if there later proved to be 
some value left in the balance sheet. 
The experiences of the Enron case led to investors temporarily fleeing companies with complicated 
constructions and ownership or companies suspected of being rather too creative in their accounting. 
However, this seems to be just a temporary phenomenon. Companies' credit spreads have not been 
affected as much as was feared and the stock market shook a little, but has begun to recover again. 
The  effect  appears  rather  to  have  been  that  accounting  methods  and  procedures  have  been 
voluntarily revised, a development welcomed by both market operators and authorities alike. 
Perhaps the Enron case can become a further indication that the markets have actually become more 
robust. However, the Enron collapse also illustrates clearly some of the risks that might arise when the 
markets grow in both significance and complexity. These risks and their effects on the real economy 
should not be underestimated. The markets' increasing dependence on one another both within and 
between  countries  could  lead  to  considerable  contagion  effects  when  there  is  a  disturbance  in  one 
part of the system. 
To summarise; the risks of large financial imbalances building up in economies have probably declined 
over  the  past  decade  as  a  result  of  more  predictable  economic  policy.  Regulations  and  risk 
management  systems  have  also  improved.  At  the  same  time,  the  complexity  of  the  financial 
instruments and the opportunities for extensive positions off the balance sheets have increased the 
difficulty in assessing future profits and risks in companies. Meanwhile, increased saving and financing 
in market-listed instruments have made households and companies more dependent on the safe and 
efficient functioning of the financial markets. This could mean that the effects of disturbances from the 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 3
 financial  system  on  the  real  economy  could  increase  in  the  long  term  if  regulatory  frameworks  and 
supervision are not adapted sufficiently rapidly. 
Can we live with large imbalances? 
When  share  prices  plummeted  almost  two  years  ago  and  when  uncertainty  increased  following  the 
terrorist  attack  in  September  last  year,  there  were  fears  that  expectations  for  the  future  would  be 
revised down so strongly that households' willingness to consume and companies willingness to invest 
would decline drastically. The fears concerned the US economy in particular, but the uncertainty was 
also  expected  to  affect  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  high  level  of  indebtedness  built  up  during  the 
economic upturn in many countries significantly increased this risk. Positive expectations of the future 
had increased companies' financing needs for investment. At the same time, a bright picture painted of 
the  future  and  an  increase  in  wealth  had  stimulated  households'  consumption  and  increased  their 
investment in housing. 
It was easy to imagine a risk scenario where household sector demand declined so rapidly that heavily 
indebted companies went bankrupt, where unemployment rose drastically and where banks an other 
lenders suffered extensive loan losses. This negative spiral could continue with further falls in share 
prices and household wealth and rising credit risk premiums would make lending more expensive. If 
this  negative  sequence  of  events  were  not  broken,  high  loan  losses  could  eventually  lead  to  bank 
crises and credit crunches, which would contribute further to the downward spiral. 
A  credit  boom,  large  increases  in  asset  prices  and  a  high  rate  of  growth  in  investment,  often 
concentrated on a particular sector, have been the factors preceding serious financial crises around 
the world. However, it is important to remember that neither a credit boom nor a large deficit on the 
current  account  need  be  interpreted  as  an  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances.  If  savings  and 
investment  decisions  are  based  on  realistic  expectations  of  future  growth  and  banks  and  financial 
investors have been able to make realistic assessments of the credit risks connected with investment 
projects  and  consumption  loans,  then  this  development  is  more  a  sign  that  the  international  capital 
markets are functioning efficiently. The task of the capital markets is to channel capital to investment 
projects  with  a  high  return.  If  financial  investors  assess  the  return  on  investments  in  a  particular 
country to be higher than in other countries, there is reason for the exchange rate to strengthen. One 
cannot rule out the possibility that this is exactly what happened in the USA. 
Whether the level of indebtedness, the deficit on the current account and the strong USD exchange 
rate comprise a significant risk of large fluctuations in growth and a threat to global financial stability in 
the near future depends to a great extent on  whether the long-term growth  in the US economy  will 
develop much more weakly than was expected when decisions on loans and investment were made. 
And,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  shaping  of  economic  policy  and  improvements  in  regulatory 
frameworks  and  risk  management  systems  should  have  reduced  the  uncertainty  in  investment  and 
savings  decisions  and  thereby  also  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  large  financial  imbalances.  However,  it 
remains to be seen  whether globalisation, IT and telecommunications technology  and perhaps  also 
more efficient financial markets have really created the potential for higher growth that lay behind the 
expectations that pushed up economic activity. So far, the economies have reacted fairly moderately 
to the shocks they have faced over the past year. The risk of financial imbalances being built up as a 
result of over-optimism still remains, but is now assessed to comprise less of a threat to the recovery 
of the economy than was previously thought. 
Monetary policy considerations 
Developments  over  the  past  months  also  indicate  that  the  risks  of  a  profound  and  prolonged 
international economic slowdown have declined considerably. There are a number of signs that the 
lowest point has now been reached. One condition for an upturn in international economic activity is 
that growth in the US economy picks up. Productivity has continued to develop very positively relative 
to  the  economic  situation,  which  is  a  good  sign.  The  fact  that  American  households'  demand  for 
consumption has improved since the autumn also indicates that the lowest point has been reached 
and a turnaround is on the way. 
The unease that has existed, and which was accentuated after the terrorist attack on 11 September, 
over  the  possibility  that  rapid  and  perhaps  exaggerated  adjustments  of  financial  imbalances  in  the 
American households' and companies' balance sheets might cause a deeper decline appears, at least 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2002
 so far, to have been quite unfounded. Better functioning financial markets as a result of the changes in 
economic  policy  and  the  improvements  in  regulatory  frameworks  and  supervision  that  I  mentioned 
earlier may have contributed to this. If so, the level of indebtedness in the corporate and household 
sectors  should  not  comprise  such  a  great  threat  to  economic  activity  in  the  coming  years  as  many 
have feared, including the Riksbank in a number of Inflation Reports. 
In Sweden, the decline in economic activity has not affected capacity utilisation and unemployment to 
the same extent as in previous cases in the economy. This means that the upward turn will be from a 
relatively high level of resource utilisation in the economy. Low interest rates, a weak krona and a very 
expansive  fiscal  policy  have  been  contributing  factors  here.  One  consequence  of  the  high  level  of 
resource  utilisation  could  be  the  unexpectedly  high  inflation  rate  registered  recently.  Earlier  price 
increases on certain product groups are assumed to be temporary, which would mean that inflation 
should fall this year. However, price rises in the services sector, for instance, probably reflect higher 
labour costs. A number of my colleagues have expressed concern over future inflation and I must say 
that I share their concern. 
The  fact  that  the  international  upturn  in  economic  activity  is  taking  place  after  a  very  brief  and 
moderate decline means that the economic upturn is not expected to be as strong as earlier upturns. 
For  Sweden,  this  means  that  exports  are  increasing,  but  that  growth  is  primarily  expected  to  come 
from domestic demand, in particular in the services sector. In my opinion, this increases the risk that 
domestically-oriented  companies  with  pressurised  profit  margins  will  continue  to  compensate 
themselves for cost increases by raising prices. 
This is roughly how the picture looks as the Executive Board of the Riksbank gathers on Monday 18 
March to discuss the economic situation and monetary  policy. We will also have as a basis for our 
decision a completely fresh Inflation Report, which will be published on the following day. 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 5
