 Mark W Olson: The European Union’s financial services action plan 
Testimony  of  Mr  Mark  W  Olson,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, 22 May 2002. 
 Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to speak today on matters relating to the operations of 
U.S.  banking  organizations  in  the  European  Union.  This  is  a  time  of  significant  change  within  the 
European Union with the ongoing efforts to complete the single market in financial services. 
I  join  with  my  colleagues  here  today  in  welcoming  the  European  Union’s  plans  to  make  its  market 
more efficient and transparent. The United States has always been a strong supporter of European 
unity  as  well  as  market  reforms  that  eliminate  unnecessary  regulatory  burden  and  promote  better 
functioning of markets and financial systems. 
The  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  of  the  European  Union  includes  proposals  that  are  aimed  at 
achieving  these  same  goals.  The  FSAP  involves  a  series  of  regulatory  and  legislative  measures 
designed to achieve, among other things, a single wholesale European market; open and secure retail 
markets;  and  state-of-the-art  prudential  rules  and  supervision.  To  further  these  goals,  a  number  of 
directives have been or will be adopted that deal with issues such as money laundering, investment 
services,  implementation  of  new  Basel  capital  rules  and  international  accounting  standards,  and 
supervision  of  financial  conglomerates.  I  will  deal  with  the  latter  three  areas  later  in  my  testimony. 
These directives, and all of the other measures being adopted in the FSAP, will affect U.S. financial 
services firms with operations in Europe. 
The FSAP is intended to modernize and enhance the efficiency and structure of the regulatory regime 
for financial services within the European Union. To the extent that the FSAP achieves these goals, 
U.S.  firms  are  well-positioned  to  offer  innovative  and  efficient  services  to  customers  throughout 
Europe. 
At the Federal Reserve,  we follow  with interest changes to foreign bank regulatory and supervisory 
systems and seek to understand how these systems affect the banking institutions for which we are 
responsible. This is especially important in the European Union, in which U.S. banking organizations 
have  substantial  operations.  As  of  December  2001,  27  U.S.  banking  organizations  operate  in  the 
European  Union  with  aggregate  EU  assets  of  over  $650  billion.  Moreover,  66  EU  banking 
organizations  conduct  commercial  banking  and  other  financial  services  in  the  United  States  with 
aggregate U.S. assets of over $1.7 trillion. 
These figures demonstrate that globalization is not a new concept or recent process. As U.S. industry 
has expanded its foreign operations, U.S. supervision has had to evolve to take account of the fact 
that  our banks operate  in  many different legal and regulatory environments. We have strengthened 
existing cooperative relationships with bank supervisors in other countries and established new ones 
as U.S. banks continue to expand their operations into other countries. At the Federal Reserve, we 
conduct  bilateral  consultations  with  individual  authorities  and  participate  in  international  groups  of 
financial  services  supervisors.  We  engage  our  EU  counterparts  both  bilaterally  and  through  these 
groups. 
The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  federal  banking  agencies  participate  regularly  in  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  was  formed  in  order  to  improve  communication  and 
cooperation among supervisors of internationally active banks. Some of the key achievements of the 
Committee include the 1988 Basel Capital Accord, which created for the first time an internationally 
accepted  standard  for  assessing  levels  of  bank  capital.  The  Accord  replaced  an  uneven  system  of 
national  standards  and  has  allowed  banks  to  expand  internationally  on  more  competitive  basis. 
Similarly,  the  Committee  adopted  its  Minimum  Standards  for  Consolidated  Supervision  in  1992, 
establishing the principle that a bank should be subject to a supervisory regime in which its financial 
statements  are  consolidated  and  subject  to  review  by  home  country  authorities.  Both  the  Capital 
Accord and the principle of consolidated bank supervision have become the internationally recognized 
standards that bank supervisors should aspire to meet. 
Nine of the member states of the European Union are also members of the Basel Committee and a 
representative  of  the  European  Commission  participates  as  an  observer.  The  Federal  Reserve  and 
eight of these nine EU countries, and a European Commission observer, also participate in the Joint 
BIS Review 34/2002 
 1
 Forum,  a  group  established  by  the  Basel  Committee,  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissioners (IOSCO), and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). The Joint 
Forum  discusses  issues  arising  from  the  operation  of  financial  services  conglomerates  and  has 
developed  principles  appropriate  to  the  supervision  of  entities  that  operate  within  financial  groups. 
These group meetings, as well as many working group meetings on specific issues, provide regular 
opportunities  for  U.S.  regulators  to  meet  and  discuss  issues  of  common  interest  with  European 
officials. 
In  addition  to  regular  meetings  of  international  groups,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  longstanding 
relationships  with  both  national  regulators  in  the  European  Union  and  staff  of  the  European 
Commission. For internationally active banking organizations with operations in both the United States 
and  the  European  Union,  national  supervisors  may  participate  in  joint  examinations  of  particular 
institutions, confer with each other on specific issues and meet periodically to discuss an institution’s 
operations  or  financial  condition.  Ongoing  communication  is  recognized  as  critical  for  effective 
supervision. Home and host countries’ interests are both furthered by dialogue and strong supervisory 
relationships. 
Regular contact with Commission staff goes back to the 1980s when the EU considered and adopted 
its  Second  Banking  Directive,  aimed  at  promoting  the  internal  market  by  establishing  the  so-called 
“European passport” for banks chartered in the EU. Under the passport, a bank chartered in one EU 
country is entitled to establish branches in any other EU country under the authority and supervision of 
its  home  country  rules.  Since  that  time,  several  U.S.  banks  have  taken  advantage  of  this  early  EU 
regulation by establishing a local bank in a European member state, which then used the “passport” to 
establish branches in other EU member countries. 
European subsidiaries of U.S. banks are able to take advantage of the passport under the principle of 
“national treatment.” National treatment generally means that a country  provides parity  of treatment 
between domestic and foreign-owned firms, resulting in equality of competitive opportunity. National 
treatment has long been the prevailing practice with respect to foreign banks operating in the United 
States and this practice was incorporated into statute in 1978 with the enactment of the International 
Banking Act (IBA). This principle has also been incorporated in various trade agreements to which the 
United States is a party, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the General 
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). The EU member states are also subscribers to the GATS 
and consequently to the national treatment principle it contains. 
Implementing national treatment can be difficult precisely because one country is trying to adapt its 
own  legal and regulatory structure to a foreign firm that  is incorporated in a different home country 
environment. This is a challenge the Federal Reserve has faced over the years as we seek to apply 
U.S. laws that were adopted for a system of bank holding companies to foreign banks that generally 
do not have a bank holding company structure. The United States also requires that a foreign bank be 
subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by its home country supervisor before it can buy a 
bank in this country. Under this law, the Federal Reserve must evaluate supervision systems that are 
different from our own and yet ensure that we are fairly applying the principle of national treatment. 
U.S. private sector firms may be concerned about new regulatory and supervisory initiatives in the EU 
because such proposals may require changes in existing operations and/or reporting standards. There 
may  also  be a concern that initiatives designed for European firms or industries would not properly 
take  account  of  home  country  supervisory  structures  or  regulatory  practices.  Foreign  banks  have 
expressed similar concerns about U.S. regulatory initiatives in the past. At the Federal Reserve, we 
have found that our open  and transparent regulatory process is crucial in helping us to understand 
how our proposals affect foreign banks and where problems arise, and gives us useful information for 
evaluating the merits of particular complaints. We have at times proposed regulations on which foreign 
banks and their governments, including the European Commission, filed  adverse comments. These 
comments  helped  us  to  reevaluate  our  regulations  and  to  determine  whether  our  supervisory  and 
regulatory  objectives  could  be  achieved  in  a  different  way,  consistent  with  the  principle  of  national 
treatment. 
With respect to the implementation of the FSAP in the European Union, the European Union has an 
obligation to ensure that the rules adopted are consistent with the principle of national treatment. It is 
our  expectation  that  the  European  Commission  and  the  member  states  will  seek  to  do  so.  Federal 
Reserve staff has met with Commission staff to discuss a number of matters, including the application 
of  the  financial  conglomerates  directives  to  U.S.  banking  organizations.  The  Federal  Reserve  is 
committed  to  continuing  the  dialogue  with  the  Commission  on  matters  of  mutual  interest,  both 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2002
 bilaterally  and  as  part  of  financial  markets  discussions  led  by  the  Treasury  Department.  We 
understand  that  the  Commission  has  begun  to  engage  in  industry  consultation  as  part  of  the  rule 
writing process and we endorse a process that allows all affected institutions, including those that are 
foreign-based, to participate actively in the process. 
The FSAP has a far reaching agenda. I will comment briefly on three issues of particular interest to 
U.S.  banking  organizations.  With  respect  to  the  conglomerates  directive,  we  understand  that  the 
impetus  for  the  directive  came  from  the  Joint  Forum’s  principles  for  the  supervision  of  financial 
conglomerates.  The  three  parent  bodies  of  the  Joint  Forum  (the  Basel  Committee,  IOSCO  and  the 
IAIS) were concerned that, although individual financial companies within a group might be subject to 
prudential supervision, the consolidated financial group might not be subject to appropriate oversight. 
This in turn could lead to relationships or transactions that could pose financial risk to the regulated 
parts  of  the  group.  The  Joint  Forum’s  principles  were  developed  to  help  assure  that  there  are  no 
material gaps in supervisors’ understanding of inter-affiliate relationships within a financial group that 
could  ultimately  result  in  financial  instability.  We  understand  that  the  EU  financial  conglomerates 
directive is concerned with this same issue. 
In the United States, U.S. banking organizations have long been subject to consolidated supervisory 
oversight. We believe that the Federal Reserve’s supervisory programs and practices for bank holding 
companies, including financial holding companies, are fully consistent with the requirements that are 
contemplated under the EU’s financial conglomerates directive. 
With  regard  to  the  capital  adequacy  directive  that  is  being  developed  for  credit  institutions  and 
investment  firms  in  the  European  Union,  we  also  believe  that  the  ultimate  product  will  not  present 
difficulties  for  U.S.  banking  organizations.  The  European  Commission  is  mindful  of  the  work  that  is 
underway  in  the  Basel  Supervisors  Committee  to  replace  the  existing  Basel  Capital  Accord  with  a 
more comprehensive risk sensitive framework for assessing an organization’s capital adequacy. 
When the EU issued its capital  adequacy directive for public comment in 2001, commenters raised 
concerns about the regulatory burden that would be imposed on institutions that would be subject to 
both  the  EU  capital  rules  and  the  Basel  capital  rules  at  the  national  level.  The  EU  committee 
responsible  for  the  capital  adequacy  directive  has  recognized  this  potential  burden  and  has  taken 
steps to ensure that the EU directive is as consistent as possible with the final revised Basel Accord. 
Technical  working  groups  of  the  Basel  Committee  have  been  communicating  with  the  EU  technical 
drafting groups with the objective of harmonizing the two frameworks to the fullest extent possible. 
The  most  sweeping  changes  in  the  Basel  capital  initiative  are  intended  for  internationally  active 
banking organizations. The EU capital adequacy directive is intended to apply to a much wider range 
of institutions, both those with international operations as well as those that are purely domestic. Thus, 
the  capital  adequacy  directive  will  likely  address  EU  specific  issues  for  smaller  institutions. 
Internationally  active  European  banks  currently  are  subject  to  the  Basel  capital  rules  as  they  have 
been adopted in individual countries, as well as to the existing EU capital adequacy directive. Some 
differences  between  the  two  sets  of  rules  do  exist.  Supervisors,  however,  are  aware  of  these 
differences  and  continually  strive  to  minimize  the  associated  regulatory  burden  on  institutions. 
Because  the  Basel  revisions  and  the  EU  capital  directive  revisions  are  underway  in  tandem  with 
similar estimated time frames for completion, there is a good likelihood that the final products will be 
substantively and significantly more consistent than the current Basel and EU capital rules. 
The FSAP also contemplates mandating adherence to international accounting standards. Currently, 
banking  organizations  in  the  European  Union  may  prepare  their  annual  financial  statements  in 
accordance  with  the  accounting  standards  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB), 
U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (U.S.  GAAP),  and/or  national  standards.  The  use  of 
U.S. GAAP is usually limited to those banking organizations or other companies whose securities are 
publicly  traded  on  U.S.  stock  exchanges  and  are  registered  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission. In many cases, these companies will also provide separate financial statements based 
on their national accounting standards and disclosure rules. The European Union will require all EU 
companies  listed  on  EU  exchanges  that  are  currently  following  national  standards  to  follow  IASB 
standards by 2005 and will require those EU companies that currently follow U.S. GAAP to adopt IASB 
standards by 2007. The EU is also working to adopt international auditing standards for external audits 
of EU companies, including banks. 
The IASB is now independent of the international accounting profession and independently funded. It 
has adopted many of the structural elements of the FASB in the United States, which are intended to 
promote an independent, objective standards-setting environment. Many senior American accounting 
BIS Review 34/2002 
 3
 experts serve on the IASB and its staff. IASB GAAP has many similarities with U.S. GAAP and the 
IASB plans to propose extensive enhancements to its standards later this year. 
The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure 
by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering 
stable  financial  markets.  The  concept  of  market  discipline  is  assuming  greater  importance  among 
international banking supervisors as well. The most recent proposal of the Basel Committee to amend 
Basel Capital Accord (called Basel II) seeks to strengthen the market’s ability to aid bank supervisors 
in evaluating banking organizations’ risks and assessing capital adequacy. It consists of three pillars, 
or  tools:  a  minimum  risk-based  capital  requirement  (pillar  I),  risk-based  supervision  (pillar  II),  and 
disclosure  of  risks  and  capital  adequacy  to  enhance  market  discipline  (pillar  III).  This  approach  to 
capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure 
will continue to be important aspects of our supervisory approach. 
The Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies are also actively involved in the efforts of 
the  Basel Committee to promote sound international  accounting,  auditing, and  disclosure standards 
and practices for global banking organizations and other companies. For example, an official of the 
Federal Reserve Board is a member of the Standards Advisory Council that advises the IASB and its 
trustees  on  its  projects,  proposals  and  standards.  The  U.S.  banking  agencies  have  been  active  in 
supporting the Basel Committee in its work with the IASB’s technical advisory groups to enhance the 
IASB’s standards for financial instruments and bank disclosures and the Basel Committee’s projects 
with other international groups to promote sound global bank auditing practices. 
In  conclusion,  I  believe  that  the  European  Union  should  be  encouraged  to  continue  its  program  to 
strengthen and modernize the rules under which financial services firms operate in Europe. This can 
only  increase  competition,  enhance  efficiency  and  contribute  to  economic  growth  in  the  EU  and 
globally. We are pleased that the European Commission is broadening its consultation and comment 
processes  on  proposals  being  considered  under  the  FSAP.  Supervisory  and  regulatory  measures 
benefit  significantly  from  an  open  and  transparent  process  in  which  affected  companies  may 
participate. We would  expect that the  European  Commission and member state national  authorities 
will apply the FSAP’s measures to U.S. firms on a fair and national treatment basis. 
U.S.  banking  organizations  are  dynamic  and  more  than  competitive  with  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Accordingly,  we  are  confident  that  U.S.  firms  will  benefit  from  a  strengthened  and  more  efficient 
European market for financial services. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2002
