 T T Mboweni: Recent economic developments 
Keynote address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Founding 
Congress of the Executive Management Institute of Southern Africa, Johannesburg, 5 July 2002. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  I  am  honoured  to  address  the  Founding  Congress  of  the  Executive 
Management  Institute  of  Southern  Africa  and  I  thank  you  for  the  opportunity.  I  will  first  discuss 
international economic developments, before turning to the domestic economy. 
There  have  recently  been  encouraging  signs  that  the  global  slowdown  has  bottomed  out.  The  IMF 
also confirmed in the April World Economic Outlook that a global recovery is under way. Business and 
consumer  confidence  have  strengthened,  leading  indicators  have  turned  up,  industrial  production  is 
levelling off, and commodity prices have begun to pick up. The United States is leading the upturn, but 
there are also signs of recovery in Europe and some countries in Asia. The recent global slowdown 
has drawn attention to the synchronisation of business cycles in nearly all regions. According to the 
Fund,  the  downturn  has  been  the  most  synchronised  in  two  decades.  The  IMF  ascribes  this 
synchronicity  to  common  shocks  such  as  the  higher  oil  prices,  the  bursting  of  the  information 
technology  bubble  and  the  tightening  of  monetary  policies  from  mid-1999  to  end-2000.  Increased 
financial  and  corporate  international  linkages  have  also  played  a  role.  This,  however,  raises  the 
question of whether the recoveries in different regions will be as synchronised as the downturn. 
The IMF forecasts projected global growth of 2,8 per cent in 2002, somewhat higher than expected in 
December 2001. The WTO projects that global merchandise trade will increase by 1 per cent this year 
following a 4 per cent decline in 2001. However, growth in the United States - and countries with close 
economic links to the United States - has been revised significantly upward, as the pace of recovery 
has exceeded expectations. The full impact of the pickup will only be felt in 2003 when global growth is 
expected  to  rise  to  4,0  per  cent.  The  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD) also recently projected that economic growth among its member states would be significantly 
higher this year than in 2001. OECD GDP growth is expected to accelerate gradually from 1,0 per cent 
in 2001 to 1,8 per cent and 3,0 per cent in 2002 and 2003 respectively. 
Oil prices 
2. 
After  surging  to  $32  per  barrel  at  the  end  of  2000,  crude  oil  prices  weakened  in  2001  with  the 
slowdown in the world economy. The price of Brent crude reached a six-month high of $27 per barrel 
in early April 2002 as a result of the tension in the Middle East, the economic recovery in the United 
States, Iraq’s 30-day sales embargo and a disruption in oil supplies caused by a strike at Venezuela’s 
state oil company. However, with Saudi Arabia pledging to replace Iraqi exports and the ousting of the 
Venezuelan president fuelling expectations of a less stringent oil policy, the price dropped to $23 per 
barrel  in  the middle  of April. With the return  of President  Chavez to power the oil price once again 
increased to levels above $27 per barrel. Crude oil prices, however, recently fell more than 1 per cent 
after Israeli forces pulled out of the Palestinian leader’s headquarters, easing concern that the conflict 
may escalate and disrupt Middle East oil flows. 
Prospects for the US 
3.  
Among the industrialised countries, the upturn is expected to be the strongest in the United States. 
This upswing is driven by a sharp turnaround in the inventory cycle, as well as substantial reductions 
in interest rates and tax cuts over the past year. In the first quarter of 2002 the United States economy 
grew at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 5,8 per cent, following an increase of 1,7 per 
cent in the previous quarter and a contraction of 1,3 per cent in the third quarter of 2001. This is the 
strongest  pace  in  more  than  two  years  underpinned  by  increases  in  consumer  spending  and  the 
yearlong  trend  of  sharp  cutbacks  in  business  inventories  is  showing  signs  of  tapering  off.  The 
acceleration  in  real  GDP  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002  primarily  reflected  upturns  in  private 
inventory  investment,  exports  and  residential  fixed  investment.  A  gradual  strengthening  in  business 
investment is expected to underpin the recovery in the second half of 2002 and into 2003. 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 1
 Euro area and the United Kingdom 
4. 
The euro area economy had contracted at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 0,7 per cent in 
the last quarter of 2001, but a gradual recovery is in progress with depleted inventories being rebuilt 
and international trade picking up. Growth in the euro area in 2002 is projected to be lower than in 
2001, but the economy is expected to gain momentum in the second half of this year, and reaching 
2,9 per cent in 2003. 
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  currently  somewhat  higher  than  expected  as  a  result  of  the  higher  oil 
prices. The ECB warned that if the increase in oil prices is sustained, it would also have an impact on 
inflation rates during the rest of 2002. 
In  the  United  Kingdom,  for  2001  as  a  whole,  real  GDP  growth  averaged  2,2  per  cent,  the  highest 
among the G-7 countries. The United Kingdom could, however, not avoid the global slowdown, which 
caused quarter-on-quarter growth in 2001 to decelerate registering zero growth in the fourth quarter of 
2001.  The  economy,  however,  managed  to  recover  marginally  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002  with 
preliminary estimates showing that GDP increased by a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 
0,3 per cent. 
Given  the  United  Kingdom’s  significant  exposure  to  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the 
United  States,  improvements  in  the  US  economy  are  expected  to  positively  impact  on  economic 
prospects  in  the  United  Kingdom. This  will  support  continuing  growth  in  domestic  demand  resulting 
from the more expansionary monetary policy since the beginning of 2001 and a fiscal stimulus, largely 
in the form of planned rises in general government spending. Growth for 2002 is expected to average 
2 per cent. 
Japan 
5. 
Japan  continues  to  experience  recession  -  the  most  severe  of  the  past  decade.  However,  the 
increasing  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  and  Asian  economies  has  led  to  an  increase  in 
Japanese  exports.  This  increase  in  exports,  which  accounts  for  about  10  per  cent  of  the  economy, 
recently prompted the Bank of Japan to raise its assessment of the economy for the second straight 
month  -  the  first  back-to-back  upgrade  in  19  months.  The  Japanese  central  bank stated  in  its  April 
monthly report that the Japanese economy still continues to deteriorate as a whole, but concluded that 
the pace has moderated somewhat. 
Emerging economies 
6. 
Recent economic attention on Latin America has focused on the crisis in Argentina and its implications 
for  the  rest  of  the  region.  Argentina’s  financial  markets  came  under  increasing  pressure  in  2001 
because of the growing fear of a debt default and the end of the peso’s peg to the dollar. A 66 per cent 
decline in the peso since the government abandoned a decade-old peg to the dollar in early January 
has triggered steep price increases. In March, inflation was 4 per cent (month-on-month), the highest 
in 11 years. Despite months of talks on an IMF sponsored recovery package, both the Argentinean 
government and the IMF remain divided on a number of issues. 
Contagion from Argentina to neighbouring countries has been limited, with the exception of Uruguay. 
With  the  exception  of  Argentina  and  Uruguay,  Latin  America  should  experience  better  growth  as  a 
result of the economic recovery in the United States and Europe. 
Economic growth in most developing Asian countries slowed significantly during the year as external 
demand  deteriorated  in  2001.  However,  despite  being  affected  by  weak  external  markets,  some 
countries  such  as  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  India  and  Vietnam  maintained  relatively  robust 
growth.  In  contrast,  South  Asian  growth  accelerated  as  slowing  export  expansion  was  offset  by 
improvement in the performance of the agricultural sector. In Central Asia, growth was higher in 2001, 
in part because of large investments mainly in the energy sector. 
It seems that strong consumer spending in some of the Asian economies is providing some cushion 
against external shocks. In countries like South Korea, the Philippines, Thailand and Malaysia where 
interest  rates  were  aggressively  reduced  in  2001,  overall  consumer  spending  rose  much  faster  as 
exports fell. On the contrary, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan (economies most hit by the global 
slowdown) saw consumer spending falling during the same period due to their reluctance in cutting 
interest rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2002
 The Asian Development Bank, however, expects economic activity to recover in the second half of this 
year, following the revival  of exports in the United States and a stabilisation of domestic sentiment. 
GDP  in  developing  Asia  is  projected  by  the  IMF  to  grow  by  5,9  per  cent  in  2002,  but  as  global 
economic  growth  gathers  momentum;  the  economy  is  forecast  to  strengthened  by  6,4  per  cent  in 
2003. 
Domestic economic developments 
7.  
Turning now to domestic economic conditions, recent events have been interesting to say the least. 
Against the extreme volatility in the financial markets, and in particular in the foreign exchange market, 
real-sector developments have been relatively stable. 
Growth in the real gross domestic product in 2001 as a whole amounted to 2,2 per cent, marginally 
exceeding population growth and signifying a small per capita increase. Focusing more closely on the 
second half of the  year, the seasonally  adjusted and annualised growth rate in real gross domestic 
product accelerated from 1 per cent in the third quarter of 2001 to 2½ per cent in the fourth quarter. 
This can be attributed to robust growth registered in the real value added by the non-primary sectors 
of the economy. While agricultural and mining output volumes contracted in the final quarter of last 
year, the other sectors expanded. Manufacturing in particular did well towards the end of last year, led 
by production of motor vehicles and parts, chemicals and basic metals. Manufacturing production rose 
at a strong annualised rate of 5½ per cent in the final quarter of 2001. Impressive output growth was 
also  recorded  by  the  transport,  storage  and  communication  sector  where  a  third  cellular  telephone 
operator  started  business,  by  the  financial  services  industry,  and  by  the  wholesale  and  retail  trade 
sectors. 
The construction industry also at last seems to be recovering from the setbacks suffered in the late 
1990s, and its real value added rose by 4 per cent in 2001 - double positive in that it also adds to the 
economy’s productive capacity. On that score it is notable that in manufacturing, where the utilisation 
of production capacity is regularly monitored, the utilisation rate stood at 79,4 per cent in the fourth 
quarter of 2001. This is still more than four percentage points below the peak rate recorded in 1995, 
indicating sufficient productive capacity to accommodate a further output expansion. Some indications 
of  bottlenecks  in  the  transport  sector  are,  however,  worrying.  While  our  capacity  to  communicate 
electronically is advancing in leaps and bounds, ordinary transport of people and goods sometimes 
seems  to  be  a  problem.  Some  of  the  construction  industry’s  recent  pick-up  in  activity  will  help  to 
resolve that problem. 
Looking at real activity from the expenditure side, the growth in real final consumption expenditure by 
households  accelerated  from  2½  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2001  to  3½  per  cent  in  the  fourth 
quarter. This was mainly due to increases recorded in real expenditure on durable and semi-durable 
goods.  Pre-emptive  buying  in  anticipation  of  future  price  increases  supported  the  level  of  durable 
purchases. 
The growth in real final consumption expenditure by general government accelerated somewhat from 
an annualised rate of 2½ per cent in the third quarter of 2001 to 3 per cent in the fourth quarter. This 
was concentrated in real spending on intermediate goods and services such as medicine. Following 
years  of  pruning  real  government  outlays,  the  interest  and  debt  burden  of  government  has  been 
brought  down  to  the  point  where  resources  can  be  redirected  towards  more  and  better  service 
delivery. 
Real gross fixed capital formation increased at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate of 5½ per 
cent in the fourth quarter of 2001. The higher tempo of real gross fixed capital formation towards the 
end  of  2001  was  fairly  widely  dispersed,  with  the  manufacturing,  finance,  mining  and  community, 
social and personal services sectors playing prominent roles. 
So  far,  the  production  and  expenditure  information  for  the  first  quarter  of  2002  presents  a  bit  of  a 
mixed bag, with domestic vehicles sales for example down while manufacturing output continues to 
rise. 
Turning to the external sector, the rand’s fortunes appear to have turned somewhat and the weighted 
exchange rate of the rand has recovered by some 13,45 per cent from 31 December 2001 to 7 May 
2002. 
South Africa’s foreign trade balance - our exports minus our imports - was adversely affected by the 
slowdown  in  the  world  economy.  Somewhat  disappointing  trade  balance  data  up  to  January  2002 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 3
 were followed by strong trade surpluses in both February and March; the March surplus, seasonally 
adjusted,  stood  at  a  record  level.  The  exchange  rate  depreciation  has  boosted  South  Africa’s 
international  competitiveness  considerably,  and  producers  are  reacting  to  it.  However,  it  remains 
essential to avoid the erosion through domestic inflation of this competitive edge. 
As  a  percentage  of  gross  domestic  product,  the  deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of 
payments shrank from 1,1 per cent in the third quarter of 2001 to 0,3 per cent in the fourth quarter. For 
2001 as a whole the deficit amounted to R1,7 billion or 0,2 per cent of gross domestic product. 
Import  cover,  defined  as  the  value  of  gross  international  reserves  relative  to  the  value  of  imported 
goods and services, improved from 20 weeks’ worth of goods and services at the end of September 
2001 to 24 weeks’ worth at the end of December. The Reserve Bank’s net open position in foreign 
currency - the amount to which the Bank is exposed to exchange rate risk - has also fallen to less than 
US$2  billion  at  present,  against  a  peak  value  of  more  than  US$23  billion  some  four  years  ago. 
Accordingly, perceived  weaknesses of the past have been removed. A $2 billion open position in a 
$100 billion GDP economy which exports $30 billion per annum is quite well-contained. 
CPIX inflation over twelve months (i.e. year-on-year increases in consumer prices in metropolitan and 
other urban areas, excluding interest cost of mortgage bonds) initially fell below 6 per cent in the three 
months to September 2001, but subsequently picked up to 8,0 per cent in the year to March 2002. 
Headline inflation rose from 4,0 per cent in October 2001 to 6,6 per cent over the same period. The 
acceleration in both these measures of inflation in the last few months, was a consequence of higher 
rates of increase in the prices of consumer food products that, in their turn, were associated with the 
decline in the exchange value of the rand. 
Essentially driven by a slowdown in imported inflation at the time, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the all-goods production price index slowed down from 10,0 per cent in December 2000 to 7,8 per cent 
in  September  2001.  It  then  accelerated  sharply  to  14,1  per  cent  in  March  2002  on  account  of  the 
depreciation  in  the  value  of  the  rand  and  the  related  surge  in  the  imported  component  of  the 
production price index and in the prices of import-competing domestically-produced goods. 
To this account of inflation developments must also be added the fact that both the money supply and 
bank credit extension are rising at double-digit rates. As far as the money supply is concerned, the 
growth over twelve months in M3 accelerated from 17,0 per cent in December 2001 to around 19 per 
cent in both January and February 2002, receding slightly to 18 per cent in March. Financial market 
volatility contributed to the public’s strong demand for monetary assets. 
Finally,  government’s  finances  are  healthy  due  to  firm  control  over  expenditure  and  continued 
buoyancy in tax collections. The national government’s deficit before borrowing for 2001/02 amounted 
to some 1½ per cent of GDP, which indicates a high level of discipline. 
The non-financial public-sector borrowing requirement amounted to R11,5 billion in fiscal 2000/01, or 
1,3 per cent of gross domestic product. The non-financial public-sector borrowing requirement in the 
first  nine  months  of  fiscal  2001/02  amounted  to  a  surplus  of  R3,4  billion,  or  0,5  per  cent  of  gross 
domestic product. 
Conclusion 
8.  
In conclusion, it appears as that the slowdown in the global economy seems to have tapered off. The 
industrialised  world,  led  by  the  United  States,  is  experiencing  vast  improvements  in  economic 
conditions. This augurs well for economic prospects in the world economy. In general the emerging 
economies are expected to benefit from a resurgence in external demand. However, it is important to 
realise that there are some risks that threaten the pace and magnitude of the  global recovery. The 
volatile geopolitical environment surrounding the oil market is one such risk. Further, with the upturn in 
economic activity, it is to be expected that government spending that helped to make the recession 
short-lived will be curtailed. In addition, expansionary monetary policy that has been a characteristic of 
the  last  year  will  become  more  contractionary  to  keep  inflationary  pressures  in  check.  Economic 
growth  is  not  sustainable  in  an  inflationary  environment  and  is  easier  to  achieve  within  an 
expansionary  monetary  policy  framework,  but  becomes  more  challenging  within  a  contractionary 
policy framework. However, it is important to realise that this is a challenge that we can successfully 
confront. 
It is within this context, a global one, that the Executive Management Institute of South Africa has to 
place  itself.  In  order  to  train  the  managers  and  business  leaders  of  tomorrow,  you  must  grasp  the 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2002
 complexities of the environment that confronts them. I commend Emisa for its community work and I 
wish you well as you chart your future course. 
BIS Review 45/2002 
 5
