 David Dodge: The conduct of monetary policy in the presence of economic 
shocks 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  National  Association  for 
Business Economics, Washington, D.C., 26 March 2002.  
 Globalization  -  the  trend  towards  greater  economic  integration  around  the  world  -  has  brought 
important benefits to us all. It has boosted world trade, opened up access to sources of global finance, 
and facilitated the diffusion of far-reaching technological advances in transportation, communications, 
and information processing.  
A  more  integrated  world  also  tends  to  speed  up  the  transmission  of  economic  and  financial 
disturbances  across  national  frontiers  and  increase  their  spillover  effects.  Over  the  past  decade, 
monetary  authorities  around  the  world  have  had  to  deal  with  a  number  of  such  disturbances.  In 
1994-95, we had the Mexican financial crisis. In 1997-98, we had the Asian and Russian crises. And 
last year we had the global economic slowdown, which was greatly exacerbated by the tragic events 
of 11 September in the United States.  
To be sure, the conduct of monetary policy has become more complicated and challenging - but not 
impossible  or  ineffective.  In  fact,  I  would  argue  that  in  most  countries,  including  Canada,  monetary 
policy has been very effective in mitigating the impact of global shocks on the domestic economy.  
Today, I would like to discuss how Canadian monetary policy has been conducted in the presence of 
economic surprises or shocks - both domestic and external. I would also like to add some thoughts on 
the issue of the appropriate monetary response, nationally and internationally, to common economic 
disturbances.  
Economic surprises and Canada's inflation-targeting approach to monetary policy  
To  put  things  in  context,  let  me  start  by  providing  a  bit  of  background  about  Canada's  inflation-
targeting system.  
When it comes to conducting monetary policy, our formal mandate is not dissimilar to that of the U.S. 
Federal Reserve or to those of many other central banks. The preamble to the Bank of Canada Act 
enjoins  the  Bank  "to  mitigate  by  its  influence  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production,  trade, 
prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally 
to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada."  
We have chosen to achieve the objectives of the Act through a policy focused on inflation control. This 
is  because  we  believe  that  a monetary  policy  that  consistently  delivers  low,  stable,  and  predictable 
inflation is likely to be the greatest contribution that the central bank can make to sustained growth in 
output and employment.  
Since 1991, the  Bank and the Government of Canada have agreed to pursue low  inflation  within a 
framework based on an explicit inflation target. The current agreement, which runs to the end of 2006, 
aims at continuing to keep inflation at the 2 per cent target midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range over the 
medium term.  
There are two elements I would like to underscore here - the emphasis we place on the 2 per cent 
midpoint as our target and the emphasis on the medium term. The significance of the first will become 
apparent in a moment. As for the focus on the medium term, it has to do with the fact that monetary 
policy  actions  take  anywhere  between  one  and  two  years  to  have  their  full  effects  on  output  and 
inflation. So, when setting monetary policy, we have to consider what will be the effect of actions we 
take today on the economy and on inflation several months down the road.  
In  practice,  setting  monetary  policy  means  raising  or  lowering  interest  rates  to  maintain  a  balance 
between the demand for goods and services and the economy's capacity to supply those goods and 
services. As long as there is a balance between demand and supply, inflation will remain stable.  
When  we  look  at  it  this  way,  the  rate  of  inflation  is  more  than  a  number  that  tells  us  how  the 
purchasing power of the average consumer is holding up. It is also a measure that the central bank 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 1
 can  use  to  gauge  how  close  to  capacity  the  economy  actually  is.  The  presence  or  absence  of 
inflationary pressures can tell us a lot about the balance between demand and supply. Our objective is 
to  help  the  economy  achieve  potential  output  -  that  is  to  say,  the  maximum  level  of  output  and 
employment that can be sustained over the medium term without putting upward pressure on inflation.  
Over the past decade, a monetary policy based on an inflation target has helped us realize important 
economic benefits, particularly solid gains in output, employment, and incomes. It has also helped us 
to avoid the boom and bust cycles of the past, even in the presence of important surprises. This is 
because the forward-looking framework of inflation targeting works like an automatic stabilizer for the 
economy,  with  interest  rates  being  raised  or  lowered  in  response  to  expected  movements  in  future 
inflation relative to our 2 per cent target midpoint. For the most part, such movements reflect changes 
in the pressure of demand on potential output.  
Thus, our focus on the 2 per cent target midpoint allows us to operate monetary policy symmetrically 
in response to surprises in demand. And this helps to reduce the ups and downs of the business cycle 
and to promote sustained economic growth.  
The forward-looking framework of inflation targeting also allows us to handle temporary supply shocks, 
so  long  as  these  shocks  do  not  feed  into  inflation  expectations.  The  monetary  credibility  gained 
through our inflation-targeting system means that changes in volatile energy or food prices no longer 
feed into  other prices  and  into  wages the  way  they  did  in  the past. That is  why, unlike some other 
central banks, we focus on the underlying trend of inflation, and use as our operating guide a core rate 
that excludes the eight most volatile components of the consumer price index (CPI) and the effect of 
changes in indirect taxes on the remaining components. Such a measure of core inflation is a better 
predictor of future inflation than the total CPI. With this approach, monetary policy responds only to 
fundamental trends and does not turn temporary price shocks into something that can destabilize the 
economy.  
How the Bank of Canada deals with international disturbances  
So far, I have described how our monetary policy framework, based on an inflation target, helps us 
respond to, and deal with, important surprises that have an impact on our economy.  
I would now like to say a few words about how the Bank of Canada incorporates external economic 
shocks into its decision-making process.  
Canada is a small and very open economy. We export more than 40 per cent of what we produce and, 
in general, we are price-takers (that is to say, the prices of what we buy and sell abroad are largely 
determined in world markets). Thus, the external environment is extraordinarily important to us.  
As part of its decision-making process, the Bank has always followed world economic developments 
very  closely.  The  Bank's  Governing  Council  starts  its  deliberations  by  looking  at  changes  in  the 
external  environment.  In  particular,  we  focus  on  economic  prospects  for  the  United  States  and  the 
major overseas countries, as well as on world commodity prices. Then we look at the implications of 
all this for aggregate demand  in  Canada. Next,  we focus on  domestic demand, taking  into account 
anecdotal information gathered by our regional offices, as well as trends in credit, money, and financial 
markets. All this feeds into our decision on interest rates.  
Let me try and relate this to recent experience. Take last year, for example. Through the first half of 
2001, we moved to loosen monetary policy at a measured pace. This approach was based on a view 
that the economic slowdown in the United States, although sharper than initially expected, would lead 
to only a moderate slowing of growth in Canada.  
By midsummer, however, evidence had begun to accumulate that the slowdown in the United States 
and  elsewhere  would  be  deeper  and  last  longer  than  anticipated.  Because  of  this,  and  because  of 
signs  that  domestic  demand  in  Canada  was  softening,  we  came  to  the  conclusion,  as  we  looked 
ahead,  that  our  economy  would  be  operating  substantially  below  potential  for  some  time,  and  that 
inflation would fall below target. The extraordinary uncertainty introduced by the 11 September terrorist 
acts in the United States pushed the recovery further back, so that, even under a relatively optimistic 
scenario, our economy was expected to be operating at levels below capacity well into 2003. That is 
why, as of mid-September and through to the end of 2001, we stepped up the pace of interest rate 
reductions.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2002
 As I said in my last speech in Paris earlier this month, more recently, there have been encouraging 
signs of a turnaround in the world economy, and the latest economic indicators for Canada show that 
a recovery is indeed underway.  
What should be the international policy response to common shocks?  
Having discussed how Canadian monetary policy has been conducted in the presence of economic 
shocks,  I  would  now  like  to  broaden  the  scope  of  my  presentation  somewhat  by  providing  some 
thoughts on the appropriate international policy response to common shocks.  
Clearly, it is very important that individual central banks do their best to assess the implications of such 
shocks  and  that  they  respond  promptly,  within  their  respective  monetary  policy  arrangements,  to 
mitigate the effects on their own economies and on the world economy as a whole.  
But given the increasing interconnectedness of national economies, a legitimate question is whether 
there  should  not  be  greater  policy  cooperation,  or  even  concerted  action,  in  response  to  major 
common shocks.  
Here's  how  I  respond  to  that  question,  and  I  will  certainly  be  very  interested  to  hear  the  views  of 
others. 
First,  let  me  note  that  we  central  bankers  greatly  value  our  bi-monthly  meetings  at  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  and  our  regular  meetings  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  where  we 
systematically  discuss  the  world  economic  situation.  So  there  is  an  important  process  in  place  for 
exchanging information on what is going on in our domestic economies as well as globally.  
Now, when it comes to policy action, I would argue that the best way to deal with common shocks, 
such as last year's global economic slowdown and the 11 September events, is prompt response by 
individual  central  banks.  This  response  should  be  based  on  individual  circumstances.  But  it  should 
also take into account what is happening elsewhere and what fiscal and monetary authorities around 
the world are doing to deal with the situation. Otherwise, there is a risk that individual central banks will 
either under- or overreact, with potentially undesired consequences for the world economy.  
But the way that I and a number of my central bank colleagues around the world see it, prompt action 
does not mean concerted action. Indeed, to be clear, I would say yes to co-operation; yes to exchange 
of information; and yes to taking into account what is happening elsewhere. But I do not believe that 
formal coordination or concerted action are necessary.  
Provided that there is a good collective appreciation of the significance of certain global shocks, there 
is no reason why individual monetary authorities should not be the ones to take action tailored to their 
own domestic circumstances to deal with the implications.  
For example, in the days immediately after 11 September, there was no formal joint decision-making, 
although the major central banks did exchange  information, leading to a shared appreciation of the 
grave risks for the world economy. And policy action was taken quickly—although not simultaneously 
and not by equal amounts.  
Judging from the signs of economic recovery we are now seeing around the globe, I would say that 
this process of international consultation and prompt policy action by individual central banks worked 
well to help us weather the very difficult circumstances we all faced last year.  
I  would  also  like  to  highlight  the  significance  of  personal  contacts  among  central  bankers.  Regular 
contacts build trust. And trust is very important when we have to act quickly, as we did last September 
to  deal  with  the  pressures  faced  by  financial  institutions,  markets,  and  infrastructures  immediately 
following the terrorist attacks. For example, in Canada, we were able to move very quickly and secure 
a temporary  increase of our existing swap facility  with the U.S. Federal Reserve. This arrangement 
was made to facilitate the  functioning  of Canadian financial markets and to provide  liquidity  in U.S. 
dollars to Canadian banks to settle their U.S.-dollar transactions, if the need arose.  
Let me conclude. Last year, as in previous episodes over the past decade, Canada's inflation-targeting 
approach to monetary policy allowed the Bank to respond quickly and successfully to buffer the effects 
of worldwide shocks on our economy.  
 BIS Review 22/2002 
 3
 In  a  very  open  and  increasingly  integrated  world,  it  is  important  that  individual  central  banks  take 
prompt  action,  based  on  their  own  circumstances  and  needs,  but  taking  also  into  account  what  is 
going  on  outside  their  borders.  Such  action  has  the  best  chance  of  mitigating  the  effects  of  global 
shocks on their economies and, by extension, on the international economy.  
When we all do what is right for our domestic economies, we are also most likely to do what is right for 
the world economy.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2002
