 Urban Bäckström: Households, stock markets and the financial system 
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, to the Share Promotion Association, 
Stockholm, 21 January 2002. 
 Thank you for inviting me to the Share Promotion Association to talk about households, stock markets 
and the financial system. This means that today I shall not be talking about current monetary policy. 
First let me note that since the deregulation of financial markets in the 1970s and ’80s, central banks 
around the world have become increasingly interested in the financial system’s various functions and 
institutions. One reason for this lies in the system’s central place in society’s infrastructure. Just as it is 
important  that  networks  for  transport,  electricity  and  telecommunications  function  properly,  so  is  it 
essential that, for example, payments can be transacted, capital can be saved and channelled to the 
most profitable investment projects and that both households and firms get help in handling financial 
uncertainty  and  risk  as  well  as  possibilities  of  spreading  consumption  over  time.  Production  and 
employment are liable to be hit to varying degrees if, for some reason, parts of the financial system do 
not work as they should or even break down completely. 
Moreover, experience has taught us that the price of shares and other assets plays a major part in the 
dynamics of economic growth. Rising share prices, for instance, tend to stimulate private consumption 
and  business  investment  and  vice  versa.  It  follows  that  stock  market  trends  are  also  relevant  for 
monetary policy. 
So there are a number of good reasons for a central bank to take a closer look at and reflect on how 
the financial system functions. 
In  recent  decades  the  financial  system  in  most  western  countries  has  undergone  a  notable 
transformation.  One  feature  of  this  development  is  disintermediation,  a  process  whereby  a  larger 
proportion of the funds involved in saving and financing flow directly to the financial markets instead of 
being routed via the banks’ traditional lending and deposit operations. The general public’s heightened 
interest in share investment, either directly or through mutual funds, has been an important component 
of  this  process.  Statistics  show  that  in  recent  decades  shares  have  made  up  an  increasingly  large 
proportion of households’ financial assets. In the same period, moreover, and not least in recent years, 
it is evident from your Association’s regular surveys that share ownership in Sweden has spread very 
rapidly. 
The stock market displays a number of interesting phenomena. In recent decades the real return on 
shares in Sweden has been almost three times higher than the long-term trend. In this period there 
have also been a number of dramatic developments, for instance the stock-market crash in 1987, the 
long downward period in the early 1990s, the mini-crash in 1998 and the IT bubble at the turn of the 
century. 
All this raises a variety of interesting issues. Today I shall confine my brief remarks to some aspects 
that have to do with the fact that shares now weigh considerably more heavily in household financial 
portfolios than  was the case thirty  years ago. As I just said,  this development has coincided  with a 
return  on  shares  that  has  been  very  high  historically.  Sooner  or  later,  however,  there  will  be  a 
normalisation, more or less in line with what has happened in the past. This is so because the return 
on  shares  is  ultimately  determined  by  corporate  profits,  which  are  bound  up  in  turn  with  economic 
development in general. GDP represents the sum of all profits and  wages in the economy and it is 
hard  to  see  how  an  annual  real  growth  rate  of  around  2  per  cent  could  result  in  a  development  of 
corporate profits that warrants a real annual return on shares that averages around 20 per cent. 
A  more  “normal”  combination  of  stock-market  returns  and  risks  makes  saving  in  shares  more 
troublesome than it has been with the good returns in the past twenty years. The financial system will 
need to do more than before to help households manage the risks associated with stock markets. The 
question is how this change is likely to occur. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 1
 Greatly increased household saving in shares 
One  factor  behind  the  growing  interest  in  share  investment  in  Sweden  in  the  late  1970s  may  have 
been the low valuations initially. A relatively weak stock-market trend in the 1960s and ’70s no doubt 
fed expectations of a favourable return in the future. Another factor was certainly that the real return on 
bank deposits had been negative at times in the 1970s. Moreover, the introduction of mutual funds 
with tax incentives in the late 1970s and their subsequent replacement by a national savings system 
presumably drew many people’s attention to the stock market. It is also conceivable that the rise of 
economic  journalism  in  the  1970s  and  ’80s  contributed  to  a  greater  interest  in  the  stock  market. 
Neither should the formation of the Shareholders Association and the Share Promotion Association in 
the  1960s  and  1970s,  respectively,  be  overlooked.  More  knowledge  and  information  certainly 
contributed. 
However, the increased saving in shares is one item in a larger context, in Sweden as well as other 
western industrialised countries. I mentioned earlier that Swedish households have transferred much 
of their traditional saving from banks to other instruments. Thirty years ago, bank deposits and other 
very liquid assets with little risk made up almost 60 per cent of households’ financial wealth, as against 
less than 20 per cent today. The major part of this adjustment in financial portfolios has gone to shares 
but a good deal now takes the form of insurance saving. The trend towards forms of saving  with a 
higher risk has been accentuated by new rules for insurance companies, permitting a high proportion 
of  shares,  although  this  is  arranged  more  indirectly.  Similar  tendencies  are  to  be  found  in  other 
industrialised countries. So it is not just in Sweden that saving has moved away from traditional bank 
deposits. 
One underlying factor is probably demographic. People traditionally tend to save more in the phase of 
life when their children are old enough to leave home. In that the large birth cohorts from the 1940s 
reached that age during the 1980s, there was no doubt an increase in the propensity to save for the 
longer term. Moreover, people today live longer on average than before, which means that they work 
for  a  shorter  proportion  of  their  lives,  so  the  higher  return  that  often  results  from  long-term  saving 
comes in handy to maintain their standard of living. Changes in tax, transfer and pensions systems 
also tend to move in the same direction. The fact that rising standards of living and a better yield have 
boosted  households’  financial  wealth  may  also  have  raised  the  propensity  to  take  risks.  Additional 
factors may be decreased transaction costs, more access to information and the simpler procedures 
for share dealing compared with the situation twenty to thirty years ago. Many of these changes have 
occurred as a result of technical innovations, not least the advent of the internet. 
Long-term saving requires an ability to manage the associated risks. Share prices fluctuate widely, in 
marked contrast to the stability of bank deposits. If the fluctuations occur around a steeply rising yield, 
as they did in the end of the 1970s and during the 1990s, the problems may not be particularly great. 
Even bad advice can be forgiven when things are going well. But the time comes when stock-market 
yields  fall  back  to  a  more  “normal”  trend  and  the  fluctuations  in  share  prices  are  then  of  greater 
importance for investors. 
It follows that in future households will need qualified assistance and support in order to arrive at the 
best and safest ways of investing their assets. As I said earlier, this is a task for the financial system’s 
institutions: banks, security companies and so on. Performing in the stock market is not all that easy 
when yields are more normal. If inexperienced people are enticed into buying shares for money they 
will soon need for other purposes, the results can be tragic. Similarly, the consequences may be fatal 
if a stock-market collapse erodes pension capital just when it is most needed for retirement. 
In order to illustrate the challenges and risks associated with share investment, let me now very briefly 
summarise some of the established theories. Not even professional financial agents find it particularly 
easy to perform successfully in the stock market. There are plenty of situations when steeply falling 
share  prices  make  the  ordinary  share  investor  feel  nervous  and  uncertain.  What,  then,  should  an 
ordinary household do to avoid running into trouble? So let me present what is perhaps a simplified 
background to some of the ideas and theories that explain the behaviour of financial markets. 
What governs share yields? 
Much of the time-honoured advice that is now disseminated to optimise share investment is based on 
what  Harry  Markowitz  arrived  at  half  a  century  ago  as  a  25-year-old  graduate  student  at  Chicago 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 University.1  Share  investment  involves  risks  that  can  be  reduced  by  not  putting  all  the  eggs  in  one 
basket. Buying one particular share entails risks of two types; one to do with conditions pertaining to 
the company  in  question, the  other  with the economy in general,  that is, factors affecting the stock 
market as a whole. Markowitz showed that with a portfolio made up of shares in a sufficient variety of 
companies  and  industries,  the  company-specific  risks  virtually  cancel  out.  The  risk  inherent  in  the 
stock market’s overall fluctuations remains but the aggregate risk is reduced. 
This insight was soon followed by the efficient-market hypothesis, which became a central tenet in the 
literature  and  has  far-reaching  implications.2  It  implies,  for  example,  that  consistently  beating  the 
market, so that the return exceeds the average for all shares, is out of the question. As the market 
always knows best, active management or even individual analysis by the ordinary share investor is 
pointless.  The  optimum  is  invariably  a  passive  portfolio  that  mirrors  the  market.  In  this  way,  the 
amateur can achieve just as good a return as the professional. 
The efficient-market hypothesis presupposes that investors are rational and base share valuations on 
fundamental factors. If their market behaviour is not rational, it is assumed to be random, which means 
that  individual  actions  have  no  impact  on  financial  prices.  If  irrational  players  nevertheless  act  in  a 
similar  way,  any  influence  on  financial  prices  is  eliminated  by  other,  more  professional  agents  via 
arbitrage, which is assumed to be quick and effective.3 The irrational players accordingly suffer losses 
and therefore ultimately leave the market. In this way, the competition between rational and irrational 
investors, together with the existence of arbitrage, results in financial markets remaining efficient. 
In  the  past  two  decades,  however,  the  notion  of  financial  market  efficiency  has  been  challenged,4 
which  will  hardly  surprise  those  with  practical  experience.  This  is  mainly  because  the  possibility  of 
arbitrage  has  proved  to  be  much  more  limited  than  assumed  earlier.  Studies  in  recent  years  have 
demonstrated  the  occurrence  of  periods  when  prices  deviate  appreciably  from  more  fundamental 
levels. A new line in financial science, Behavioural Finance, has emerged, aimed at explaining why 
price deviations occur and developing tools for predicting them. Academics in this field have turned to 
experimental psychology and other disciplines to explain the mind-set of financial market players.5 
In a notable paper by  a Princeton professor, Robert  Shiller, it had already been shown in the early 
1980s  that  share  prices  are  considerably  more  volatile  than  would  be  expected  if  they  were 
determined by the current value of expected future dividends.6 This was remarkable in that according 
to  the  efficient-market  hypothesis,  it  is  only  changes  in  fundamental  factors,  for  instance  profits  or 
dividends, that ought to affect share prices. 
Further studies later in the 1980s indicated that future developments can be explained by  historical 
price  movements.  A  look  at  the  share  prices  of  two  groups  of  firms  –  extreme  losers  and  extreme 
winners – reveals that the group with the  worst share performance in the first period gives a better 
return in the coming five years than the group that did best and vice versa. In the second period the 
undervalued  shares  recovered  their  fundamental  value  and  the  overvalued  fell  correspondingly. 
Studies  with  a shorter horizon confirm that shares which have begun to rise continue  to do so and 
conversely,  shares  which  have  started  to  fall  often  continue  to  do  so  in  the  short  run.  The  intuitive 
                                                      
1  Markowitz, H.M. (1952), Portfolio selection, J. of Finance, VII:1 (March), pp. 77–91. 
2  Fama, E. (1970), Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work, J. of Finance 25, pp. 383–417. 
3  This point has been made by, for instance, Milton Friedman and Eugene Fama; see Friedman, M. (1953), The case for 
flexible exchange rates, in Essays in Positive Economics, University of Chicago Press, and Fama, E. (1965), The behavior 
of stock market prices, J. of Business 38, pp. 34–106. 
4  Perhaps  I  should  point  out  that  the  academic  discussion  between  advocates  of  the  efficient  market  and  those  with 
somewhat different views is still in progress; the advent of the Behavioural Finance school has not left the former at a loss 
for words. 
5  For an introduction to Behavioural Finance, see Shleifer, A. (2000), Inefficient markets, Clarendon Lectures in Economics, 
Oxford University Press. See also Shiller, R.J. (2001), Bubbles, human judgment and expert opinion, Cowles Foundation 
Discussion Paper 1303, Yale University. The senior economist at Föreningssparbanken has written an introduction to the 
subject that has also attracted attention: Fromlet, H. (2001), Behavioural finance – theory and practical application, Business 
Economics (July), pp. 63–69. 
6  See  Shiller,  R.  (1981),  DO  stock  prices  move  too  much  to  be  justified  by  subsequent  changes  in  dividends,  American 
Economic Review 71, pp. 421–436. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 3
 explanation  for  these  findings  is  that  stock  markets  frequently  over-react  both  upwards  and 
downwards.7 
Something that no doubt helped to question the explanatory power of the efficient-market hypothesis 
was  the  stock  market  crash  in  1987,  when  the  Dow  Jones  index  plummeted  22.6  per  cent  –  the 
largest-ever one-day fall in the United States. This dramatic event demonstrated that share prices can 
fall  even  though  nothing  more  fundamental  has  happened;  a  thorough  search  failed  to  detect  any 
specific or unexpected  development that might account for the crash. It also seems to be the case 
more generally that many price movements are not occasioned by new information; a study of the fifty 
largest  one-day  share  price  movements  in  the  United  States  in  the  post-war  period  confirms  this.8 
Moreover, a number of studies have shown that price movements have occurred solely because the 
company in question has been included in or excluded from Standard & Poor’s 500 index, without any 
new information about fundamentals. 
One explanation for over-reactions in financial markets can be derived from the finding in experimental 
psychology that people often perceive a wider pattern in the light of just a few observations that are 
actually  entirely  random.  In  the  present  context  this  means  that  a  succession  of  good  news  items 
about a company’s profits may lead investors to project the trend well into the future and accordingly 
generate  an  over-reaction;  if  the  share  price  then  rises,  this  is  seen  as  confirming  the  analysis.  A 
period  of  good  returns  also  boosts  the  investor’s  self-confidence,  making  her/him  bolder  and  more 
prone to take risks. Bit by bit the over-reaction takes shape and, if the worst comes to the worst, leads 
to a bubble.9 
The  roots  of  sizeable  speculative  bubbles  often  lie  in  some  popular  theory  that  is  seen  as  being 
supported by reliable figures or analyses.10 Topical examples are such concepts as ‘the new economy’ 
or ‘the new economic era’. Although they may be highly exaggerated or even completely wrong, so-
called theories of this kind easily become conventional wisdom. As pointed out more than a century 
ago  by  the  American  psychologist  William  James,  an  important  factor  behind  human  behaviour  is 
attention;  as  also  demonstrated  by  later  psychological  studies,  we  tend  to  direct  our  attention  at 
whatever is attracting the attention of others. A major role in this process is frequently played by the 
media. It should be born in mind, however, that media operate in a highly competitive environment that 
makes it difficult for them to stand apart from the conventional wisdom. But media can both accentuate 
and modify the prevailing consensus. 
A phenomenon – also studied in experimental psychology – that works against taking an independent 
stance is group thinking. It is not easy to stick to an opinion that differs from what a majority of the 
group seems to hold; “surely all the others cannot be wrong” is a common thought. People who go 
their own way are liable to be regarded as have-beens with little influence or significance.11 We are 
also liable to succumb to wishful thinking. Supporters of a football club or a political party, for instance, 
are not infrequently over-confident about the chances of winning.12 Another example with which you 
may be familiar is the reluctance to enter a restaurant that is empty; people generally prefer one that 
has many guests – they simply rely on the judgement of others. 
In this way our inherent behaviour can generate both optimistic and pessimistic over-reactions. Herd 
behaviour pulls share prices far beyond what is fundamentally warranted. If things go really wrong, the 
result  may  be  a  financial  bubble  that  –  just  like  any  bubble  –  sooner  or  later  bursts,  with  dramatic 
consequences. 
Those with practical experience of financial markets will readily find themselves at home in this new 
theoretical  and  empirical  analysis.  In  the  1990s  there  were  a  number  of  bubble-like  developments 
where prices ceased to mirror fundamental values. The one that comes to mind first is perhaps the IT 
                                                      
7  See  De  Bondt,  W.F.M.  &  Thaler,  R.  (1985),  Does  the  stock  market  overreact?,  J.  of  Finance  40,  pp.  793–805;  also 
Jegadeesh, N. & Titman, S. (1993), Returns to buying winners and selling loosers: implications for stock market efficiency, 
ibid. 48, pp. 65–91. 
8  Cutler, D. Poterba,J. & Summers, L. (1991), Speculative dynamics, Review of Economic Studies 58, pp. 520–546. 
9  See e.g. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974), Judgement under uncertainty: heuristics and biases, Science 185, pp. 1124–
1131. 
10  Shiller, R. (2000), Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press, New Jersey. 
11  Janis, I.L. (1982), Groupthink (2nd ed.), Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston. 
12  Babad, E. (1987), Wishful thinking and objectivity among sport fans, Social Behavior: An International J. of Applied Social 
Psychology 4, pp. 231–240. 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 bubble. Another is the bond market; in the early 1990s bond rates in many parts of the world declined 
to low levels and when the U.S. Federal Reserve then raised its instrumental rate at the beginning of 
February 1994, bond rates moved up sharply in the following months.  
To sum up, new interesting theoretical and empirical arguments have been put forward in the past two 
decades  against  the  notion  that  financial  markets  are  efficient.  They  show  that  via  increased  or 
decreased demand, investors may well pull financial prices away from their fundamental level. Over-
reactions can occur so that excessive euphoria drives prices unduly high, just as undue pessimism 
can push them down too far. 
How can households benefit from stock markets? 
The combination of Markowitz’ approach to risk diversion and the efficient-market hypothesis meant 
that for a long time the best advice for saving in equity has been to build up and hold onto a broad 
portfolio that more or less mirrors the stock market as a whole. In that way, even an amateur could 
obtain the relatively higher yield that the stock market provides in the long run compared with other 
financial  investments.  This  diagram  shows  that  such  a  diversified  share  portfolio  gives  an  average 
annual real return of approximately 7 per cent, which is appreciably more than financial alternatives 
(Diagram 1). The next diagram shows, moreover, that the level of this return has been stable over long 
periods  (Diagram  2).  But  it  will  also  be  seen  that  in  certain  periods  the  return  has  deviated  rather 
markedly from the trend. That raises the question of how long the horizon needs to be for a diversified 
portfolio to actually yield a good return.13 
The third diagram plots the highest and lowest real returns for rolling investment horizons of different 
duration  between  1918  and  1996  (Diagram  3).  It  will  be  seen  that  with  a  five-year  horizon  in  this 
period,  the  best  average  annual  return  has  been  26  per  cent;  with  an  unfavourable  initial  year, 
however,  the  average  annual  return  could  be  as  poor  as  –9  per  cent;  moreover,  even  such  a  long 
horizon  as  twenty  or  thirty  years  did  not  guarantee  a  return  on  a  par  with  the  trend.  The  return  is 
admittedly  positive  for  all  the  rolling  periods  but  even  for  such  a  long  horizon  as  twenty  years  the 
return on equity was worse than for bonds and bank deposits in 5 per cent of the cases. 
This raises the issue of timing, that is, when to start saving in shares. Doing so at a time when stock 
market prices are high may entail a long – in some cases very long – wait for a return that is even in 
the vicinity  of the trend. One  way, used by many people, of coping  with the problem of timing is to 
spread the investments over time. Saving regularly in particular shares or a mutual fund reduces the 
problem of timing but experience shows that the inputs should be spread over a long period. Another 
approach involves using various methods to assess when the stock market is high or low; as I need 
hardly point out to such an experienced assembly, this is not exactly easy. 
 
Real earnings on shares, bonds and bank savings 
Diagram 1 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
7,2
7,0
3,5
3,2
2,9
2,4
Shares
Bonds
Bank savings
USA 1802-1998 Sweden 1918-1998
                                                      
13  All three diagrams come from Bäckström, U. (2000), Tankar om aktiesparande (‘Thoughts about saving in shares’) Ekerlids 
Förlag, Stockholm. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 5
    6 
 Index of actual earnings and earnings trend on shares 1901-1998 
Diagram 2: 
Trend 7% per 
1000
100
10
1
0,1
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
Highest and lowest real earnings on shares for different investment horizons 1918-1996 
Diagram 3: 
55
-36
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
26
23
-2
-9
15
0
11
1
9
3
1 year 5 years
10
years
15
years
20
years
30
years
BIS Review 5/2001
 While many  people  definitely  do  adopt  these  strategies,  based  on  proven  experience,  this  is  by  no 
means the case for every  household or individual. Some clearly aim for the big deal and search in 
various ways for potential winners. This has been evident not least in recent years. Day trading is a 
concept that has been coined to denote private attempts to make a quick profit from short-run dealing 
in shares. IT and telecom shares became popular in the late 1990s as a growing number of people 
were  attracted  by  these  categories.  Less  has  been  heard  about  these  players  recently,  perhaps 
because falling share prices have led to losses.  
As I have indicated, without a sufficiently diversified portfolio, saving in shares entails risks that are 
unnecessarily large  in the  sense that they  are not commensurate  with expected profits. Even so,  a 
good many private investors have gone in for more risky strategies of this type. 
To my knowledge, there are unfortunately no studies that systematically illustrate more precisely how 
people  in  Sweden  have  managed  their  saving  in  shares.  A  research  paper  from  the  United  States 
points  out  that  the  IT  boom,  combined  with  markedly  lower  transaction  costs  as  a  result  of  new 
technology, induced many inexperienced people to invest in shares.14 Moreover, access to the internet 
leads  to  an  increased  number  of  share  transactions,  with  poorer  results.  These  less  experienced 
players  have  tended  to  concentrate  on  the  technology-oriented  Nasdaq  exchange.  Whereas  more 
professional  and  institutional  investors  account  for  90  per  cent  of  transactions  on  the  New  York 
exchange,  approximately  half  of  Nasdaq  dealing  is  by  private  individuals.15  American  investors  are 
also becoming younger; the proportion who are under 35 and make more than six transactions a year 
rose from 1.1 per cent in 1995 to 13.2 per cent in 1998. The same tendency applies to stockbrokers 
and financial consultants, more than half of whom began their careers in the 1990s. All this indicates 
that  large  numbers  of  inexperienced  investors  entered  the  market  in  the  1990s  and  that  a  high 
proportion of their brokers and consultants unfortunately have relatively little experience. On the other 
hand, many of the newcomers working in financial markets have had a thorough training that is often 
better and – perhaps more important – more up-to-date than many of their older colleagues’. 
The fact that many people have entered the stock market in a short time is not entirely a good thing. 
Besides the losses they may incur and thereby run into financial difficulties, there is a risk of the stock 
market functioning less well because prices bolt from more fundamental levels. An example of this is 
the IT bubble in recent years. The ease with which firms attract capital in an over-valued market leads 
to misinvestment which, if it becomes too prevalent, can be harmful for society in general when the 
economy and the stock market both turn downwards. The behaviour of inexperienced investors is thus 
a general economic issue. 
The American study argues that firms, banks and analysts had incentives to talk inexperienced people 
into  investing  in  new  enterprises  on  grounds  that  were  not  entirely  sound.  Many  new  technology 
companies were not generating a profit and had to rely instead on paying for wages and equipment by 
issuing  shares.  For  this  to  be  feasible,  stock  markets  need  to  be  high.  In  this  sense  there  were 
incentives  for  managements  to  trim  reports  and  statements  about  their  firm’s  future  profits.  At  the 
same  time,  analysts  and  investment  banks,  with  potential  earnings  from  launching  share  issues, 
lacked incentives to take a critical look at these reports and statements. Inexperienced investors did 
not get the assistance and support they needed. As a sign of this, the paper mentioned that in summer 
2000  professional  analysts  were  summoned  to  Washington  for  a  congressional  hearing  on  their 
market recommendations. The results showed that in the period before the Nasdaq index fell as much 
as 60 per cent, less than 1 per cent of the recommendations had been to sell. The media subscribed 
to the exuberant mood with reports of rapidly rising share prices and the notion that quick money could 
be earned in the so-called new economy became the conventional wisdom. In retrospect we know that 
while share prices for IT and other new companies did rise rapidly for a number of years, they could 
also fall very quickly. Could there be a better illustration of a financial market bubble? 
Here I want to call for studies like those in the United States to throw more light on whether and, if so, 
to what extent there were also similar tendencies in Sweden. For the time being we shall have to make 
do  with  occasional  observations  and  more  anecdotal  information.  There  is  little  doubt  about  the 
Swedish stock market also being feverish in the late 1990s, with many inexperienced newcomers. As 
far as I know, a good many companies were operating at a loss and issued shares. Neither did I detect 
a massive increase in sell recommendations before the IT bubble began to collapse. So a cautious 
                                                      
14  D’Avolio, G., Gildor, E. & Shleifer, A. (2001), Technology, information production and market efficiency, paper presented at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium in Jackson Hole (August). 
15  See also Blume, M. (2000), The structure of the U.S. equity markets, Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research, paper 
17-00, The Warton School, University of Pennsylvania. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 7
 conclusion at present could be that certain tendencies that were evident in the United States may also 
have been present in Sweden. 
How can households’ risks be reduced? 
Besides calling for more knowledge about what actually happened while the IT bubble was growing, 
the  course  of  events  raises  what  is  perhaps  the  more  important  question  of  what  can  be  done  to 
provide  more  support  in  the  future  for  long-term  saving  by  households.  It  is  essential  for  society  in 
general that stock markets function properly. At the same time, households need an adequate return 
on their savings and should be in a position to identify and manage different types of risk. 
Basically, this is a matter of education. Over the years, the Swedish Share Promotion Association and 
the  Swedish  Shareholders  Association  have  done  much  to  improve  people’s  knowledge  of  these 
matters.  Information  that  is  prompt,  up-to-date,  correct  and  relevant  is  likewise  crucial.  The  new 
technology is inundating us with information but more does not necessarily mean better. It follows that 
households must be helped to interpret the information and pick out what matters most. An import role 
in this respect is played by independent analysts and consultants, not to mention media. These agents 
can see through and criticise corporate managements that are unduly optimistic or provide information 
selectively. 
But  all  this  is  already  available.  It  can,  of  course,  be  said  that  if  only  everyone  becomes  better  at 
obtaining knowledge, information and critical assessments, it is possible that more households than at 
present can actually come closer than before to the stock market’s return. Unwarranted euphoria can 
be avoided and share prices can be more stable. 
At the same time it can be said that the problems go deeper than that and have to do with how the 
financial system functions today. 
It  is  certainly  true  that  in  recent  decades,  financial  deregulations,  new  financial  products,  improved 
data and telecommunications and the development of financial theory have led to an outstanding and 
rather fantastic growth and transformation of the financial system in many parts of the world. 
Even  so,  to  a  growing  extent  households  face  what  are  sometimes  very  difficult  risk-management 
decisions  that  were  not  called  for  or  even  possible  earlier.  Many  people  still  lack  the  requisite 
knowledge  for  this  and  it  may  be  asked  whether  people  in  general  can  be  expected  to  have  such 
knowledge in the future. Everyone cannot be a specialist in risk management and financial theory. 
As  I  have  indicated,  one  reason  why  households  face  a  more  difficult  situation  than  before  is,  of 
course, the substantially greater exposure to the stock market that stems from disintermediation. But 
this  tendency  has  been  accentuated  by  the  new  pension  system.  It  is  now  up  to  the  individual  to 
decide how a part of her/his pension capital is to be invested. Moreover, the problems with complex 
risk  management  are  exacerbated  in  that  perhaps  the  most  important  component  available  to  an 
individual  is  human  capital,  with  all  the  forms  of  risk  connected  with  its  management  and  yield.  In 
addition, households encounter complicated decisions in other aspects of life, of which some have to 
do with insurance products. 
As  I  just  said,  the  financial  system  has  already  changed  spectacularly  and  become  increasingly 
sophisticated. But it will not stop there. It may therefore be asked whether banks and other financial 
institutions will become increasingly consumer oriented in the future, instead of the current focus on 
products. One advocate of such a development is Robert Merton, a Harvard professor who predicts 
that financial institutions will split into one group that produces business services and another that is 
close to consumers and mainly distributes financial services.16 Banks today often perform both these 
functions. 
Merton considers that in such a new consumer-oriented financial system, help is needed to construct 
well though-out, tailor-made plans for the life cycle that allow for all the potential risks. One type of risk 
that  needs  to  be  considered  is  stock  market  fluctuations.  Central  matters  here  are,  of  course, 
investment  horizons,  how  buying  and  selling  is  arranged  and  the  degree  of  diversification  across 
companies and geographical regions. Another parameter is, as indicated, the life cycle; the possibility 
of saving for the long run is restricted by how much capital is likely to be needed in the nearer future. 
The risk profile’s covariation with the return on human capital has to be considered, too; perhaps a 
                                                      
16  Merton, R.C. (2000), Finance and the role of financial engineering in the 21st century, unpublished, Harvard University. 
8 
 BIS Review 5/2001
 stockbroker, for example, should be wary of exposing even her/his personal financial savings to the 
stock market. Other risks lie in fluctuations in the price of a home that one either owns or is saving up 
for, as well as in the financing costs and, not least, the cost of refinancing; even if the mortgage rate is 
fixed,  when  the  time  comes  to  renew  the  loan  it  may  be  too  high.  The  risks  inherent  in  price 
fluctuations apply to other capital goods, too. It is also necessary to consider the risks in any saving 
plan  for  children’s  education  or  for  personal  supplementary  health  insurance  and  life  assurance. 
Perhaps it would even be advisable to allow for the risks that are covered today by insurance against 
fire, theft and accidents. 
Merton’s point is that there is a composite package of risks that is specific to each person and needs 
to be identified and covered. The management of all these risks calls not only for professional advice 
in the construction of such a plan but also for tailor-made financial products. The plan can include a 
variety of financial instruments but these must be easy for the individual household to understand in 
order to form a picture of and decide about the potential risks. However, the construction and provision 
of composite financial products that are easy for consumers to understand may be extremely complex. 
The new producers of financial services therefore face considerable challenges. 
Let me illustrate all this with one of the examples Merton offers. Assume that a family wants to save for 
the  children’s  university  education.  Even  if  the  education  is  free,  there  may  be  costs  for  textbooks, 
food, lodging, travel and so on. And if it is a matter of studying abroad, even the education may have 
to be paid for. Relevant questions are the amount that needs to be saved, the likely return and the 
total  cost  when  the  education  is  ultimately  complete.  One  solution  would  be  for  the  sophisticated 
financial  institute to draw  up a contract  whereby  all  the specified costs are financed during a  given 
future  period.  The  family  gets  a  payment  schedule  that  specifies  all  the  requisite  savings.  In  this 
example  it  is  the  bank  or  other  financial  institute  that  carries  the  various  risks,  not  the  individual 
household. So besides receiving advice about how to behave in order to save up for education, the 
household  concludes  a  contract  –  a  tailor-made  financial  instrument  –  that  specifies  payments  and 
deliveries. The institute is more competent at managing risks than the individual function and therefore 
performs this function. 
Another example of financial innovations that households can use to reduce long-term risk exposure is 
financial  products  related  to  some  real-estate  index.  Given  a  well-established  measure  of  this  kind 
(with a status equivalent to that of the consumer price index, for instance), financial products ranging 
from forward traded instruments to loan agreements with terms based on a real-estate index, would 
enable households, for a reasonable sum, to reduce exposure  to the risk of a large fall in property 
prices. 
This process is already under way. Banks have made varying progress in their customer orientation. 
Independent financial consultants have also  begun to some extent. Increasingly composite financial 
products are being constructed and distributed. The range of mutual funds offered by banks includes 
funds  owned  by  others.  So  perhaps  one  can  say  that  the  development  towards  more  consumer 
orientation has already begun but the decisive steps still lie ahead. 
Re-regulations  of  the  financial  system,  perhaps  accompanied  by  amended  tax  regulations,  may  be 
needed, of course, to produce the course Merton points out but there is also a need for new structures 
in the financial system. Another requirement is appreciably more knowledge about how, for example, 
the systems’ productive components can identify and spread the risks that may have to be taken. Still, 
I  am  sure  you  will  agree  that  this  opens  up  new  and  truly  interesting  perspectives  for  the  future  in 
many fields of the life cycle as well as for the development of the financial system. 
Such a development might also lead to some savings finding their way back to the financial institutions 
and to markets being dominated by more professional players. Perhaps it would also render financial 
markets more stable. It could be welcomed by individual households that want to save in shares but 
are  uneasy  about  the  risks.  That  I  believe  is  the  case  for  many  of  those  who  succumbed  to  the 
exuberance in the late 1990s and subsequently saw their savings dwindle. At the same time, a good 
many people in Sweden will no doubt want to go on saving directly in shares. 
Let  me  conclude  by  presenting  an  authority’s  perspective  on  this  matter,  in  which  the  Riksbank, 
together  with  Finansinspektionen  (Sweden’s  financial  supervisory  authority)  and  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  plays  a  significant  role.  In  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of  financial  market  imbalances,  it  is 
important  that  we  have  a  well  thought-out  legislative,  regulatory  and  supervisory  infrastructure  that 
functions properly and follows any changes in the rest of the world. This is a never-ending task that 
requires the participation of all concerned. 
BIS Review 5/2002 
 9
