 Willem F Duisenberg: Press conference on the introduction of the euro 
banknotes and coins 
Statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a  joint  press 
conference given by the EU Presidency, the European Central Bank and the European Commission, 
Frankfurt, 3 January 2002. 
 ... 
The Eurosystem - the European Central Bank and the 12 national central banks of the euro area - and 
all  parties  involved  were  confident  that  the  euro  cash  changeover  would  be  a  success,  given  the 
enormous effort and preparation which went into this historic and unprecedented operation. Now, two 
days after the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, I can say that the huge task of putting into 
circulation some 9 billion euro banknotes and over 51 billion euro coins serving more than 300 million 
citizens in twelve countries has so far progressed very smoothly, even beyond our own expectations. 
By the end of 2001, more than 6.5 billion euro banknotes worth some EUR 134 billion - amounting to 
approximately  50%  of  national  banknote  circulation  -  had  been  frontloaded,  as  had  more  than 
37.5 billion euro coins with a total value of around EUR 12.4 billion. Broadly speaking, sub-frontloading 
was in line with the initial forecasts, and came to between 10 and 20% of the frontloaded amount. At 
the same time, the withdrawal of legacy currencies was well under way, as the circulation of national 
banknotes dropped sharply in 2001, falling from EUR 380 million on 1 January 2001 to EUR 70 million 
on 1 January 2002. 
As to the conversion of ATMs, this is very much on track. By 4 p.m. yesterday some 92 % of the total - 
i.e.  around  190,000  machines  -  had  been  converted.  Later  on  this  afternoon  a  press  release  with 
further updated figures will be released. 
The Eurosystem is proud of its contribution to this historic event. We have been working hard since 
1996, when the competition for the design of the euro banknotes was launched, and especially for the 
past three years, to ensure a successful introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. Today, we can 
see that our efforts and those of all parties involved have not been in vain. In particular, I should like to 
express my gratitude to the banking community and the retailer sector and to all European citizens for 
the  enthusiasm  they  have  shown  for  the  euro  since  the  euro  coin  starter  kits  went  on  sale  in 
December, but specially since 1 January. It is because Europeans have seized the opportunity to play 
an  active  part  in  the  euro  changeover  that  we  can  already  pronounce  this  unprecedented  move  a 
tremendous success. 
With the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, the euro has ceased to be a currency familiar 
only to the financial markets, to financial institutions and large enterprises. 
On 1 January at 00.00  hour, the  introduction of the  euro banknotes and coins  marked not only the 
completion of Economic and Monetary Union, which is a crucial achievement in itself, but one of the 
major,  if  not  the  major  step  forward  in  the  history  of  European  integration.  I  am  convinced  that 
1 January 2002 will appear in the history books in all our countries and beyond as the start of a new 
era for Europe. 
BIS Review 1/2002 
 1
