 Y V Reddy: Economic reforms and evolving role of RBI as banker to the 
governments 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference of the 
Silver Jubilee Celebrations of the Indian Civil Accounts Organization, New Delhi, 3 April 2002. 
Dr  Reddy  is  thankful  to  Mr  K  Venkatappa,  Dr  A  Prasad,  Mr  G  D  Kallianpur  and  Mr  P  Loganathan  for  their 
assistance. 
 Mr. Chairman, Mrs. Usha Sahajpal and friends, 
I  am  thankful  to  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  the  Silver  Jubilee  Year  of  founding  of  Accounts 
Organisation and I recognize it as a reflection of the close cooperation and understanding that have 
evolved between Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as a banker to Government of India and its Accounts 
organisation. The title of the address refers to being banker to governments simply because RBI is a 
banker not only to the Central Government, but also State Governments. RBI by virtue of its charter 
performs  several  functions,  the  most  important  being  to  secure  stability  in  the  internal  and  external 
value  of  the  currency  mainly  through  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  while  at  the  same  time,  ensuring 
adequate  availability  of  credit  to  meet  the  genuine  needs  of  a  growing  economy.  Currency 
Management is yet another function of the RBI which impacts the transactions of a large number of 
people. Managing public debt is also assigned to RBI, but this is sought to be separated from RBI in 
due course. Its regulation of money and forex markets flows from its primary responsibility while its 
role in debt markets is closely linked to it being manager of public debt. RBI is also a regulator and 
supervisor of banks, development financial institutions, and non-banking financial companies, but the 
process  of  supervision  is  overseen  by  an  independent  Board  for  Financial  Supervision,  within  RBI. 
Incidentally, RBI is also a banker to banks. Payment System is also under the aegis of RBI, and the 
technological infrastructure for the financial sector, especially in the money and Government Securities 
market is provided by RBI to subserve its overall responsibilities. To the governments it renders advice 
on financial matters, whenever called upon to do so. Being banker to governments is also an important 
function,  but  is  seldom  in high  profile,  perhaps  due  to  the  reason  that  it  does  not  directly  or  visibly 
impinge on prices or output. However, as will be explained today, though it is not a big-ticket item on 
RBI’s balance-sheet, its role as a banker to governments is very significant and it has been evolving in 
the recent years reflecting the process of economic reform.  
The Bank provides banking services to both Central and State Governments such as acceptance of 
moneys on Government account, payment / withdrawal of funds and collection and transfer of funds 
by various means throughout India. The Governments' principal accounts are maintained at Central 
Accounts  Section  of  the  Bank  at  Nagpur.  Government  accounts  are  handled  by  RBI  at  15  Offices, 
besides two State Government Cells at Bhopal and Chandigarh. Further, all public sector banks and 
two private sector banks handle Governments accounts through their 20,800 branches. Currently, the 
Agency  banks handle Governments transactions of around Rs.12 lakh crore in  a full financial  year. 
Over  and  above  these,  sizeable  transactions  are  handled  at  Reserve  Bank  Offices.  Some 
transactions,  though  minimal,  are  handled  in  Governments’  own  treasuries  and  sub  treasuries, 
numbering  453,  equipped  with  Currency  Chests.  This  data  gives  the  magnitude  and  spread  of 
transactions relating to Governments. 
The first part of today’s presentation will cover very briefly cross-country practices. The second part 
provides  the  legal  and  institutional  framework  in  India  for  conduct  of  Government’s  business  in 
banking. The third section describes the range of banking services provided by RBI to Governments. 
The  fourth  part  describes  some  of  the  reforms  already  undertaken  in  this  area.  The  fifth  section 
describes  major  issues  while  the  concluding  section  indicates  a  possible  agenda  for  immediate 
actions. 
Cross-country practices 
By  custom  and  tradition  or  by  express  provision  in  the  laws  by  which  they  have  been  established, 
Central Banks are bankers to their respective Governments. In the view of Sir Montagu Norman of the 
Bank  of  England  and  Benjamin  Strong  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  Central  Bank  should 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 1
 undertake all the banking business on behalf of their own Governments. However, the actual practices 
do vary among countries.  
In the UK, Bank of England is  the main banker to Government  and maintains the  Principal Central 
Government Account. Individual Government departments are not obliged to use Bank of England as 
their banker. Typically Government Department with significant requirements for banking service put 
some  or  all  of  their  banking  business  out  to  tender.  In  the  case  of  South  Africa,  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank acts as banker to the Central Government. Provincial Governments are, however, the 
clients of private banking sector. In Japan, Bank of Japan carries out the transactions with the National 
Government but not with local Governments. As regards USA, the Federal Reserve acts as the banker 
to  US  Government.  The  Reserve  Banks  serve  as  depositories  of  the  United  States  and  perform 
several payment-related services.  
Legal and institutional framework 
Government business in India was initially handled by the Presidency Banks of Bengal, Madras and 
Bombay from 1862 to 1921 and thereafter by the Imperial Bank of India, which came into existence as 
a result of amalgamation of the Presidency Banks. Since April 1, 1935, the Reserve Bank has been 
the banker to the Central and State Governments. 
According to Article 283(1) and (2) of the Indian Constitution, it is open to the Central Government and 
to any State Government to make rules for the receipt, custody and disbursement of all the amounts 
accruing to or held in its consolidated or contingency funds or in its public account. Sections 20 and 21 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 provide that the Central Government shall entrust the Bank 
with all its money, remittance, exchange and banking transactions in India and the management of its 
public debt, and shall also deposit all its cash balances with the Bank free of interest. The Bank may, 
by agreement with any State Government, take over similar functions on behalf of that Government 
under  Section  21A  of  the  RBI  Act.  Accordingly,  the  RBI  is  the  common  banker  to  the  Central 
Government and all the State Governments in the Indian Federation with the exception of Jammu & 
Kashmir and Sikkim. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  as  banker  to  various  Governments,  has  well  defined  obligations  and  provides 
several  services.  First,  the  Central  Government  Treasury  Rules,  the  Central  Government  Account 
(Receipts  and  Payments)  Rules,  in  respect  of  the  transactions  of  the  Central  departments,  and  the 
corresponding provisions in the State Financial codes are deemed to be legally binding on the Bank. 
Second, the Bank carries on the General Banking business of the Centre and the States in terms of 
the working agreement between the Government and the Reserve Bank. The liability of the Bank to 
the  Governments  in  the  conduct  of  the  Government  business  is  that  of  a  banker  to  an  ordinary 
customer.  Third,  the  Bank  also  undertakes  to  float  loans  and  manage  the  loans  on  behalf  of  the 
Governments  on  agreed  terms.  Fourth,  where  there  is  no  full-fledged  office  of  RBI,  it  appoints 
commercial  banks  as  agents  of  RBI  and  they  are  made  responsible  for  transacting  the  entire 
Government  business.  Fifth,  the  Bank  does  not  charge  to  Governments,  the  cost  of  carrying  on 
Government business through its offices or the agency banks. Sixth, a facility for grant of ways and 
means  advances  is  provided  by  Reserve  Bank  to  the  Governments,  to  meet  the  temporary 
mismatches  in  their  income  streams.  Seventh,  the  RBI  arranges  for  investments  of  surplus  cash 
balances  of  the  Governments  as  a  portfolio  manager.  Eighth,  the  RBI  also  acts  as  Adviser  to 
Government,  whenever  called  upon  to  do  so,  on  monetary  and  banking  related  matters  besides 
dispensing merchant banking services. 
Range of banking services 
Banker to central government  
The work relating to Government business is attended by the Public Accounts Department of the RBI. 
The discharge of the Bank's functions as banker to Government involves the receipt and payment of 
money on behalf of the various Government departments. For this purpose, under Section 45 of the 
RBI Act 1934, initially the RBI appointed State Bank of India as its sole agent at all places where the 
Bank had no office or branch of its Banking Department. In turn, SBI entered into agency agreements 
with  all  its  associate  banks  and  delegated  the  agency  functions  to  some  of  the  branches  of  the 
associate banks at certain centres. Considering the increasing volume of Government business and 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2002
 nationalisation  of  some  commercial  banks,  the  Government  and  the  RBI  associated  nationalised 
banks,  which  had  a  vast  network  of  branches,  to  conduct  Government  business.  In  1970,  the 
Government  empowered  the  RBI  to  appoint  them  as  agents  at  any  centre.  By  1976,  the  SBI, 
Associate Banks and nationalised banks were acting as agents of the RBI for this business. In order to 
facilitate the handling of Government receipts and payments, currency chests were established with a 
number of branches of nationalised banks in addition to SBI and Associate Banks.   
Prior  to  1976,  the  responsibility  for  arranging  payments  and  compiling  accounts  of  receipts  and 
disbursals  and  auditing  of  transactions  of  all  Central  Government  Ministries  devolved  on  a  single 
authority, viz., Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The Government introduced from April 1976, 
a scheme in stages for decentralisation and departmentalisation of accounts of individual Ministries at 
the  Centre,  thereby  transferring  the  responsibility  for  maintenance  of  accounts  at  all  stages  to  the 
Ministries / Departments themselves. Under this scheme each ministry/ department has been allotted 
a specific public sector bank for handling its transactions based on the principle of 'one bank - one 
ministry/department'. Hence, the Reserve Bank does not handle government's day-to-day transactions 
as  before,  except  where  the  Bank  itself  has  been  nominated  as  banker  to  a  particular 
ministry/department. 
Banker to State Governments 
The financial transactions of the State Governments are carried out at a number of offices, including 
those of the RBI SBI, nationalised banks, Treasuries, etc. The Government transactions conducted at 
all  such  places  are  allowed  without  any  reference  to  the  actual  position  of  the  cash  balance  of  the 
State Government, the accounts of which are maintained at the Central Accounts Section of the RBI at 
Nagpur.  The  transactions  that  are  put  through  at  various  agency  bank  branches  in  the  State 
concerned are consolidated at the link cell in the respective State capitals and settled with the Reserve 
Bank Office in the State. Currently, Reserve Bank also handles directly, banking business of four State 
Governments viz.,  Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamilnadu and West Bengal. The consolidated position 
including  the  State  Government  transactions  put  through  at  RBI  Offices  is  ultimately  booked  in  the 
Principal Account of the respective State maintained at CAS, Nagpur.  
Central Accounts 
The Central Accounts Section (CAS) at the RBI maintains the principal accounts of both Central and 
State  Governments.  The  principal  accounts  in  Nagpur  are  based  on  the  daily  position  /  aggregate 
receipts  and  payments  in  respect  of  each  Government,  Ministry  /  department,  received  from  RBI 
offices and agency banks. Each of the accredited agency bank has set up a link office at Nagpur to 
liaise with CAS for funds settlement. Thus, the Bank's offices and agency banks' branches function 
like tributaries, which flow in the direction and merge into the Central Accounts Section. CAS, Nagpur, 
thus plays a pivotal role in consolidating the transactions and working out the overall daily position of 
each government.  
The  actual  day-to-day  transactions  are  handled  by  the  Bank's  offices  and  agency  bank  branches. 
They  render  accounts  to  respective  Government  accounting  authorities  while  effecting  monetary 
settlement with RBI. Since frequent adjustments between the various Governments are unavoidable, 
settlement  of  these  transactions  through  Central  Accounts  Section  is  convenient,  accurate  and 
expeditious.  
Reserve Bank through its Remittance Facilities Scheme operates a funds transfer system. It carries 
out the adjustments as between the various Governments providing in effect, facilities for the transfer 
of funds on a very large scale within the Government Sector. In order to facilitate the actual conduct of 
Government transactions, the Reserve Bank has built up over the years, a network of currency chests, 
repositories and small coins depots, all of which are intended to service all the Governments in the 
country.  
As  banker  to  the  Government,  Reserve  Bank  works  out  the  overall  funds  position  and  sends  daily 
advices showing the balances in its books, ways and means granted and investments made. The daily 
advices are followed up with monthly statements, and are useful from the point of view of enabling the 
Government to prepare their ways and means budgets.  
The arrangement between the Government of India and the Reserve Bank on the one hand and the 
public sector banks and the Reserve Bank on the other, are based largely on trust as well as being 
merely contractual.  
BIS Review 22/2002 
 3
 Treasury system 
All payments on account of Central and State Governments are made either by cheques or by bills. 
The Government of India, Reserve Bank and the banks, which serve the treasuries and sub-treasuries 
normally, prefer cheques to bills. Certain States like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, West Bengal 
etc. have adopted the system of payments by cheques at their Treasuries. However, a large number 
of States are yet to introduce the cheque System. In view of the advantages of cheques as compared 
with bills, Official policy continues to be in favour of changing over to cheque system. 
Since  1976,  Treasuries  and  non-departmental  Pay  and  Accounts  Offices  have  ceased  to  be 
responsible  for  handling  transactions  on  behalf  of  the  Central  (Civil)  Departments  as  integrated 
financial  advisers  and  principal  accounts  officers  of  these  departments  have  taken  over  the 
responsibility for receiving and paying money, compiling and maintaining the accounts, in respect of all 
the  transactions  relating  to  these  departments.  The  pay  and  accounts  officer  or  a  drawing  and 
disbursing officer of each Ministry or Department is linked to a designated public sector bank or RBI 
and is not allowed to draw on a treasury. 
Other services 
In  addition  to  being  a  pure  banker  to  Government,  RBI  provides  a  full  range  of  related  services  to 
Government. These include exchange, remittance transactions, management of public debt and issue 
of new loans, handling the forex transactions of the Government of India, investment of surplus funds 
of Governments, providing safe custody facility, providing of ways and means advances, management 
of special funds like Consolidated Sinking Fund, Guarantee Redemption Fund, Calamity Relief Funds, 
National Defence Scheme, etc., issue and management of tap bonds like Relief Bonds, administration 
of the Scheme for disbursal of pensions of Central and State Governments’ employees through public 
sector  banks,  and  as  Advisor  to  Government  on  all  matters  involving  monetary  and  economic 
perspective. 
The fee recovered by the Bank for some of the above services, which are rendered as an adjunct to its 
role  as  Banker  to  Government,  are  nominal  and  do  not  even  cover  the  costs,  while  for  most  other 
services no charge is levied.  
Recent reforms undertaken  
Focal point and beyond 
The  experience  of  the  working  of  the  "Departmentalised  Scheme"  has  shown  a  few  shortcomings. 
With the large number of bank branches handling the work, delays often occurred in the transmission 
of the relevant documents (paid cheques, challans scrolls etc) to Pay and Accounts Officers (PAOs) 
for accounting. Besides, there were certain difficulties in reconciliation of figures between government 
departments and banks.  
In order to obviate these difficulties as well as making reconciliation easier, a Working Group was set 
up  in  1986  to  review  the  working  of  the  scheme,  and  on  the  basis  of  its  recommendation  existing 
procedures  were  revised.  This  marked  the  beginning  of  focal  point  approach  for  reporting  and 
settlement  of  government  transactions  and  set  the  pace  for  further  refinement  of  the  accounting 
system. The focal point approach envisages "one focal point branch - one (Pay and Accounts Office) 
PAO". This concept was incorporated into the system to bring about an interactive method of resolving 
the day-to-day problems while achieving expeditious reconciliation. This system ensures updating of 
accounts at PAO level and speedy settlement of funds at Central Accounts Section at Nagpur. It has, 
sought to bridge the gap between RBI accounts and Government accounts. Based on its success, it 
has been subsequently adopted in phases, in Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and extended to 
Departmentalised  Ministries  Accounts  (DMA)  (both  civil  and  non-civil  ministries).  There  has  been  a 
close alignment between accounting jurisdiction of the government and the dealing branches of the 
bank.  
However, in the envisaged computerized environment, with electronic connectivity, the settlement of 
funds  on  real  time  basis,  directly  between  the  dealing  branches  and  CAS  at  Nagpur  for  credit  of 
Government  Account  without  the  intervention  of  the  Focal  Point  and  Link  Cell  may  be  a  distinct 
possibility in the near future.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2002
 Standing Committee on Computerisation 
Given the large magnitude of the transactions in Government account, the manual system results in 
delays in handling transactions. Complete electronic data processing in the preparation and settlement 
of the accounts of Government business by the agency banks as also for compilation of accounts at 
Treasury/Pay  and  Accounts  Office/Accountant  General  will  eliminate  the  time  lag  in  the  flow  of 
information  and  improve  standards  of  accuracy.  During  the  last  few  years,  RBI  offices  and  agency 
banks have initiated steps for computerization of Government transactions at their dealing branches. 
The  Committee  on  Technology  Upgradation  in  Banking  Sector  laid  down  the  road  map  for 
computerization of bank branches handling Government business, to be achieved in phases. The first 
phase  envisaged  computerization  of  all  Focal  Point  branches  of  agencies  by  March  31,  2000  and 
State  government  Link  Cells  /  dealing  branches  in  the  second  phase  thereafter.  The  Committee 
desired  that  efforts  should  be  made  to  inter-connect  the  computerized  branches  dealing  in 
Government Accounts with Link Offices/ branches, and the Public Accounts Departments of the Bank 
and  also  Central  Accounts  Section,  Nagpur  where  it  is  ultimately  accounted  for  in  the  books  of 
accounts. On Government side, the Committee suggested that all PAOs/Circle Offices of Government 
should be computerized by  March  31, 2001  and  the Drawing Offices / Treasury Offices well before 
March 31, 2002 in alignment with computerization of Focal Point and Dealing branches.  
A Standing Committee comprising members from RBI, Government and agency banks is monitoring 
the computerization of government transactions. There have been some delays in adhering to the time 
schedule mentioned. RBI has been urging the agency banks to capture 80 per cent of Government 
business by June 2002.  
Payment systems reforms 
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  constitute  the  backbone  of  any  economy  and  the  existence  of 
competent payment and settlement systems have a positive impact on the efficient functioning of the 
various  sectors  of  the  economy.  Central  Banks  in  the  world  are  according  great  importance  to  well 
established payment and settlement systems. The Reserve Bank, too, has taken up as its mission, the 
establishment of a robust, safe, secure and efficient payment and settlement system for the country as 
part of its initiatives aimed at financial sector reforms in this area. Constituted in 1999, the National 
Payments Council is the Apex level body, which provides general policy directions and guidelines for 
reforms in the Payment and Settlement Systems of the country.  
Initiatives aimed at improvements in the payments and settlement systems are centered on the three-
pronged  strategies  of  consolidation,  development  and  integration  of  the  various  components  of  the 
payment  and  settlement  systems.  Consolidation  takes  its  base  from  existing  activities  such  as 
computerised clearing, etc. Development envisages opening of new clearing houses, introduction of 
systems  such  as  the  Centralised  Funds  Management  System  and  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS) and Integration of all these initiatives both within the Reserve Bank and for the banking Sector 
as a whole would result in the culmination of the reform process.  
Non-paper  based  payment  systems,  such  as  Electronic  Funds  Transfers  (EFT)  and  Electronic 
Clearing Services (debit and Credit Clearing), have been accepted widely for use within the country. 
The  proposed  introduction  of  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  System  would  ensure 
settlement of funds in real time and in an electronic manner. All these would have positive impact for 
the  government  sector  too,  which  could  exploit  the  benefits  of  ECS  and  EFT  for  even  their 
conventional payments - such as tax collections, various payments, tax refunds, drawback payments, 
etc. 
Since movement of funds is scheduled to take place using electronic means, the need for providing for 
a  more  elaborate  and  clear  legal  infrastructure  has  also  been  recognized.  Accordingly,  work  has 
commenced on draft legislation to regulate the payment systems, which may not only be restricted to 
banks and financial institutions, but could also go beyond that. The proposed legislation will also have 
powers to regulate EFT, except that the proposed EFT regulation will deal only  with credit transfer. 
The debit transfer transactions will continue to be governed by the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. 
Further, in order to deal with electronic instruments like e-cheques, which are in the nature of debit 
transfer, amendments to the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 and IT Act 2000 have been suggested 
for consideration of Government.  
BIS Review 22/2002 
 5
 Improving connectivity between CGA and CAS 
Computerisation in Central Accounts Section and connectivity to various user agencies: 
Since  July  1,  2001,  a  state-of-the-art  technological  Architecture  for  management  of  Government 
Accounts  at  Central  Accounts  Section,  Nagpur  was  set  up.  The  system  provides  online  data 
processing capability in front office mode and on line connectivity to all the RBI offices, agency banks 
and State Governments. The system is designed to provide information on a real-time on-line basis to 
Central and State Governments for ascertaining their cash balance position and other transactions. 
As  a  further  improvement,  a  Virtual  Private  Network  (VPN)  is  being  established  between  CGA  and 
Principal Accounts Officers of various ministries. The network is also proposed to be extended to the 
Pay & Accounts Office level. The network would act as a hub for electronic interchange of information 
between CAS Nagpur and various civil and non-civil ministries. While Inter Government Transactions 
would  be  handled  on  an online basis, the  Agency  Bank transactions  will be available  as and  when 
reported to CAS. 
The above arrangements when fully put in place will enable the various Principal Accounts Offices to 
send  Inter-Government  Transactions,  along  with  details  of  the  relative  sanction  orders  to  CAS 
electronically,  get  confirmation  advices  (clearance  memos)  instantly  and  eliminate  most  of  the 
reconciliation  problems  not  only  at  the  level  of  Central  Government  but  also  facilitate  proper 
accounting in the States.  
In fact State Governments have been complaining regarding delays in receipt of sanction orders as a 
result of which they are unable to know the purpose of the funds being given from Central Government 
at the time of such amount being credited by RBI to their accounts. RBI has also taken initiative in 
redesigning  the  format  of  the  IGA  (Inter  Government  Adjustment)  advice  and  Clearance  Memo  to 
ensure  that  the  advice  being  sent  to  CAS  is  comprehensive  and  meets  requirements  of  the  State 
Governments as well. I would request the Office of CGA to examine the suggestions made by us in 
this regard and implement the revised IGA format at the earliest. 
Another benefit of the connectivity would be strong MIS support. From the Bank's view point, on-line 
access will eliminate the need for periodical statements being sent to the accounting authorities as the 
authorities will be able to choose the period (a week, fortnight, month or more) for which they want the 
data and then can use it for any number of MIS purposes. Maintenance of parallel records can also be 
eliminated. 
The  RBI  is  also  examining  the  feasibility  of  using  the  Internet  to  connect  all  State  Governments, 
Central Government Departments and various agency banks to implement total workflow automation 
in respect Government transaction.  
Under the current procedure, the fund settlement at CAS Nagpur takes place after the rendering of 
accounts by the focal point branches to the local PAO. The focal point branches receive the scrolls 
and the documents from the dealing branches by post (normally by Registered post). This means that 
settlement of funds is inevitably delayed for the period of postal transit plus the time for consolidation 
at  focal  point  branch  creating  a  lag  in  final  accounting  in  government  account  with  CAS  Nagpur. 
During this lag, the funds remain in pipeline as a float at the cost of government departments. Often, 
the banks also suffer opportunity loss due to delay in monetary settlement. With the computerization of 
transactions  both  at  the  bank  branches  and  government  departments,  it  would  be  possible  to  re-
engineer the process. Forwarding of paper scroll/receipted challans and paid cheques to government 
offices could take place at a later stage than the electronic transmission of transactions. This means 
that  the  focal  point  branch  would  transmit  the  transactions  to  CAS  Nagpur  without  waiting  for  the 
scrolls  received  from  the  branches  to  be  consolidated  and  verified.  The  Committee  on  Technology 
Upgradation in Banking Sector examined this aspect and felt that this would help in quicker finalisation 
of government account and fund settlement at CAS Nagpur. The issue remains open. 
Interaction with States  
A  forum  has  been  provided  by  the  Reserve  Bank  bringing  all  the  Finance  Secretaries  of  State 
Governments and the Union for exchange of ideas and sorting out the problems. These conferences 
are held in Reserve Bank for the last few years and the deliberations have proved useful in identifying 
the  common  problems  and  developing  best  practices  in  regard  to  Government  finances.  Between 
November 1997 and November 2001, nine such conferences have been held. A number of important 
initiatives  relating  to  ways  and  means  advances,  approach  to  market  borrowing  programme, 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2002
 investment of surpluses, ceilings on State guarantees, apart from changes in the content and format 
for reporting have emanated and taken shape as a result of interactions in these meetings.  
Major issues 
Minimum balances requirements in government  
The RBI is authorized to provide Ways and Means Advances to Central and State Governments in 
terms of Section 17(5) of the RBI Act. Until 1994-95, the needs of Government were accommodated 
through automatic monetisation by  issuing  ad hoc Treasury Bills at 4.6 per cent. Considering the ill 
effects  of  automatic  monetisation  of  Government  deficit,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government 
agreed mutually in September 1994 to restrict the issue of ad hocs for the year-end and also within the 
year and for scrapping the issue of ad hoc treasury bills from 1 April 1997. Accordingly the issue of ad 
hoc treasury bills was discontinued with effect from 1 April 1997. Simultaneously, a scheme of granting 
Ways  and  Means  Advances  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  Government  of  India  has  been  introduced  to 
accommodate temporary  mismatches in Government receipts and  payments, interest on  which  was 
initially concessional, is presently at Bank Rate. Currently, Central Government is required to maintain 
a minimum balance of Rs.10 crore on a daily basis and Rs.100 crore on Fridays. The limit for Ways & 
Means Advances for 2001-2002 to Central Government has been fixed at Rs. 10,000 crore for the first 
half year and at Rs. 6,000 crore for the second half year. When the Government utilizes 75 per cent of 
the  WMA  limit,  the  Reserve  Bank  considers  fresh  floatation  of  market  loan  depending  on  market 
conditions. 
State  Governments  were  expected  to  match  the  outflows  with  inflows  very  carefully  so  as  to  avoid 
recourse  to  ways  and  means  advances  from  RBI.  If  a  State  Government  allowed  its  account  to 
emerge in overdraft, this would have been regarded with extreme disfavour and also as reflecting on 
the competence and ability of the State Government to manage its own finances. Over the years, the 
State  Governments  resorted  increasingly  to  WMA  and  overdraft.  The  WMA  limits  were  fixed  as  a 
multiple of minimum balance of States. However, while the multiples increased, the minimum balances 
required to be maintained by the State Governments were not revised between 1976 and 1999. Since 
1999, the WMA Scheme is being worked out on the basis of the recommendations of the B.P.R.Vittal 
Committee (1998). The Committee recommended that the minimum balance should be revised and 
linked  to  the  same  base  as  normal WMA  which  itself  is  worked  out  taking  into  account  the  sum  of 
revenue  receipts  and  capital  expenditure.  The  first  revision  after  the  implementation  of  the  Vittal 
Committee  formula  was  effected  from  April  1,  1999,  followed  by  the  next  revision  from  February  1, 
2001.  The  latest  revision  took  effect  from  April  1,  2002.  However,  the  minimum  balances  have  not 
been revised since April 1, 1999. A review of the WMA scheme will be made in April 2003. 
Automatic debit mechanism 
The  Technical  Committee  of  State  Finance  Secretaries  on  the  State  Government  Guarantees  has 
observed that such a mechanism runs the risk of resulting in insufficient funds for financing minimum 
obligatory payments and other grounds as well. Using an automatic recovery mechanism for inviting 
subscription  to  bonds  issued  by  autonomous  bodies  with  State  Government  Guarantees  not  only 
erodes the credibility of the State Government, but also would prompt other States to request for such 
assurance  to  offer  additional  comfort  for  investors.  The  matter  is  under  the  consideration  of  the 
Reserve Bank and the Central Government. 
Expansion in agency banks 
At  present,  the  RBI,  SBI  and  nationalised  banks  conduct  business  relating  to  Governments.  More 
recently, private banks promoted by the all India Financial Institutions (AFI), which meet the defined 
criteria, are also being considered for induction for conduct of Government business. The objective is 
to  help  the  State  Governments  to  get  better,  quick  service  with  safety  of  funds.  The  question  is  to 
strike a balance between the two and this may have to be decided by the States with the help of RBI. 
Thus, there can be competition for Government business in the future.  
The Reserve Bank, being a Central Bank, for achieving the functional focus, may have to consider in 
due course, shedding of the retail banking business in relation to Governments in favour of the agency 
banks with a view to ensuring that in the long run, the Bank will maintain only the Principal Accounts of 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 7
 the Governments, leaving the day-to-day banking business to the commercial banks functioning as its 
agents.  
Treasury 
The  treasury  system  has  evolved  very  gradually  over  a  number  of  years  and  has  worked  with 
reasonable satisfaction. Nevertheless, there is scope for improvement with a view to providing more 
facilities to the general public in a number of ways. First, the non-banking treasuries / sub-treasuries, 
which  handle  the  cash  business  itself,  could  be  gradually  converted  into  banking  treasuries  by 
transferring  their  cash  business  to  banks.  Second,  States  may  weigh  the  option  of  introducing 
separation of audit and accounts and departmentalization of accounts on the lines of Centre gradually. 
Third, as cheques for various reasons are preferable to bills, it is desirable to encourage wider use of 
cheques. The treasury is the primary accounting unit and its cash accounts are prepared and rendered 
to Accountant General. Fourth, in order to cut short delays, many treasuries, sub-treasuries and pay 
and  accounts  offices  have  made  arrangements  for  disbursing  small  amounts  in  cash  without  the 
intervention of the bank, even when they are served by the public sector banks as agents. It may be 
advantageous  to  raise  the  monetary  limit  for  payments  across  the  counters,  without  requiring  the 
payees to visit the banks. 
Rationalising agency charges  
The agreements entered into by Bank with the State Governments provide that the Bank shall not be 
entitled  to  any  remuneration  for  the  conduct  of  ordinary  banking  business  of  the  Government  other 
than  such  advantage  that  may  accrue  to  it  from  holding  of  cash  balances  free  of  obligation  to  pay 
interest thereof. The minimum balances by no means compensate the Bank for the cost of conducting 
Government  business.  On  the  contrary,  the  Bank  has  been  remunerating  the  Agency  banks  for 
conducting the Government business on its behalf at a rate related to the costs incurred by them for 
conducting  Government  business.  The  rate  is  revised  from  time  to  time  quinquennially  after 
ascertaining  the  actual  cost  of  conducting  the  government  business  and  the  present  rate  is  11.80 
paise per Rs.100 of Government turnover. Agency banks requested for a revision of the methodology 
of determining the rates and an Expert Committee was constituted to study their request. Recently in 
its  report,  the  Expert  Group  on  revising  the  methodology  for  determining  the  cost  of  conducting 
Government business, has observed that in most of the countries, the cost is borne by the respective 
Governments and not the Central Bank. The cost of conducting government business has been rising 
in  the  recent  years.  A  possible  way  of  rationalising  the  agency  charges  from  the  present  cost  plus 
system could be to move over to a system of bidding for Government business by agency banks. 
Reducing lags in credit  
At present, banks have been allowed a transit time of 5 days in respect of local receipts and 9 days in 
respect  of  outstation  receipts  for  settlement  of  funds.  In  order  to  ensure  expeditious  credit  to 
Government  account  by  the  dealing  branches,  a  deterrent  measure  has  been  put  in  place. 
Accordingly, any delay in crediting the receipts to Government account beyond the stipulated period 
(of  15  days  in  case  of  delayed  remittances  over  Rs.1  lakh  and  one  month  in  other  cases)  attracts 
penal  interest.  As  compared  to  public  sector  banks,  the  newly  inducted  private  banks  are  allowed 
merely  5  days  for  settlement.  This  is  based  on  the  distinction  in  regard  to  the  degree  of 
computerization  of  public  sector  banks  vis-à-vis  private  banks.  With  the  upgradation  of  payment 
systems in the country and electronic connectivity, the cut off limits needs to be made more stringent 
with the ultimate goal of achieving real time settlement in Government Account, with CAS, Nagpur.  
Possible improvements by Government  
Submission of scrolls in electronic form  
At  present,  the  scrolls  are  submitted  in  paper  form  separately  for  receipts  and  payments. With  the 
computerization of bank branches and government departments, the scrolls in magnetic media (floppy 
form)  should  be  acceptable  to  Government  departments.  A  switch  over  to  submission  of  scrolls  on 
magnetic media, will necessitate delinking of paid instruments and the payment scrolls.  
8 
 BIS Review 22/2002
 The  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  'Electronic  Clearing  Service'  (ECS)  for  bulk  receipts  /  payments 
which involve multiple credits with a single debit or vice-versa. ECS is customer friendly and remains 
untapped by Government. Government should use ECS for bulk and repetitive transactions like salary, 
pension,  income  tax  refund  orders  etc.  As  recommended  by  the  Committee  on  Technology 
Upgradation  in  the  Banking  Sector,  the  Government  may  examine  the  feasibility  of  introducing  a 
variant  of  an  electronic  funds  transfer  system  to  facilitate  collection  of  taxes,  beginning  with  direct 
taxes.  
Elimination of paper-based reporting system 
Under the present system, it is a government requirement that all deposits in the government account 
should  be  accompanied  by  an  appropriate  challan.  The  challans  are  in  multiple  copies,  different 
shapes  and  sizes.  This  requirement  of  the  government  has  constrained  the  process  of  electronic 
banking in government business. Over the years, despite the deliberations in various fora, it has not 
been possible to reduce the number of copies of challan. With the swift progress in banking, and the 
electronic  connectivity  as  envisaged,  it  would  become  possible  for  the  assessees  to  deposit  the 
government dues in any designated bank by using a simple pay-in slip as in the case of bank deposit, 
and at a later stage, electronically by quoting the PAN. The elimination of the challan would pave the 
way for electronic settlement. 
Discontinuance of advice system for income tax refund orders  
At  present,  Income-tax  refund  orders  advices  for  value  upto  Rs.999  are  sent  directly  to  assessees 
while advices for Rs.1,000 and above are forwarded to payee banks. The advices are not received 
promptly  resulting  in  the  return  of  refund  orders  causing  inconvenience  to  assessees.  Significantly, 
even  after  switchover  to  MICR  form  with  all  its  in-built  security  features  on  par  with  a  cheque,  the 
advice  system  has  been  continued  regardless  of  the  difficulties  caused  to  the  assessees.  At  the 
Government level, issues related to ECS and forwarding of advices in electronic formats viz., magnetic 
media, etc., are being considered. 
Customer service 
Government of India has constituted a standing committee at Apex level to monitor the working of the 
schemes  pertaining  to  Departmentalised  Ministries.  Similar  monitoring  committees  at  local  level  are 
also functioning for Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) and CBDT.  
Reserve Bank has been proactive in extending prompt and courteous customer service. The bank has 
an institutionalized set up for redressal of complaints from customers on regular basis. The Bank has 
also taken Citizen Charter initiatives and displayed the Charter for frontline Departments with public 
interface.  Specific  to  this,  customer  satisfaction  surveys  are  organized  at  frequent  intervals  and 
appropriate responses are formulated for improving service and avoiding recurrence of complaints, to 
the extent feasible.  
In order to assess the level of customer satisfaction rendered by the Reserve Bank and its agencies in 
acting as banker to Governments in the light of all round technological developments taking place at 
RBI/agency  banks/  Government  Departments  and  to  suggest  improvements  in  the  day-to-day 
operations  of  the  Government  business,  Reserve  Bank  had  constituted  five  sub-Groups  in  October 
2001, one each at Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Nagpur offices comprising officials 
from Reserve Bank, representatives from Finance Department of the State Governments. The sub-
Groups  had  deliberated  on  the  day-to-day  operational  procedures  in  vogue  in  Reserve  Bank  and 
evaluated their efficiency in relation to the users and accounting authorities.  
The Groups came up with very  valuable suggestions in January  2002. This includes laying  down a 
roadmap  for  enhancing  the  level  of  computerization,  both  at  agency  banks  and  Government 
Departments,  provision  of  tele-banking  facility  at  all  Link  Offices,  simplification  of  challan  forms, 
making the challans easily available through internet, transmission of scrolls / DMS through electronic 
media  in  addition  to  regular  mode,  phasing  out  of  non-MICR  instruments,  acceptance  of  only  local 
cheques for Government payments  instead  of outstation instruments, cheque system to replace  bill 
system at Government Departments, use of ECS for effecting Government payments, introduction of 
note sorting machines at Government Departments, easing pensioners' problems, acceptance of cash 
by  RBI  beyond  working  hours,  curtailing  the  cut-off  period  for  levy  of  penal  interest  on  delayed 
remittance of Government collections / funds to RBI by agency banks progressively, extension of time 
available at CAS for settlement of funds by link cells of agency banks at Nagpur. 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 9
 The  RBI  is  earnest  in  its  intent  to  implement  all  these  recommendations  in  consultation  with  the 
Governments/agency banks. The RBI is also formalizing the review mechanism by setting up Standing 
Advisory  Committees  under  the  Regional  Directors  of  RBI  offices  at  all  centers,  so  as  to  ensure 
optimum customer satisfaction at all times. The day-to-day procedures are being recast in the light of 
the suggestions, which have emerged. 
Conclusion 
The endeavour of the RBI is to create conditions for the common person to pay Government dues at 
his/her  bank branch  of choice,  while  ensuring  instantaneous credit to  the Government account  with 
Reserve  Bank.  This  can  be  achieved  with  a  high  degree  of  computerization  with  appropriate 
connectivity / net-working, encompassing agency banks, Government Departments and Central Bank 
for expeditious, cost effective and seamless financial flows, in a paperless environment.  
In view of the enormous work of Government and complexities and inter linkages between the Central 
and  State  Governments  and  the  banking  system,  it  maybe  possible  to  explore  the  setting  up  of  an 
Advisory  Board,  which  could  meet  quarterly,  for  evolving  best  practices  in  the  overall  interest  of 
discharging  the  Reserve  Bank's  duties  as  Banker  to  Governments.  This  arrangement  will  be 
analogous to the Cash and Debt Management Group in which Government of India and the RBI are 
involved.  I  commend  the  acceptance  of  this  proposal  as  a  fitting  tribute  to  this  Silver  Jubilee 
Celebrations. 
Thank You.  
10 
 BIS Review 22/2002
