 Lars Nyberg: The repo rate - Spring 2002  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish  taxpayers(cid:146) 
association in Malm(cid:246) and Kristianstad, 22 April 2002. 
 I  should  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  this  discussion  and  the  opportunity  to 
develop  some  ideas  on  the  Swedish  economy  as  it  looks  in  spring  2002.  I  shall  start  with  the 
Riksbank’s most recent Executive Board meeting on 18 March, where we decided to raise the repo 
rate by 0.25 percentage points to 4.0 per cent. It may seem as though the interest rate hike did not 
come at the most appropriate point in time, as economic activity is still weak. Why did we raise the rate 
so quickly and before most other central banks had done so? Moreover, we, in common with most of 
the analysts in the market, expect the inflation rate to fall during the spring. Why did we raise the repo 
rate when inflation is on its way down? These are questions that I shall try to answer today. Some 
analysts also consider that the Riksbank has made a sudden U-turn in its assessment of inflation and 
so I thought I would explain a little about how our view has changed and why. However, it was not 
actually a major change and cannot really be regarded as a total U-turn. 
Why was the repo rate raised when inflation is on its way down? 
The Riksbank has been given a statutory task of maintaining price stability and promoting a safe and 
efficient  payment  system.  The  Riksbank  has  specified  the  monetary  policy  objective  as  a  rate  of 
increase  in  consumer  prices,  measured  as  CPI  inflation,  of  2  per  cent,  with  a  tolerated  deviation 
interval of plus/minus one percentage point. The most important instrumental rate, the repo rate, is the 
instrument normally used by the Riksbank to maintain price stability. 
Our monetary  policy  strategy  can  be  described  in  a  simplified  manner  using  the  rule  of  thumb  that 
when an assessment indicates that inflation one to two years ahead will deviate from the target level, 
the instrumental rate is adjusted. The Riksbank’s assessment of future inflation is communicated, for 
instance, in the Inflation Reports published four times a year. 
The Riksbank has chosen to maintain the inflation target in a medium-term perspective. One reason 
for this is that monetary policy affects inflation with a significant time lag. An attempt to ensure that 
inflation  also  develops  in  line  with  the  target  in  the  short  term  would  probably  require  much  larger 
changes  in  the  instrumental  rate  and  thereby  contribute  to  excessive  fluctuations  in  demand  and 
employment.  The  fact  that  the  inflation  target  is  worded  in  terms  of  a medium-run  perspective  also 
helps tone down the significance of temporary price changes. 
The unexpectedly high inflation rate last year can partly be explained by a number of transitory factors. 
These include the low precipitation that affected hydroelectric power, various diseases that affected 
livestock and the fact that Sweden and southern Europe suffered poor harvests. We are in agreement 
with other forecasters and analysts that the inflation rate will fall as the effects of the transitory price 
rises  abate  and  inflation  approaches  2  per  cent  in  early  summer.  In  the  longer  term  perspective, 
however,  the  picture  looks  slightly  different  and  developments  indicate  an  inflation  rate  above  the 
target of 2 per cent. 
The assessment contained in the main scenario of the most recent Inflation Report has CPI inflation at 
2.2  per  cent  one  year  ahead  and  2.4  per  cent  two  years  ahead.  The  corresponding  forecast  for 
underlying inflation, UND1X, is an increase of 2.2 per cent at both one and two years ahead. It is the 
latter measure that is the most central to monetary policy. However, each inflation assessment also 
takes  into  account  the  risk  spectrum.  The  risk  spectrum  mainly  concerns  domestic  inflationary 
pressure.  If  resource  utilisation  comes  under  greater  strain  than  the  Riksbank  has  estimated  in  its 
main scenario, or if the potential growth rate has been overestimated, there is a risk that inflation will 
be higher than expected in future. Taking into account the risk spectrum, underlying inflation comes 
out at 2.3 per cent both one year and two years ahead. 
Although the inflation rate is expected to fall over the coming months, the forecasts indicate that it will 
exceed the inflation target one to two years ahead. As it takes such a long time for an adjustment in 
the repo rate to have an impact on the economy, it is both natural and reasonable to raise the rate 
now. 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 1
 Now the transitory rise in inflation has affected not only Sweden but also a number of other countries. 
The decision to raise the repo rate meant that Sweden was the first central bank in the OECD region 
that chose to ease up on the accelerator somewhat and make monetary policy less expansionary. This 
is partly because resource utilisation appears to have been higher in Sweden than in other countries 
during the economic downturn and, above all, because it has been expressed in rising costs, primarily 
payroll expenses. To provide a more nuanced picture of this, I shall go on to discuss what lies behind 
our inflation forecast and why underlying inflation is high at present. It is important to begin with how 
we view the global economy and Swedish economy today in order to give a clear picture. 
Brighter prospects for the global economy 
The  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  increased  uncertainty  over  how  the  already  weak  global 
economy would develop. Investments were postponed in the face of a possibility of escalating anti-
terrorist measures of unknown scope and consequences. There was also the risk of a considerable 
slowdown  in  consumption.  Many  central  banks  around  the  world  cut  their  instrumental  rates  to 
counteract a feared decline in demand. The Riksbank cut its repo rate by 0.5 percentage points, to 
3.75 per cent. 
Now, just over six months later, we can conclude that the impact of the attacks on the global economy 
was less than feared, although certain sectors  were  hard  hit. In addition,  there are more and more 
signs of an imminent improvement in activity in both the USA and Europe. The stocks that had been 
built up during  the  downturn in activity appear to have been  largely phased  out and  according to  a 
number of indicators, production has begun to  increase. A cautious optimism has begun to spread. 
There  is  also  the  additional  impetus  that  comes  from  the  expansionary  economic  policy  in  many 
countries and strengthens confidence in an impending upturn. 
However,  for  the  global  recovery  to  really  take  off  and  become  stronger,  it  is  necessary  that  it  is 
accompanied by a broad and sustained increase in demand. If production increases because stocks 
are too small and need to be refilled, there is a risk that the upturn will be short-lived. 
We have been receiving both positive and negative signals regarding the situation in the US economy. 
The  positive  signals  come  from  an  unusually  strong  growth  in  productivity  during  the  slowdown  in 
activity,  which  indicates  that  the  US  industry  has  managed  to  adapt  its  production  structure  in  an 
impressive  manner.  Private  consumption,  which  is  important  in  all  countries,  but  particularly  in  the 
USA, has also remained strong during the whole of 2001 and early 2002. 
Negative signals are coming from manufacturing, where companies’ profit expectations are subdued in 
both the USA and Europe. However, the first reports just presented for Q1 look better than the market 
had  expected.  Although  as  private  consumption  has  been  relatively  strong  in  the  USA,  there  is  no 
pent-up need to purchase capital goods as is usually the case after an economic downturn. Household 
consumption may also be negatively affected if households’ wealth in property, and not just equity, is 
undermined. If the US long rates continue to rise as they have done in recent years, this may be one 
of the consequences. 
A large part of Sweden’s exports go to the euro area, which means that developments in economic 
activity here are particularly important. There are fewer signs of a recovery in Europe and the upturn in 
economic  activity  may  be  less  strong.  However,  if  one  examines  the  leading  indicators,  companies 
appear to have become more optimistic. 
All in all, it can be concluded that growth prospects in the world around us have improved. The effects 
of the expansionary monetary and fiscal policy conducted on both sides of the Atlantic are becoming 
more tangible. The slowdown in economic activity therefore looks to be relatively limited. At the same 
time, there are risks. The structural imbalances in the US economy, which were built up during the end 
of the 1990s as a result of excessive optimism, are threatening to slow down the recovery. However, 
the  picture of the global  economy  is nevertheless much brighter than  it  was in the autumn and the 
signs of a turnaround are becoming more distinct. 
Developments in Sweden 
The signals of a general recovery in Sweden have also become more tangible. According to Statistics 
Sweden’s sales index, the retail trade’s sales volume rose in January, compared with December 2001. 
During the most recent three-month period (November-January) industrial production and order intake 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 had  increased,  compared  with  the  immediately  preceding  three-month  period.  The  manufacturing 
industry is optimistic with regard to the coming months and the retail trade is expecting sales statistics 
to remain high, according to the National Institute of Economic Research’s economic barometer. 
The expansionary fiscal policy contributes to a strong development in households’ disposable income 
and  forms  a  basis  for  both  higher  private  consumption  and  increased  savings.  Exports  increased 
gradually during the period, but relatively cautiously, both because the international upturn in activity is 
rather  tentative  to  begin  with  and  because  the  krona  is  expected  to  appreciate.  According  to  the 
Inflation  Report,  GDP  was  estimated  to  increase  by  1.6  per  cent  this  year  and  then  accelerate  to 
between 2.5 and 3 per cent in the coming years. 
Despite the weaker demand last year, employment continued to develop strongly and unemployment 
declined  slightly.  Both  the  number  of  hours  worked  and  the  number  of  those  employed  increased 
during  2001.  Part  of  the  favourable  development  in  employment  may,  however,  stem  from  the 
increased  absence  due  to  sickness. The  picture  of  employment  is  nevertheless  rather  divided.  The 
number of jobs in the manufacturing industry has declined markedly, while jobs in the public sector 
and the service industries have increased. 
Given  this,  the  situation  on  the  labour  market  is  of  particular  interest.  It  appears  to  be  relatively 
constrained, considering that we are at the end of an economic downturn and wage increases have 
also  been  slightly  higher  than  expected,  particularly  in  the  construction  sector  and  the  service 
industries. As the level of employment has been retained, despite the decline in demand, productivity 
has  shown  a  weak  development,  particularly  in  the  services  sector.  To  some  extent,  the  effect  of 
companies’  higher  costs  has  not  had  an  impact  on  prices,  but  instead  led  to  falling  profit  shares. 
However, it now appears that the demand situation has enabled companies to shift a larger part of the 
cost increases onto consumers. 
So, how come wage increases have been higher than expected? One possible explanation may be 
that  the  resource  utilisation  in  the  economy  has  been  higher  in  recent  years  than  we  had  earlier 
believed. A strained resource utilisation means quite simply that the total demand is high in relation to 
the production capacity of the economy. This is usually revealed, for instance, in rising wage increases 
and higher underlying inflation. In the Inflation Report presented on 19 March 2002, we have made a 
slight upward revision for resource utilisation. This means that we believe that there are now, and will 
be in future, less available resources that can be used without price and wage increases accelerating. 
Inflation above the target level 
Looking at inflation, it is primarily the underlying rate that has been surprisingly high. The largest rise 
has been in prices of services. Here, the relatively high resource utilisation in the services sector has 
contributed to rising labour costs. In addition, prices of input goods, such as electricity and foodstuffs, 
have risen. 
Given the developments in prices and wages over the past year, the Riksbank has gradually altered its 
view  of  the  inflation  propensity  in  the  Swedish  economy  in  a  broader  sense.  A  higher  resource 
utilisation, together with rapid wage increases and a weak exchange rate, have led to slightly higher 
inflationary pressure than in previous assessments. It is this gradual shift that has sometimes been 
referred to as a total U-turn. 
Recent events 
Since the most recent Executive Board meeting, new statistics have been received that largely confirm 
the picture of the Swedish economy painted by the Riksbank. 
In my opinion, there is no reason, all in all, to alter significantly the assessment of economic prospects 
made  in  the  latest  Inflation  Report,  with  regard  to  either  the  international  picture  or  the  Swedish 
picture. We wrote in the press release from the Executive Board meeting on 18 March: "If economic 
activity continues to strengthen as expected - and if there are no grounds for changing the appraisal of 
the inflation propensity - it is, however, reasonable to assume that the level of interest rates in Sweden 
will  be  adjusted  successively  upwards."  We  thus  see  before  us  a  path  leading  towards  a  less 
expansionary monetary policy than we have now. I think this assessment will remain the case. 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 3
