 Donald T Brash: An indebted people 
Speech  by  Mr  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Canterbury 
Employers' Chamber of Commerce, Canterbury, 25 January 2002. 
 Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be here again for my ninth annual address to the Canterbury Employers' Chamber of 
Commerce. Last year I spoke to this audience about what goes on "behind the scenes" in formulating 
monetary policy at the Reserve Bank, and over the years I have addressed a wide range of topics. In 
1998, I talked about New Zealand's balance of payments deficit and its relevance to policy-makers. 
The topic of that speech was "New Zealand's balance of payments deficit: does it matter?"1  
I want to return to this topic today, from a slightly different tack. As part of our brief to watch out for 
things to do with financial stability, we in the Reserve Bank have been doing some thinking recently 
about New Zealand's dependence on foreign capital and some of the risks that that exposes us to.2 
(As an aside, it seems fitting to be addressing this topic in Christchurch this year, as my own Masters 
thesis, submitted to the University of Canterbury forty years ago this year, was entitled "New Zealand's 
External Debt Servicing Capacity" - although I am bound to say my understanding of the issues has 
evolved considerably since that time!)  
Just how dependent are we on foreign capital? 
By international standards, and by our own historical standards, New Zealand is unusually dependent 
on  foreign  capital.  Since  the  mid-1970s,  New  Zealand  has  consistently  spent  more  on  goods  and 
services from abroad, including the income paid to the foreigners who have provided us with capital, 
than it has earned from exports. It has, in other words, consistently run a current account balance of 
payments  deficit.  Each  of  these  deficits  has  had  to  be  financed  by  capital  inflows  of  one  kind  or 
another. 
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
                                                      
1  Speech to Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce, 30 January 1998. 
2  See, for example, the article "International capital flows, external debt, and New Zealand financial stability" in the December 
2001 issue of the Reserve Bank's Bulletin. 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 1
 Four years ago when I talked about the current account, the deficit stood at 6.4 per cent of GDP, then 
one of the largest deficits in the world relative to GDP. In fact, the deficit deteriorated further, peaking 
at 7.0 per cent of GDP in the year to March 2000. The latest information we have is for the year to 
September 2001, when the current account deficit was 3.4 per cent of GDP. That is low by recent New 
Zealand standards. But what matters is not any particular year's current account deficit - whether the 
14 per cent peak deficit in 1975, when the terms of trade collapsed, or the rather lower deficit of the 
last year, helped by good commodity prices and an unusually low exchange rate. What matters, when 
we think about financial stability, is the accumulation of deficits: the stock of debt and equity finance 
which  foreign  investors  have  provided  to  this  economy  over  the  years,  and  the  relationship  of  that 
stock to our wealth and income.  
Capital inflows match (and fund) a current account deficit. Capital inflows can take the form of debt 
(foreigners lending to us) or equity (foreign investors buying property and shares in other productive 
assets in New Zealand). But each inflow adds to the stock of foreign debt and foreign ownership. The 
numbers involved are large. If we add together all the current account deficits since 1975, they total 
almost $80 billion, and of course there were substantial amounts of foreign debt and foreign ownership 
prior to that date. 
Source: Statistics New Zealand  
I have no doubt that foreign investment in New Zealand has been very beneficial to the New Zealand 
economy and to most New Zealanders, and that is especially true since we abolished the subsidies 
which  we  used  to  extend  to  some  foreign  investors  through  our  protection  of  internationally 
uncompetitive industries.3  
Of course, there is nothing inherently wrong with borrowing or debt either. I differ, for example, from a 
strict interpretation of the sentiment Mr Micawber expressed in Charles Dickens's "David Copperfield":  
"Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen pounds nineteen shillings and sixpence, 
result  happiness.  Annual  income  twenty  pounds,  annual  expenditure  twenty  pounds  ought  and 
sixpence, result misery." 
Taking  on  debt  permits  spending  and  investment  earlier  than  would  otherwise  be  possible.  It  can 
provide a buffer when income is temporarily low, and help finance profitable investment opportunities. 
This applies  both to  individuals and to  nations. Much of the  initial  infrastructure of this country  was 
financed by foreign borrowing from the United Kingdom in the nineteenth century.  
However,  the  more  indebted  a  country  is  the  more  vulnerable  it  is  to  things  going  wrong.  In  many 
ways, the story is the same for a country as for a highly indebted individual - everything is fine as long 
                                                      
3 
"Foreign investment in New Zealand: Does it threaten our prosperity or our sovereignty?", speech to the Wellington Rotary 
Club, 20 November 1995. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 as there is the willingness and the ability to service the debt. But the higher the level of debt, the more 
exposed the individual is if, say, he or she is made redundant or faces unexpected expenses. 
I mentioned a moment ago that we have run current account deficits totalling around $80 billion since 
1975. The best official measure of how reliant we are on foreign capital is Statistics New Zealand's 
International Investment Position data. That shows that our total net use of foreign capital - allowing for 
the best estimates of New Zealanders' holdings of foreign assets - is around $88 billion, or nearly 80 
per  cent  of  GDP.  Moreover,  the  gross  numbers  matter  too  -  the  total  amount  of  capital  which 
foreigners have provided to New Zealand is around $170 billion. There is a mix of debt and equity: the 
distinction between the two isn't always clear cut,4 but in the official data approximately $120 billion of 
the total takes the form of debt. 
Source: IMF 
In isolation, these figures don't mean very much; and, after all, many of us have had mortgages well in 
excess of one year's income. International comparisons can help us gain a better perspective. Most 
mature and highly developed economies in Europe and North America are either net lenders to the 
rest  of  the  world,  or  have  financing  from  abroad  equivalent  to  only  20-30  per  cent  of  GDP.  Even 
Australia, with its own history of persistent current account deficits, is only about half as dependent on 
foreign capital as we are. 
It is not easy to draw strong conclusions from international comparisons, as there are measurement 
difficulties in comparing data from different countries. However, it does seem that New Zealand is now 
much  more  dependent  on  foreign  capital  than  any  of  the  developed  countries  we  like  to  compare 
ourselves with. One exception is the tiny - but much wealthier - country of Iceland, which is in about 
the same position. Looking back over history, the data are not as reliable, but it is not obvious that any 
developed country in the post-war era has been more dependent on foreign capital than we are now5 - 
and certainly none since the general liberalisation of private capital flows over the last few decades.  
As I suggested earlier, a heavy dependence on foreign capital - whether of debt or of equity - need not 
be a problem. What matters is how that capital is used, and what is happening to the incomes and 
assets of those raising the finance. I  have noted on  many  occasions that Singapore ran  very  large 
current account deficits, averaging around 11 per cent of GDP, for a long period in the 1970s. As any 
businessperson knows, borrowing or raising outside equity makes a lot of sense if there are profitable 
investment  opportunities  available.  At  a  national  level,  an  unusually  high  degree  of  dependence  on 
foreign  capital  (especially  debt)  makes  a  lot  of  sense  if  there  are  opportunities  that  mean  it  is 
reasonable to expect the rate of economic growth to take a big step up, and to move ahead of the 
average. 
                                                      
4  Tax considerations often encourage foreign parent companies to finance their local subsidiaries in the form of debt rather 
than equity, and some instruments are designed to be equity for some purposes and debt for tax purposes. 
Ireland may have been an exception in the late 1970s and early 1980s (the data do not allow a direct comparison). 
5 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 3
 Singapore got that sort of pay-off. That country graduated from being a low-income developing country 
in the 1950s to the point where it now has per capita incomes higher than our own. 
Unfortunately,  we  haven't  achieved  a  similarly  dramatic  transformation.  Yes,  our  GDP  growth 
performance has been better in the 1990s, but on most measures (eg growth in output per hour or per 
person  employed)  it  has  still  not  been  as  good  as  those  of  other,  much  less  indebted,  developed 
nations. Australia's picture looks better: although our trans-Tasman cousins have also run relatively 
large  current  account  deficits,  and  are  therefore  also  relatively  quite  heavily  dependent  on  foreign 
capital, they achieved growth rates among the highest in the developed world during the 1990s. 
But  even  that  does  not  get  to  the  crux  of  the  issue  for  New  Zealand.  Gross  domestic  product  is  a 
measure of the income generated within New Zealand, and New Zealand's growth in GDP was not too 
bad  during  the  1990s.  But  because  we  have  become  increasingly  reliant  on  finance  from  foreign 
savers, an increasing share of the income this economy generates goes (in interest and dividends) to 
those  who  financed  us.  Gross  national  product  is  a  measure  of  the  income  generated  by  New 
Zealanders'  own  resources.  Unfortunately,  GNP  per  capita  in  New  Zealand  barely  increased  at  all 
during  that  time.  In  other  words,  because  we  have  been  such  heavy  users  of  capital  from  foreign 
savers - so reluctant to save enough to provide our own investment capital - much of the growth in the 
New Zealand economy in recent years has accrued to those foreign savers. 
This is not a speech about why our growth performance has been disappointing. I have spoken on that 
and related issues on other occasions, including to this audience two years ago.6 Instead, I want to 
devote the rest of this speech to looking briefly at how we came to be so dependent on foreign capital, 
and then turn to outlining some of the risks that that dependence may expose New Zealand to.  
How did we get into this situation? 
I don't think there are too many easy answers to the question of why we became so dependent on 
foreign  capital.  I  think  it  is  clear,  however,  that  the  current  situation  is  more  a  reflection  of  private 
sector choices over a number of years than of government decisions, though of course to the extent 
that government policies have influenced private sector choices those government policies must share 
some of the responsibility.  
At  the  heart  of  the  issue,  countries  run  up  obligations  to  foreign  investors  when,  in  total,  they  are 
spending (consuming or investing) more than they are earning.  
Let  me  stress  that  government  borrowing  is  not  the  issue  today.  When  we  first  ran  large  current 
account deficits in the 1970s, and through to 1984, government fiscal deficits accounted for much of 
the excess spending that gave rise to the current account deficits, and government borrowing abroad 
financed those deficits. As late as the early 1990s, New Zealand's total government debt was relatively 
high by international standards - though never anywhere nearly as high as the public debt of countries 
like  Ireland,  Belgium  and  Italy,  or  indeed  Japan  today.  But  a  decade  or  more  of  prudent  fiscal 
management means that our net public debt is now among the lowest in the developed world. Good 
comparative data are hard to come by, but it seems likely that the New Zealand government's overall 
net asset position is today at least as good as the average for developed countries. 
It is also worth noting that the New Zealand government now has no net foreign currency debt. The 
small  amount  of  foreign  currency  government  debt  still  outstanding  is  fully  matched  by  foreign 
currency assets held by the Treasury and the Reserve Bank. The limited net amount of debt still owed 
by the government to foreigners is in the form of locally-issued New Zealand dollar bonds that foreign 
investors have bought on the local bond market. 
Nor  is  privatisation  to  blame.  Many  of  the  formerly  government-owned  assets  that  have  been  sold 
have ended up owned by foreign investors. But selling the assets didn't change the spending habits of 
New  Zealanders.  The  deficits  needed  to  be  financed:  selling  assets  (whether  privately  owned  or 
publicly owned) has been one way of doing that, and if we hadn't sold such assets, we would have 
had to finance those deficits by going even further into debt. As I said a moment ago, current account 
deficits need to be financed, and that financing can take the form of either equity or debt. If not equity, 
then debt; if not debt, then equity.  
                                                      
6 
"The building blocks of economic growth", speech to the Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce, 26 January 2000. 
See also "Faster growth? If we want it", a speech to the Catching the Knowledge Wave conference, 2 August 2001. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 Who then is behind the spending that has made us so reliant on foreign savings?  
The "culprit" has been the private sector - and New Zealand households in particular. The share of 
their  incomes  that  New  Zealand  households  are  saving  has  fallen  away  very  markedly.  Household 
savings rates fell in a number of developed countries over the last ten years or so. But, while some 
caution  is  needed  because  of  cross-country  measurement  difficulties,  New  Zealand's  record  looks 
particularly poor. 
Fifteen years ago, our household saving rate was not too bad by developed country standards. But by 
2000,  we  had  slipped  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  OECD  developed-country  class.  By  that  year,  our 
households were, in aggregate, spending more than their income. The OECD average saving rate that 
year was 8.4 per cent.  
Source: Statistics New Zealand 
The sharp fall in the household savings rate has not been sufficiently offset by increased savings in 
other sectors of the  economy, so  that  now  our overall national savings rate  also appears to  be the 
lowest among the developed OECD countries. If we, as New Zealanders, are not saving very much, 
somebody  else - somebody  overseas - has to finance the ongoing  investment the economy needs. 
Our level of investment is not unusually high, but our savings rate is unusually low. 
Why are we, on average, saving so little of our incomes?  
I have, from to time to time, suggested that we are poor savers because we have been effectively told 
by successive governments for more than half a century that we do not need to save for the things that 
people in many other countries save for. We have been reassured that government will care for us if 
we get sick; that government will pay for the primary, secondary, and tertiary education of our children; 
that  government  will  care  for  us  in  old  age.  "You  don't  need  to  save"  has  been  the  message.  And 
successive  governments  have  also  effectively  told  us,  by  their  behaviour  during  the  seventies  and 
eighties at least, that if we nevertheless do save we would lose our savings through high inflation, and 
strongly negative after-tax real interest rates.  
But while there may be something in that explanation, it does not really explain either why our savings 
performance is so much inferior to that  in, for example, most European countries (where  the social 
welfare  net  is  at  least  as  generous  as  it  is  in  New  Zealand),  or  why  our  savings  performance  has 
actually  deteriorated  in  recent  years,  as  government's  commitment  in  health,  education,  and 
retirement income has become a little less generous, as inflation has been largely eliminated and as 
real after-tax interest rates on savings have become positive.  
In principle, another possibility is that the savings rate (from current income) might be falling because 
households own assets that have risen in value, making people feel that there is less need to save 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 5
 from current income. This seems to have been the story in the United States - which has also become 
much more dependent on foreign savings in recent years. Ten years ago, US household saving rates 
were around 8 or 9 per cent, but by the end of the decade (at the end of the longest and strongest 
equity market expansion of the twentieth century), the US savings rate had dropped to just 1 per cent. 
One might question just how robust those high asset prices will prove - on most longer-term metrics, 
US share prices still look to me to be rather considerably overvalued. But, if people believe the wealth 
gains will last, it does make sense for them to increase spending and reduce savings in response.  
We, by contrast, have not seen soaring asset prices of that sort - indeed, the data suggest that real 
household wealth has been falling for several years. There are very real data difficulties in comparing 
wealth in different countries, but New Zealand stands out in the data we do have: we have a low ratio 
of wealth to income, indeed the lowest of the developed countries we've looked at. Our numbers are 
likely to be understated - in particular, farms are not included in the data, and farms make up a larger 
percentage of wealth here than in most other developed countries. But even if adjustments were made 
for these factors, it seems unlikely to change the overall picture materially. And our relative position in 
those league tables looks much worse than it did a decade ago.  
It is worth highlighting a few numbers. Financial assets and liabilities are easier than most to get a 
good  fix  on.  New  Zealand  households'  net  financial  wealth  (deposits,  shares,  unit  trusts,  pension 
funds, etc less household debt) is estimated to be only around 70 per cent of our annual disposable 
income. In the bigger developed countries, that ratio averages around 270 per cent - even after the fall 
in  international  share  prices  last  year.  Even  allowing  for  the  inevitable  problems  in  putting  together 
such cross-country comparisons, and for the possibility that international share prices still have some 
further adjustment to do, that is a large - and sobering - difference. Put another way, the debt of the 
household sector in New Zealand is very much higher, relative to the sector's financial assets, than in 
many other developed countries.  
Household net financial wealth to income ratios 
Per cent 
US 
Japan 
Germany 
France 
UK 
Italy 
G6 
Australia 
New Zealand 
1990 
261.8 
260.3 
130.8 
130.6 
211.8 
196.3 
198.6 
253.0 
102.7 
1995 
304.7 
283.8 
140.4 
184.7 
291.2 
217.1 
237.0 
218.4 
108.6 
2001 
333.0 
356.9 
150.0 
264.4 
333.2 
250.0 
281.3 
266.0 
70.4 
1990-2001 
change 
71.2 
96.6 
19.2 
133.8 
121.4 
53.7 
82.7 
13.0 
– 32.3 
1995-2001 
change 
28.3 
73.1 
9.6 
79.7 
42.0 
32.9 
44.3 
47.6 
– 38.1 
Source: OECD, national sources, and UBS Warburg. 2001 data are forecast, except for NZ, which are 2000 actuals. 
 6 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 Household debt to household financial assets ratios 
Per cent 
1990 
US 
Japan 
Germany 
France 
UK 
Italy 
G6 
Australia 
New Zealand 
25.0 
3.4 
34.9 
40.3 
35.6 
12.9 
30.4 
30.8 
39.1 
1995 
23.6 
32.7 
42.5 
25.8 
24.9 
12.9 
27.0 
36.7 
47.3 
2001 
23.8 
27.1 
41.1 
17.3 
24.4 
12.9 
24.4 
40.4 
64.5 
1990-2001 
change 
– 1.2 
– 6.3 
6.2 
– 23.0 
– 11.2 
0.0 
– 5.9 
9.6 
25.4 
1995-2001 
change 
0.2 
– 5.6 
– 1.4 
– 8.5 
– 0.5 
0.4 
– 2.6 
3.7 
17.2 
Source:  OECD,  national  sources,  and  UBS Warburg.  2001  data  are  latest  estimates  based  on  monthly  or  quarterly  figures, 
except for NZ, which are 2000 actuals. 
Unlike  most  developed  countries,  in  New  Zealand  houses  make  up  the  overwhelming  bulk  of  our 
relatively modest net wealth. Of course, we all have to live somewhere, but especially in a low inflation 
environment, houses do not offer a high investment return - either to most of us as owner-occupiers or 
to those holding investment properties (although I acknowledge the incentives created by the present 
tax regime). It is perhaps worth noting that New Zealand home ownership is no longer particularly high 
by developed world standards and, although getting consistent data over time is not easy, may even 
be slipping down the international rankings. I suspect this may surprise some people, as we tend to 
see ourselves as a nation of home-owners tending the quarter acre plot. It isn't obvious that we are 
building a disproportionate number of houses either, but perhaps - by default as much as by design - 
we are rather too keen on having a house as the principal asset in our investment portfolios. What we 
haven't done is built up or maintained holdings of other income-earning assets.  
Later this year, the Retirement Commissioner will release a report based on a fairly comprehensive 
survey  of  New  Zealand  household  wealth.  While  I  have  not  seen  the  report  of  course,  it  will 
undoubtedly  add  a  great  deal  to  our  understanding  of  household  balance  sheets.  I  suspect  that 
underlying  the  aggregate  figures  -  and  by  that  I  mean  the  household  sector  as  a  whole  -  some 
disturbing figures could emerge about just how low the wealth and savings of even the middle-aged 
middle income sections of our society are.  
What still isn't so clear is why we have cut our savings rate to such a low level.  
Part  of  it,  of  course,  is  simply  that  we  could.  In  many  developed  countries  following  financial 
deregulation, households have run debt levels up quite substantially. Refinancing, and drawing down 
the equity  in one's house,  has become much easier - with revolving mortgage facilities, people can 
and  do  now  "put  the  groceries  on  the  mortgage".  Banks  have,  at  times,  marketed  this  opportunity 
aggressively.  I  can  recall  one  innovative  television  advertisement  that  encouraged  home-owners  to 
"put the boat on the house", and illustrated the message by depicting a boat balanced on the roof of 
the  house.  The  wisdom  of  following  their  advice  literally,  or  financially,  was  for  the  householder  to 
determine!  But  whatever  the  wisdom,  households  went  on  a  borrowing  spree  -  we  estimate  that 
household borrowing increased by $45 billion during the 1990s alone, from 57 per cent of disposable 
income in 1990 to 110 per cent in 2000, and that despite loud complaints from some about the high 
real interest rates on such borrowing. 
Perhaps a little paradoxically, lower inflation also facilitated the increase in debt. When inflation was 
high, high nominal interest rates meant that bank limits on debt servicing as a share of income cut in 
very  quickly.  Given  the  way  mortgages  are  structured,  lower  inflation,  and  the  lower  interest  rates 
which come with it, have allowed individuals to borrow more than they could in high inflation periods.  
As we've highlighted in a number of our Monetary Policy Statements, household debt-to-income ratios 
now seem to be fairly similar to those in, say, the United States and the United Kingdom. But post-
deregulation adjustment to international norms isn't enough of an explanation. The difference between 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 7
 New  Zealand  and  most  other  developed  countries  is  that  we  do  not  have  as  many  assets  as 
householders in other developed countries do. Basically, we have borrowed to finance consumption or 
relatively unproductive investments.  
Source: OECD and Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
More work is needed in this area, but my own sense of what has gone on is relatively prosaic. Our 
incomes  haven't  been  growing  as  rapidly  as  those  in  other  comparable  countries.  But  the  range  of 
goods and services available to us has increased dramatically, as we have liberalised and as other 
countries  have  grown  -  indeed,  it  is  often  commented  just  how  good  the  services  available  in  New 
Zealand  now  are.  If  our  tastes  (our  demand  for  goods  and  services)  are  increasing  faster  than  our 
income,  savings  inevitably  fall.  We  were  able  to  finance  the  difference  between  our  low  level  of 
savings and our average level of investment expenditure by accessing the savings which foreigners 
made. Over the years, those differences have added up to large numbers.  
Average investment as a percentage of GDP 1988-1999 
Country 
Residential Investment % 
Finland 
Netherlands 
Denmark 
US 
Italy 
New Zealand 
UK 
Australia 
Canada 
Average 
Source: OECD Quarterly National Accounts 
 
5.0 
5.8 
3.9 
4.0 
5.0 
4.9 
3.4 
4.9 
5.6 
4.7 
Investment excluding residential 
% 
15.9 
15.8 
15.2 
14.6 
14.5 
14.3 
14.4 
18.3 
13.5 
15.2 
8 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 What does it all mean? 
What should we make of all this?  
As I noted at the outset, the more indebted we are - as individuals and in aggregate - the less resilient 
to adverse economic shocks we are, and the higher the potential vulnerability. Without automatically 
presuming that there are problems, central bankers thinking about potential risks to financial stability 
should  be  prodding  and  probing  when  financing  patterns  in  the  economy  look  very  different  from 
international norms, or when structures and stocks change rapidly in a relatively short space of time. 
The  changes  in  New  Zealand  debt  levels  over  the  last  15  years  have  been  very  marked  and  have 
taken us increasingly away from international norms.  
In recent years, and particularly following the Asian crisis, the Reserve Bank has been devoting more 
attention to thinking about potential risks, both economic and financial. Internationally, we have seen 
numerous financial crises over the last decade or so. Part of our work in this area has highlighted the 
encouraging features that differentiate New Zealand from the crisis countries, a point I will come back 
to in a moment.  
It is worth noting that, since capital account liberalisation 18 years ago, the country's increasingly large 
external financing requirement has been met remarkably smoothly through a variety of international 
crises and changing domestic economic and financial conditions. But the perennial question concerns 
what sort of shocks or emerging points of vulnerability should we be alert to. If things turned against 
us, where might the pressure points in the economy and the financial system be? 
In essence, there is one big New Zealand imbalance that manifests itself in two - connected - ways. 
First, our household sector balance sheets appear to be very out of line with the international norm. 
And second, we are very dependent on foreign capital, with a large share of that in the form of debt 
finance. Let's remind ourselves of the connection.  
Households  do  not,  of  course,  typically  borrow  directly  from  overseas.  Instead,  they  borrow  from 
domestic banks. But that bank lending has to be financed somehow. Some of it is effectively financed 
by New Zealanders selling their holdings in New Zealand listed companies: we've seen a lot of that in 
the last 12-18 months as a low exchange rate has made many New Zealand companies appear very 
cheap to foreign buyers. But the household demand for credit has substantially exceeded the rise in 
the bank deposits of New Zealanders. As a result, much of the household borrowing has ultimately 
been  financed  by  banks'  borrowing  from  overseas.  New  Zealand  banks  now  rely  more  heavily  on 
overseas borrowing than banks in any other developed country - roughly a third of the total assets of 
the banking system are now funded by borrowing overseas, though not all of this funding is used to 
make loans to the household sector. Or measured another way, of the total increase in banks' balance 
sheets during the nineties, roughly a third has been financed from offshore. Of course, the average 
borrower isn't even aware of this (and need not be) - she goes to the bank on the corner and finances 
her house  without realising from where the funds are sourced. Financial intermediaries do their job 
very well, bringing together domestic borrowers and often-foreign providers of funds. 
Interestingly, individual loan-to-valuation ratios appear to be relatively conservative (and bank balance 
sheets are in very good shape in New Zealand), but I wonder how sustainable existing property prices 
would be if households ever decided to try to adjust their savings patterns, bringing their holdings of 
assets more into line with the international mainstream - looking to buy more shares, or to invest more 
in small and medium-sized businesses, for example.  
Think, for example, of a large number of "baby boomers" realising that they really do not have enough 
income-generating assets to support a good lifestyle in retirement, and foregoing the next move up to 
a  bigger  house.  In  aggregate,  the  effects  could  be  large.  Think  also  of  the  impact  on  consumption 
spending,  and  the  demand  facing  large  parts  of  the  business  sector,  if  the  household  savings  rate 
were to move back to 10 per cent of disposable income over a relatively short period of time. And of 
the possible implications then for the quality of bank loan books - built up at times when demand has 
been strong. 
We  all  hope  that  the  imbalances  resolve  themselves  gradually  and  without  undue  disruption.  And 
there are some encouraging signs. Having run  up debt over the 1990s (in  particular), credit growth 
rates are now much lower than they were in the mid-1990s. And the lack of house price inflation in 
recent years is a salutary reminder of what life should be like in a low inflation environment. Perhaps 
households may be beginning to stand back and consider their overall balance sheets. This certainly 
seems to be the sector of the economy that needs to think about how well placed it would be to absorb 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 9
 a shock - a large drop in house prices, the loss of a job, and so on - and indeed the assets required to 
support a good quality of life in retirement. 
Nonetheless, we cannot be complacent. Lending to households continues to grow faster than incomes 
are rising. And the current account position itself, although improving in the last couple of years, is not 
overly encouraging given the strength of New Zealand's export prices recently and the fact that most 
commentators, ourselves included, believe that our exchange rate is substantially undervalued. Unless 
the current account deficit stays below around 4 per cent of GDP or we achieve a rather faster rate of 
economic growth than we have managed in recent decades, the ratio of net foreign capital to GDP will 
continue  to  increase  from  already  unusually  high  levels.  Resolving  imbalances,  even  "naturally"  if 
borrowers voluntary come to the conclusion that they are over-extended, can be painful, and it seems 
to be in the nature of life that adjustments of this sort don't always occur easily or smoothly. Often they 
seem to require some sort of external prompt or trigger. 
Browsing  in  a  second-hand  bookshop  recently,  one  of  my  colleagues  came  across  the  following 
salutary observation from a New Zealand commentator writing in 1886: 
I fear it is of no use writing against excessive borrowing. The disease must run its course and no one 
will rejoice more than the writer if a certain cure is found for it. There are reckless lenders as well as 
reckless borrowers and the two must share the difficulties and troubles which may be in store for them 
in the future.7 
One obvious area of risk is that those who are providing the finance from abroad may reassess their 
willingness  to  go  on  doing  so.  A  sharply  increased  cost  of  overseas  finance,  for  example,  could 
dramatically alter the situation facing many New Zealand households.  
The external finance we now use takes a variety of forms: some short-term and some long-term; some 
debt and some equity; some in New Zealand dollars and some in foreign currency. The conventional 
wisdom is that the risk of financial instability tends to increase as the proportion of short-term liabilities 
increases,  as  the  proportion  of  debt  increases  relative  to  equity,  and  the  greater  the  proportion  of 
liabilities denominated in foreign currency. 
Of course, these are simple rules of thumb not immutable laws of nature. They do not always hold. For 
example,  it  is  clear  that  much  of  the  apparently  short-term  debt  owed  by  the  New  Zealand  private 
sector  is  owed  by  foreign-owned  subsidiaries  to  their  overseas  parents,  and  is  quite  unlikely  to  be 
called up at short notice.  
Sometimes, long-term debt can create less vulnerability than equity: an investor's equity stake could 
be short-term in nature, while long-term debt holdings might be part of an overall relationship between 
highly-integrated  foreign  parent  companies  and  local  subsidiaries.  Even  if  the  underlying  equity 
investment itself is a long-term one - and it can often be difficult to off-load large or controlling interests 
quickly  -  equity  holders  may  move  to  hedge  themselves  against  currency  risk  if  they  fear  that  the 
exchange  rate  is  vulnerable  to  a  fall.  That  sort  of  selling  could  exacerbate  any  pressures  on  the 
exchange rate. 
Foreign currency borrowing is generally held to be much riskier than domestic currency borrowing, and 
most of the private sector's external debt is denominated in foreign currencies. But at the same time, 
the overwhelming majority  of that foreign-currency debt is hedged back to New  Zealand dollars (by 
contrast, most heavily indebted developing countries are unable to raise foreign funding in their own 
currencies). That meant that our banks and corporates got through the sharp fall in the exchange rate 
during the late 1990s - a fall  which saw the New Zealand dollar fall against the US dollar by some 
45 per cent from peak to trough - almost entirely unscathed. 
But the very fact that so much of the debt is hedged raises further questions. If New Zealand residents 
are  not  directly  exposed  to  foreign  currency  exchange  rate  risk,  who  is  taking  the  risk?  If  we  can 
effectively  borrow  from  abroad  in  New  Zealand  dollars,  someone  must  be  willing  to  lend  in  New 
Zealand  dollars  -  someone,  most  likely,  without  a  strong  "natural"  interest  in  holding  New  Zealand 
dollar  assets.  Unfortunately,  we  cannot  be  sure  who  these  holders  are,  what  drives  them,  or  what 
might make them reconsider their willingness to be exposed to a relatively small peripheral currency.  
Financial systems and currencies can become illiquid quite quickly. Once investors begin to doubt the 
safety of the assets which they have tied up in a financial system or specific currency, they may want 
                                                      
7   C.R.  Carter,  An  Historical  Sketch  of  New  Zealand  Loans  and  Other  Matters  Connected  Therewith  from  1853  to  1886, 
London, 1886 
10 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 to  liquidate  them  quickly  -  the  more  so  when,  as  in  New  Zealand's  case,  we  feature  in  few  of  the 
international "benchmarks" that shape where portfolio managers place the bulk of their funds. There 
are considerable advantages in maintaining an independent currency and free movement of private 
capital, but it does mean that stability relies to an important extent on maintaining the confidence of 
market participants in the currency and the financial system. 
An unusual feature of New Zealand's offshore financing is that such a large proportion of the financing 
now takes the form of hedged foreign currency financing undertaken by a relatively small number of 
banks.  The  ability  of  those  banks  to  continue  tapping  the  international  markets,  and  to  continue 
effectively  hedging  the  foreign  currency  risks,  is  clearly  a  point  of  vulnerability.  That  is  likely  to  be 
closely linked not only to their own financial health, but also to the financial health of the small number 
of overseas parents.  
Under  some  circumstances,  all  this  could  become  much  more  difficult.  For  example,  even  shocks 
outside the control of the borrowing bank or its overseas parent, such as a slip in New Zealand's credit 
rating (or indeed, in Australia's rating, given the dominant role of Australian banks in New Zealand), 
could trigger a reappraisal of the risks inherent in dealing in the New Zealand market. Below certain 
ratings thresholds it can be impossible to tap financial markets.  
Concluding remarks 
Clearly there are risks in being as heavily dependent on foreign savers as the New Zealand private 
sector has become. Heavy reliance on foreign capital is something New Zealand shares with many of 
the  countries  that  have  experienced  exchange  rate  or  banking  system  crises  in  recent  years.  But 
fortunately New Zealand differs from these countries in many respects, and our points of vulnerability - 
and it is no more than heightened vulnerability - appear to be rather specific to New Zealand. 
We have had a floating exchange rate for 17 years. That has made borrowers appropriately cautious 
in  ensuring  that  their  borrowings  are  well  hedged,  and  can  help  the  economy  adjust  to  adverse 
economic shocks. Unusually among heavily indebted countries, we are readily able to tap international 
capital  markets  in  our  own  local  currency.  We  have  a  sound  macroeconomic  policy  framework,  a 
government committed to running fiscal surpluses, and a relatively low level of government debt. We 
do not have a large bubble in asset prices just waiting to burst. Our banks are well-capitalised and well 
managed,  and  have  very  low  levels  of  non-performing  loans  by  international  standards.  There  is  a 
good level of high-quality disclosure about the financial position of banks and the government. And yet 
the very fact that imbalances of the sort I have highlighted in this speech can emerge, even against 
the  backdrop  of  what  appears  to  be  such  a  sound  well-designed  policy  framework,  is  part  of  what 
makes our situation quite unusual - and hard to know just how things will work out from here. Other 
countries have not been this way before. 
Can  I  say  unambiguously,  however,  that  I  am  not  predicting  some  sort  of  financial  crisis  for  New 
Zealand. Yes, it appears that quite substantial adjustment in household balance sheets will be needed 
over  time,  and  that  will  begin  to  reduce  the  levels  of  external  indebtedness.  We  all  hope  that  that 
adjustment  will  occur  gradually,  voluntarily,  and  against  the  background  of  favourable  international 
circumstances. That seems by far the most likely outcome. But the message of this speech has been 
simply  that  when  the  ratios  are  as  stretched  as  they  have  become  in  New  Zealand,  we  are  more 
vulnerable if things goi ng  wrong - and that is something which firms, households, the government, 
and  a  central  bank  focused  on  financial  stability  need  to  be  aware  of.  All  that  underscores  the 
importance of a sound macroeconomic framework for fiscal and monetary policy, and of robust and 
well-managed banks. For us at the Reserve Bank, it also highlights the need for continual monitoring 
of  the  nature  of  the  risks  and  the  ways  in  which  demand  for  finance,  and  the  terms  on  which  it  is 
available, are changing. 
I have not devoted any time today to the question of what more public policy could or should do about 
this picture. Those are issues for another day.  
BIS Review 6/2002 
 11
