 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 6 June 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Papademos, the new Vice-President of the ECB, and I will now report on 
the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
The  Governing  Council  undertook  a  comprehensive  examination  of  monetary,  financial  and 
economic  developments  and  considered  the  evidence  that  has  become  available  since  its  last 
meeting on 2 May 2002. Notwithstanding the recent decline in inflation, the outlook for price stability in 
the medium term remains less satisfactory than expected a few months ago. However, the economic 
outlook  is  still  subject  to  uncertainty.  Further  evidence  is  needed  before  we  can  fully  assess  the 
upward risks to price stability over the medium term. Against this background, the Governing Council 
decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. 
Starting  with  the  analysis  under  the  first  pillar  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  three-month 
average of the annual growth rates of M3 decreased to 7.4% in the period from February to April 2002, 
down from 7.6% in the period from January to March 2002. While the high annual growth rate of M3 
still  partly  reflects  the  portfolio  shifts  to  liquid  positions  which  occurred  last  autumn,  and  there  was 
some  normalisation  in  the  development  of  M3  in  early  2002,  this  trend  towards  moderation  has 
recently  been  interrupted.  In  addition,  annual  rates  of  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  have 
stabilised over recent months. 
As regards the second pillar, our expectations for a gradual recovery in real GDP growth in the euro 
area have been confirmed by Eurostat’s recently published first estimates for real GDP growth. These 
preliminary estimates show an improvement of quarter-on-quarter growth rates from –0.3% in the last 
quarter of 2001 to moderately positive rates in the first quarter of this year. Moreover, business and 
consumer confidence has strengthened again more recently, as reflected in the data published by the 
Commission.  Looking  ahead,  available  forecasts  all  point  to  a  continued  strengthening  in  both 
domestic  and  foreign  demand,  relating  to  a  more  favourable  external  environment,  sound  domestic 
fundamentals and the absence of major imbalances within the euro area. Overall, they suggest that 
real GDP growth in the euro area should again be in line with potential growth later this year, with a 
further increase expected in 2003. Despite this rather positive outlook, the assessment of the short-
term  dynamics  of  real  activity  is  still  surrounded  by  uncertainty.  Moreover,  future  oil  price 
developments and economic imbalances elsewhere in the world economy remain elements of risk. 
Turning to price developments, Eurostat’s early estimate indicates that annual HICP inflation fell from 
2.4% in April to 2.0% in May. However, this decline is mainly due to a base effect relating to the spike 
in HICP inflation in May 2001. Moreover, in the first months of this year HICP inflation excluding the 
more volatile items of energy and unprocessed food prices has remained stubbornly high, reflecting in 
particular trends in services prices. While a further decline in the annual inflation rate is possible in the 
short run, the medium-term outlook remains less satisfactory than expected a few months ago. Over 
recent  weeks  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  has  appreciated.  This  will  contribute  to  containing 
inflationary pressures, but it is still too early to assess the impact of exchange rate developments on 
the outlook for prices. 
As stated on a number of occasions, the less satisfactory picture in the short term is due partly to a 
sequence  of  adverse  but  rather  specific  shocks  to  prices,  including  recent  oil  price  increases.  In 
principle, such shocks should unwind over time and therefore not affect the medium-term perspectives 
for  price  stability  as  long  as  past  upward  tendencies  in  prices  do  not  become  entrenched.  The 
outcome  of  recent  wage  negotiations  in  some  regions  of  the  euro  area  is  a  cause  for  concern, 
especially  in  view  of  the  negative  impact  this  could  have  on  continued  employment  creation.  High 
wage increases must not spread across the euro area given that inflationary pressure, which would 
have unfavourable consequences for competitiveness, employment growth and consumption, is to be 
avoided. 
At this juncture it is therefore particularly important for monetary policy to remain vigilant with regard to 
the further evolution of the key factors determining the outlook for prices. 
BIS Review 36/2002 
 1
 Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, it is vital that all Member States maintain a medium-term 
perspective  in  compliance  with  the  framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Maintaining  such  a 
perspective  will lead to a  successful transition to budgetary positions close to  balance or in surplus 
and to a smooth functioning of automatic stabilisers in all member countries. Let me therefore reiterate 
that the Member States concerned must honour the commitments made to achieve balanced budgets 
by 2003-4.  Moreover, governments are encouraged to push ahead  with reforms relating to the size 
and structure of public expenditure and revenue, which will also create room for further tax cuts and 
absorb the fiscal costs of population ageing. 
This reform agenda, as well as the urgent structural reforms relating to product, labour and financial 
markets,  will  be  addressed  in  the  forthcoming  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines.  Overall,  such 
reforms reflect the key challenge for the euro area to expand its potential for non-inflationary growth 
and to reduce its high level of unemployment. The Governing Council calls upon Member States to 
make faster progress in accelerating and deepening structural reforms in order to provide economic 
agents with the proper incentives to enhance efficiency and entrepreneurship and to progress towards 
a knowledge-based economy as proclaimed in the Lisbon agenda and confirmed in Barcelona. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2002
