 Alan Greenspan: Federal deposit insurance reform 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, 23 April 2002.  
 Chairman Sarbanes, Senator Gramm, it is a pleasure to appear before this Committee to present the 
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on deposit insurance reform. I will be 
addressing general reform issues, as proposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
in the spring of 2001, rather than any specific bill. Consequently, I will be expressing the broad views 
of the Federal Reserve Board on the issues associated with modifications of deposit insurance.  
At  the  outset,  I  should  note  that  last  year’s  FDIC  report  highlighted  the  significant  issues  and 
developed an integrated framework for addressing them. In broad terms, while the Board opposes any 
increase  in  coverage,  we  support  the  framework  for  other  reform  issues  that  the  FDIC  report 
constructed.  
Benefits and costs of deposit insurance  
Deposit  insurance  was  adopted  in  this  country  as  part  of  the  legislative  framework  for  limiting  the 
impact of the Great Depression on the public. In the environment of the record number of bank failures 
of  the  time,  deposit  insurance  in  this  country  was  designed  mainly  to  protect  the  unsophisticated 
depositor with limited financial assets from the loss of their modest savings. References were made to 
the "rent money" and the initial 1934 limit placed on deposit insurance was $2,500, promptly doubled 
to $5,000, a  level maintained for the next sixteen  years. I should note that the $5,000 of insurance 
coverage in 1934, consistent with the original intent of Congress, is equal to less than $60,000 today, 
based on the Personal Consumption Deflator in the GDP accounts.  
Despite  its  initial  quite  limited  intent,  the  Congress  over  the  intervening  decades  has  raised  the 
maximum amount of coverage five times to its current $100,000 level. The last increase, in 1980, was 
a  more  than  doubling  of  the  cap  level  and  was  clearly  designed  to  let  depository  institutions, 
particularly  thrifts,  offer  an  insured  deposit  free  of  the  then  prevailing  interest  rate  ceilings  on  such 
instruments,  which  applied  only  to  deposits  below  $100,000.  Insured  deposits  of  exactly  $100,000 
thus became fully insured  instruments in 1980, but  were not subject to an interest rate ceiling. The 
efforts of thrifts to use $100,000 CDs to stem their liquidity outflows resulting from public withdrawals 
of smaller below-market-rate insured deposits led first to an earnings squeeze and an associated loss 
of  capital  and  then  to  a  high  risk  investment  strategy  that  led  to  failure  after  failure.  Depositors 
acquiring  the  new  larger  denomination  insured  deposits  were  aware  of  the  plight  of  the  thrifts  but 
unconcerned about the risk because the principal amount of their $100,000 deposits was fully insured 
by  the  United  States  government.  In  this  way,  the  1980  increase  in  the  deposit  insurance  cap  to 
$100,000  exacerbated  the  fundamental  thrift  problem  associated  with  concentration  on  long-term 
assets  in  a  high  and  rising  interest  rate  environment.  Indeed,  it  significantly  increased  the  taxpayer 
cost of the bail out of the bankrupt thrift deposit insurance fund.  
Not withstanding this problematic episode, it is clear that deposit insurance has played a key--at times 
even critical--role in achieving the stability in banking and financial markets that has characterized the 
past almost seventy years. Deposit insurance, combined with other components of our banking safety 
net (the Federal Reserve’s discount window and payment system guarantees) has meant that periods 
of  financial  stress  are  no  longer  characterized  by  depositor  runs  on  banks  and  thrifts.  Quite  the 
opposite:  Asset  holders  now  seek  out  deposits--both  insured  and  uninsured--as  safe  havens  when 
they have strong doubts about other financial assets.  
Looking  beyond  the  contribution  of  deposit  insurance  to  overall  financial  stability,  we  should  not 
minimize the security it has brought to millions of households and small businesses. Deposit insurance 
has  provided  a  safe  and  secure  place  for  those  households  and  small  businesses  with  relatively 
modest amounts of financial assets to hold their transaction and other balances.  
These benefits of deposit insurance, as significant as they are, have not come without cost. The very 
same  process  that  has  ended  deposit  runs  has  made  insured  depositors--as  in  the  1980s  with 
insolvent, risky thrifts--largely indifferent to the risks taken by their depository institutions because their 
BIS Review 26/2002 
 1
 funds  are  not  at  risk  if  their  institution  is  unable  to  meet  its  obligations.  As  a  result,  the  market 
discipline to control risks that insured depositors would otherwise have imposed on banks and thrifts 
has  been  weakened.  Relieved  of  that  discipline,  banks  and  thrifts  naturally  feel  less  inhibited  from 
taking on more risk than they would otherwise assume. No other type of private financial institution is 
able to attract funds from the public without regard to the risk it takes with its creditors’ resources. This 
incentive  to  take  excessive  risks  is  the  so-called  moral  hazard  problem  of  deposit  insurance,  the 
inducement to take risk at the expense of the insurer.  
Thus,  two  offsetting  implications  of  deposit  insurance  must  be  kept  in  mind.  On  the  one  hand,  it 
appears fairly unambiguous that deposit insurance has contributed to the prevention of bank runs that 
could  have  destabilized  the  financial  structure  in  the  short-run.  On  the  other,  there  are  growing 
concerns that even the current levels of deposit insurance have created such underwriting imbalances 
at insured depository institutions that future large systemic risks have arguably risen.  
Indeed,  the  reduced  market  discipline  and  increased  moral  hazard,  have  intensified  the  need  for 
government  supervision  to  protect  the  interests  of  taxpayers  and,  in  essence,  substitute  for  the 
reduced  market  discipline.  Deposit  insurance  and  other  components  of  the  safety  net  also  enable 
banks and thrifts to attract more resources, at lower costs, than would otherwise be the case. In short, 
insured banks and thrifts receive a subsidy in the form of a government guarantee that allows them 
both to attract deposits at lower interest rates than would be necessary without deposit insurance, and 
to take more risk without the fear of losing their deposit funding. Put another way, deposit insurance 
misallocates  resources  by  breaking  the  link  between  risks  and  rewards  for  a  select  set  of  market 
competitors.  
From  the  very  beginning,  deposit  insurance  has  involved  a  tradeoff.  On  the  one  hand,  deposit 
insurance contributes to overall short-term financial stability and the protection of small depositors. On 
the other hand, deposit insurance induces higher risk-taking, resulting in a misallocation of resources 
and larger long-term financial imbalances that increase the need for government supervision to protect 
the  taxpayers’  interests.  Deposit  insurance  reforms  must  balance  these  tradeoffs.  Moreover,  any 
reforms should be aimed primarily at protecting the interest of the economy overall, and not just the 
profits or market shares of particular businesses.  
The Federal Reserve Board believes that deposit insurance reforms should be designed to preserve 
the benefits of heightened financial stability and the protection of small depositors without at the same 
time  further  increasing  moral  hazard  or  reducing  market  discipline.  In  addition,  we  urge  that  the 
implementing  details  be  kept  as  straightforward  as  possible  to  minimize  the  risk  of  unintended 
consequences that comes with complexity.  
Recommendations for reform 
The FDIC has made five broad recommendations.  
Merging BIF and SAIF.  
1.  
The Board supports the FDIC’s proposal to merge the BIF and SAIF funds. Because the charters and 
operations of banks and thrifts have become so similar, it makes no sense to continue the separate 
funds. Separate funds reflect the past, but neither the present nor the future. Merging the funds would 
diversify their risks, reduce administrative expenses, and widen the fund base behind an increasingly 
concentrated banking system. Most importantly, the federally guaranteed insurance coverage provided 
to the two sets of institutions are identical, and thus the premiums need to be identical as well. Under 
current  arrangements,  the  premiums  could  differ  significantly  if  one  of  the  funds  fell  below  the 
designated reserve ratio of 1.25 percent of insured deposits and the other fund did not. Should that 
occur, depository institutions would be induced to switch charter to obtain insurance from the fund with 
the lower premium. This could distort our depository structure. The federal government should not sell 
an identical service, like deposit insurance, at different prices.  
Statutory restrictions on premiums. 
2.  
Current law requires the FDIC to impose higher premiums on riskier banks and thrifts but prevents it 
from 
the 
corresponding fund’s reserves exceed 1.25 percent of insured deposits. The Board endorses the FDIC 
recommendations  that  would  eliminate  the  statutory  restrictions  on  risk-based  pricing  and  allow  a 
imposing  any  premium  on  well-capitalized  and  highly-rated 
institutions  whenever 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2002
 premium to be imposed on every insured depository institution, no matter how well capitalized and well 
rated it may be or how high the fund’s reserves.  
The  current  statutory  requirement  that  free  deposit  insurance  be  provided  to  well-capitalized  and 
well-rated banks when FDIC reserves exceed a predetermined ratio maximizes the subsidy provided 
to these institutions and is inconsistent with efforts to avoid inducing moral hazard. Put differently, the 
current rule requires the government to give away its valuable guarantee  when fund reserves meet 
some ceiling level. This free guarantee is of value to banks and thrifts even when they themselves are 
in  sound  financial  condition  and  when  macroeconomic  times  are  good.  At  the  end  of  last  year, 
92 percent of banks and thrifts were paying no premium. Included in this group were banks that have 
never paid any premium for their, in some cases substantial, coverage and fast-growing entities whose 
past  premiums  were  extraordinarily  small  relative  to  their  current  coverage.  We  believe  that  these 
anomalies were never intended by the framers of the Deposit Insurance Fund Act of 1996 and should 
be addressed by the Congress.  
The Congress did intend that the FDIC impose risk-based premiums, but the 1996 act limits the ability 
of the FDIC to impose risk-based premiums on well-capitalized and well-rated banks. And these two 
variables--capital  strength  and  examiner  overall  rating--  do  not  capture  all  the  risk  that  banks  and 
thrifts  could  create  for  the  insurer.  The  Board  believes  the  FDIC  should  be  free  to  establish  risk 
categories based on any well-researched economic variables and to impose premiums commensurate 
with  these  risk  classifications.  Although  a  robust  risk-based  premium  system  would  be  technically 
difficult to design, a closer link between insurance premiums and individual bank or thrift risk would 
reduce moral hazard and the distortions in resource allocation that accompany deposit insurance.  
We note, however, that significant benefits in this regard are likely to require a substantial range of 
premiums but that the FDIC has concluded in  its report that  premiums for the riskiest banks would 
probably need to be capped in order to avoid inducing failure at these weaker institutions. We believe 
that capping premiums may end up costing the insurance fund more in the long run should these weak 
institutions  fail  anyway,  with  the  delay  increasing  the  ultimate  cost  of  resolution.  The  Board  has 
concluded, therefore, that if a cap is required, it should be set quite high so that risk-based premiums 
can  be  as  effective  as  possible  in  deterring  excessive  risk-taking.  In  that  way  we  could  begin  to 
simulate the deposit insurance pricing that the market would apply and reduce the associated subsidy 
in deposit insurance.  
Nonetheless,  we  should  not  delude  ourselves  that  even  a  wider  range  in  the  risk-based  premium 
structure would eliminate the need for a government back-up to the deposit insurance fund, that is, 
eliminate the government subsidy in deposit insurance. To eliminate the subsidy in deposit insurance--
to make deposit insurance a real insurance system--the FDIC average insurance premium would have 
to be set high enough to cover fully the very small probabilities of very large losses, such as during the 
Great  Depression,  and  thus  the  perceived  costs  of  systemic  risk.  In  contrast  to  life  or  automobile 
casualty insurance, each individual insured loss in banking is not independent of other losses. Banking 
is subject to deposit run contagion, creating a far larger extreme loss tail on the probability distributions 
from which real insurance premiums would have to be calculated. Indeed, pricing deposit insurance 
risks to fully fund potential losses--pricing to eliminate subsidies--would require premiums that would 
discourage  most  depository  institutions  from  offering  broad  coverage.  Since  the  Congress  has 
determined  that  there  should  be  broad  coverage,  the  subsidy  in  deposit  insurance  cannot  be  fully 
eliminated, although we can and should eliminate as much of the subsidy as we can.  
Parenthetically, the difficulties of raising risk-based premiums explain why there is no private insurer 
substitute for deposit insurance from the government. No private insurer would ever be able to match 
the actual FDIC premium and cover its risks. A private insurer confronted with the possibility, remote 
as  it  may  be,  of  losses  that  could  bankrupt  the  insuring  entity  would  need  to  set  especially  high 
premiums to protect itself, premiums that few, if any, depository institutions would find attractive. And, 
if premiums were fully priced by the government or the private sector, the issuing entities would likely 
lower their offering rates, reducing the amount of insured deposits demanded, and consequently the 
amount outstanding would decline.  
Designated reserve ratios and premiums. 
3.  
The current law establishes a designated reserve ratio for BIF and SAIF of 1.25 percent. If that ratio is 
exceeded, the statute requires that premiums on well-capitalized and well-rated institutions must be 
discontinued. If the ratio declines below 1.25 percent, the FDIC must develop a set of premiums to 
restore  the  reserve  ratio  to  1.25  percent;  if  it  appears  that  the  fund  ratio  cannot  be  restored  to  its 
BIS Review 26/2002 
 3
 statutorily designated level within twelve months, the law requires that a premium of at least 23 basis 
points be imposed on all insured entities.  
These  requirements  are  clearly  procyclical,  lowering  or  eliminating  fees  in  good  times  when  bank 
credit  is  readily  available  and  deposit  insurance  fund  reserves  should  be  built  up,  and  abruptly 
increasing  fees  sharply  in  times  of  weakness  when  bank  credit  availability  is  under  pressure  and 
deposit fund resources are drawn down to cover the resolution of failed banks. The FDIC recommends 
that surcharges or rebates should be used to bring the fund back to the target reserve ratio gradually. 
The  FDIC  also  recommends  the  possibility  of  a  target  range  for  the  designated  reserve  ratio,  over 
which  the  premiums  may  remain  constant,  rather  than  a  fixed  target  reserve  ratio  and  abruptly 
changing premiums.  
We  support  such  increased  flexibility  and  smoothing  of  premiums.  Indeed,  we  recommend  that  the 
FDIC’s suggested target reserve range be widened in order to reduce the need to change premiums 
abruptly.  Any  floor  or  ceiling,  regardless  of  its  level,  could  require  that  premiums  be  increased  at 
exactly the time when banks and thrifts could be under stress and, similarly, that premiums be reduced 
at the time that depositories are in the best position to fund an increase in reserves. Building a larger 
fund in good times and permitting it to decline when necessary are prerequisites to less variability in 
the  premium.  This  approach  stands  in  favorable  contrast  to  the  present  system  that  is  designed  to 
stabilize the designated reserve ratios of the funds at the cost of, perhaps wide, premium instability.  
In addition to widening the range for the designated reserve ratio, the Board would recommend that 
the FDIC be given the latitude temporarily to relax floor or ceiling ratios on the basis of current and 
anticipated  banking  conditions  and  expected  needs  for  resources  to  resolve  failing  institutions.  In 
short, on stability grounds we prefer less hard-wiring of the rules under which the FDIC operates and 
more  management  flexibility  for  the  Board  of  the  FDIC,  operating  under  broad  guidelines  from  the 
Congress.  
Rebates.  
4.  
Since  its  early  days,  the  FDIC  has  rebated  "excess"  premiums  whenever  it  felt  its  reserves  were 
adequate.  This  procedure  was  replaced  in  the1996  law  by  the  requirement  that  no  premium  be 
imposed on well-capitalized and highly rated banks and thrifts when the fund reaches its designated 
reserve ratio. The FDIC proposals would re-impose a minimum premium on all banks and thrifts and a 
more  risk-sensitive  premium  structure.  These  provisions  would  be  coupled  with  rebates  for  the 
stronger entities when the fund approaches what we recommend be a higher upper end of a target 
range than the FDIC has suggested, and surcharges when the Fund trends below what we suggest be 
a lower end of a target range.  
The FDIC also recommends that the rebates not be uniform for the stronger entities. Rather, the FDIC 
argues that rebates should be smaller for those banks that have paid premiums for only short periods 
or that have in the past paid premiums that are not commensurate with their present size and hence 
FDIC  exposure.  The  devil,  of  course,  is  in  the  details.  But  this  latter  proposal  makes  considerable 
sense, and the  Board endorses it. More  than 900 banks--some now quite large--have  never paid a 
premium, and without this modification they would continue to pay virtually nothing, net of rebates, as 
long as their strong capital and high supervisory ratings were maintained. Such an approach is both 
competitively inequitable and contributes to moral hazard. It should be addressed.  
Indexing insured-deposit coverage ceilings. 
5.  
The FDIC recommends that the current $100,000 ceiling on insured deposits be indexed. The Board 
does not support this recommendation and believes that the current ceiling should be maintained.  
In  the  Board’s  judgment,  it  is  unlikely  that  increased  coverage,  even  by  indexing,  would  add 
measurably to the stability of the banking system today. Macroeconomic policy and other elements of 
the safety net, combined with the current, still-significant level of deposit insurance, continue to be an 
important bulwark against bank runs. Thus, the problem that increased coverage is designed to solve 
must be related to either the individual depositor, the party originally intended to be protected, or to the 
individual bank or thrift. Clearly, both groups would prefer higher coverage if it cost them nothing. But 
Congress  needs  to  be  clear  about  the  nature  of  a  specific  problem  for  which  increased  coverage 
would be the solution.  
4 
 BIS Review 26/2002
 Depositors. 
Our surveys of consumer finances suggest that most depositors have balances well below the current 
insurance  limit  of  $100,000  and  those  that  do  have  larger  balances  have  apparently  been  adept  at 
achieving the level of deposit insurance coverage they desire by opening multiple insured accounts. 
Such spreading of asset holdings is perfectly consistent with the counsel always given to investors to 
diversify  their  assets--whether  stocks,  bonds,  or  mutual  funds--across  different  issuers.  The  cost  of 
diversifying for insured deposits is surely no greater than doing so for other assets. An individual bank 
would clearly prefer that the depositor maintain all of his or her funds at that bank, and would prefer to 
eliminate  the  need  for  depositor  diversification  by  being  able  to  offer  higher  deposit  insurance 
coverage.  Nonetheless,  the  depositor  appears  to  have  no  great  difficulty--should  he  or  she  want 
insured deposits--in finding multiple sources of fully insured accounts.  
In  addition,  the  singular  characteristic  of  postwar  household  financial  asset  holdings  has  been  the 
increasing diversity of portfolio choices. The share of household financial assets in bank deposits has 
been  declining  steadily  since  World  War  II  as  households  have  taken  advantage  of  innovative 
attractive financial instruments with market rates of return. There has been no break in that trend that 
seems related to past increases in insurance ceilings. Indeed, the most dramatic substitution out of 
deposits in recent years has been from both insured and uninsured deposits to equities and mutual 
funds  holding  equities,  bonds,  and  money  market  assets.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  a  change  in 
ceilings during the 1990s would have made any measurable difference in that shift. Indeed, the data 
indicate that the weakness in stock prices in recent quarters has been marked by increased flows into 
bank and thrift deposits.  
Depository institutions.  
Does  the  problem  to  be  solved  by  increased  deposit  insurance  coverage  concern  the  individual 
depository  institution?  If  so,  the  problem  would  seem  disproportionately  a  small  bank  issue  since 
insured deposits are a much larger proportion of total funding at small banks than at large banks. But 
smaller  banks  appear  to  be  doing  well.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  adjusted  for  the  effects  of  mergers, 
assets of the smaller banks, those below the largest 1,000, have grown at an average annual rate of 
13.9  percent,  almost  twice  the  pace  of  the  largest  1,000  U.S.  banks.  Uninsured  deposits  at  these 
smaller  institutions  have  also  grown  more  rapidly  than  at  larger  banks--at  average  annual  rates  of 
22 percent at the small banks versus 11 percent at the large banks, both on the same merger-adjusted 
basis. Clearly, small banks have a demonstrated skill and ability to compete for uninsured deposits. To 
be sure, uninsured deposits are more expensive than insured deposits, and bank costs would decline 
and profits rise if their currently uninsured liabilities received a government guarantee. But that is the 
issue of whether subsidizing bank profits through deposit insurance serves a national purpose. I might 
add  that  throughout  the  1990s,  small  banks’  return  on  equity  was  well  maintained.  Indeed,  the 
attractiveness of banking is evidenced by the fact that more than 1,350 banks were chartered during 
the past decade.  
Some  small  banks  argue  that  they  need  enhanced  deposit  insurance  coverage  to  equalize  their 
competition with large banks because depositors prefer to put their uninsured funds in an institution 
considered too big to fail. As I have noted, however, small banks have more than held their own in the 
market for uninsured deposits. In addition, the Board rejects the notion that any bank is too big to fail. 
In 1991, Congress made it clear that the systemic-risk exception to the FDIC’s least-cost resolution of 
a failing bank should be invoked only under the most unusual circumstances. Moreover, the resolution 
rules under the systemic-risk exception do not require that uninsured depositors and other creditors, 
much less stockholders, be made whole. Consistent with  this  view, the market clearly believes that 
large institutions are not too big for uninsured creditors to take at least some loss. Spreads on large 
bank  subordinated  debt  are  wider  than  spreads  on  similar  debt  of  large  and  highly  rated  nonbank 
financial institutions. Indeed, there are no AAA-rated U.S. banking organizations.  
To be sure, failure to index deposit insurance ceilings has eroded the real purchasing power value of 
those  ceilings.  But  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  detrimental  effect  on  depositors  or  depositary 
institutions, with the possible exception of a small reduction in those profits that accrue from deposit 
guarantee  subsidies  that  lower  the  cost  of  insured  deposits.  The  current  deposit  insurance  ceiling 
appears more than  adequate to achieve the positive benefits of deposit insurance that I mentioned 
earlier in my statement, even if its real value were to erode further.  
Another argument often raised by smaller banks regarding the need for increased deposit insurance 
coverage is their inability to match the competition from those large securities firms and bank holding 
BIS Review 26/2002 
 5
 companies with multiple bank affiliates, offering multiple insured accounts through one organization. 
The Board agrees that such offerings are a misuse of deposit insurance. But, raising the coverage limit 
for  each  account  is  not  a  remedy  since  it  would  also  increase  the  aggregate  amount  of  insurance 
coverage that large multi-bank organizations would be able to offer. The disparity would remain.  
Conclusion  
Several  aspects  of  the  deposit  insurance  system  need  reform.  The  Board  supports,  with  some 
modifications, all of the recommendations the FDIC made in the spring of 2001 except indexing the 
current $100,000 ceiling. The thrust of our proposed modifications would call for a wider permissible 
range for the size of the fund relative to insured liabilities, reduced variation of the insurance premium 
as the relative size of the fund changes with banking and economic conditions, and a positive premium 
net of rebates.  
There may come a time when the Board finds that households and businesses with modest resources 
are having difficulty in placing their funds in safe vehicles and/or that there is reason to be concerned 
that  the  level  of  deposit  coverage  could  endanger  financial  stability.  Should  either  of  those  events 
occur, the Board would call our concerns to the attention of the Congress and support adjustments to 
the  ceiling  by  indexing  or  other  methods.  But  today,  in  our  judgment,  neither  financial  stability,  nor 
depositors, nor depositories are being disadvantaged by the current ceiling. Raising the ceiling now 
would extend the safety net, increase the government subsidy to banking, expand moral hazard, and 
reduce the incentive for market discipline, without providing any real evident public benefits. With no 
clear public benefit to increasing deposit insurance, the Board sees no reason to increase the scope of 
the safety net. Indeed, the Board believes that as our financial system has become ever more complex 
and  exceptionally  responsive  to  the  vagaries  of  economic  change,  structural  distortions  induced  by 
government guarantees have risen. We have no way of ascertaining at exactly what point subsidies 
provoke  systemic  risk.  Nonetheless,  prudence  suggests  that  we  be  exceptionally  deliberate  when 
expanding government financial guarantees.  
6 
 BIS Review 26/2002
