 Yves Mersch: In the run-up to an enlarged Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the  6th  European 
Congress  of  the  Association  des  Cambistes  d’Internationaux  (ACI)  (Financial  Markets  Association), 
Luxembourg, 25 May 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I should first like to thank the organisers for having invited me to the 6th European Congress of the 
ACI.  It  is  a  real  pleasure  to  address  today's  audience.  I  had  been  tempted  to  speak  about  the 
Luxembourg  central  bank  which  in  the  meantime  is  the  second  largest  provider  of  liquidity  to  the 
European banking system, second only to the Bundesbank. But I think it is more important being in 
Luxembourg  to  show  you  that  we  can  only  decline  our  national  identity  in  relation  to  European 
integration. 
European  integration  is  an  ongoing  dynamic  process.  Enlargement  is  not  something  threatening 
Europe. It is not something new. We have had experience with enlargement in history, and we also 
should  not  consider  enlargement  as  only  limited  to  the  institutional  sphere  and  the  immediate 
neighbourhood of Europe. I think you should know that with the introduction of the euro, Europe has 
now  relations  with  more  than  56  countries  in  the  world,  which  use  the  euro  to  some  extent  as  an 
anchor currency. These countries represent about 20% of world population, but barely represent 5% of 
world  GDP.  There  are  a  number  of  relations  with  those  countries  through  the  euro  or  through 
association  arrangements.  Basically,  we  can  say  that  in  all  cases  Europe  is  the  largest  creditor  to 
those  countries:  this  applies  to  the  European  banking  system,  but  also  to  the  status  as  an  official 
creditor. In some of those countries the euro is only used as a private mean of transactions, mainly as 
an investment currency; in some other countries the link exists through exchange rate policy. In some 
other countries, the euro has been introduced as a de facto currency (euroisation). 
My  subject  today  is  focusing  more  closely  on  the  accession  countries  of  which  you  had  some 
representatives  speaking  to  you  in  the  previous  days,  and  I  would  like  to  recall  that  the  first  six 
countries  which  tried  to  build  up  an  European  integration  process  from  1951  on  did  not  think  of 
integration until the 60's. 
It  was  in  Luxembourg  in  1970  that  we  decided  to  open  negotiations  with  four  countries:  the  UK, 
Denmark, Ireland and Norway. When the accession decisions were concluded in 1973, one country, 
Norway, decided through referendum to step back, and we only enlarged for the first time to three new 
countries. The next enlargement was in 1981 when Greece joined Europe, Spain and Portugal both 
following in 1986. When we started the Maastricht negotiations, we knew already that there would be 
three additional candidates which joined Europe in 1995: Finland, Austria and Sweden. Even though 
the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  ratified  in  1992,  you  ought  to  know  that  during  the  discussions  and 
negotiations, we already tried to take into account the enlarged Europe when we designed the built-up 
of the institutions that were to run the single currency. 
It is of course this time a little bid different insofar that the block of countries which are on the way to 
access Europe is much larger. Thus, thirteen countries are standing ready to join the new European 
area and later on the European currency zone as well. Where do we stand as of today? We defined 
thirty-one chapters to be discussed with twelve countries. With one country, Turkey, negotiations have 
not yet started. Progress has been encouraging, but, as you know, you always start with the easiest 
chapters and you leave the most difficult ones to the end. So, as of end of April 2002, 73% of total 
chapters were concluded. The most advanced country had still four open chapters, one of them being 
agriculture of course. 
The European Summit last year decided that the negotiations ought to be concluded by the end of this 
year.  Now,  with  two  elections  looming  in  the  two  largest  countries  of  the  European  Union,  it  is 
sometimes a little bid difficult to come to common positions especially on the most difficult chapters 
that are still open. I can only express hope that the objective of concluding the negotiations by the end 
of this year will be fulfilled, and that it will not be due to a lack of common positions of the existing 
European Member States that we are not able to come to final conclusions. 
If we would not come to final conclusions by the end of this year, it would become too tight to have any 
new accession country participating in the next European Parliament elections to take place in 2004. 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
1
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
But let us not forget that even at this stage, part of the internal preparations that the EU has embarked 
on is not yet finished. I speak about the so-called Nice Treaty which is to prepare partly the European 
institutions for the enlargement and which has not been ratified in all of our countries. But on the other 
hand, we have also in the meantime started a new exercise, the Convention, which also has to come 
to an end and to be ratified in order to prepare the European Union for enlargement. 
But I don't want to dwell too much on the political aspects and give you the view of the Eurosystem in 
the monetary field. 
Even  if  we  are  not  taking  part  in  the  official  negotiations,  the  Eurosystem  is  tightly  involved  in 
cooperation  with  the  central  banks  of  the  candidate  countries.  This  process  started  in  1999  with  a 
high-level  seminar  organised  in  Helsinki,  which  defined  the  five  principles  on  which  the  European 
system of central banks would approach its cooperation: 
1. 
First, the principle of competence. That means the Eurosystem is involved in all fields falling 
in  its  exclusive  or  shared  competence:  monetary  policy,  exchange  rate  policy,  payment 
systems  and  financial  stability  meaning  not  only  oversight  of  payment  systems  where  the 
Eurosystem  has  not  a  shared  responsibility,  but  an  exclusive  one,  but  also  banking 
supervision where the Eurosystem is of the opinion that it has a shared responsibility just as 
it is stated in the Maastricht Treaty;  
The second principle is to preserve the Eurosystem's primary objective. The Eurosystem's 
involvement in the accession process must be without prejudice to its independence and its 
primary objective to preserve price stability;  
Third, the principle of openness. The Eurosystem has a positive attitude to the prospect of 
accession of new EU Member States;  
Fourth, the principle of equality of treatment. The criteria on which we will assess the ability 
of countries to join the European Union and later on the euro should be implemented in a 
strict and effective manner while also avoiding any discrimination;  
Finally,  the  principle  of  plurality  of  approaches  which  means  the  possibility  to  choose 
different  paths  and  ways  to  join  the  European  Union  without  compromising  equality  of 
treatment. 
The cooperation activities between the Eurosystem and the accession countries are intense and have 
increased  considerably  between  2000  and  2001.  In  line  with  the  principle  of  competence  I  just 
mentioned,  the  fields  covered  by  the  cooperation  are  the  following:  operational  framework  for 
monetary  policy,  operational  framework  for  foreign  exchange  policy,  economic  analysis,  internal 
control  and  procedures,  payment  systems,  statistical  systems,  accounting,  communication  network 
architecture,  legal  issues,  banknotes,  prudential  supervision,  capital  account  liberalisation  and  of 
course the transition to the adoption to the euro. To give  you an idea of the intensity of those joint 
efforts  in  all  the  fields  I  just  have  mentioned,  let  me  quantify  them  by  giving  you  two  figures:  since 
2000,  the  Eurosystem  has  conducted  (or  plans  to  conduct)  more  than  800  activities  accounting  for 
around 19.000 working days in the accession countries. 
Let me now say a word about the criteria. The criteria accession countries have to comply with are 
often thought to be constricted to the Maastricht criteria, which are nominal criteria, but we ought not to 
forget that there is another second set of Copenhagen criteria, by the number of three, which have 
been set up in 1993 already: 
1. 
The  first  is  a  political  criterion.  It  encompasses  the  stability  of  institutions  guaranteeing 
democracy,  the  rule  of  law,  human  rights  and,  what  is  important  in  some  of  the  new 
accession countries, the respect for protection of minorities as well.  
The  second  Copenhagen  criterion  is  of  economic  nature.  Accession  countries  should 
demonstrate the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope 
with competitive pressure and market forces which are the key rules in the European Union.  
Finally,  the  third  Copenhagen  criterion  relates  to  the  acquis  communautaire.  We  must  be 
convinced  that  it  can  be  implemented,  that  means  the  ability  to  take  on  the  existing 
obligations  of  membership  including  adherence  to  the  aims  of  political,  economic  and 
monetary union. 
2. 
3. 
Let me now elaborate on three issues that I consider of importance: convergence, currency regimes 
as well as policy mix. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2002
 1. 
• 
 Convergence 
Nominal  convergence  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient.  Thus,  real  convergence  has  to  be 
pursued in parallel. Why also real convergence? Because the Maastricht Treaty very clearly 
spells out that the criteria must be fulfilled in a sustainable way and not result from a point 
lending at one day in the year;  
Real  convergence  is  also  the  translation  of  the  second  Copenhagen  criteria,  which  very 
clearly says that you have to demonstrate your capacity to cope with competitive pressure 
and market forces. That is why real convergence is also important and has to be pursued in 
parallel.  This  process  will  allow  a  closing  of  the  gap  between  accession  and  euro  zone 
countries as it is stated in the objectives of the Union as defined in Article 2 of the Treaty of 
the Union and Article 2 of the Community Treaty. 
The  recent  economic  policies  have  shown  that  this  parallel  convergence  is  possible  and  has  been 
pursued and achieved in many existing European Union countries. On the nominal side, convergence 
to the bottom has occurred in long-term interest rates already in most accession countries, showing 
that  financial  markets  pay  some  credibility  to  the  current  policy  frameworks  and  consider  the 
announced accession timetable as being credible. 
Real  convergence  is  proceeding  further  but  I  must  say  at  a  rather  slow  pace.  Indeed,  accession 
countries still show important gaps in terms of income levels versus the EU. So at the end of 2001, 
that are the latest figures I have come across, income levels in accession countries were 44% of the 
EU  average  in  terms  of  PPP.  With  a  growth  rate  scenario  of  4%  per  year,  all  accession  countries 
would reach by the year 2026 the same income level of Greece when it joined the EU in 1981, namely 
62.4%. If I look at the level Greece had reached when it joined the euro zone twenty years later, then it 
would take the accession countries about to year 2033 before they would be at the level of the country 
with  most  catch-up  need  that  has  so  far  joined  the  euro  zone.  Therefore  the  right  policies, 
concentrating on liberalisation and macroeconomic stabilisation, have to be implemented and pursued 
in order to foster growth and enhance the catching-up process. 
2. 
• 
  Currency regimes 
First principle: There are no "one fits all" exchange rate strategies in the wake of accession. 
Different  regimes  are  possible  as  long  as  they  are  supported  by  a  stability-oriented  policy 
stance;  
Second principle: An exchange rate regime should be assessed on its ability to contribute to 
a stable macroeconomic environment by supporting an exchange rate level consistent with 
underlying fundamentals and expectations;  
Third  principle:  For  non-key  currencies,  corner  solutions  are  not  necessarily  the  best 
solution.  Intermediate  options  may  be  a  relevant  alternative,  especially  for  small  open 
economies with a dominant trading partner that maintains price stability as it is the case for 
most accession countries. 
In addition, I would like to make one personal remark on currency boards arrangements, which has 
become fashionable at one point in the time: 
• 
Euro-based  CBAs  are  not  a  substitution  for  participation  in  the  European  Exchange  Rate 
Mechanism,  ERM  II.  Like  all  countries  having  entered  EMU,  the  ERM  II  passage  is 
compulsory and I would give three reasons:  
1. 
To  be  able  to  assess  on  the  basis  of  equal  treatment  whether  the  fulfilment  of  the 
exchange  rate  criterion  is  satisfied,  it  has  to  be  done  in  an  equivalent  multilateral 
environment, namely ERM II;  
In  full  respect  of  the  principle  of  equal  treatment  we  cannot  assess  exchange  rate 
stability inside ERM II for past accessions and outside ERM II for new accessions;  
I think the ERM II  and  the assessment of the exchange rate stability criteria  is also 
part of the second Copenhagen criteria. 
2. 
3. 
 However, under certain circumstances, an unilateral CBA can be a suitable option in order to 
enhance the commitment to foreign exchange stability deriving from ERM II, but I would like 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
3
    3. 
• 
   4 
 to underline that this will not and cannot impose any unilateral obligation on the ECB besides 
those that are related to ERM II participation per se;  
The  discipline  entailed  by  CBAs  may  be  a  good  incentive  to  pursue  stability-oriented 
macroeconomic policies in order to enhance convergence efforts before EMU participation. 
Nonetheless, this stability is not automatically warranted, the cause being related to complex 
adjustment  mechanisms  through  which  accession  countries  being  in  a  market  economy 
transition phase have to go;  
Accession  countries  operating  a  sustainable  CBA  would  not  necessarily  have  to  face  a 
double regime shift. However, if a CBA would prove to be weak and not adapted to the ERM 
II  framework,  the  ECB  has  made  it  very  clear  it  would  speak  up  and  tell  this  country  its 
opinion and make its concern known;  
And finally, I think the fashion of CBA has also to be viewed within the recent experiences as 
for example in Argentina. The exit strategy is key.  
in 
this  country, 
Policy-mix 
On average, fiscal deficits have widened in 2001 in accession countries. The sustainability of 
the  budgetary  situation  in  some  countries  is  at  stake.  The  forthcoming  parliamentary 
elections in some countries, as well as large accession-related expenditures, are subject to 
amplifying this situation. Monetary policy should be supported by an adequate fiscal policy in 
order  to  avoid  a  large  risk  of  overburdening  monetary  policy.  This  is  not  only  true  for 
accession  countries  however.  Some  concern  already  has  been  expressed  towards  some 
Member States of the present euro area and I would like to voice it again.  
I want to stress that the strict compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact is important just 
in order to give back to the political sphere the margin of manoeuvre to do policy in the fiscal 
area and record it is key to the credibility of the policy-mix and therefore also to the orderly 
functioning  of  EMU.  This  understanding  has  been  steady  from  its  inception  and  now  it  is 
crucial to keep EMU perennial;  
In  the  framework  of  the  policy-mix,  the  ECB  has  accepted  to  be  involved  in  an  informal 
dialogue with governments and other political actors. This institutional setting has however 
been questioned recently. Some voices have been heard advocating a reinforcement of the 
policy-mix  coordination,  even 
to  achieve  overarching 
recommendations applying to all areas of policy-mix. I would like to underline that from the 
point of view of the ESCB there should not be any ambiguity. The implication of the ECB in 
this  informal  dialogue  has  as  sole  purpose  to  share  information.  Any  form  of  ex-ante 
coordination  would  undermine  the  ECB's  credibility  in  fulfilling  its  mandate  and  would  be 
considered to be in opposition to the terms of the Treaty;  
Let  me  come  back  to  the  accession  countries  now.  In  the  monetary  sphere,  continuous 
efforts are necessary in order to bring down inflation. Inflation has been brought down from 
12.4%  in  the  accession  countries  in  the  year  2000  to  8.8%  in  2001.  In  the  present  year, 
inflation is expected to be around 6-7%. This track record is quite encouraging and ought to 
be  pursued.  Some  challenges  however  remain,  likely  to  generate  pressure  on  prices:  the 
liberalisation  of  administered  prices  in  many  accession  countries,  the  so-called  Balassa-
Samuelson effect, which on average has been considered to represent between 2 and 4 % 
of  inflation  for  accession  countries,  as  well  as  the  sliding  fiscal  policy  stance  in  some 
countries.  All  are  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  In  addition,  the  weight  of  energy-related 
items in most accession countries' HICPs is higher than in European countries. In accession 
countries they vary between 22% and 31%, while the average in the euro area is only 11%. 
The rising oil prices hence add a further element to the balance of risks for inflation inside 
the accession countries.  
The  catching-up  process  will  bring  inflation  rates  above  those  prevailing  in  the  euro  area 
before they will converge slowly. Let me stress in this respect that no additional criteria will 
be added for accession countries but that, as for the actual members, the entry in the euro 
area will be based on the strict fulfilment of the existing convergence criteria as they have 
been applied in the past, without new interpretations. 
in  view 
BIS Review 43/2002
 The run-up to an enlarged Europe also is an opportunity to stress what I would call two core principles 
for the functioning and the strategy of the Eurosystem. 
Independence 
4. 
In  Europe,  independence  is  a  quite  recent  principle.  Today  it  is  also  acknowledged  that  it  is  an 
indisputable one. Independence is one of the key items to be implemented in the framework of the 
acquis communautaire. But this issue does not only relay to accession countries. As you have seen in 
the  recent  convergence  report  of  Sweden,  we  consider  that  the  present  Swedish  law  is  still  not 
compliant  with  the  requests  needed  for  the  Swedish  central  bank  to  enter  the  euro.  The  same  of 
course holds true for the UK. Some mixed signals emerged from some accession countries, the most 
lately being the Czech Republic and most alarmingly Poland. 
Independence of central banks is, as you know, declined at least in two different forms. On the one 
hand,  the  independence  of  the  institution,  but  also  the  independence  of  the  people  working  in  the 
institution,  the  so-called  personal  independence.  The  institutional  independence  has  again  two 
functions. One is the operational independence. Each central bank must have all the instruments at its 
disposal  and  at  its  free  disposal  in  order  to  execute  all  operations  related  to  a  central  bank's  core 
activity, in particular in the area of monetary policy, foreign exchange, as well as payment systems. On 
the  other  hand,  I  think  the  financial  independence  is  also  increasingly  attracting  attention.  It  means 
that a central bank ought to rely on a robust balance sheet in order to underline its independence. But 
financial independence also applies to the personal independence of the people running the central 
bank. I think that as a Luxemburger I should not give anyone a lesson in this respect. 
The Treaty has made the ECB responsible and accountable for the maintenance of price stability over 
the medium term. That is why it also has been shielded from political pressures. Medium term price 
stability  should  not  be  sacrificed  to  meet  short-term  objectives  linked  to  political  and  electoral 
considerations, risking to weaken the stability of the currency. 
Consensus building 
5.  
The  second  important  element  in  the  functioning  of  the  European  monetary  institutions  is  the 
underlying principle of decision-making, namely consensus building. The approach of seeking a broad 
consensus rather than to resort to voting in my opinion has the following advantages. 
• 
• 
It is shielding from pressures arising from national authorities;  
It  allows  continuous,  multilateral  check  of  time  consistency  and  policy  direction  within  the 
Council, thus imposing a discipline on monetary policy and  
It is countering any public suspicion that national bias may inform policy decisions. 
• 
I think this approach has been a key element in the efficient functioning of the Governing Council of 
the European Central Bank up to now. It is representative of an European culture of decision-making 
which has served us well until now. Therefore I think it ought also to be pursued in the perspective of 
accession countries adopting the euro in the medium term. 
Now finally a word about monetary policy strategy. 
The  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem,  as  well  as  the  set-up  of  its  operational  toolkit,  has  been 
designed as to accommodate the specific environment in which it evolves and this is an environment 
of hugely diversified financial structures and cultural diversity as well. This gives me the opportunity to 
underline once more that the designing of our strategy is and should not be a transposition of other 
models like for instance that of the Federal Reserve System which is designed by a different historical 
development.  But  I  think  I  ought  not  too  much  dwell  on  the  difference  between  the  FED  and  the 
Eurosystem, although that is a very interesting subject in itself. Let me just limit myself to say a few 
words concerning the inter-relation between our primary objective and the question whether there is a 
so-called second objective. 
You  know  that  without  prejudice  to  our  overriding  objective,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  general 
policies of the Community according to the Treaty. This support of economic policies in our opinion is 
fully  encompassed  in  the  overriding  objective  of  the  ECB.  Monetary  policy  is  neutral  on  output  and 
employment in the long run and there should be no short-term trade-off between output and prices. 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
5
 The marginal gains on the output-side in the very short-term have to be weighted against the building 
of  inflationary  pressures  and  unrealistic  expectations  about  the  monetary  policy's  impact  on  output. 
This  approach  would  entail  incoherent  monetary  policy  decisions  and  be  detrimental  to  the  ECB's 
credibility in fulfilling its mandate. However, this does not mean that the Governing Council does not 
take into account the economic sphere, all to the contrary. When we assess every month the risk to 
price stability over the medium term, we do not only take into account the information from the first 
pillar, the so-called monetary pillar, we also look into the second pillar. The shape of the yield curve, 
exchange rate, oil prices or labor market developments, are examples of the variables analysed in the 
second pillar. As a consequence, the two parts of the mandate enshrined in the Treaty should not be 
considered  separately  but  in  conjunction.  Let  me  add  on  this  point  that  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability as such over the medium term is the best contribution to fostering an environment favourable 
to sustainable growth in the longer run. 
Price stability is to be achieved in the medium term and in the whole euro area. First, this mandate is 
based  on  the  fact  that  short-term,  volatile  factors  cannot  be  controlled  by  monetary  policy  and  that 
monetary policy acts within long and variable lags. Second, the mandate underlines that price stability 
is assessed euro area wide, the Governing Council not reacting to national or regional developments. 
The ongoing accession process will have no impact on this underlying philosophy. 
Our will to be as transparent as possible so as to allow agents to internalise stable price developments 
in their expectations is key to accountability and will remain so with accession. 
In order to underline that we pay great attention to developments in the real economy, I am very glad 
that I am able also now to invite a representative of the real economy to this rostrum, namely the chief 
financial  officer  of  the  largest  steel  company  in  the  world.  I  am  very  glad  to  count  him  among  the 
supervisory board of the Luxembourg central bank. I think very appropriately that he will also dwell on 
something  which  is  similar  to  my  mind,  namely  that  you  also  have  to  see  globalisation  from 
Luxembourg and not go the other way around and start with globalisation and then try to come back to 
your national attitude. We only can realise our aims in the context of the international environment and 
therefore I am very glad and interested to hear now what Mr. Michel Wurth will have to tell us. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2002
