 Koh Yong Guan: Regulatory approaches in global capital markets 
Keynote address by Mr Koh Yong Guan, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the MAS Capital Markets Seminar 2002, Singapore, 2 May 2002.  
 MAS Capital Markets Seminar  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good  morning  and  a  warm  welcome  to  the  MAS  Capital  Markets  Seminar.  For  participants  from 
abroad, I wish you a pleasant and rewarding time in Singapore. 
We have chosen “Evolving Regulatory Approaches” as the theme to underscore the importance for 
regulators to keep pace with developments in the global capital markets.  
Advances  in  technology  have  enabled  instantaneous  and  seamless  access  into  diverse  capital 
markets. At the same time, consolidation of specialist financial institutions into financial conglomerates 
with cross-border  presence has redefined traditional notions of market boundaries. The consequent 
growth  in  cross-border  transactions  poses  regulatory  challenges  to  national  regulators  supervising 
global market players.  
As we have seen in recent months, a single event in one market can create significant ripple effects 
elsewhere. These developments have not been lost on regulators. Having no less than 12 countries 
represented here today bears testimony to the importance attached to learning from fellow regulators. 
One key reason for organising the capital market seminar is to facilitate the exchange of views and 
sharing of ideas. The occasion also provides an opportunity for regulators to get to know one another 
better.  
We  hope  that  the  interaction  through  presentations  and  panel  discussions  will  provide  ample 
opportunities  for  participants  to  share  the  experiences  and  challenges  in  their  home  markets.  To 
provide a global perspective, we are honoured to have distinguished speakers from the US Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission,  the  UK  Financial  Services  Authority,  and  the  Australian  Securities  and 
Investments  Commission.  The  presentations  by  leading  industry  practitioners  will  add  an  important 
market dimension.  
To start off the programme this morning, let me put to you three broad propositions which regulators 
should reconcile with, in keeping with the demands of global capital markets:  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
First, the need for cross-jurisdiction regulatory collaboration;  
Second, a growing impetus for international standards; and  
Third, how can regulators and regulations respond and facilitate capital markets’ continued 
innovation and growth.  
The need for regulatory collaboration  
The importance of cross-border regulatory cooperation is evident from the cross-border element in the 
regulator’s  job.  Local  investors  buy  financial  products  overseas  while  foreign  funds  own  substantial 
stakes  in  locally-listed  stocks.  Capital  market  intermediaries  compete  vigorously  to  add  value, 
servicing global orders. Even markets now seek direct presence, in the form of trading terminals, in 
different jurisdictions.  
Increasingly,  cross-border  operations  are  no  longer  conducted  predominantly  via  telephone  or  fax 
wires, but by proprietary networks capable of channeling orders and funds across the globe almost 
instantaneously. Such proprietary systems combined with the reach of the internet has pooled isolated 
pockets of liquidity into a single global market.  
With the aid of international rating agencies and global issue managers, corporate entities on their part 
are raising funds wherever it is priced most cheaply and available with minimal hassle. On the demand 
side,  investors  recognize  the  importance  of  global  liquidity  and  market  diversification.  By  taking 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 1
 advantage of the financial links provided by intermediaries, retail investors have become empowered 
to actively manage a global portfolio of investments.  
In this environment, no single national regulator can afford to focus just on activities taking place in its 
domestic markets. To achieve the objectives of investor protection and systemic stability, cross-border 
regulatory cooperation is imperative. The Sep 11 incident demonstrates the degree to which financial 
markets are interwoven and illustrates the need for such collaboration. All of you will recall that the 
event resulted not just in the closure of US markets for 4 working days, but also justified the temporary 
closure  of  several  markets  in  Asia,  while  delaying  trading  hours  in  others.  The  reality  was  that 
regulators the world over found themselves having to assess the situation, update one another, and 
decide on actions to be taken in their respective markets.  
Systemic  risk  has  also  increased  with  the  trend  towards  commoditisation,  ie  volume  business  at 
competitive  costs.  The  concentration  of  volumes  into  key  nodes  such  as  large  global  custodians 
represents exposure by market participants to entities located in other jurisdictions. Meanwhile, cross-
border capital flows have significantly increased the magnitude by which markets adjust to shocks as 
evidenced in the Asian crisis. The same systems that allow international trades to be conducted from a 
hub are also conduits by which volatility is transmitted globally.  
For the risk to be satisfactorily managed, collaboration is necessary. Regulatory collaboration can take 
many forms. It begins from interaction on occasions such as this, which represents an opportunity to 
compare notes, discuss issues and exchange views. Such informal but regular contact should not be 
discounted.  Indeed,  I  understand  from  my  colleagues  that  a  series  of  telephone  conversations  and 
e-mails with regulatory counterparts elsewhere in the aftermath of Sep 11 contributed considerably to 
a quick appreciation of the type, and magnitude, of issues that could be expected. This contributed to 
the avoidance of instability in individual markets. Looking back, we can all agree the markets stood up 
remarkably well. 
International  meetings  and  joint  forums  such  as  IOSCO  are  a  further  step  towards  setting  the 
foundation  for  more  structured  lines  of  communication  amongst  regulators.  Participation  in  IOSCO 
taskforces  requires  resources  but  helps  to  develop  better  appreciation  of  characteristics  unique  in 
other markets, and alternative approaches to addressing regulatory concerns. It is in recognition of this 
that MAS has devoted resources to active participation in IOSCO’s committees and working groups.  
We have also found the Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) to be a useful instrument for setting 
out mutually agreed procedures by  which regulators  may exchange information and provide mutual 
assistance. Since the mid-1990s, MAS has entered into a number of such MOUs to ensure that the 
level of regulatory collaboration keeps pace with the capital market linkages that are in place. A formal 
arrangement  enshrined  in  an  MOU  may  not  be  necessary  in  all  cases,  but  are  helpful  amongst 
jurisdictions with substantive capital market linkages or trading arrangements in place.  
Impetus for international standards  
The second proposition is the growing impetus for international standards. In this regard, IOSCO has 
taken  the  lead  in  putting  forward  a  set  of  principles  which  its  members  subscribe  to.  Some  of  the 
principles  are  necessarily  pitched  at  a  broad  level,  to  allow  members  to  agree  on  key  areas  which 
regulators should focus their attention.  
The challenge ahead is to continue working systematically on the principles to further cross-reference 
against  quantifiable  standards.  There  are  several  reasons  why  such  international  standards  are 
important.  
Danger of a weak link in the system  
The first is that interconnected markets means that transactions involving intermediaries or markets in 
different jurisdictions are always exposed to the weakest link. As an example, a localised weak link in 
clearing and custody networks used for cross-border transactions that buckles under stress will have 
far  reaching  repercussions  on  the  smooth  functioning  of  counterparties  and  markets  in  other 
jurisdictions.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2002
 Benchmarking 
The second reason is that, whereas regulations are developed for local usage, international standards 
are invariably developed under the close scrutiny of different regulators, and are derived after rigorous 
debate and sometimes protracted fine-tuning. The end product is usually of laudable standards and 
serves as a good yardstick for domestic practices to be benchmarked against.  
Investor protection  
The third reason is that a common set of standards facilitates sound regulatory oversight that is based 
on  consistent  treatment  of  cross-border  markets  and  activities.  With  regulators  using  the  same 
standards  in  assessing  systems,  products  and  practices,  market  players  that  deal  with  foreign 
institutions or instruments can take comfort that those institutions and products are regulated based on 
similar high standards. 
Efficiency & cost savings  
And  the  fourth  reason  is  that  the  establishment  of  a  set  of  standards  that  is  subscribed  to 
internationally has the effect of aligning the regulatory practices in different jurisdictions. This allows 
international financial institutions operating in different markets with similar features and rules drawn 
up according to international standards, to benefit from lower compliance costs. Given a choice, from 
the business proposition point of view, few fund managers, issuers or financial advisers would wish to 
expend resources on compliance systems to keep track of different requirements and procedures in 
different markets.  
Much work is already underway to develop international standards on specific subjects. Within IOSCO, 
MAS  is  a  participant  of  various  of  its  working  groups  including  the  Internet  Project  Team  and  the 
Implementation Committee which, as its name suggests, has been tasked to implement the 30 IOSCO 
principles  of  securities  regulation.  Apart  from  IOSCO,  a  number  of  other  fora  has  also  proposed 
recommendations  in  their  respective  areas.  These  include  the  Basle  Committee’s  work  on  a  set  of 
globally accepted principles of risk-based capital among banks; the Group of 30’s work in the area of 
standardising OTC documentation; and a collaborative effort by the Bank for International Settlements 
and IOSCO on recommended standards for securities settlement systems.  
Indirectly giving impetus to international best practices is the IMF and World Bank’s Financial Sector 
Assessment Programme (“FSAP”). Under this initiative, assessors will collaborate  with regulators in 
participating jurisdictions to benchmark financial systems and practices against global standards.  
MAS  is  convinced  that  these  efforts  represent  considerable  value-add  to  the  global  regulatory 
environment and has participated in support of these initiatives. We will be undertaking an FSAP this 
year.  As  an  international  financial  center,  we  are  also  committed  to  contributing  to  international 
financial  stability  as  a  member  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  and  have  found  our  involvement  in 
various of its working groups to be invaluable. The establishment of international standards and best 
practices  as  the  way  forward  will  become  even  more  compelling  as  globalisation  continues,  and 
regulators should be prepared to stay engaged with the process.  
In doing so, it should be recognised that initiatives to draw up international standards in themselves 
also  add  value  by  prompting  regulators  to  re-examine  existing  regulation  and  review  the  policy 
rationale behind them. This is useful in bringing dated practices back into line with international best 
practices. Improvements to comply with globally accepted principles will benefit the market’s growth 
and in the long term attract participants with strong internal controls. 
Call for responsive regulation  
My  third  point  concerns  the  role  of  regulators  and  regulations.  Markets  are  calling  and  indeed 
demanding for regulation to be more responsive to the needs of innovation and growth. If globalisation 
has changed the international outlook of markets, the blurring of sectoral boundaries has transformed 
financial markets from within. 
With  the  mergers  and  acquisitions  of  the  1990s  in  the  financial  industry,  cross-selling  has  become 
prominent  today  with  banks  seeking  to  distribute  investment  and  insurance  products  while 
stockbrokers  offer  cash  management  and  checking  accounts.  Insurance  corporations  on  their  part 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 3
 have concentrated efforts to promote investment-linked policies. The trend is in  part demand-driven 
with customers seeking a one-stop financial house that provides convenient and integrated approach 
to  money  management.  Notwithstanding  the  global  economic  downturn  which  has  checked  M&A 
activities,  market  players  have  not  let  up  efforts  to  gain  a  competitive  edge  by  consolidating  their 
positions through alliances.  
The regulatory response to this has been  a trend towards more integrated supervision. This allows 
regulators to supervise the range of activities more efficiently by taking a holistic view of the financial 
services  market.  The  UK  FSA  is  one  example  of  integrated  supervision  under  one  roof  while 
Australia’s Securities and Investments Commission and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority 
have ambits that cut across different industries.  
As product lines converge, regulators in setting the rules have to be careful not to inadvertently pick 
and choose the  winning models. Put another  way, similar activities that involve identical risk issues 
should be regulated on an equal basis to avoid tilting the playing field. Failure to do so will result in 
regulatory arbitrage and cause activities to migrate towards looser controls. 
In Singapore, the regulators for banking, securities and insurance activities are consolidated in MAS. 
Specific  to  the  capital  market,  we  have  integrated  our  legislation  for  the  securities  and  futures 
industries,  and  harmonised  our  regulation  of  the  financial  advisory  business  to  support  the 
cross-selling  of  products.  What  is  critical  however,  is  not  how  regulatory  responsibility  is  divided  or 
consolidated  into  one  or  more  agencies.  The  overriding  objective  is  equitable  treatment  and 
consistency in the approach to the measurement and management of risk.  
Capital  requirements  illustrate  this  most  clearly.  Most  regulatory  models  have  moved  away  from 
setting  fixed  minimum  capital  for  regulated  activities.  In  banks  as  for  capital  market  intermediaries, 
regulators are adopting and refining the risk based regulatory approach. Where risks take on a similar 
profile therefore, the capital charges should be aligned based on a consistent principle. This is so even 
as  the  risk  management  regime  in  the  banking,  securities  and  insurance  sectors  retains  some 
distinctive features that recognises the differences in these businesses.  
Legislative initiatives in Singapore  
In  Singapore,  at  the  heart  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  capital  markets  is  the  Securities  and 
Futures Act (“SFA”) which was enacted in September last year. The SFA is an omnibus Act that sets 
out the regulatory framework for the capital market. It seeks to cover in a single rulebook the range of 
capital market activities undertaken in Singapore, for the convenience of market participants. 
The SFA introduces a single licensing regime covering the various activities in securities and futures, 
fund management and corporate finance advice under a modular approach. This is a shift away from 
folding  all  capital  market  activities  into  the  categories  of  dealing  in  securities,  and  provision  of 
investment advice. In its place, the new licensing framework is designed to accommodate individual 
slices of the capital market value chain.  
To complement the modular licensing of intermediaries, MAS has announced the introduction of a risk 
based  capital  framework  which  will  take  effect  later  this  year.  Under  the  framework,  capital  market 
licence holders need only maintain capital sufficient to the business risks they undertake, according to 
their respective operations. 
Complementing  the  SFA  is  the  Financial  Advisors  Act  which  governs  the  provision  of  investment 
advice and the sale of collective investment products across all financial institutions. This will include 
banks, insurance companies, capital market intermediaries as well as independent financial advisers. 
A common code of conduct and business practices will be promulgated under the FA Act, and will set 
minimum standards for all investment advisers.  
Conclusion 
In  concluding,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  new  financial  landscape  both  domestically  and 
internationally has thrown up challenges and opportunities for regulators and market players alike. It is 
a time of change and renewal as the tried and tested means of doing things come under scrutiny as 
markets  continually  innovate.  The  challenge  for  us  as  regulators  is  to  put  in  place  a  regulatory 
framework and operate the system flexibly to meet the market demand for innovation and dynamism, 
without compromising the safety and soundness of the system.  
4 
 BIS Review 31/2002
 I hope to have given you some food for thought that will spark off questions and discussion over the 
next few days. It remains for me to encourage all of you to make the most of this opportunity and give 
voice to your views in the course of the seminar. I have no doubt that you will have much to share and 
learn from the speakers, and from one another’s experiences. I wish you a lively and useful Seminar. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 5
