Alan Greenspan: Productivity 
Speech  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the US Department of Labor and American Enterprise Institute Conference, Washington, 
D.C., 23 October 2002. 
 The increase in nonfarm business output per hour over the past year will almost surely be reported as 
one of the largest advances, if not the largest, posted over the past thirty  years. We at the Federal 
Reserve, along with our colleagues in government and the private sector, are struggling to account for 
so  strong  a  surge.  We  would  not  be  particularly  puzzled  if  the  increases  in  output  per  hour  were 
occurring during a period of very rapid economic growth, such as has often attended recoveries from 
steep  recessions.  Historically,  such  recoveries  have  allowed  overhead  and  maintenance  employee 
hours to be spread over a rapidly increasing level of production. But during the past year we averaged 
only modest economic growth.  
The reported estimates of output per hour do not appear to have resulted principally from faulty data or 
measurement error. Whether output is measured from the expenditure side or from the independently 
estimated income side of the national accounts, and whether hours of work are measured from the 
survey  of  establishments  or  the  survey  of  households,  the  same  basic  result  is  clearly  evident:  an 
impressive gain in output per hour over the past year. This conclusion is buttressed by recent sizable 
increases  estimated  for  labor  productivity  for  the  manufacturing  sector,  derived  from  a  data  system 
that, for the most part, is independent of the national accounts.  
To be sure, because the productivity feast of recent quarters has been so difficult to explain, many 
analysts expect a productivity famine in the  period ahead. Others, however,  are not so pessimistic. 
Regardless  of  how  events  unfold,  we  will  need  to  confront  difficult  questions  posed  by  the  recent 
performance of productivity, if we are to properly evaluate economic developments going forward.  
Indeed, if the recent surge in measured productivity is not a statistical mirage, or if it is not expunged 
by data revisions, then we need to ask about its possible causes.  
Clearly,  over  the  past  year  corporate  managers,  confronted  with  tepid  demand  and  a  virtual 
disappearance of pricing power, have struggled to maintain profit margins. With price increases largely 
off the table and demand soft, lowered costs have become the central focus of achieving increased 
profitability. On a consolidated basis for the corporate sector as a whole, lowered costs are generally 
associated with increased output per hour.  
Much of the recent reported improvements in cost control doubtless have reflected the paring of so 
called "fat" in corporate operations--fat that accumulated during the long expansion of the 1990s when 
management attention was focused primarily on the perceived profitability of expansion and less on 
the increments to profitability that derive from cost savings.1 Managers, now refocused, are pressing 
hard to identify and eliminate those redundant or non-essential activities that accumulated in the boom 
years.  
Now, with margins under pressure, businesses effectively have been reorganizing work processes and 
re-allocating  resources  so  as  to  use  them  more  productively.  Moreover,  for  capital  with  active 
secondary markets, such as computers and networking equipment, productivity may also have been 
boosted by a reallocation to firms that could use the equipment more efficiently. For example, healthy 
firms reportedly have been buying equipment from failed dot-coms.  
Businesses  also  may  have  managed  to  eke  out  increases  in  output  per  hour  by  employing  their 
existing  workforce  more  intensively.  Unlike  cutting  fat,  which  permanently  elevates  the  levels  of 
productivity,  these  gains  in  output  per  hour  are  often  temporary,  as  more  demanding  workloads 
eventually begin to tax workers and impede efficiency.  
                                                      
1   There  are  those  who  point  out,  quite  correctly,  that  a  significant  part  of  the  output  of  the  late  1990s  was  wasted  in  a 
misallocation of capital to pie-in-the-sky ventures. But that output was misused does not subtract from the evident capacity 
to produce that output, and it is this that our measures of structural productivity attempt to capture. 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 1
Perhaps the return to a low-inflation environment in recent years in itself explains the intensification of 
competitive  pressures,  which  has  been  a  spur  to  the  growth  of  productivity.  Indeed,  the  data  do 
suggest a relationship between inflation and productivity growth over the long run. But that statistical 
relationship is modest at best and inferring causality is complicated by a circularity that arises because 
increased growth in output per hour depresses unit labor costs and, hence, prices.  
Taken at face value, historical relationships suggest low inflation would explain very little of the most 
recent surge in output per hour. To be sure, while lack of pricing power and associated competitive 
pressures may have initiated much of the cost cutting and organizational changes that have occurred, 
it will ultimately be the quantity of fat in the system and the opportunities for productive reorganization 
that will determine the potential gains in productivity.  
Only in retrospect, if then, will we be able to ascertain how much of the past year's elevated growth in 
output per hour was transitory--that is, growth that resulted from cutting of fat, reorganizing operations, 
and  more  fully  exploiting  technologies  already  embedded  in  the  existing  capital  stock.  Such 
improvements, even though they are long-lasting, are, of course, a level adjustment with no necessary 
implications for productivity growth going forward. Moreover, there is an upper limit to the amount of 
output that can be produced from an existing facility, even in the short run, no matter how intensively it 
is employed and how much fat is taken out of the system. Corporate management can not unendingly 
reduce cost without at some point curtailing output or embodying new technologies through investment 
to sustain it.  
The  recent  upsurge  in  the  growth  of  output  per  hour  has  understandably  renewed  interest  in  the 
relationship between investment and so-called adjustment costs. Firms do not necessarily reap the full 
benefits  of  their  capital  investments  immediately  because  of  the  disruptions  to  activity  that  can  be 
initially created  when new  equipment is installed; these disruptions may include learning to  use the 
new  equipment  and  software  or  getting  the  new  machines  to  mesh  with  existing  systems.  Thus, 
although capital investment ultimately boosts output per hour, these adjustment costs temper the initial 
benefits to increased production obtained from new investment.  
It  is  likely  that  as  capital  spending  fell  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  so  did  the  disruptions  that 
accompanied its installation. Moreover, the dislocations associated with the substantial investment of 
the late  1990s and 2000 also likely  were  waning. This lower level  of disruption  provides a  boost to 
growth in output per hour for a time. How much remains an open question. The quantitative evidence 
on the magnitude of this effect spans the range from significant to small.2  
The ability of businesses to boost productivity with what seems to be minimal new capital investment 
over  the  past  two  years  suggests  that  output  per  hour  growth  in  the  later  years  of  the  1990s  likely 
trailed the  growth in underlying productivity  in those  years. If this inference  is accurate, part  of that 
earlier growth in underlying productivity is being reflected in today's gains in output per hour.  
The difficulty in explaining the recent past is most evident when we decompose gains in output per 
hour into the contribution from changes in worker quality, the amount of capital used by workers--that 
is,  capital  deepening--and  the  contribution  from  all  other  factors,  a  notion  that  economists  label 
"multifactor  productivity."  By  definition,  multifactor  productivity 
technical  change, 
organizational improvements, cyclical factors, and myriad other influences on output per hour, apart 
from capital investment. With capital spending sluggish over the past year, and no evident acceleration 
of worker quality, it is likely that growth of multifactor productivity accounts for an appreciable portion 
of the rise in output per hour.  
Based on historical experience, it seems improbable that all of the large rise in multifactor productivity 
could be attributed to cyclical or transitory factors. Conversely, it seems very unlikely  that  all of the 
increase  in  the  growth  of  productivity  could  be  attributed  to  structural  influences.  The  truth, 
presumably,  lies  between  these  two  extremes,  but  where  has  yet  to  be  determined.  At  minimum, 
however, it seems reasonable to conclude that the step-up in the pace of structural productivity growth 
that occurred in the latter part of the 1990s has not, as yet, faltered.  
includes 
                                                      
2  Susanto  Basu,  John  Fernald,  and  Matthew  Shapiro,  in  their  paper  "Productivity  Growth  in  the  1990s:  Technology, 
Utilization,  or  Adjustment?,"  Carnegie  Rochester  Conference  Series  on  Public  Policy,  (April  2001)  pp.  117-165,  find 
significant effects. Frank Lichtenberg, in his paper "Estimation of the Internal Adjustment Costs Model Using Longitudinal 
Establishment Data," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 70 (1988), pp. 421-430, finds much smaller effects. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2002
Indeed, high growth of productivity over the past year merely extends recent experience. Over the past 
seven  years,  output  per  hour  has  been  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  more  than  2-1/2  percent,  on 
average, compared with a rate of roughly 1-1/2 percent during the preceding two decades. Although 
we  cannot  know  with  certainty  until  the  books  are  closed,  the  growth  of  productivity  since  1995 
appears to be among the largest in decades.  
Our  nation  has  had  previous  concentrated  bursts  of  technological  innovation.  In  those  instances, 
business  practices  slowly  adapted  to  take  advantage  of  the  new  technologies.  The  result  was  an 
outsized increase in the level of productivity spread over a decade or two, with unusually rapid growth 
rates observed during the transition to the higher level.  
For example, as the benefits that attended the development of the electric dynamo and the internal 
combustion  engine  more  than  a  century  ago  became  manifest  in  both  the  capital  stock  and  the 
organization of production, the growth of labor productivity surged. From an average annual rate of 1-
3/4 percent in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, it jumped to a 3-3/4 percent rate in the 
decade  following World War  I.  Subsequently,  productivity  growth  returned  to  a  1-3/4  percent  pace. 
Then, for the quarter century following World War II, productivity growth rose to an average rate of 2-
3/4  percent  before  subsiding  to  a  pace  of  1-1/2  percent  annually  from  the  mid-1970s  to  the  mid-
1990s.3  
Arguably,  the  pickup  in  productivity  growth  since  1995  largely  reflects  the  ongoing  incorporation  of 
innovations  in  computing  and  communications  technologies  into  the  capital  stock  and  business 
practices.  Indeed,  the  transition  to  the  higher  permanent  level  of  productivity  associated  with  these 
innovations is likely not yet completed.  
Surveys  of  purchasing  managers  in  recent  quarters  consistently  indicate  that  an  appreciable  share 
reports that their firms still have a considerable way to go in achieving the desired efficiency from the 
application  of  technology  to  supply  management.  If  the  backlog  of  unexploited  long-term  profitable 
technologies remains high, it should be assumed that once currently elevated risk premiums and the 
heightened cost of equity  capital (and some debt) recedes, or cash flows expand, new productivity-
enhancing capital investment will pick up.  
Further evidence that firms still have not fully adapted their operations to the latest state of technology 
also  is  provided  in  a  recent  study4  that  attempts  to  measure  the  "technological  gap"--that  is,  the 
difference between the productivity of leading-edge capital and the average productivity embodied in 
the current capital stock. This gap is estimated to be quite wide currently, which suggests that there 
are still significant opportunities for firms to upgrade the quality of their technology and with it the level 
of productivity.  
The paper presented by Stephen Oliner and Dan Sichel this morning also provides a basis for arguing 
that a significant portion--and possibly all--of the productivity revival of the mid-1990s is sustainable. 
Based on an analysis of a multisector growth model, their work suggests that a range for sustainable 
growth in labor productivity over the next decade is 2 percent to 2-3/4 percent per year. Jorgenson, 
Ho, and Stiroh use a similar methodology and find a range from a little less than 1-1/2 percent to about 
3 percent with a central tendency of around 2-1/4 percent.5  
These estimates are clearly plausible, but history does raise some warning flags concerning the length 
of time that productivity growth continues elevated. Gains in productivity remained quite rapid for years 
after the innovations that followed the surge of inventions a century ago. But in other episodes, the 
period of elevated growth of productivity was shorter. Regrettably, examples are too few to generalize. 
                                                      
3 
In  contrast  to the  boom  in  productivity  after World War  I,  which many  economists  associate  with a  few  key  innovations, 
analysts  usually  ascribe  the  post-World  War  II  boom  to  innovations  in  many  sectors  reflecting  the  diffusion  through  the 
private economy of (a) new technologies that appeared in the 1930s but were not fully implemented during the Depression, 
and  (b)  a  gradual  application  to  civilian  activities  of  military-related  innovations.  Sectors  with  major  innovations  included 
electronics, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and transportation (jet travel). 
4   Jason  G.  Cummins  and  Giovanni  L.  Violante,  "Investment-Specific  Technical  Change  in  the  United  States  (1947-2000): 
Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences," Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 5 (April 2002), pp. 243-284. 
5   Dale  W.  Jorgenson,  Mun  S.  Ho,  and  Kevin  J.  Stiroh,  "Projecting  Productivity  Growth:  Lessons  from  the  U.S.  Growth 
Resurgence," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review, Third Quarter 2002, p. 1-13. 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 3
Hence, policymakers have no substitute for continued close surveillance of the evolution of this current 
period of significant innovation.  
 In  summary  then:  given  the  difficult  adjustments  that  our  economy  has  been  undergoing,  long-term 
productivity optimism may currently seem a bit out of place. It may appear even more so in the months 
ahead should output per hour soften following this period of outsized gains. Nevertheless, it is both 
remarkable  and  encouraging  that,  despite  all  that  has  transpired  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  a 
significant step-up in the growth of productivity appears to have persisted.  
William J McDonough: Promoting financial resilience 
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Cato Institute’s 20th Annual Monetary Conference on “International Financial 
Crises: What Role for Government?” cosponsored with The Economist, New York, 17 October 2002. 
    Good morning. It  is a pleasure to have the opportunity to join  you on the  occasion of this 
timely conference, and to share with you my thoughts on promoting financial resilience.  
Despite the fact that periodic surges in volatility are a fact of life in financial markets, I think 
there is general acknowledgment that recent years have been extraordinary in this regard. 
This has been a period  of historic change and remarkable  volatility in markets, going  well 
beyond the emerging markets, and carrying with it important implications for political, social, 
and institutional stability in significant segments of the globe.  
The experiences of recent years have reinforced old lessons and brought home new insights 
about maintaining financial stability and sustained growth. In particular, a broad consensus 
continues to develop on ways of strengthening the institutional framework at the national and 
international level to create more robust, and thus more crisis-resistant, economies. There is 
general  agreement  that  in  order  for  countries  to  enjoy  sustained  and  stable  growth,  the 
following are crucial: 
G
G
a sound and stable macroeconomic environment, and 
well-functioning and robust financial systems in both capital-exporting and capital-
importing countries. 
 Moreover, both of these are most effective when supported by a dynamic and adaptive policy regime.  
• 
The simple reality is that countries with robust financial systems, strong fiscal accounts, low 
inflation, credible and coherent monetary and exchange rate policies, moderate external and 
internal  indebtedness,  reasonable  current  accounts,  and  adequate  domestic  savings  rates 
are less likely to be buffeted by financial and economic turbulence. Moreover, when shocks 
do occur, such countries tend to be far more resilient.  
There  is  also  considerable  agreement  on  many  of  the  elements  needed  to  achieve  these 
goals. This agreement has been reflected, in part, in the development and promulgation of 
globally accepted standards and codes for best practices in areas ranging from transparency 
in fiscal, monetary, and financial policies, to public debt management, and core principles for 
bank  supervision.  Guiding  themes  across  these  various  standards  have  included  the 
importance of consistent disclosure practices and of building stability up from the firm and 
sector  level.  The  latter  is  accomplished  by  encouraging  sound  risk  management  and 
stronger  balance  sheets,  and  creating  efficient  systems  of  market,  legal,  and  regulatory 
discipline.  
But the learning process continues. For example, in this country, recent experiences have 
brought  to  light  the  need  to  do  more  to  strengthen  corporate  accounting  and  disclosure 
standards, particularly with regard to guarantees and complex financial arrangements, such 
as those funded offshore or through special-purpose entities.  
 4 
 BIS Review 61/2002
       Our ongoing efforts to revise the Basel Capital Accord also reflect a learning process. We 
embarked on this voyage in the late 1990s because we realized that the original 1988 Basel 
Accord  had  been  overtaken  by  advances  in  the  financial  sector  –  and  in  the  broader 
economy. While the  1988  Accord represented an important advance,  new  technology, the 
globalization  of  financial  markets,  and  innovative  financial  products  and  services  have 
changed the way that banks monitor and manage credit, market, and operational risks in a 
manner that the 1988 Accord could not anticipate and does not address.  
To  ensure  that  the  New  Accord  remains  flexible,  forward-looking,  and  appropriate  for  the 
risks and capital needs of internationally active banks of the twenty-first century, the Basel 
Committee established several goals for its work, goals that the industry has embraced.  
G
G
G
G
First,  we  intended  to  develop  a  framework  that  encompasses  the  "three  pillars" 
necessary  to  support  an  effective  system  of  regulatory  capital:  the  appropriate 
measurement  and  minimum  requirements,  supervisory  review,  and  market 
discipline.  
Second,  we  wanted  to  align  the  minimum  requirements  more  closely  with  the 
actual underlying economic risks to which banks are exposed, which should help 
allocate capital resources effectively.  
A third goal was to encourage banks to refine their measurement and management 
of risk over time. By creating incentives in the New Accord for banks to re-evaluate 
and enhance their tools constantly, we expect that banks themselves will adopt a 
forward-looking perspective on risk.  
I’m pleased to say that, through the Committee’s efforts and the cooperation and 
support  of  other  supervisors  and  the  industry,  it  appears  that  the  proposed 
framework  will  attain  each  goal. We  can  now  count  them  among  the  milestones 
we've achieved.  
However, though we have covered quite a bit of territory over the past three years, the last 
miles of any marathon are the toughest to finish. I’d like to turn now to the status of the New 
Accord and of the issues we are still resolving.  
Since  the  Second  Consultative  Document’s  release  21  months  ago,  the  members  of  the 
Basel  Committee  have  worked  collaboratively  and  publicly  with  supervisors,  banks,  and 
others to revise the proposals so that they best serve the needs of modern banking. We’ve 
published and discussed thousands of pages of proposals and studies with the industry and 
the  public.  I’d  like  to  share  with  you  the  latest  news  on  how  we  are  resolving  the  key 
challenges and concerns that have surfaced in this process.  
One general issue raised is that the New Accord’s increased sensitivity to risk will reinforce 
procyclical behavior by banks, leading to increased cost of credit during cyclical downturns. 
While we are working to address this concern, I would note that banks already are expected 
to operate above minimum capital requirements, manage  to their economic capital  needs, 
and evaluate how their risk profiles may change over time. Along those lines, the Committee 
recently agreed that banks adopting the "internal ratings based" approach to credit risk will 
be  required  to  conduct  appropriate  credit  risk  stress  testing,  which  should  help  to  contain 
procyclical behavior.  
Another concern raised about Basel II is its complexity. If the New Accord is to be more risk-
sensitive, however, it must involve an irreducible degree of complexity, which parallels the 
changes in bank practices and market instruments. Indeed, some of this complexity stems 
from the various options the New Accord provides to address the wide range of risk profiles, 
strategies, and systems that banks maintain.  
The  treatment  of  operational  risk  has  been  a  more  specific  area  of  concern.  While 
operational risk cannot be quantified with the same degree of precision as credit or market 
risk,  the  Committee  believes  that  introducing  a  separate  charge  for  operational  risk  will 
bolster  efforts  to  find  better  ways  to  address  it.  In  this  vein,  we  have  seen  encouraging 
progress in operational risk measurement, although we recognize that the industry has not 
settled on particular methodologies or principles. Accordingly, the New Accord will permit an 
unprecedented  amount  of  flexibility  to  accommodate  a  spectrum  of  approaches  to 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 5
operational risk. Toward that end, under the "advanced measurement approach," the most 
sophisticated institutions will be free to experiment with a great variety of methodologies.  
The Basel Committee expects that we will achieve our goal of not raising in aggregate the 
capitalization required of the banking industry, though clearly and appropriately those banks 
that engage in higher risk businesses may see their requirements rise, and vice versa.  
G
To help ensure this, the Committee launched its third Quantitative Impact Study on 
October 1, 2002, involving, to date, 265 banks from nearly 50 countries. The banks 
will  assess  how  the  proposals  will  affect  them  and  submit  their  findings  by 
December  20,  2002.  These  results  will  allow  us  to  ascertain  the  need  for 
adjustments prior to the release of an updated proposal for public comment in the 
second  quarter  of  2003,  followed  by  finalization  of  the  New  Accord  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2003, and implementation at year-end 2006.  
While much work clearly remains to be done over the next three years - including evaluating 
banks' readiness, training supervisory staff, and working towards consistent implementation 
across  supervisors  -  in  my  view,  both  the  journey  and  the  ultimate  destination  of  a  New 
Accord will contribute substantially to a more resilient international financial system.  
Unfortunately, while there is a deepening consensus on key elements about how to promote 
resilience  ex  ante,  there  is  no  comparable  degree  of  consensus  on  how  best  to  handle 
international financial crises once they do erupt, or the proper roles of public institutions and 
the  private  sector  in  containing  and  resolving  such  crises.  Notwithstanding  considerable 
efforts at the public and private level to search for a better way, no magic bullet or formula 
has been found, although at times some have been asserted.  
Nor is one likely to be available. Experience and a reading of the historical record suggest 
that  the  seductive  allure  of  grand  solutions  must  be  resisted.  Cases  differ  greatly  with 
respect to what is possible and desirable in terms of their implications for the interests of the 
public and private sectors. Moreover, history tells us that new developments in markets and 
practices  quickly  will  render  obsolete  those  measures  that  might  seem  well  attuned  to 
today’s circumstances.  
Allow me to explain how I think progress can be made by first focusing a bit on the problem 
that confronts us. I  would  like to highlight some of the important changes that  have taken 
place over the past two decades in the patterns and instrumentation of capital flows to the 
emerging world, and in the nature of crises that can arise associated with these flows.  
G
G
G
G
flows  since  1990, 
the  predominance  of  private-to-private 
First, it is important to keep in mind that the constellation of investors and the range 
of instrumentation have broadened considerably over the past two decades. Equity 
investors (both direct and portfolio) are now the principal source of net inflows for 
emerging market countries, and most medium-term debt is held in tradable form by 
a broad array of diversified, well-capitalized, fixed-income investors.  
Second,  there  have  been  equally  important  changes  in  the  destination  of  flows. 
Reflecting 
today 
sovereign foreign debt often represents only a relatively small part of maturing debt 
in crisis cases. Most maturing debt is owed by private borrowers and/or is locally 
issued.  
Third,  the  context  has  been  fundamentally  altered  by  broad  institutional  change. 
Accounting,  regulatory,  technological,  communications,  and  structural  market 
changes  have 
fostered  an  environment  characterized  by  mark-to-market 
accounting and much more liquid and actively managed balance sheets. Investors 
are focused on financial performance, and on their fiduciary responsibilities to their 
largely  private  clients  and  shareholders,  rather  than  on  long-term  strategic 
relationships  with  sovereigns.  Today  this  is  as  true  for  banks,  which  remain 
important providers of credit, as it is for other providers of capital.  
Last, the new environment entails new and complex linkages - - between domestic 
and  international  markets,  and  within  and  across  countries  -  -  reflecting  the 
internationalization  of  local  banking,  equity,  debt,  and  currency  markets,  and  the 
greater complexity of funding structures.  
BIS Review 61/2002
     6 
 G
G
G
This  new  environment  has  important  implications  for  policymakers  and  market 
participants alike. Let me comment on just a few:  
On the negative side, crises are more complex and unfold much more quickly and 
with surprising dimensions. Variable and often highly interdependent cross-market 
developments are often critical in the evolution of a given case and its implications 
for others. Indeed, many of the more recent crises were triggered by problems in 
domestic  banking,  currency,  and  debt  markets  that  then  spread  to  the  capital 
account. Also, in today’s environment, the fear of an event often is the event itself, 
because  of  the  inherent  tendency  of  markets  to  anticipate  developments  and 
overreact.  
But on the positive side, financial recoveries can proceed more rapidly in today’s 
environment,  particularly  with  the  right  policy  responses  from  borrowers.  In  part, 
this reflects the fact that today’s market participants generally have the capacity - - 
and many have little choice, under mark-to-market accounting - - to digest losses 
and move on. The broader sourcing of capital today also gives more scope to the 
possibility  that,  while  some  investors may  withdraw,  others  may  take  their  place. 
The caveat here is that the well not be poisoned through unnecessarily broad or 
heavy-handed approaches, a point I will return to later.  
  What is the right way to deal with this changed and changing environment? In my view, the 
solution is neither a single piece of financial engineering nor a compact between the official 
lenders  and  private  creditors.  Rather,  it  is  a  process  incorporating  a  number  of  elements. 
Essentially, I would suggest that our current case-by-case approach to crisis management 
needs to evolve in ways that are market-based and adaptive, yet strategic, creative, and 
principled.  
Being successful in today’s environment requires adapting to the particularities of the case at 
hand, as well as the global financial and economic context, and requires seeking, as far as 
possible,  to  work  with  the  grain  of  a  given  situation.  The  approach  needs  to  be  market-
based, in part because that is what the game is all about. Today, the relevant considerations 
for  crisis  management  relate  more  to  markets  and  the  problem  of  restoring  market 
confidence, than to individual borrowers and creditors.  
G
G
G
To the extent that systemic concerns pertain, they more often relate to the risks of 
market disruption and over-adjustment than to potential domino effects caused by 
the failure or impairment of key institutions. Also, in today’s environment, a market-
based approach is much more feasible, because financial recoveries can proceed 
more rapidly than in the past.  
To be more specific, in my view, although much has been made of the difficulties in 
achieving debtor workouts, the truly thorny issues associated with emerging market 
financial crises usually relate to the following:  
    containing the fallout to domestic financial systems and to local consumer 
and investor confidence,  
minimizing contagion and spillovers to other cases and markets,  
maintaining  or  restoring  market  access,  particularly  for  private  sector 
borrowers, and,  
most importantly, encouraging policy reform so that a given crisis falls as 
closely  as  possible  to  the  liquidity,  rather  than  the  solvency,  end  of  the 
spectrum.  
Working with the grain means recognizing the realities and limitations inherent in 
the  current  market  structure  and  its  functioning,  and  tailoring  approaches  to  the 
specifics of individual cases. This involves acknowledging that attempts to impose 
solutions from outside are unrealistic and potentially counterproductive. Instead it 
involves identifying ways to induce and encourage desired behaviors. I would also 
suggest  that  it  means  avoiding  departures  from  normal  market  functioning 
whenever  possible.  Interventions  should  seek  not  to  override  or  suspend  market 
functioning, but rather to guide market processes.  
BIS Review 61/2002 
 7
  This is not to say that payment suspensions always can and should be 
avoided,  or  that  ever-larger  bailouts  are  desirable  or  feasible.  I  would 
note  that  we  at  the  New  York  Fed  in  numerous  instances,  spanning 
several  decades,  have  worked  to  help  borrowers  and  creditors  find 
mutually beneficial solutions that involved some degree of concerted or 
coordinated financing.  
But in such instances, when payment interruptions or resort to concerted 
financing  truly  are  unavoidable,  experience  has  shown  that  minimalist 
approaches - - where only certain payments are suspended or delayed, 
and  only  when  absolutely  necessary  -  -  generally  offer  the  best 
prospects  for  minimizing  spillover  effects  and  for  restoring  market 
access rapidly.  
G
The  linchpin  of  a  market-based,  minimalist  approach  has  to  be  a  strong  policy 
response  on  the  part  of  the  country  in  crisis.  Markets  may  not  always  be 
reasonable, but they usually have reasons for reacting adversely. Those reasons 
most often relate to policy or institutional shortcomings. Across all of the episodes 
of market distress in the emerging world over the past two decades, an essential 
element of heading off or minimizing damage from a crisis has been policymakers 
showing that they "get the message" about the need for reform, and are prepared 
to take appropriate measures.  
  In  this  regard,  the  comparative  advantage  of  the  international  public 
sector  is  in  guiding  economic  and  financial  policy,  and  fostering  the 
conditions  that  will  facilitate  the  restoration  or  maintenance  of  voluntary 
credit and investment flows. IMF support should provide an unambiguous 
signal  of  the  international  community’s  confidence  in  the  capacity  of 
crisis-affected  countries  to  take  the  measures  necessary  to  restore 
economic health.  
This  role  is  particularly  important  in  unfolding  crisis  situations,  because 
borrowing  country  authorities  too  often  are  slow  to  recognize  the  full 
dimensions  of  the  policy  challenges  confronting  them,  and  the  private 
sector is ill-equipped to deal with this.  
 A case-by-case approach by definition is supremely tactical, but it also needs to be strategic 
in orientation if it is to be successful in the longer run. I would like to highlight several ways in 
which the case-by-case approach needs to be strategic.  
G
G
First off, strategy needs to be informed by a long-run view about the case at hand. 
The emphasis should not be merely on "working out" the problems at hand, but on 
"working through" them. The latter orientation focuses attention beyond the current 
circumstances to the restoration of growth, access to capital,  and normal market 
functioning, recognizing that workouts are  but one of several  means to that end, 
not an end in themselves.  
 We should not forget that a crisis is not over when capital outflows have 
been halted and prices stop falling. Emerging market economies depend 
on sustained and predictable access to international capital market and 
bank credit, and economic recovery and restoration of growth depend on 
confidence being reestablished, so that the necessary financing, beyond 
emergency lending, can be obtained.  
Secondly,  we  in  the  public  sector  would  be  well  served  to  maximize  the 
complementarity  between  efforts  to  prevent  crises  and  efforts  to  contain  and 
resolve crises when they do arise. 
 The consensus on sound preventative policies includes precepts that public 
sectors should limit the scale of their involvement in the domestic economy, 
and that borrowers, public and private, should be encouraged to follow best 
practices in the management of their liquidity, foreign exchange, and credit 
risk. Indeed, as I discussed earlier, this is the essence of what we are trying 
to  do  under  the  revised  Capital  Accord.  Moreover,  countries  are  being 
encouraged to strengthen their legal and regulatory regimes for insolvency 
8 
 BIS Review 61/2002
    resolution to deal more effectively with cases when private sector borrowers 
and lenders get it wrong.  
 Progress  in  these  areas,  even  if  only  incremental,  will  have  important 
implications for what is possible and necessary in the future. For example, 
having  stronger  bank  and  corporate  balance  sheets,  with  lower  leverage, 
expands the scope for using interest rates and asset price adjustments as 
stabilizing devices. Better liquidity management at both the micro and macro 
levels  -  -  longer  maturities,  and  greater  reserve  coverage  and  back-up 
financing  -  -  will  create  margins  to  ride  out  financial  shocks.  And  more 
effective  insolvency  regimes  would  make  decentralized  workouts  more 
feasible, particularly in cases where systemic stress is better contained. 
The approach to crisis management and resolution also needs to be creative. In part, this 
can be accomplished by relying as much as possible on the efforts of debtors and private 
creditors  to  work  things  out  on  their  own.  The  perception  in  some  circles  that  private 
creditors  are  not  interested  in  resolving  payment  problems  expeditiously  is  mistaken,  and 
stands at odds with recent experience. If nothing else, investors are interested in restoring 
liquidity to debt instruments in order to move on to new opportunities. There is also scope for 
exploring creative market-based ways to lever in private participation and stretch the impact 
of public sector funds.  
G
The various experiences since the late 80s with buybacks, partial guarantees, and 
debt exchanges provide some hints for how targeted deployment of public moneys 
can  spur  tendencies  in  a  direction  consistent  with  public  policy  goals.  Such 
creativity  is  essential  if  we  are  to  get  beyond  stark  and  unpalatable  choices 
entailing either massive bailouts or sweeping defaults.  
Finally, a successful market-based, case-by-case approach also needs to be principled. I 
would suggest that the essence of an effective case-by-case approach is the development of 
viable  plans  that  link  broad,  generally  acceptable  principles  to  the  particulars  of  a  given 
situation.  
G To  achieve  this,  a  clearer  and  more  transparent  articulation  of  the  public  sector’s 
objectives is necessary. Greater emphasis and clarity are needed as to the purposes 
and  limits  of  public  intervention,  and  the  extent  to  which  those  interests  warrant 
different  degrees,  modes,  and  timing  of  public  and  private  sector  involvement, 
depending on the particular country and circumstances. In this way all parties will be 
better  placed  to  understand  current  developments  and  how  the  international 
community might react to future strains.  
There are, of course, other points of view. In particular, it has been suggested that an early 
recourse  to  broad  suspensions  of  debt  service,  perhaps  amplified  or  reinforced  by  capital 
controls, would increase the manageability of crises and enhance predictability.  
My reading of the record convinces me that trying to preemptively override market processes 
would do the opposite. Let me share a few thoughts with you on this point. 
G
G
G
G
The  desire  for  certainty  and  control  which  seems  to  underlie  such  proposals  is 
understandable, as it appears to offer the promise of using less public money, and 
seemingly entails less risk that creditors will be bailed out for poor credit decisions. 
But the control and manageability that might result may be more seeming than real.  
For one, a perceived disposition to preemptively lock the door seems likely to send 
investors heading for the exits all that much sooner. As a result, many avoidable 
crises  soon  may  become  inevitable.  And  the  problem  of  contagion,  whereby 
difficulties in one case spread to many, would seem likely to worsen.  
Moreover, a perceived weakening of the international community’s commitment to 
voluntary,  market-oriented  approaches  and  its  support  for  honoring  contractual 
commitments  would  likely  create  deep  distrust,  making  it  harder  to  encourage 
cooperation between debtors and creditors in ultimately resolving the crisis.  
An overly quick recourse to payment suspensions also risks discouraging precisely 
the types of flows that we should wish to encourage, that is, longer maturities with 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 9
better  risk-sharing  characteristics,  such  as  long-term  bonds  and  equities.  In  a 
crisis, the hottest money leaves first - - by definition. It seems counterproductive to 
seek to penalize those who stay.  
Finally,  I  would  suggest  that  preemptive  attempts  to  "freeze  markets"  also 
undermine market discipline of, and ownership by, the local authorities.  
G
  Increases  and  decreases  in  financial  flows  -  -  and  the  fluctuations  in 
pricing  that  naturally  accompany  positive  or  negative  trends  in  policies 
and economic and financial performance - - are a reflection of, and act as 
a natural brake on, the development of imbalances. 
But an assertion of control by the international community risks diverting 
attention from the policies of the local authorities. As a result, denial and 
delay, aggravating factors in almost every crisis, may well continue and 
be exacerbated. And then, as a practical matter, once market processes 
have  been  stopped,  how  and  when  do  you  get  things  started  again, 
particularly if needed corrective policies still have not been convincingly 
and transparently implemented?  
G
To  sum  up,  I  believe  the  one-size-fits-all  disposition  inherent  in  a  preemptive 
approach risks making situations much worse than they need to be. The only thing 
that  strikes  me  as  predictable  under  such  an  approach  would  be  that  market 
access would be harmed across the board. Just as bailouts risk encouraging too 
much risk taking, efforts to orchestrate preemptive bail-ins may encourage too little.  
Underlying  the  suggestions  that  I  have  made  is  a  firm  belief  that  the  success  of  our 
approaches  to  crisis  management  needs  to  be  viewed  and  assessed  with  a  wide  focus. 
Certainly, there is the question of efficacy in containing the crisis at hand, and the balance 
between this and the costs, actual and potential, to the public sector. But we also must keep 
in  mind  the  implications  for  the  functioning  of  the  global  financial  system  in  the  near  and 
medium  term.  This  requires  consideration  of  prospects  for  restoring  normal  market 
functioning and access, and the creation of appropriate incentives.  
When  difficulties  arise,  the  challenge  remains,  as  always,  to  encourage  and  work  with 
countries that are ready and able to implement strong corrective actions and to find financial 
solutions  best  suited  to  both  the  specific  case  and  the  broader  functioning  of  the  global 
financial system. A flexible, case-by-case, managed-market approach, represents the best 
bet - - and the only realistic option - - for achieving those goals as  we face a challenging 
future.  
  Thank you. 
David Dodge: Economic and financial trends in Canada 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, 23 October 2002.  
 Today, we released our October Monetary Policy Report, in which we discuss economic and financial 
trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy.  
The Canadian economy has been expanding strongly so far this year and is now operating fairly close 
to its full  production capacity.  Consumer price inflation has risen  above the  2 per cent target and is 
expected to rise further before year-end because of high oil prices and a number of other relative price 
movements. What is important for monetary policy is that these one-off influences on specific prices 
not feed more generally into price and wage inflation.  
The Canadian economy has grown more rapidly than those of all other G-7 countries over the past 
year. Annualized growth exceeded 5 per cent in the first half of 2002—well above the growth of the 
economy's potential. We estimate that Canada's economy grew at an annualized rate of about 4 per 
10 
 BIS Review 61/2002
cent in the third quarter. Thus, we have seen a significant reduction in the amount of excess supply in 
the economy so far this year.  
As we look ahead, global economic, financial, and geopolitical uncertainties are likely to moderate the 
rate of Canada's economic growth over the next three quarters. Growth should come in at the bottom 
of, or slightly below, the 3 to 4 per cent range that we anticipated in our last Update.  
Bear in mind that the output gap is very small. Assuming the uncertainties now clouding the outlook 
dissipate in the second half of next  year,  we expect  growth to accelerate to above  potential at that 
time, absorbing the remaining small amount of excess supply.  
The  Bank's  core  measure  of  inflation  is  running  above  our  earlier  projections.  This  largely  reflects 
sharp increases in home and auto insurance premiums and, in Ontario, electricity prices. Core inflation 
is also being pushed up by strong demand for housing.  
All told, core inflation is expected to peak at about 3 per cent by the end of this year. But, as the one-
time influences that I just mentioned fade, core inflation is expected to decline in the second half of 
2003, provided those one-time factors do not feed into price and wage inflation more generally.  
We must remember that the Canadian economy is now operating not far from its capacity. In order to 
sustain  non-inflationary  growth,  we  will  need  to  continue  to  remove  monetary  stimulus  before  the 
excess supply in the economy is completely absorbed. The pace and extent of this action will depend 
on  the  balance  of  domestic  and  external  developments  and  on  their  implications  for  pressures  on 
capacity and inflation in Canada.  
Now Malcolm and I will be happy to take your questions. 
Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Productivity growth - a realistic assessment  
Speech  by  Mr  Roger  W  Ferguson,  Jr,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Stockton  Lectures  2002,  London  Business  School,  London,  U.K., 
24 October 2002. 
 I want to thank Laura Tyson and the other members of the London Business School for inviting me to 
participate  in  your  Stockton  lecture  series.  As  Laura  requested  several  months  ago,  my  topic  this 
evening will be the "new economy" and more specifically the growth of labor productivity. This issue is 
one of the most studied in macroeconomics, yet it is an area in which obviously far too many puzzles 
remain. Of course, the usual disclaimer applies to my remarks: I will express my own views, and you 
should not interpret them as the position of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Board of 
Governors.  
How--you might reasonably ask--could so many questions remain after so much research on this key 
topic?  The  answer--I  submit--is  not  that  the  productivity  of  my  fellow  economists  is  low  or  that  the 
economics  profession  has  failed  in  a  key  mission.  Rather,  it  is  that  the  underlying  sources  of 
productivity growth are very complex. On the surface, the determinants of productivity growth might 
seem  straightforward:  factors  such  as  technological  progress,  capital  deepening,  and  the  changing 
institutional structure of labor and product markets. However, these fundamental determinants shift in 
importance  over  time  and  often  do  not  lend  themselves  to  measurement  in  the  real  world.  As  you 
know, to measure the hours worked of a lawyer, a doctor, a business school dean, or even a governor 
of a central bank is easy. But evaluating the quantity of our collective output is much more difficult. 
Thus, before embarking on any serious discussion of productivity growth, one must recognize the very 
difficult  measurement  challenges  that  we  face.  Different  methods  of  data  construction  will  yield 
different answers to important questions. But if we are consistent in our methods, I believe both our 
aggregate  statistics  and  also  microeconomic  studies  of  productivity  growth  at  the  firm  and  industry 
level can yield important insights.  
With  that  caveat  about  productivity  measurement  aside,  let  me  state  right  from  the  outset  of  this 
lecture that I continue to be cautiously optimistic about productivity growth in the United States. Based 
on my reading of the data and my understanding of numerous business case studies, I believe that 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 11
trend labor productivity in the United States accelerated in the mid-1990s. That acceleration reflected 
several factors not tied to the strong business expansion: notably, an apparent pickup in the pace of 
technological  progress--especially  in  the  so-called  high-tech  sector--as  well  as  a  surge  in  capital 
spending  by  businesses.  But  other  factors  were  also  at  work,  including  well-aligned  monetary  and 
fiscal policies that created an economic environment conducive to noninflationary economic growth. In 
addition,  our  economy  continued  to  benefit  from  past  actions  by  the  government  to  deregulate 
industries.  The  removal  of  unnecessary  government  regulation  began  more  than  twenty  years  ago, 
during the administration of President Ford, and gathered momentum during the Carter years. It has 
altered the business landscape. Deregulation allowed, indeed forced, businesses to focus more clearly 
on a marketplace that had become more competitive, with fewer constraints and increased flexibility.  
The Statistical Evidence 
I  think  it  would  be  useful  at  this  point  to  review  what  the  data  actually  tell  us  about  the  pattern  of 
productivity  growth  in  the  United  States.  From  the  beginning  of  1960  until  the  fall  of  1973,  labor 
productivity in the nonfarm business sector grew about 3 percent per year. Productivity growth then fell 
to an annual pace of 1-1/2 percent, likely in response to the supply shocks that hit the world economy 
during  that  period,  higher  inflation,  a  rise  in  uncertainty  about  the  prospects  for  future  economic 
growth, and public policy decisions that diverted resources from activities that would have generated 
more  measured  output.  I  should  stress  that,  although  I  have  listed  several  likely  contributors,  the 
ultimate  cause  or  causes  of  this  post-1973  productivity  slowdown  have  eluded  researchers. 
Productivity continued to grow at an annual pace of about 1-1/2 percent from 1973 to 1995. We can 
divide this period into several subperiods, yet the results are essentially the same: continued gains in 
labor productivity but well below the pre-1973 pace.  
From  1995  to  2001,  labor  productivity  grew  at  an  annual  pace  of  2-1/4  percent.  Research  by  my 
colleagues at the Federal Reserve--Steve Oliner and Dan Sichel--sheds some light on the sources of 
this faster productivity growth. Using a growth accounting methodology, they find that about half the 
acceleration  in  productivity  can  be  attributed  to  capital  deepening.  As  you  know,  providing  workers 
with  more  equipment  improves  their  efficiency.  At  the  aggregate  level,  the  high  levels  of  business 
investment raised the amount of capital per worker and thereby boosted productivity. Also, most of the 
faster capital deepening reflected spending by businesses on high-tech equipment, mainly computer 
hardware  and  software.  The  other  half  of  the  pickup  in  productivity  growth  reflected  technological 
innovations  in  the  actual  production  of  computer  hardware  and  semiconductors  as  well  as  better 
management--perhaps  assisted  by  these  high-tech  investments--of  the  nation's  capital  and  labor. 
Oliner and Sichel estimate that, if one consolidates all the influences of high-tech investments, they 
fully account for the acceleration in productivity over the 1995-2001 period.  
The Oliner-Sichel estimates are broadly consistent with the results of most other researchers in this 
field. I should also note that their conclusions have not changed in any fundamental way since they 
were first published in 2000. I mention this fact to address the concerns of some observers that recent 
revisions  to  the  national  income  and  product  accounts  have  changed  the  evidence  on  post-1995 
productivity  growth.  The  last  two  annual  revisions  have  indeed  lowered  output  growth,  but  these 
adjustments  followed  several  years  of  upward  revisions.  To  focus  on  the  most  recent  revisions  is 
natural, but we should not lose sight of the complete record of historical revisions. Research by Board 
economists--Karen  Dynan  and  Doug  Elmendorf--clearly  shows  that  we  initially  overestimate  growth 
during recessions and periods of economic weakness. But  we also initially underestimate growth in 
recovery periods. Thus, based on the revisions to growth over the past three years, I do not believe 
that  one  should  presume  that  future  data  revisions  will  whittle  away  the  post-1995  acceleration  in 
productivity.  
Microeconomic studies provide corroborating information to the macroeconomic evidence of a post-
1995 acceleration in productivity growth. Industry studies indicate a pattern of greater efficiency gains 
after 1995, and one clearly gets that impression from talking to business leaders. These executives 
consistently say that, when they have little leverage to raise their prices, the key to boosting profits is 
productivity growth. Many corporate CEOs cite the more efficient use of information technology as one 
vehicle for cost saving, and I doubt that anyone would question the assertion that all of us are working 
"smarter and faster" than we were in 1995. Researchers can and will debate the exact magnitude of 
that increment to our efficiency, but it was doubtless a key economic development of the past decade 
and one that will continue to pay dividends in future years.  
12 
 BIS Review 61/2002
Having said that I think the post-1995 productivity acceleration was real, let me also assert that we 
should constantly challenge our assumptions. With the passage of time and the acquisition of more 
information, we are better able to distinguish between events that have true long-run significance and 
those whose effects prove fleeting. In that spirit, I am the first to admit that we do not fully understand 
the boom and subsequent bust that has occurred worldwide in the high-tech sector--especially in the 
telecommunications area. There apparently was overinvestment in the late 1990s, but we do not yet 
know  the  exact  magnitude.  Furthermore,  we  don't  understand  how  this  overinvestment  should  be 
factored into our analysis of productivity growth over this period. It seems straightforward not to count 
nonproductive capital as part of the productive capital stock. But should we also exclude the value of 
such equipment from our measures of output as well? These tricky questions are important for us to 
resolve.  
Similarly,  I  don't  think  we  yet  fully  understand  the  role  of  Year  2000  preparations  in  either  the  late 
1990s investment boom or the acceleration in productivity. Billions of dollars were invested to fix the 
Y2K bug, and we don't know how much of that spending was for the replacement of obsolete systems 
(and hence should be considered as depreciation in measuring the stock of available capital) or for the 
expansion  and  upgrading  of  systems  (which,  parenthetically,  is  the  assumption  we  use  in  all  our 
growth  accounting  exercises).  But  although  these  Y2K  remediation  efforts  were  costly  and  at  times 
painful,  virtually  all  the  business  leaders  I  know  would  assert  that  the  efforts  produced  significant 
efficiency gains in the use and management of their information systems. Thus, the net effect of Y2K 
on our economy is still very much an unanswered question, and I'd like to see the research community 
systematically assess it.  
Current and Prospective Productivity Growth 
The cyclical slowing in 2001 and gradual expansion in 2002 have raised a critical issue. That question 
is: Will productivity growth in the  years ahead more closely resemble the substantial gains over the 
1960-73  period  or  the  weaker  performance  of  the  1973-95  slowdown?  I  tend  to  believe  that  future 
growth will most likely follow the 1960-73 pattern, and the most recent record of productivity growth 
reinforces that view. Productivity is a cyclical variable that typically falls in recessions. However, during 
the most recent downturn, productivity never declined and instead continued to grow at a fairly strong 
pace.  Moreover,  after  the  tragic  events  of  September  11,  many  economists  feared  that  the  U.S. 
economy would weaken substantially and that productivity growth would suffer a severe setback as 
well. In the event, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector has grown in excess of 5 percent 
over the last four quarters.  
How should we interpret this truly extraordinary performance? Cyclical forces probably played some 
role. After September 11, many businesses sharply reduced their payrolls in anticipation of a slump in 
demand. But demand continued to grow briskly, and these companies learned to squeeze more output 
out of a smaller workforce. These efficiency gains likely were facilitated by the capital investments of 
recent  years.  Adjusting  to  new  technologies  takes  time,  and  it  is  plausible  that  such  an  adjustment 
process has continued to boost productivity growth in recent years. Although cyclical forces and lags 
in the assimilation of new technologies have been important, their influence is likely to be transitory. 
More  fundamentally,  I  believe  that  the  trend  in  productivity  growth  has  ratcheted  up,  and  this 
development has been the driving force behind the recent extraordinary productivity growth.  
What  might  be  wrong  with  this  assessment?  Some  analysts  have  cited  the  low  level  of  business 
confidence today and the possibility that it could inhibit economic growth. But sentiment rises and falls, 
and this period of pessimism, too, will pass. Others contend that productivity growth itself can be a 
problem  because  efficiency  gains  are  achieved  by  a  reduction  in  payrolls,  which  tends  to  deflate 
aggregate demand. I do not want to dismiss the notion that "downsizing" or "rightsizing" can be painful 
in  the  short  run.  It  can  be.  But,  this  pain  is  transitory,  and  ultimately,  the  faster  productivity  growth 
raises real wages, stimulates growth in real incomes, and contributes to an increase in our standard of 
living.  
A  third  risk,  however,  is  that  we  will  not  get  a  meaningful  recovery  in  profitability.  Without  such 
renewed corporate profits, firms will be reluctant to invest in research and development or to purchase 
new  efficiency-improving  equipment.  In  many  cases,  new  technologies  are  introduced  into  our 
economy through capital investment, and the important productivity gains of recent years will not be 
repeated  unless  businesses  continue  to  invest  in  new  plant  and  equipment.  Increases  in  business 
fixed investment, particularly equipment and software, are unlikely to return to the extraordinary levels 
experienced in the period immediately prior to the recent slowdown. However, a period of inadequate 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 13
corporate investment that  results in  "capital shallowing" rather than capital deepening  would almost 
surely hurt our productivity performance.  
I do not attach a high probability to this latter scenario. Although some industries have suffered severe 
losses  and  have  sharply  curtailed  their  capital  expenditures,  other  sectors  have  posted  growth  in 
earnings  and  have  continued  to  invest.  Thus,  in  the  aggregate,  the  underlying  picture  of  both 
corporate  profits  and  capital  spending  is  not  as  bleak  as  the  experiences  of  some  industries  might 
suggest. Indeed, as measured in the national income and product accounts, economic profits in the 
second quarter--the latest available data--were 8-3/4 percent above year-earlier levels. And ultimately, 
if I'm right about the stronger underlying pace of productivity growth, aggregate profits will continue to 
recover once the sectoral imbalances are eliminated.  
That  brings  me  to  the  current  state  of  the  high-tech  sector  and  its  future  prospects.  To  understand 
what is happening in that sector, we may find it helpful to put recent developments into a longer-term 
historical  perspective.  In  the  1990s,  the  high-tech  boom  appears  to  have  been  sparked  by  the 
confluence of three key trends: the rapid growth in computing power generated by explosive advances 
in semiconductor technology; the advent of new networking technologies that permitted computers to 
communicate more easily with each other in private networks and through the public Internet; and the 
development of software programs that facilitated these interactions and greatly expanded the uses of 
personal computers. During such a period of rapid change, the rate of return to investing in these new 
technologies and applications seemed to be very high. The spectacular financial returns from investing 
in  leading-edge  technology  companies  induced  new  firms  to  enter  these  markets,  supported  by 
investors eager for windfall financial gains. As these new firms set up or expanded their operations, 
capital spending surged. For a time, investors seemed to think that high-tech companies were low-risk, 
high-return investments. But, as we all now know, they were wrong.  
Ultimately,  more  businesses  entered  the  high-tech  field  than  could  be  supported  by  the  substantial 
growth in demand in this sector. Businesses overinvested in high-tech equipment, and when profits 
failed  to  materialize,  many  of  these  firms  went  bankrupt.  In  the  end,  the  economy  was  left  with  an 
overhang of high-tech capital, which is exerting a drag on economic activity to this day.  
Does this experience call into question the economic potential of these new information technologies? 
I don't think so. In the exigencies of the moment, one can easily lose sight of how much progress has 
been made over the past decade as a result of these new technologies. It is true that rates of return to 
high-tech  investments  were  not  as  high  as  the  most  optimistic  once  thought.  However,  these 
technologies have truly changed the way businesses operate, and I believe that they will continue to 
do so in the future. The progress that is occurring today may not seem as revolutionary as it did five or 
six  years  ago.  Nonetheless,  the  ongoing  evolution  of  these  technologies  is  continuing  to  generate 
productivity gains. We all have a natural tendency to look for the next "killer application" that will once 
again revolutionize the high-tech marketplace. This is the high-tech equivalent of "waiting for Godot," 
and we should not ignore the many, smaller changes to business practices that are continuing to yield 
real efficiency gains.  
When will the high-tech sector recover? I can't give you an exact time or date, but I will assert that its 
economic  prospects  still  seem  positive  over  the  long  run.  The  capital  overhang--especially  in  the 
telecommunications  industry--obviously  must  be  eliminated  before  any  meaningful  expansion  can 
occur, and some additional consolidation may be necessary if businesses are to be profitable in the 
long run. But I, like many other observers, think such change is occurring and is likely to bear fruit in 
the years to come.  
Conclusion 
To sum up, none of us, obviously, can see the future, and instead we shall have to monitor incoming 
data closely for evidence of any shifts in recent productivity trends. Nonetheless, I remain cautiously 
optimistic that the  U.S. economy can continue to enjoy strong productivity-led  growth that  will raise 
living standards in the years to come. I believe this based on analyses at the firm, the industry, and the 
macroeconomic levels. The unbelievable stories of high-tech revolution  were proven to be just that, 
unbelievable. But the more moderate and credible explanations remain.  
14 
 BIS Review 61/2002
Lee Hsien Loong: Singapore’s economic restructuring against the background 
of Asia’s changing economic landscape 
Keynote address by DPM Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  at  the  Morgan  Stanley  Asia-Pacific  summit  2002,  Singapore,  22 
October 2002. 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
For  two  decades  during  the  East  Asian  miracle,  Southeast  Asia  grew  rapidly.   Large  volumes  of 
foreign  investments  helped  to  transform  the  economies,  creating  jobs  and  expanding  exports.   This 
ended abruptly in 1997, when the Asian Crisis swept through the region. The crisis has passed. But 
since  then,  Northeast  Asia’s  economic  performance  has  outshone  Southeast  Asia’s.  In  Southeast 
Asia, growth has been weaker and more disparate, both direct and portfolio investments have fallen, 
and ebullience has been replaced by pessimism. There are three main reasons.  
First, China. A large part of Northeast Asia’s strong performance reflects the continuing growth and 
transformation of the Chinese economy, which largely escaped the Asian Crisis. The past few years 
have witnessed rapid market liberalisation in China, as it prepared itself to join the WTO and bring 1.3 
billion  people  into  the  global  trading  system.  As  the  Chinese  economy  grew  and  showed  tangible 
progress,  MNCs  have  become  euphoric  over  China’s  potential,  both  as  a  production  base  and  an 
enormous market.  Accordingly, foreign direct investments have poured into China. China still faces 
daunting  problems,  for  example,  in  its  banking  system,  state-owned  enterprises,  and  intellectual 
property rights regime.  But the  dramatic and  ongoing changes give investors  hope and confidence 
that these problems will in time be overcome, making them feel that they cannot afford not to be in 
China.   
A  second  reason  for  Southeast  Asia’s  under-performance  is  the  regional  political  and  security 
situation. The Asian Crisis precipitated major social and political changes in many countries, deterring 
MNCs from committing to new investments in an uncertain climate. These overriding political concerns 
also  distracted  the  governments  from  tackling  urgent  economic  problems  and  implementing  painful 
structural  reforms  to  remedy  weaknesses  uncovered  by  the  crisis.  In  contrast,  South  Korea’s 
aggressive post-crisis restructuring of its corporate sector has spurred a more rapid recovery.  
Most  crucially,  the  Asian  Crisis  brought  down  the  Suharto  Government  in  Indonesia,  and  launched 
Indonesia on a new and uncharted path. For thirty years, a stable Indonesia, with a strong government 
focused  on  economic  development,  had  provided  a  critical  basis  for  confidence  and  peaceful 
cooperation in the whole of Southeast Asia. Suharto’s fall changed this. The subsequent Indonesian 
government  abandoned  Suharto’s  longstanding  policy  of  restraining  political  Islam,  thus  opening 
Pandora’s  box.   Islamic  groups,  including  the  militant  ones,  now  wield  considerable  influence  in 
Indonesia’s  body  politic.  Indonesia’s  political  and  social  landscape  has  altered  drastically  and 
permanently, affecting the whole region.  
More  recently,  Southeast  Asia  has  faced  security  problems  from  extremist  Islamic  terrorist  groups 
linked to Al Qaeda.  After September 11, such groups were discovered in Malaysia, the Philippines, 
Singapore  and  Indonesia.  They  are  linked  to  one  another  in  a  network  which  seeks  to  create  an 
Islamic  state  in  Southeast  Asia  through  violence  and  terror.  The  recent  bomb  attack  in  Bali  was  a 
tragic reminder that Southeast Asia is at the frontline of the worldwide war against terrorism.  
A  third,  more  cyclical,  factor  underlying  Southeast  Asia’s  under-performance,  has  been  weakening 
external  demand.  Although  Southeast  Asia’s  economies  have  been  diversifying  their  sources  of 
demand,  they  are  still  heavily  dependent  on  external  demand,  unlike  China.   But  Southeast  Asia’s 
main export markets – US, Japan, and the EU – are all languishing. The timing and strength of a pick-
up  in  the  US  economy  is  uncertain,  especially  given  the  possibility  of  a  war  in  Iraq,  and  the 
concomitant impact on oil prices and the international security climate. The Japanese economy is still 
mired  in  difficulties,  with  no  imminent  prospect  of  decisive  fundamental  change.  With  fiscal  and 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 15
monetary policies constrained by the Maastricht Stability Pact and a stringent inflation target, the EU 
economy too remains weak. 
Southeast Asia’s response 
These three factors – China’s rise, regional political and security problems, and weak external demand 
– explain Southeast Asia’s under-performance, but they do not condemn Southeast Asia to perpetual 
stagnation. How can Southeast Asia overcome these problems? 
China 
First, Southeast Asia should not see China only as a challenge, but also as an opportunity. A rising 
China is a formidable competitor for investments and in global markets, but Southeast Asia is better off 
with a prosperous and modern China, than with a poor and backward China.  
International trade is not a mercantilist zero sum game. As China’s exports have grown, so have its 
imports.  Southeast  Asian  exports  to  China  have  been  expanding  rapidly.  Between  1999  and  2001, 
Singapore’s own exports to greater China (i.e. PRC, Hong Kong and Taiwan) grew by an average of 
14% p.a., and now exceed our exports to the US. These exports range from integrated circuits, disk 
drives, scientific measuring instruments, oil and chemical products to food and beverages. 
In services too, China’s rising affluence offers great opportunities to Southeast Asia. China is one of 
the  fastest-growing  sources  of  tourists  to  Thailand,  Malaysia  and  Singapore.  A  growing  Chinese 
middle-class will want high-quality healthcare and education services. And wealthy Chinese – whose 
numbers are already not insignificant – will need more sophisticated financial services.  
In manufacturing, China is rapidly expanding into activities previously carried out in Southeast Asia. 
But that does not mean that Southeast Asia will revert to agriculture and primary production. Attractive 
as China is to investors, it will not soak up all manufacturing investments, nor will it out-compete all 
other  countries  in  every  industry  and  every  product.  More  likely,  Southeast  Asia  and  China  will 
complement  each  other  in  an  international  division  of  labour,  for  example,  with  Southeast  Asia 
providing  the  components  and  intermediate  processing,  and  factories  in  China  doing  the  final 
assembly for the Chinese market. The desire of MNCs to diversify their investments beyond one or 
two countries will also promote such an outcome. 
For our part, Singapore is actively positioning itself to benefit from China’s growth. When Chinese Vice 
President  Hu  Jintao  visited  Singapore  recently,  he  proposed  four  areas  for  increased  bilateral 
cooperation:  high-tech  industrial  sectors,  the  economic  development  of  China's  western  provinces, 
helping  Chinese  enterprises  to  exploit  international  opportunities,  and  the  training  of  personnel  and 
exchange  of  talent.   Officials  from  both  countries  are  pursuing  these  ideas.  To  help  Chinese 
companies go international, Singapore has mooted the idea of setting up a base in Singapore to help 
Chinese  companies  market  their  products  to  the  region  and  beyond.  We  are  actively  facilitating 
Singapore  business  ventures  interested  in  China,  providing  market  information,  office  space  and 
consultancy services, and maintaining business networks.  We have also launched an Asian Business 
Fellowship Programme, to develop a talent pool with operational experience, and network and market 
knowledge in China. 
Politics & Security 
Second,  Southeast  Asian  governments must  tackle  the  security  problems  resolutely  and  decisively. 
Terrorism is not unique to Southeast Asia.  It is a global problem, originating in the Middle East, and 
spreading to every continent.  Southeast Asia cannot be immunised against the terrorism virus.  The 
large Muslim populations in the region are a natural host which extremist Islamic groups will exploit for 
concealment  and  political  cover.  Fortunately,  the  vast  majority  of  Southeast  Asian  Muslims  are 
peaceful  and  moderate  in  their  beliefs.  The  problem  therefore  lies  in  dealing  with  the  extremist 
elements in a way which does not alienate the majority of peaceful Muslims. This calls for deft political 
handling. 
Southeast  Asian  governments  are  already  taking  action.  In  Malaysia,  with  a  Muslim  majority,  the 
government  has  acted  with  despatch,  arresting  members  of  extremist  groups  and  rooting  out  their 
organisations.  The Malaysian government also controls the outflow of Malaysian students studying in 
madrasahs in Pakistan, where they may pick up extremist ideas.   
16 
 BIS Review 61/2002
In Singapore, with a sizeable Muslim minority, the government has arrested extremists belonging to 
the Jemaah Islamiyah group, and severely disrupted their operations. We have gone beyond security 
actions and taken pains to explain the problem to the population, so that Muslim Singaporeans do not 
feel that they are all under a cloud of suspicion, and the non-Muslims do not treat their Muslim fellow 
citizens  any  differently  than  before.  Muslim  community  leaders  have  come  together  to  publicly 
condemn the extremists as doing great harm to the Muslim community. Their clear and unequivocal 
collective  stand  has  been  enormously  helpful  in  maintaining  confidence  and  avoiding  a  rupture  in 
racial and religious harmony.  
In Indonesia, where 90% of the population is Muslim, the government has been extremely circumspect 
in acknowledging and dealing with the problem. The extremist groups have skilfully used religious and 
nationalist sentiments to garner political support and protect themselves against arrest. However, the 
Bali  bombing  has  changed  the  situation.  President  Megawati  has  promulgated  tough  anti-terrorist 
decrees,  including  powers  to  detain  suspected  terrorists.  The  Indonesian  government  has  arrested 
Abu Bakar Ba’asyir, who is the emir, or leader, of the Jemaah Islamiyah group, who had till now defied 
the Indonesian authorities to act against him. Government action in the aftermath of the Bali bombings 
has  won  the  strong  backing  of  key  local  institutions  and  the  Indonesian  population.  Parliamentary 
leaders concurred with the passing of the anti-terrorism decrees, and the leaders of the two largest 
Muslim groups in Indonesia, the Nahdlatul Ulama and Muhammadiyah, have also voiced their support. 
The  people  of  Indonesia  know  that  if  the  militants  succeed,  not  only  will  international  confidence 
plummet and economic progress grind to a halt, but their country will be torn asunder. 
Southeast Asian governments will act because they know that the objectives of the terrorists are totally 
beyond the pale.  These are not innocent political dissidents exercising their democratic rights. They 
are ruthless fanatics, quite willing to destroy innocent lives in order to create civil strife and animosity 
between  communities  and  countries,  shake  confidence  in  Southeast  Asian  economies  and  their 
legitimate  governments,  and  weaken  the  basis  of  the  states.   They  cannot  succeed,  but  they  can 
cause great harm in trying. Provided the governments respond vigorously to the extremist threat, they 
can contain the problem and gradually restore confidence to the region.  
Access to Markets 
Third, Southeast  Asian economies need to boost  external  demand by strengthening their access to 
the major developed markets. In the short term, there is little we can do about the cyclical downturn. 
But for the longer term, favourable and assured access to key trading partners will allow Southeast 
Asian countries to maximise benefits from free trade  and globalisation,  and make themselves more 
attractive to investors.  
One basic approach  is to  promote multilateral trade, and contribute to a successful outcome of the 
Doha Development Agenda of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). But we need to complement the 
multilateral approach with bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with our key trading partners. This 
is why Singapore is actively pursuing an FTA strategy. We have concluded FTAs with New Zealand, 
Japan,  and the  European  Free Trade Area (EFTA),  and hope  to conclude  agreements with the US 
and Australia very soon.  
Singapore’s aim is not just to boost our own trade links with our FTA partners, but also to catalyse 
broader economic engagement between ASEAN and its trading partners.  This is indeed happening. 
After New Zealand concluded its FTA with Singapore, Australia and New Zealand proposed starting a 
Closer Economic Partnership Agreement with ASEAN.  Last year, ASEAN and China agreed to set up 
an  ASEAN-China  FTA  within  10  years.   Weeks  later,  Prime  Minister  Koizumi  of  Japan  proposed  a 
Japan-ASEAN  Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership,  to  be  modelled  on  the  Japan-Singapore 
bilateral agreement.  Similarly,  we hope that the US-Singapore FTA will  become a model for a US-
ASEAN FTA in the longer term.  These link-ups show that ASEAN is not turning inwards and away 
from the global economy, and will give ASEAN a valuable edge as an investment destination. 
Singapore’s economic restructuring: philosophy & initiatives 
Given this bracing environment, Singapore is at  a turning  point  in our economic development.  The 
whole landscape has changed.  We need to change our strategies to continue to thrive. This is why we 
convened  the  Economic  Review  Committee  (ERC),  to  carry  out  a  comprehensive  review  of  our 
economic policies, and to identify ways to develop a vibrant and competitive private sector. We have 
concluded that the key tenets of our economic strategy are as follows: 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 17
First, we must enhance the competitiveness of our economy. This means keeping direct taxes as 
low as possible. There is a worldwide trend towards lowering taxes to attract and anchor companies.  
We also need to cut personal tax rates to spur entrepreneurship, risk-taking and wealth creation, and 
to  attract  and  retain  talent.   Hence  we  undertook  a  major  restructuring  of  our  tax  system,  reducing 
corporate and personal tax rates from around 25% to 20% over three years. We will tax individuals 
who  are  not  ordinarily  resident  in  Singapore,  based  on  the  number  of  days  they  actually  spend 
working in Singapore.  To make up part of the revenue shortfall, we are raising our consumption tax 
from 3% to 5%.  
Tax  incentives  have  also  been  enhanced.   Qualifying  high-growth  and  high  value-added  financial 
activities  will  enjoy  a  concessionary  tax  rate  of  5%,  while  a  10%  rate  will  apply  to  tax-sensitive  but 
mature activities.  We have also enhanced incentives for specific activities, such as fund management, 
trustee and custodian services, insurance and capital market and treasury activities.   
We also undertook a fundamental review of the Central Provident Fund (CPF) Scheme, which is our 
social security and pension fund scheme.  We refocused the CPF on its core objective of providing for 
the basic needs of the majority of Singaporeans, in terms of retirement needs, healthcare expenses 
and home ownership.  We are tightening the use of CPF for buying properties, so as to leave more for 
retirement needs.  We are reducing the coverage for high-income Singaporeans, who should be able 
to plan and provide for their own retirement.  We are lowering contribution rates for older workers, who 
are most vulnerable to losing their jobs.  These measures will make our labour market more flexible, 
and contribute to our economy’s overall resilience and competitiveness. 
Second, we want to encourage entrepreneurship in order to develop more local and foreign start-ups 
and emerging enterprises to complement our strong base of MNCs and established local companies. 
In this rapidly changing, unpredictable environment, the best way to spot and exploit new opportunities 
is not by centralised direction, but through the drive and entrepreneurship of our people. According to 
the 2001 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Report, Singapore ranked 27th out of 29 countries in terms 
of entrepreneurial activity.  We need to do better.   
We  need  to  imbue  our  young  with  entrepreneurial  instincts  and  attitudes,  through  their  school 
education and life experiences.  At the same time, the government should cut red tape, create more 
economic space for private enterprise, nurture high-potential local enterprises and develop a culture 
tolerant of risk-taking, experimentation and honest failure.   
A self-renewing, self-sustaining entrepreneurial culture will not emerge overnight, but we are making 
some headway.  Ten Singapore companies made it to this year’s list of Forbes’ Global 200 companies 
with  revenues  under  US$1  billion.   This  ranks  among  the  largest  number  of  companies  for  any 
country.  
A third area of focus is the development of our human capital, both local and foreign.  Singaporeans 
rank  highly  in  technical  skills,  and  our  students  often  top  international  mathematics  and  science 
competitions.   But  we  need  to  improve  our  soft  skills,  such  as  people  skills,  management  skills, 
communications skills, as well as cultural and artistic skills.  We will also continue to welcome foreign 
talent to work, live and play here, to add to our talent pool.  
Fourth,  we  need  to  identify,  nurture  and  promote  new  areas  of  growth  in  both  manufacturing  and 
services, the two complementary engines of our economy.  The continuing emergence of lower-cost 
locations  spurs  us  to  constantly  review  and  refresh  our  manufacturing  value  proposition,  be  it  in 
refining our division of labour, exploiting economies of scale through shared facilities, or undertaking 
more innovation and R&D work.  For instance, about 70 companies are located on our petrochemical 
complex in Jurong Island, where they plug into customised infrastructure facilities, specialised services 
and the supply of feedstock.  We cooperate with the Indonesian islands of Batam and Bintan, each 
specialising in different parts of the manufacturing value-chain that it is strong in.   
In the services sector, we expect regional demand for health, education, tourism and financial services 
to  grow  rapidly  as  the  middle-income  group  burgeons.   Already,  Singapore  plays  host  to  50,000 
foreign  students  in  tertiary  and  commercial  institutions,  and  150,000  foreign  patients  per  year  from 
across the region.  They are attracted to local universities and hospitals, as well as to the international 
arms of top schools and medical research institutes based in Singapore, like INSEAD, University of 
Chicago and Johns Hopkins. 
Fifth, Singapore is improving our corporate governance practices and standards.  A globally oriented 
economy needs a robust framework for corporate governance. Singapore’s standards are high but we 
must  continue  to  improve  them,  not  only  in  the  form  of  the  rules  but  also  in  the  spirit  of  their 
18 
 BIS Review 61/2002
implementation. Our integrity premium is a precious competitive advantage which we guard zealously, 
and which will not be easy to replicate. 
The Company Legislation and Regulatory Framework Committee, a private sector-led body, has been 
reviewing our company law and regulatory framework. The Committee has made recommendations to 
simplify the process of incorporating a company, facilitate capital raising and reduce compliance costs 
for companies in Singapore.  Let me highlight some key recommendations. 
To  widen  the  options  available  for  businesses  and  investments,  the  Committee  recommended 
introducing Limited Partnerships and Limited Liability Partnerships.  To improve access to finance and 
lower  the  cost  of  raising  capital,  the  Committee  advocated  allowing  additional  exempted  offerings, 
such as private placement and small offering exemptions.  The Committee also suggested removing 
statutory requirements for audit and appointment of professional company secretaries, so as to trim 
compliance costs for companies, especially small private companies and start-ups.  Safeguards will be 
simultaneously  introduced  to  uphold  corporate  governance  standards  and  protect  stakeholders’ 
interests.   
I  am  happy  to  announce  that  the  government  has  accepted  all  the  recommendations  of  this 
Committee.  They will ensure that our company law is market-driven, supportive of entrepreneurship 
and aligned with international best practices. The Ministry of Finance will release further details. 
Finally,  just  as  we  are  encouraging  greater  corporate  disclosure,  the  government  is  also  working 
towards raising levels of transparency through consultation and collaboration with the private sector.  
Consultation lengthens the policy-making process and entails commitment of effort and resources on 
the  part  of  the  industry  and  the  public.  But  it  also  helps  to  pre-empt  implementation  problems, 
minimise  unintended  consequences,  and  foster  better  industry  understanding  and  support.   The 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  has  introduced  guidelines  to  make  public  consultation  a 
standard procedure whenever significant changes in the financial services regulatory framework are 
planned.   Over  time,  these  changes  will  further  improve  the  operating  environment  for  the  financial 
sector. The MAS will release further details. 
Conclusion 
Singapore  has  not  shied  away  from  tough  measures  to  remake  our  economy  and  maximise  our 
chances in a difficult environment. These measures will enhance our competitiveness, strengthen our 
companies and consolidate our social cohesion. They will make our economy more flexible, resilient 
and able to adjust quickly to changing circumstances, and so help it to remain ahead in the race of 
nations.  
Although the media impression is that Southeast Asia has stagnated since the Asian Crisis, the reality 
is  less  gloomy.  ASEAN  economies  have  made  progress  in  picking  up  the  pieces  and  pursuing 
domestic reform and restructuring, albeit some more successfully  than others.  Between  1999-2001, 
ASEAN economies as a whole grew by about 4% per annum.  Last year, an export-led slowdown on 
the back of a global electronics slump broke the recovery trend. But ASEAN economies weathered the 
downturn fairly well, with most still managing positive GDP growth.  Most are running current account 
surpluses, in contrast to the large deficits that prevailed in 1997. From a macroeconomic standpoint, 
the  countries  have  held  up  well  and  even  shown  a  certain  resilience.  Reflecting  this,  ASEAN 
stockmarkets have generally performed better than their counterparts in the rest of the world thus far 
this year.  
Part of Southeast  Asia’s negative image is  attributable to political and security  concerns,  which are 
indeed real. A week or so after the Bali attack, these worries naturally loom large.  Many observers, 
seized by the mood of the moment, are now forecasting the worst for the region. But we should adopt 
a longer-term, more nuanced perspective.  Southeast Asia’s economic fundamentals remain positive – 
a sizeable market with a collective population of 500 million people, high savings, abundant natural 
resources, under-developed consumer appetites and a strong work ethic.  The political problems can 
be overcome, provided governments act swiftly and resolutely to counter terrorism and restore order 
and  confidence.  Those  countries  which  do  so  will  regain  investor  interest,  while  those  investors 
shrewd enough to discern which countries and projects deserve support will be amply rewarded by the 
risk  premiums.  Provided  Southeast  Asian  countries  adapt  themselves  to  their  new  environment, 
remedy  their  economic  weaknesses,  and  grasp  the  new  opportunities,  this  region  can  once  again 
become a vibrant part of Asia. 
BIS Review 61/2002 
 19
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
20 
 BIS Review 61/2002
