 Mervyn King: The inflation target ten years on 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, delivered to the London School 
of Economics, London, 19 November 2002. 
The references for the speech can be found on the website of the Bank of England. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ten  years  ago,  in  this  very  room,  Robin  Leigh  Pemberton  (then  Governor,  now  Lord  Kingsdown), 
delivered the first LSE-Bank of England Lecture. It was entitled “The Case for Price Stability”. In the 
twenty-five years prior to that lecture, prices had risen by over 750%, more than over the previous two 
hundred and fifty years. So the audience on that evening in November 1992 had grown up in a world 
in which rapidly rising prices appeared inevitable. They were the inflation generation. To them price 
stability seemed remote. Inflation was simply taken for granted. 
But that LSE-Bank of England Lecture coincided with the introduction of a new monetary framework - 
the inflation target. Since then price stability has become a reality. Over the past decade inflation has 
averaged 2.5%, and has been no lower than 1.5% and no higher than 3.3% 
Alan Greenspan defined price stability as when “expected changes in the average price level are small 
enough and gradual enough that they do not materially enter business and household decisions.” With 
inflation  expected  to  remain  close  to  2.5%,  it  is  no  longer  a  material  concern  to  families  and 
businesses in this country. Alan Blinder, who was Alan Greenspan’s deputy at the Federal Reserve 
Board, put it even more clearly.  Price stability,  he said,  was  when ordinary  people stop talking  and 
worrying  about  inflation.  And  so  successful  has  been  the  pursuit  of  low  inflation  that  some 
commentators  have  talked  about  the  “death  of  inflation”  and  others  have  become  increasingly 
concerned about the prospect of deflation. 
Tonight  I  want  to  re-examine  the  case  for  price  stability,  and  ask  the  following  questions.  Did  the 
benefits of low inflation promised ten years ago materialise? Is the case for price stability the same as 
in  1992? What  does  price  stability  mean  in  practice?  Finally,  what  are  the  challenges  for monetary 
policy over the next decade? 
Ten years of the inflation target: what has it achieved? 
2. 
Since  Britain’s  departure  from  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  in  September  1992,  monetary  policy 
has been based on an explicit numerical target for the rate of inflation - now 2.5% - and a high degree 
of transparency and accountability. Indeed, it was in his LSE lecture that Lord Kingsdown announced 
that  the  first  Inflation  Report  would  appear  in  February  1993.  And  last  week’s  Report  completes 
exactly a decade of Inflation Reports - forty assessments of the outlook for growth and inflation in the 
British economy. 
Although  inflation  targeting  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  now  ten  years  old,  the  most  significant 
institutional changes occurred five years ago. Decisions on interest rates were taken out of the political 
arena in May 1997 and delegated by the Chancellor to the new Monetary Policy Committee. It is too 
soon  to  compare  the  nine-member  Monetary  Policy  Committee  with  the  Council  of  Nine  that  ruled 
Siena during the fourteenth century. Exactly 660  years before the Chancellor created the MPC, the 
Council  of  Nine  commissioned  Lorenzetti  to  paint  the  marvellous  frescoes  in  the  Palazzo  Pubblico 
showing  the  virtues  of  Good  Government  and  the  vices  of  Bad  Government.  There  are  few  more 
convincing  representations  of  the  case for stability  than  those  frescoes.  Since  the  MPC  has  not,  at 
least  yet,  discovered  a  modern  Lorenzetti,  I  shall  present  the  case  for  price  stability  in  a  more 
orthodox, if less compelling, visual form. 
Chart 1 shows consumer price inflation in this country over the past fifty years. The decade of inflation 
targeting stands out as a period of low and stable inflation. Table 1 shows that not only has inflation 
been lower since inflation targeting was introduced, but that, as measured by its standard deviation, it 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 1
 has also been more stable than in recent decades. Moreover, inflation has been less persistent - in the 
sense that shocks to inflation die away more quickly - under inflation targeting than for most of the past 
century.1 
Now this fall in inflation has led to sharp reductions in nominal interest rates, at both short and long 
time  horizons,  as  shown  in  Table  2.  That  reflects  both  lower  inflation  expectations  and  smaller  risk 
premia to compensate for future inflation uncertainty. The total inflation premium - the sum of expected 
inflation and the inflation risk premium - is measured by the difference between yields on conventional 
and index-linked government securities. Chart 2 shows that the total inflation premium fell significantly 
on  the  announcement  of  Bank  of  England  independence  and  the  creation  of  the  MPC.  It  is  highly 
suggestive of a fall not just in expected inflation but also in the inflation risk premium. In principle, the 
behaviour of businesses and households depends on real interest rates - nominal interest rates less 
the expected increase in prices.2 To the extent that the inflation risk premium falls, then so too does 
the  level  of  real  interest  rates.  The  evidence  in  Chart  2  suggests  that  real  rates  have  fallen  too, 
although by less than nominal rates. 
Chart 1 
Annual inflation in the UK 
 
Note: Four-quarter growth rate of the quarterly retail price index (RPI) until 1974, 
and four-quarter growth rate of the quarterly retail price index excluding mortgage 
interest payments (RPIX) after 1974. Note that the RPI methodology before 1974 
did  not  include  mortgage  interest  payments,  so  the  RPI  series  before  1974  is 
equivalent to RPIX in that sense. Data up to 2002 Q3. 
Source: ONS. 
                                                      
1  The conclusion reflects statistical tests including first-order auto correlations of consumer price inflation over ten-year rolling 
windows, and estimated spectral densities for inflation from a random coefficient AR (4) and GARCH (1,1) model. The only 
periods in which persistence was lower than in the 1990s was in the early 1930s and early 1960s. 
If index-linked contracts were widely used the relevant real rate would be the index-linked rate. And if the risk premium were 
determined largely in an integrated world capital market without frictions then again the real rate would be the riskless index-
linked rate. 
2 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2002
   1950-1959 
1960-1969 
1970-1979 
1980-1992 
1993-2002 
1950-2002 
Table 1 
Inflation in the UK 
Mean 
4.14 
3.65 
13.07 
6.40 
2.49 
5.93 
St. dev 
1.06 
0.72 
1.81 
1.14 
0.24 
1.41 
Note:  Mean  inflation  is the  total  increase  in  the  quarterly  price  level  (RPI  until  1974,  RPIX  after  1974)  over  the  period 
indicated,  expressed  as  a  four-quarter  growth  rate.  Standard  deviation  is  calculated  on  quarterly  inflation  rates  (not 
annualised) over the period indicated. Data up to 2002 Q3. 
Source: Bank of England calculations based on ONS data. 
Table 2 
Short and long interest rates in the UK 
Short rate 
Long rate 
Mean 
2.87 
5.51 
8.92 
11.28 
5.58 
7.09 
St. dev 
1.67 
1.31 
2.81 
2.23 
0.88 
3.59 
Mean 
4.40 
6.58 
11.94 
10.83 
6.38 
8.19 
St. dev 
0.88 
1.07 
2.41 
1.88 
1.59 
3.32 
 1950-1959 
1960-1969 
1970-1979 
1980-1992 
1993-2002 
1950-2002 
Note: Short rates are three-month treasury bill yields. Long rates are 20-year gilt yields. Data are monthly, and use the rate at 
the close of the last business day of the month. Data up to September 2002. 
Source: Global Financial Data, Inc.; Bank of England calculations. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 
 3
 Chart 2 
Total inflation premium expected 
in ten years time, UK 1997 
 
Note: The total inflation premium is measured as the difference between implied forward 
nominal rates on conventional gilts ten years hence and implied real rates on index-linked 
gilts ten years hence. 
Source: Bank of England. 
So  price  stability  appears  to  have  led  to  a  more  stable  macro  economic  environment,  with  fewer 
surprises  to  inflation,  less  inflation  uncertainty,  and  a  lower  level  of  real  interest  rates.  Has  this 
improved nominal performance led to greater stability of the real economy? Table 3 shows that since 
1992, output has grown at a little above its forty year average, and has been much more stable than 
before. The standard deviation of quarterly growth rates over the past decade was less than half that 
in earlier periods. 
Can these gains in terms of greater stability be attributed to a more stable monetary regime? After all, 
a  sceptic  might  argue  that  the  causation  runs  from  a  more  stable  economic  environment  to  lower 
inflation. But some of these alternative explanations, such as the rise in the share of services in total 
output and better inventory management, are part of longer-term trends and do not fit well  with the 
observation  that  volatility  has  fallen  sharply  over  the  past  decade.  And  shocks  to  the  UK  from  the 
world economy and from the sterling real exchange rate have been as large, if not larger, over the past 
five years as in earlier periods.3 
                                                      
3  Most of the evidence on the link between inflation and stability comes from the United States where the greater stability of 
output is evident over the past two decades. A number of recent studies have concluded that at least part of the explanation 
for greater stability can be attributed to better monetary policy, for example Taylor (1998). 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2002
   1956-1959 
1960-1969 
1970-1979 
1980-1992 
1993-2002 
1956-2002 
Table 3 
Real GDP growth in the UK 
Mean 
2.42 
3.15 
2.12 
1.86 
2.76 
2.42 
St. dev 
1.22 
0.92 
1.42 
0.84 
0.36 
0.98 
Note: Mean GDP growth is the total increase in real quarterly GDP over the period indicated, expressed as a four-quarter 
growth rate. Standard deviation is calculated on quarterly growth rates (not annualised) over the period indicated. Data up to 
2002 Q2. 
Source: Bank of England calculations based on ONS data. 
It is, of course, difficult to identify the effect of changes in the monetary policy regime on the path of 
total output. One approach is to consider long runs of data which make it easier to identify structural 
breaks  in  the  behaviour  of  output.  Luca  Benati  of  the  Bank  of  England  has  been  investigating  the 
statistical properties of inflation over long periods for a number of countries. He finds that changes in 
the  behaviour  of  inflation  appear  broadly  to  coincide  with  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  regime. 
Some tentative evidence that this general conclusion applies to the UK can be found in the behaviour 
of ten-year forward interest rates on UK government bonds. At this horizon, high and variable interest 
rates are signs of high expected inflation and a large inflation risk premium. As shown in Chart 3, the 
ten-year forward interest rate has fallen significantly in recent years, and has been less variable since 
inflation targeting, and especially the MPC, were introduced. 
What  is  the  mechanism  by  which  monetary  policy  contributes  to  a  more  stable  economy?  I  would 
argue that monetary policy is now more systematic and predictable than before. Inflation expectations 
are  anchored  to  the  2.5%  target.  Businesses  and  families  expect  that  monetary  policy  will  react  to 
offset shocks that are likely to drive inflation away from target. In the jargon of economists, the “policy 
reaction  function”  of  the  Bank  of  England  is  more  stable  and  predictable  than  was  the  case  before 
inflation  targeting,  and  easier  to  understand.4  More  simply,  monetary  policy  is  not  adding  to  the 
volatility of the economy in a way that it did in earlier decades. 
                                                      
4  The behaviour of monetary policy in the United Kingdom after 1992 more closely resembles a “Taylor Rule” that has been 
shown to fit data in the United States than was the case before 1992. See the work of Ed Nelson of the Bank of England 
(Nelson 2000). 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 5
 Chart 3 
Ten year forward rates in the UK 1970-2002 
 
Note: Implied forward nominal rates on conventional gilts ten years hence, calculated on the 
last business day of the month. 
Source: Bank of England. 
The case for price stability: what have we learnt over the past 10 years? 
3. 
The  costs  of  departing  from  price  stability  -  either  inflation  or  deflation  -  depend  upon  whether  it  is 
expected  or  comes  as  a  surprise.  In  his  1992  lecture,  Lord  Kingsdown  distinguished  three  costs  of 
unanticipated inflation and four of anticipated inflation. I shall focus on the former, commenting on the 
latter only briefly. Although none of the ideas are new, research since 1992 has thrown new light on 
both  the  theoretical  and  the  empirical  relevance  of  the  costs  of  inflation.  The  main  costs  of 
unanticipated inflation are: 
(i) 
Distortions to production and investment resulting from mistakes in distinguishing 
between relative and absolute price changes 
The  crucial  link  between  price  stability  and  production  and  investment  is  that  high  inflation  is 
associated  with  more  volatile  and  uncertain  inflation.  I  showed  earlier  that  as  inflation  has  fallen  in 
Britain, so too has its variability. The same link can be seen in cross-section data. Chart 4 shows the 
relationship between average inflation and its variability, measured by its coefficient of variation, over 
different time horizons for a sample of 144 countries. In all cases it is clear that inflation uncertainty 
increases with the average inflation rate. 
But  does  this  link  between  inflation  and  its  volatility  mean  that  higher  inflation  results  in  greater 
variability of relative prices? Chart 5 provides the answer for the UK. For each (approximate) decade 
for which the data on 80 sub-components of the retail prices index are available, the chart shows the 
relationship  between  the  standard  deviation  of  those  relative  prices  and  the  inflation  rate  in  each 
month. At low inflation rates, say up to 4% a year, it appears that it is the absolute value of changes in 
relative prices that is linked to the inflation rate. This would be the case, as in Britain recently, where 
changes in relative prices, whether up or down, were largely responsible for short-term fluctuations in 
the  inflation  rate  around  a  relatively  stable  long  run  level.  Variability  in  relative  prices  might  lead 
inflation to be either above or below the inflation target, but not systematically in one direction or the 
other. Increases in house prices move the inflation rate up and falls in oil prices move it down. In both 
cases, an increase in the variability of relative prices leads to movements of inflation away from the 
target, but not in a systematic direction. But at higher rates of inflation (or deflation) the deviation of 
inflation from zero is positively correlated with the variability of relative prices. Hence, outside a range 
close to price stability, the higher the inflation rate, the greater is the variability of relative prices. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2002
  Cross-country relationship between level and variability of inflation 
Chart 4 
Note: Mean inflation is the total increase in the quarterly consumer price index, expressed as a four-quarter growth rate, over 
the indicated horizon ending in 1999 Q4. The variability of inflation is the coefficient of variation (standard deviation divided by 
the mean) of the gross inflation rate (ie 1 + growth rate) over the indicated horizon ending in 1999 Q4. Each panel covers the 
all the countries for which a consumer price index was available over the indicated horizon. The largest sample size is 144 
(for the 5-year horizon), the smallest sample is 85 (for the 25-year horizon). 
Source: IMF International Financial Statistics, data item 64, and Bank of England calculations. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 
 7
 Chart 5 
Inflation and relative price variability in the UK 
 
Note: Inflation is the total increase in monthly RPIX over the period indicated, expressed as a 12-month growth rate. Relative 
price variability is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the monthly increases of 80 sub-components of the RPIX in each 
month. Data ends August 2002. 
Source: Bank of England calculations based on ONS data. 
So  inflation  makes  it  more  difficult  for  firms  and  households  to  work  out  whether  the  prices  of  the 
products they buy and sell have changed relative to other goods, or whether there has been a change 
in the overall price level.  Such confusion can lead firms to produce, at least temporarily, the  wrong 
level  of  output.  And  if  many  firms  make  these  mistakes  at  the  same  time  then  the  result  is  an 
unnecessary fluctuation in aggregate output. 
Another decision affected by uncertainty about prices is investment. Many investments are specific to 
a  particular  model  or  product,  and  so  they  become  sunk costs.  For such  irreversible  investments  it 
may pay to wait before investing since time will resolve some of the uncertainty. A Premiership football 
team may decide to postpone the construction of a new stadium until their survival in the League is 
assured. Or a car manufacturer may postpone a decision about opening a new plant to see if a rise in 
demand  is  temporary  or  appears  likely  to  last.  And  that  uncertainty  could  stem  from  a  difficulty  in 
disentangling  relative  from  absolute  prices.  In  the  language  of  finance,  there  is  an  option  value  to 
waiting when there is uncertainty about the returns on an irreversible investment. 
So a project must offer a rate of return sufficient not only to cover the cost of financing of the project, 
but also the option value to waiting. That may explain why surveys of firms show that their hurdle rates 
of return are often well in excess of the cost of either equity or debt finance. For example a CBI survey 
last year found that the average real hurdle rate for UK firms was 11.3% - down from rates of around 
15% in surveys conducted in 1994 - but still well above the cost of financial capital. If uncertainty about 
inflation  creates  an  option  value  to  waiting,  then  it  will  reduce  investment.  And  there  is  growing 
8 
 BIS Review 68/2002
 empirical  evidence  that  inflation  is  a  key  explanatory  variable  for  cross-country  differences  in 
investment to output ratios.5 
Redistribution of wealth between debtors and creditors. 
(ii) 
Unexpected  changes  in  the  price  level  -  the  standard  of  value  used  to  define  contracts  -  produce 
arbitrary  redistributions  of  wealth.  As  Keynes  wrote  in  his  powerful  advocacy  of  price  stability  in  A 
Tract on Monetary Reform, “We leave saving to the private investor. We leave the responsibility for 
setting production to the business man. These arrangements have great advantages. But they cannot 
work  properly  if  the  money,  which  they  assume  as  a  stable  measuring-rod,  is  undependable. 
Unemployment, the precarious life of the worker, the disappointment of expectation, the sudden loss 
of savings, the profiteer - all proceed, in large measure, from the instability of the standard of value”. 
Or, as Lenin remarked, the best way to destroy capitalism is to debauch the currency. It is arguable as 
to  whether  it  is  high  inflation  or  serious  deflation  which  results  in  the  greater  economic  damage.  In 
Europe  in  the  1920s  hyperinflation  undermined  economic  and  social  arrangements,  as  it  has  done 
more recently in Latin America. But deflation has proved just as unpopular as inflation. In 274 A.D. the 
Roman Emperor Aurelian tried to restore the integrity of the coinage which had been adulterated by 
workmen  in  the  Mint.  Aurelian  exchanged  good  money  for  bad,  and  ordered  the  destruction  of 
accounts  drawn  up  in  the  devalued  currency.  In  the  long  run  the  operation  restored  the  value  of 
money. But in the short run it caused hardship. Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 
observed that “a temporary grievance of such a nature can scarcely excite and support a serious civil 
war”. Unfortunately, taking a different and more Keynesian view that in the long run we are all dead, 
the population at the time rose in insurrection. Many of them found that they were dead in the short run 
as well, with seven thousand soldiers and countless civilians perishing during the suppression of the 
uprising. 
So  let  us  consider  the  costs  of  wealth  redistributions  arising  from  unanticipated  deflation.  Such 
redistributions  can  lower  aggregate  demand.  Why?  Since  it  is  difficult  either  to  borrow  or  insure 
against uncertain future employment and earnings opportunities, current assets act as a buffer stock 
to make it possible to smooth consumption in the face of shocks to future prospects. When net worth 
is small it is risky to run down the buffer stock even further, and so the marginal propensity to spend 
out  of  wealth  is  much  higher  for  households  with  low  net  worth  than  for  families  whose  assets 
comfortably exceed their liabilities. If significant numbers of debtors have little net worth - recent first-
time house-buyers with high debt-to-value ratios are a prime example - then an unanticipated deflation 
could cause a sharp fall in aggregate consumption spending. 
Such effects can be amplified if spending - consumption or investment - depends on the value of the 
assets that are used as collateral for loans. A fall in prices can produce a vicious circle in which the 
initial fall in demand lowers asset prices, reducing the value of collateral, which in turn leads borrowers 
to repay debt, exacerbating the original decline in aggregate demand. This “debt deflation” was first 
formulated clearly by Irving Fisher in the 1930s, and has recently been revived in a more sophisticated 
form by Nobu Kiyotaki and John Moore, here at the London School of Economics. 
Because deflations are, fortunately, few and far between, there is a lack of hard empirical evidence on 
the quantitative significance of debt deflation. In 1993, I argued that the depth of the recession in the 
UK and the US in the early 1990s was the result of debt deflation. Consumption fell more sharply than 
would have been expected given movements in incomes and interest rates, reflecting an unexpected 
fall  in  inflation  and  asset  prices.  The  effects  on  consumption  of  negative  equity  in  housing  were 
particularly severe. 
The  experience  of  Japan  may  add  to  our  knowledge  in  this  area,  although,  as  shown  in  Chart  6, 
despite  a  stagnant  economy  over  the  past  decade,  deflation  of  consumer  prices  has  not  been 
especially large. And I am confident that all central banks will do their best to prevent the sample size 
of countries suffering from serious deflation from increasing. 
                                                      
5  See  for  example  Pindyck  and  Solimano  (1993).  Examples  of  how  the  option  value  to  waiting  can  lead  to  significant 
increases in required rates of return are given in Dixit and Pindyck (1994). 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 9
 Chart 6 
Consumption and deflation in Japan, 
1985-2002 
Note:  Inflation  is  measured  using  the  consumer  price  index  excluding  foodstuffs.  The 
overnight interest rate is the nominal overnight uncollateralised call rate. 
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream. 
 (iii) 
Aversion to long-term contracts and excessive resources devoted to hedging inflation 
risks. 
As  we  have  seen,  high  inflation  goes  hand  in  hand  with  greater  uncertainty  about  future  inflation. 
Inflation  is,  therefore,  associated  with  a  positive  risk  premium  to  compensate  investors  for  that 
uncertainty. The longer the time horizon, the greater the risk premium is likely to be. That discourages 
long-term  contracts  and  interest  rates  in  such  contracts  will  often  depend  upon  future  spot  interest 
rates.  Floating-rate  mortgages  are  a  good  example.  With  a  floating-rate  mortgage  the  borrower  is 
exposed to the risk of sharp fluctuations in the proportion of income that is devoted to debt service, as 
many households in Britain still remember from the late 1980s when interest rates doubled to 15%. 
Fixed-rate mortgages eliminate that risk, but at the cost of introducing a new risk: the real value of the 
outstanding  debt  may  change  relative  to  the  value  of  the  house.  John  Campbell  and  João  Cocco 
(2002)  have suggested  that a superior contract  would be a fixed-rate mortgage  where the principal 
was index-linked. That would reduce both income and capital risk. For whatever reason the market 
has  not  generated  many  private-sector  index-linked  contracts,  despite  the  encouragement  of  high 
inflation in the past. Perhaps that is because the risks are generated not by some exogenous process, 
but by policy decisions. In any event, price stability is a good alternative to indexation. 
The move from a regime of high inflation to one of price stability can have consequences which again 
are  best  illustrated  by  the  housing  market.  A  credible  move  to  inflation  targeting  can  bring  down 
inflation expectations relatively quickly, even if with a lag. Chart 7 shows that inflation expectations, as 
measured  by  surveys,  fell  steadily  following  the  introduction  of  inflation  targeting,  and  are  now 
anchored on the 2.5% target. But a move to low inflation has other consequences that may be less 
easily  understood.  Price  stability  means  lower  nominal  interest  rates,  and  lower  mortgage  interest 
payments. It may also mean lower real interest rates if the inflation risk premium falls. But the fall in 
nominal rates is likely to be much larger than the fall in real rates. The lower mortgage payment largely 
reflects a rise in the effective duration of the loan because inflation no longer erodes the real value of 
the debt as quickly as before. In a low inflation world, nominal incomes rise more slowly than before 
and the real burden of servicing the debt persists. It may take longer for households to work out the 
10 
 BIS Review 68/2002
 impact  of  low  inflation  on  real  interest  rates  than  to  realise  that  the  rate  of  increase  of  prices  of 
everyday purchases has fallen. Learning takes time. 
Chart 7 
One-year ahead inflation expectations and inflation outturns 
in the UK, 1988-2002 
 
Note:  Inflation  is  the  four  quarter  change  in  the  RPI.  Expected  inflation  is  based  on  the 
quarterly  Barclays  Basix  survey  of  inflation  one  year  ahead.  It  is  the  weighted  average 
across all surveyed sub-groups, excluding the general public. Expected inflation is lagged 
on  year  in  the  chart,  so  that  expectations  and  outturns  for  the  same  period  can  be 
compared. 
Source: ONS and Basix. 
One possible consequence of a slow adjustment to low inflation is that households may mistake too 
much of the reduction in nominal interest rates for a permanent fall in the real rate. As a result, asset 
prices are bid up to levels that prove unsustainable when learning finally occurs - and at the LSE you 
know that in time we do learn. How far this theoretical argument applies to the British housing market 
at present is difficult to say, but it demonstrates the risks from current house price to earnings ratios 
that are close to the peaks reached in the late 1980s. 
 So  much  for  the  costs  of  unanticipated  inflation.  What  are  the  costs  of  anticipated  inflation?  Time 
permits me to comment only briefly on the four costs of anticipated inflation noted by Lord Kingsdown. 
Distortions to cash balances 
(i) 
Money - notes and coin - may no longer, as Sally Bowles claimed, make the world go round, but, even 
in  a  world  of  plastic,  it  oils  the  wheels  of  transactions.  Cash  still  accounts  for  a  large  number  of 
transactions, albeit a smaller fraction of the value of all transactions. The opportunity cost of holding 
cash is the interest rate on deposits. Inflation raises nominal  interest rates and hence this cost. So 
agents  economise  on  their  real  money  balances,  and  incur  additional  costs  in  the  form  of  more 
frequent trips to the cash dispenser - the so-called ‘shoe-leather costs’ of inflation. The traditional view 
was that these costs could be measured by the area under the money demand curve. Such estimates 
were  typically  small,  and  left  researchers  wondering  if  the  costs  of  inflation  were  really  all  that 
important. But high inflation rates can affect more than just money demand. If agents economise on 
money balances, transactions costs may rise in markets for goods, labour and assets. As argued by 
Hahn (1965) and more recently articulated by Wallace (2001), many monetary models contain hidden 
inconsistencies  in  the  sense  that  they  ignore  the  credit  or  trade  frictions  -  in  particular,  imperfect 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 11
 monitoring and enforceability - that give to money an essential role in the first place. To assess the 
welfare implications of inflation we need a theoretical framework that takes seriously the role of money 
in all these transactions. I have discussed elsewhere (King, 2001) the potential importance of money 
in  reducing  the  transactions  costs  of  firms  by  reducing  liquidity  premia  in  a  wide  range  of  financial 
markets. There is much to learn here. 
Incomplete indexation of the tax system 
(ii) 
A  second  cost  of  anticipated  inflation  is  the  added  inefficiencies  that  arise  when  an  already 
distortionary tax system is incompletely indexed. Martin Feldstein (1999) has edited a major study of 
the costs of incomplete indexation which includes a detailed analysis of the tax distortions to saving, 
consumption and investment in several major countries, and to which the Bank of England contributed. 
The benefit of reducing inflation in an already low inflation environment is estimated to be lower in the 
UK than in some other countries because some parts of the tax system are indexed. Nevertheless, the 
authors  estimate  that  a  reduction  in  inflation  by  2  percentage  points  would  bring  an  annual  benefit 
equivalent to 0.2% of GDP. That may sound small, but it is a large absolute number. Against that, the 
end of mortgage interest deductibility will have lowered the impact. 
Front-end loading of debt burdens 
(iii) 
A  third  distortion  is  that  of  front-loading  of  the  real  debt  burden  when  debt  contracts  are  fixed  in 
nominal  terms.  Inflation  reduces  the  amount  that  households  borrow  because  it  raises  the  cost  of 
servicing the loan  in the early  years. In this way decisions on consumption and investment may be 
distorted. 
Costs of changing price lists 
(iv) 
The costs of changing price lists and catalogues - so-called menu costs - are generally agreed to be of 
little direct consequence. But they may produce a degree of nominal rigidity in wages and prices which 
takes on greater significance. Inflation now causes relative price variability as not all firms are able to 
change  their  prices  at  the  same  time.  The  cost  of  greater  relative  price  variability  was  discussed 
above, and continues to be an active field of research. Recent work at the Institute of Fiscal Studies 
(2002) shows that when inflation is higher, there is a larger dispersion in the inflation rates faced by 
individual  households.  This  finding  points  strongly  to  the  role  of  nominal  rigidities  in  contributing  to 
relative price dispersion. 
Taken together, the verdict of economics, history and common sense is that inflation and deflation are 
costly. It is clear that very high inflation - in extreme cases hyperinflation - can lead to a breakdown of 
the economy. There is now a considerable body of empirical evidence that inflation and output growth 
are negatively correlated in high-inflation countries. For inflation rates in single figures, the impact of 
inflation  on  growth  is  less  clear.  But  in  a  study  of  133  market  economies  over  the  past  50  years, 
Stanley Fischer and his co-authors (2002) concluded that “the old idea that in some sense inflation 
may be good for growth or is perhaps an inevitable part of the growth process should remain buried in 
the cemetery of harmful policy ideas”. 
Price stability: what does it mean in practice? 
4. 
So there is a strong case for price stability. But what does price stability mean in practice? Recall that 
the  definitions  of  price  stability  offered  by  Alan  Greenspan  and  Alan  Blinder  are  rather  general  in 
nature and make no reference to particular indexes of prices or precise numbers for inflation. There 
are good reasons for this. The prices of the goods that I buy may rise at a different rate from the goods 
that you buy. Relative prices are always changing. And the basket of goods and services that you buy 
today is very different from the basket you could or would have bought fifty or a hundred years ago. 
The official retail price index now includes computers and cable TV, but no longer bowler hats or the 
price of admission to cricket matches. Measurement problems mean that there is no unique way to 
calculate inflation. 
Information on prices of individual commodities in the past can be found in Harrods catalogues which 
were published from the mid-1890s until 1930, catalogues for the Army and Navy Stores from 1872 to 
1940, and the advertising records for Selfridges which go back to 1909. To illustrate the problems of 
12 
 BIS Review 68/2002
 measuring inflation, I shall draw largely on historic price material kindly provided by Harrods - mainly 
the Catalogues, Harrods News, and Harrods Food News. No records were published after 1970, so 
we have supplemented the historical data by our own researches. And I am very grateful to the young 
Bank of England economist who was apprehended in the Food Hall, suspected of comparing prices for 
a competitor who was opening a store across the road. 
The richness of this information can be seen from the size of the Catalogue for 1907 - weighing over 
six  pounds  and  containing  1375  pages.  In  those  days  the  telegraphic  address  of  Harrods  was 
“Everything, London”. The Internet has nothing on Harrods in 1907 when a telephone service with real 
people answering was available to take orders right through the night which were despatched early 
the next day with free local delivery (as far as Windsor) and by mail elsewhere. 
According  to  the  catalogues,  a  record  player  in  Harrods  cost  £11  in  1910  (approximately  £627  in 
today’s  money).  That  would  have  bought  you  a  hand-cranked  machine  that  provided  low-quality 
sound.  Today,  you  could  buy  a  record  player  for  as  little  as  £39  on  the  Internet,  and  at  Harrods  a 
better  quality  model  for  £250.  How  much  have  record-players  increased  in  price?  Ignoring  quality 
changes, the price rose by a factor of 3.5 (that is, £39/£11). But ignoring the vast quality improvements 
would surely overstate this increase - a quality change bias. So how do we quantify the increase in 
the  quality  of  today’s  record  player  relative  to  the  one  in  1910?  Statistically,  there  are  a  number  of 
ways of dealing with this issue: one is to determine the price as a function of characteristics that do not 
change over time. The prime example of such hedonic pricing techniques in use today is for pricing 
computers, where the quality characteristics - performance in terms of speed and memory - can be 
fairly  accurately  measured.  But  hedonic  pricing  is  not  the  only  way  to  deal  with  this  measurement 
issue, and recent research suggests that these techniques may overstate the extent to which quality 
has improved. 
Is a record player still the relevant product, since record players today are only used by a small group 
of enthusiasts of - now outdated - vinyl records? Perhaps a computer or CD (or DVD or MP3) player is 
the relevant product today. From about £34 you can buy a CD player on the Internet today. This is a 
much  more  sophisticated  piece  of  equipment  than  even  today’s  record  player,  and  its  features  are 
impossible to compare to those of a 1910 record player. If we ignore the invention and marketing of 
new products, we introduce a new product bias. 
To illustrate  the quality change and the new product bias, imagine that  we go  shopping in Harrods 
both today and in 1910. Suppose that we are given £350 to spend - the same amount in both years. In 
1910 you could have bought a vacuum cleaner, a record player, an iron, a camera, and a telephone. 
The vacuum cleaner would have spread as much dust as it removed, the record player would have 
been hand-cranked and the iron would need to be filled with coal. The camera would have been bulky 
and  awkward  to  set  up,  and  the  telephone  would  have  been  largely  silent  because  so  few  people 
owned one. Today you can buy a similar bundle of goods for the same total outlay, but all would be of 
vastly superior quality. So for durable goods it is not clear that the cost of living has increased at all. 
But if we buy food, however, the results are very different. Unlike appliances, many of the food items in 
1910 are unchanged today - McVitie’s digestive biscuits, Quaker oats, Rose’s Lime Juice, Bournville 
cocoa, Frank Cooper’s Oxford marmalade, Marmite, Heinz baked beans and Colman’s mustard are 
only some of the familiar items for which precise comparisons over the years are possible. In 1910 you 
could have fed yourself on 10p a day by eating Marmite on Hovis toast for breakfast; eggs, bacon and 
toast for lunch; Heinz beans on toast for dinner; with a pint of milk to drink. The same menu, consisting 
of exactly the same brand products, would cost £4.80 today. The food basket has increased in price 
by a factor of 48. 
A  vacuum cleaner,  if  you  wanted one in 1910, cost  £229. That  is more than  6  years  worth of food 
based on the menu used in the previous example. A vacuum cleaner was an item of such luxury that 
owners would invite their friends round to ‘Hoover parties’ to show off their prized possession. Over 
the  years,  the  price  of  food  increased  in  nominal  terms  by  a  factor  of  48,  but  the  price  of  vacuum 
cleaners stayed roughly the same. Today you can still buy a vacuum cleaner for £229. But that is only 
47 days of food shopping, rather than 6 years. As vacuum cleaners became cheaper relative to food, 
people bought more of them - ignoring such change would introduce a substitution bias. If there is 
any degree of substitutability between products, then rational consumers would have taken account of 
such changes in relative prices, and the weight of this particular good in the consumption bundle may 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 13
 have  changed.  The  overall  result  of  the  substitution  is  that  the  expenditure  share  of  electrical 
appliances6  has  not  changed  much,  at  least  not  in  the  past  50  years.  If  we  ignored  the  fact  that 
vacuum cleaners were a rare luxury item in 1910 and applied today’s quantities to calculate the 1910 
consumption basket, we would greatly understate the increase in the average cost of living. 
And, of course, Harrods today is not exactly the typical place to go shopping - there was not much talk 
in 1910 of suburban shopping centres, or of Internet shopping. Ignoring developments in retail practice 
introduces an outlet bias. Had the bias remained constant over the years, this would have been less 
of an issue for measuring retail price inflation, but it clearly has not. 
Quality change bias, new product bias, substitution bias and outlet bias - these are some of the issues 
that the Boskin Commission discussed in their report on measuring inflation in the United States.7 The 
finding of the report,  which generated  wide national and international interest,  was that the US CPI 
might  have  overstated  changes  in  the  cost  of  living  by  between  0.8  and  1.6  percentage  points  per 
year. The examples I have given show how difficult it is to measure changes in the price level over 
time. Precision is not to be had. According to the official retail prices index, the general level of retail 
prices rose by a factor of 52 between 1910 and 2002. But changes in the nature of the goods and 
services available, and the nature of retail selling, make such comparisons treacherous. 
Does this matter for price stability? Probably not. The Greenspan-Blinder definitions of price stability 
suggest that we know price stability when we see it, or rather, when we stop hearing about inflation. 
There  is  nothing  mystical  about  the  RPIX  measure  of  inflation,  nor  the  figure  of  2.5%.  But  it  is 
important to have a precise numerical target which is easy to understand in order to provide an anchor 
for inflation expectations and to which the MPC can be held accountable. 
Monetary policy over the next decade: what are the challenges? 
5. 
Although inflation targeting has delivered many of the benefits from low inflation that were promised 
ten years ago, there remain real challenges for monetary policy over the next decade. Two questions 
have been prominent recently. First, is inflation targeting enough? Second, is deflation, not inflation, 
the main threat at present? 
Is inflation targeting enough? Do rapid increases in asset prices pose a threat to stability, even though 
inflation targeting has delivered steady growth with low inflation? Some commentators have suggested 
that  monetary  policy  target  asset  prices  in  addition  to  inflation.8  But  which  asset  prices,  and  what 
would that mean for interest rates? House prices have been rising rapidly, and as a ratio to average 
earnings  have  reached  the  previous  peak  in  the  late  1980s.  That  might  suggest  that  interest  rates 
should have been higher. Sterling has for six years now been around 30% higher against the euro (or 
its predecessors) than before, the trade deficit  has grown and the profitability  of manufacturing has 
fallen by two-thirds. That might suggest that interest rates should have been lower. Equity prices rose 
by  120%  between  1995  and  2000,  before  falling  40%  subsequently.  Presumably  that  would  have 
implied first higher and then lower interest rates. What this means is that asset prices cannot sensibly 
be viewed in isolation, but only in the context of the economy as a whole. I believe that, although there 
are justifiable concerns about recent movements in asset prices, the policy dilemma can be analysed 
within the framework of inflation targeting that we have in the UK. 
No  honest  person  actually  knows  the  “equilibrium”  level  of  asset  prices.  They  are  dominated  by 
expectations  of  the  prices  that  other  investors  will  pay  for  those  assets  in  future.  The  relevant 
uncertainties  can  rarely  be  quantified  by  observing  the  frequencies  of  events  in  the  past.  And  the 
response of asset prices to changes in monetary policy is also unpredictable. So targeting asset prices 
directly  is  virtually  impossible.  But  changes  in  asset  prices  can  have  a  major  impact  on  levels  of 
spending and the MPC devotes considerable time to the question of how such changes should affect 
policy. 
                                                      
6  Electrical appliances and audio-visual equipment share was 0.021 in 1956 and was 0.018 in 2002. 
7  See Boskin M et al (1996) ‘Towards a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living’. Final report to the Senate Finance 
Committee from the Advisory Committee to Study the Consumer Price Index. 
8  The most rigorous statement of the case for stabilising asset prices is Dupor (2002). 
14 
 BIS Review 68/2002
 The  immediate  question  is  whether  changes  in  asset  prices  have  led  to  an  imbalance  within  the 
economy that poses the risk of a large negative demand shock at some point in the future. I believe 
the answer is yes; but how big is that risk is extremely difficult to judge, and so the appropriate policy 
response is far from clear. Beneath the surface of overall stability in the UK economy lies a remarkable 
imbalance  between  a  buoyant  consumer  and  housing  sector,  on  the  one  hand,  and  weak  external 
demand,  on  the  other.  As  a  summary  statistic  of  this  imbalance,  Table  4  shows  that  in  the  United 
Kingdom the growth of real domestic demand exceeded the growth of output by no less than 7½% 
over the five years to 2002 Q1, more than over any five year period in the 1980s and more than in any 
other major country during the recent  past.  Even the optimistic Mr Micawber  would realise that this 
cannot continue indefinitely. How then, and over what timescale, will these imbalances unwind? 
Table 4 
Domestic demand and output growth 
 Output growth (1997-2002 Q1) 
Dom. demand growth (1997-2002 Q1) 
Cumulative difference 
UK 
2.4 
3.8 
–7.5 
US 
3.2 
3.9 
–4.2 
Euro area 
Japan 
2.5 
2.3 
0.8 
–0.4 
–0.6 
0.9 
Note: Growth rates are calculated as the total increase in output (and domestic demand, respectively) over the period 1997 
Q1-2002  Q1,  based  on  quarterly  data,  expressed  as  a  four-quarter  growth  rate.  Cumulative  difference  is  the  cumulative 
growth rate, expressed as a percentage, of output less domestic demand. 
Source: ONS (for UK data); Thomson Financial Datastream (for data on the Euro Area, US and Japan). 
Three  possibilities  deserve  consideration.  First,  the  rapid  growth  in  household  consumption  - 
averaging  over  4%  for  the  last  five  years  -  may  reflect  an  adjustment  to  higher  real  disposable 
incomes. Consumption growth would then slow naturally as spending and debt reach their new levels. 
The imbalance between domestic demand and output would unwind as steadily as it built up, with no 
reason to fear a sudden correction. For this to occur the source of higher disposable incomes must be 
permanent. In part the increase in recent years has resulted from the improved terms of trade - 7% up 
on five years ago - which raise real national income for any given level of output. The main threat to 
the persistence of that improvement is the possibility of a fall in sterling that may be a necessary part 
of the rebalancing of the UK economy. It is very hard to assess the risk of that over any given time 
horizon. So far the path of consumer spending is not inconsistent with this benign outcome. 
The second possibility is that the level of debt taken out by households - the debt-to-income ratio is 
now at an all-time high - makes households sensitive to any adverse future shock to their employment 
or income prospects. In that event the risk is of a sharper adjustment of consumption to the shock than 
might otherwise have occurred. Monetary policy would respond, but a large negative demand shock 
might result in an undershoot of the inflation target for some considerable time. 
The third possibility I touched on earlier. Households may adjust more quickly to the implications of a 
low  inflation  world for the  prices of goods and services than for nominal interest rates or the future 
growth of nominal incomes. A mistaken underestimate of real interest rates or overestimate of nominal 
income  growth  may  raise  borrowing,  spending  and  asset  prices  temporarily.  Eventually  households 
learn and consumption adjusts, again possibly sharply. 
The policy dilemma is that by allowing consumption and demand to grow rapidly there is a risk that 
there will be a sharp correction of demand later. The essence of the argument is well put by Borio and 
Lowe  who,  in  a  BIS  Working  Paper,  argued  that,  “lowering  rates  or  providing  ample  liquidity  when 
problems  materialise,  but  not  raising  them  as  imbalances  build  up,  can  be  rather  insidious  in  the 
longer run. They promote a form of moral hazard that can sow the seeds of instability and of costly 
fluctuations in the real economy”. In practice it is difficult to know whether an “imbalance” does contain 
the seed of a future negative demand shock on a scale that would leave inflation below the target for 
some considerable time, or whether it will unwind of its own accord. 
The fact that growing imbalances might cause sharp deviations of inflation from target at some point in 
the future, raises the possibility of a trade off between deviations of inflation from target over the next 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 15
 year or so and deviations of inflation from target further ahead. That, I believe, is the right way to think 
about the challenge to monetary policy posed by asset price movements. Although there are no simple 
answers  I  hope  I  have  shown  that  inflation  targeting  is  enough,  provided  that  one  thinks  carefully 
about the horizon over which policy can hope to affect inflation. 
The  second  challenge  for  monetary  policy  over  the  next  decade  is  the  possibility  of  deflation.  That 
prices are now rising at the slowest rate for decades is, of course, a positive achievement of which the 
Bank is proud. But is the real threat now deflation? It is important to recognise that falling prices of 
manufactured  goods  is  not  the  same  as  general  deflation.  In  fact  price  stability,  in  the  sense  of  an 
inflation rate overall of around 2½% a year, is likely to mean that the prices of manufactured goods 
will, on average, not rise at all. Faster productivity growth in manufacturing than in services, averaging 
around 2% over the last twenty years, means that the prices of services will rise faster than those of 
manufactured goods. And the rise in sterling over the past five years increased the difference between 
inflation rates in the two sectors. 
Table  5  shows  the  inflation  rates  for  goods  and  services  in  the  major  economies.  Positive  rates  of 
inflation for services, which account for around half of consumer spending, show deflation in most of 
the world economy is still some way off. In all countries over the past decade the gap between goods 
and services price inflation reflects productivity differences. That gap has widened somewhat in recent 
years as increasing competition from new producers has driven down prices of tradable goods. But the 
striking  feature  of  the  table  is  the  extent  to  which  the  difference  has  increased  to  no  less  than 
5.7 percentage  points  in  the  UK,  much  more  than  in  the  US  where  in  turn  the  gap  is  larger  than 
elsewhere.  Exchange  rate  movements  are  largely  responsible  for  these  differences.  The  extent  to 
which services inflation has risen relative to goods inflation is another manifestation of the imbalance 
within the UK economy. 
Table 5 
Total, goods and services inflation 
 CPI inflation (year to Aug 2002) 
CPI goods 
CPI services 
Services - goods infl. 
Services - goods infl. (1990-97) 
Services - goods infl. (1990-2002) 
UK 
1.9 
–1.1 
4.6 
5.7 
1.6 
2.3 
US 
1.7 
–0.1 
3.1 
3.2 
1.6 
1.8 
Euro area 
Japan 
2.2 
1.4 
3.3 
1.9 
1.6 
1.3 
–0.9 
–1.6 
0.0 
1.6 
1.3 
1.3 
Note: Inflation rates are calculated as the total increase in the price index over the indicated period, based on monthly data, 
expressed as a 12-month growth rate. 
Source: ONS (for UK data) and Thomson Financial Datastream (for data on the Euro Area, US and Japan). 
Deflation  -  in  the  sense  of  a  sustained  fall  in  the  aggregate  price  level  -  can  be  found  among  the 
G7 economies only in Japan, where the consumer price level has been falling almost continuously for 
four years and by a cumulative total of 4%. Elsewhere, deflation is remote. 
All  of  this  serves  to  remind  us  that,  with  a  single  instrument,  monetary  policy  cannot  ensure  that 
inflation is at target and output on trend all of the time. To suppose otherwise is to believe in the “myth 
of  the  straight  line”,  as  Nigel  Lawson  described  it.  Monetary  policy  can  reduce,  but  not  eliminate, 
fluctuations  in  output.  Cycles  in  real  activity  sometimes  reflect  behaviour  outside  the  influence  of 
monetary policy. As Lawson (1994) put it, “I find it wholly unconvincing to believe that the credit cycle 
is caused simply by mistakes in monetary policy. Of course, such mistakes can exacerbate the cycle; 
but the cycle would be there without them. There is no way in which the monetary authorities can fine-
tune bank lending, any more than they can fine-tune expectations”. 
That is why the framework introduced in 1997 explicitly recognises that the MPC would not attempt to 
bring inflation back to the target immediately following a large shock. As a result inflation might deviate 
from the 2.5% target by more than one percentage point. That would require the Governor to write an 
16 
 BIS Review 68/2002
 open letter to the Chancellor. Ed Balls explained in his Oxford lecture in 2001, “Some have assumed it 
[the requirement to write an open letter] exists for the Chancellor to discipline the MPC if inflation goes 
outside the target range. In fact the opposite is true. In the face of a supply-shock, such as a big jump 
in the oil price, which pushed inflation way off target, the MPC could only get inflation back to 2.5 per 
cent quickly through a draconian interest rate response - at the expense of stability, growth and jobs. 
Any sensible monetary policymaker would want a more measured and stability-oriented strategy to get 
inflation  back  to  target.  And  it  is  the  Open  Letter  system  which  both  allows  that  more  sensible 
approach to be explained by the MPC and allows the Chancellor publicly to endorse it.” That applies 
not just to a supply shock, but also to a demand shock that might follow a large movement in asset 
prices. 
Both challenges to policy in the future have one aspect in common: they make us think carefully about 
the consequences of current policy for inflation well into the future. Asset prices raise the question of 
how far one should err on the side of caution while imbalances are building up. Deflation makes us 
aware of the risk that the zero lower bound on interest rates might bind in the future. They imply that 
while, in normal circumstances, monetary policy should focus on meeting the inflation target eighteen 
months  or  two  years  ahead,  in  practise  it  may  be  necessary  to  look  even  further  ahead  about  the 
consequences of present actions. But that should not deflect monetary policy from its task of keeping 
inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term, in other words achieving price stability. 
Conclusions 
6. 
When Lord Kingsdown addressed the LSE ten years ago, he said that departure from the Exchange 
Rate  Mechanism,  offered  an  opportunity  -  “An  opportunity  to  demolish  the  image  of  the  United 
Kingdom as a second-rate inflation-prone economy”. I believe that opportunity was taken. Today the 
UK has low and stable inflation. And that has not come at the expense of either output or employment. 
Britain has now experienced 41 successive quarters of positive economic growth. And unemployment 
in  this  country  is  lower  than  in  any  other  G7  country.  This  greater  stability  is  no  accident.  It  is  the 
product of a commitment to price stability as reflected in an institutional design encompassing a clear 
inflation  target  and  a  transparent  and  accountable  process  for  reaching  decisions  on  interest  rates 
embodied in the Monetary Policy Committee. 
At the beginning of my lecture I referred to the frescoes of Good and Bad Government by Lorenzetti. If 
today you go to the Palazzo Pubblico in Siena to see these wonderful paintings in the Sala della Pace, 
which I translate as the Room of Stability,  you will see the results of allowing daylight to fall on the 
walls. Yes, greater transparency - more daylight - has damaged the paintings. But if you look carefully, 
you will see that whereas daylight has caused no harm to the paintings of Good Government, it has 
indeed  damaged  Bad  Government  on  the  opposite  wall.  Even  today,  Lorenzetti’s  frescoes  tell  us 
about the benefits of transparency and the importance of careful institutional design. 
Five years ago I delivered, again in this room, a lecture on the inflation target five years on. I argued 
that the new requirement on the Governor to write an open letter to the Chancellor whenever inflation 
deviated from target by more than one percentage point would provide ample opportunity for the Bank 
to  restore  the  lost  art  of  letter-writing.  No  letter  has  so  far  been  required.  But  given  Alan  Blinder’s 
definition  of  price  stability  -  when  ordinary  people  stop  talking  about  inflation  and  converse  instead 
about more important matters - I hope that the MPC, by remaining focussed on its task of meeting the 
inflation target, will be more successful in restoring the equally lost art of good conversation. In that 
way the inflation generation will give way to a new generation able to devote its energies to the wider 
economic  and  social  policies  from  which  our  attention  has  so  often  been  diverted  by  the  need  to 
control inflation. 
The lesson of the past ten years is that it is stability - price stability and the broader economic stability 
which  it generates - that  is the  platform for the deeper satisfaction  portrayed so  well  in  Lorenzetti’s 
frescoes. 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 17
