 David Dodge: Staying the course 
Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, during a panel discussion at the Banco 
de México, Mexico City, 12 November 2002.  
 The dramatic events of the last two years and growing concern about the near-term prospects for the 
global  economy  have  created  a  climate  in  which  policy-makers  focus  only  on  current  economic 
developments and lose sight of longer-term goals.  
There's a natural tendency to focus on the here and now, and to use any tools that are readily at hand 
to deal with today's problems, without proper regard for their long-term consequences.  
It's easy to forget the hard-learned lessons of the past and overlook the longer-term fundamentals that 
are necessary to support a strong recovery and sustained positive economic performance over time.  
What are those fundamentals?  
Mr.  Greenspan,  in  his  opening  remarks  to  this  conference,  talked  about  the  importance  of  the 
fundamentals,  going  all  the  way  back  to  Adam  Smith.  What's  interesting  is  that  things  have  not 
changed that much. But we don't have to reach that far in history for guiding principles. We can look at 
the four key principles that emerged as part of the OECD consensus during the 1980s.  
The first principle relates to monetary policy. It basically recognized price stability as the appropriate 
goal for monetary policy over the medium term. Policy-makers were advised to respond symmetrically, 
and  in a forward-looking  manner, to excess demand and supply so as to keep the  economy on  an 
even keel, thus achieving price stability and maximizing output over the medium term.  
The  second  principle  applied  to  fiscal  policy  and  the  need  for  a  more  disciplined  approach  to 
managing  the  public  purse.  Rising  debt  levels  and  an  aging  population  made  it  clear  that  concrete 
action  was  necessary to eliminate deficits and put the debt-to-GDP ratio firmly  on a declining path. 
Automatic stabilizers should still be allowed to work during economic downturns. But in good times, 
surpluses would be generated that would help preserve the budget balance and keep the debt-to-GDP 
ratio on a downward trend.  
The  third  principle  focused  on  the  need  for  wide-ranging  structural  reform  to  reduce  rigidities  and 
inefficiencies. This meant removing burdensome regulations and legislative restrictions and eliminating 
wasteful government expenditures and distortionary tax and subsidy systems.  
The  fourth,  and  final,  principle  called  for  trade  liberalization.  It  was  based  on  the  premise  that  only 
through  freer  international  trade  can  countries  fully  exploit  the  gains  from  increased  specialization, 
enhanced productivity, and greater competitiveness.  
These four principles can be likened to the four legs of a chair. The chair is steadier when all four legs 
are the same length. Similarly, an economy is more stable when progress is made on all four policy 
fronts.  
But what should we be doing during periods of unexpected, pronounced economic turbulence?  
The latest worldwide economic slowdown has increased pressures on policy-makers to take action on 
a  number  of  fronts.  Some  of  them  are  being  encouraged  to  erect  trade  barriers  in  order  to  protect 
favoured  national  sectors  from  foreign  competition.  But  experience  shows  that  such  beggar-thy-
neighbour policies not only impose costs on the rest of the domestic economy, they also undermine 
global economic welfare.  
Other policy-makers are being advised to forget about structural reforms in the short term, for fear of 
exacerbating  economic  weakness.  Unfortunately,  this  approach  virtually  guarantees  suboptimal 
performance in the future and maximizes the long-term costs of dealing with the structural problems – 
in many cases, sowing the seeds of future crises.  
In many countries, weak economic growth, coupled with rising government expenditures, has recently 
led to a deteriorating fiscal position, reversing the hard-won gains made over the past decade. To the 
extent this result is driven by the automatic stabilizers in place, it is unavoidable and desirable in the 
short run. But policy-makers should be very careful about calls for more extensive, discretionary fiscal 
measures taken for stabilization purposes. Such measures typically take effect long after the need for 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 1
 additional stimulus has passed, and they are often difficult to reverse. In the end, they often simply 
weaken a country's structural budget position.  
Without  a  doubt,  the  most  suitable  tool  for  dealing  with  any  short-term  cyclical  problems  in  the 
economy is monetary policy. It is flexible, easily reversible, and general in scope. If monetary policy is 
allowed to perform this function, then there will not be inordinate pressure on other, less appropriate, 
instruments and policies. But let me be clear: this is not to say that we should use monetary policy to 
allow us to avoid taking the necessary steps on the other three fronts. For example, it is inappropriate 
to  erect  trade  barriers  and  then  say  we  need  more  monetary  stimulus.  It  is  inappropriate  to  allow 
rigidities to build in the economy and then call on central banks to provide stimulus. The right thing to 
do is to continue working on steadying the other three legs of the chair and to use monetary policy 
appropriately.  Central  bankers  must  guard  against  turning  monetary  policy  itself  into  a  source  of 
instability. So here too, the bottom line is to never lose sight of our longer-term objective of low and 
stable inflation.  
The  prevailing  worldwide  economic  weakness,  together  with  geopolitical  uncertainty  and  financial 
market  volatility,  has  led  to  significant  monetary  easing  in  most  countries.  This  easing  has  been 
broadly  appropriate  and,  in  some  cases,  indeed  even  more  may  be  needed.  But  it  is  extremely 
important  that  the  monetary  authorities  keep  their  eyes  firmly  on  the  economic  horizon.  By 
concentrating  on  developments  18  to  24  months  ahead,  not  only  will  they  ensure  that  the  critical 
medium-term objectives are met, but the short-term needs of the economy are also addressed.  
Monetary policy-makers should also be wary of taking on too many additional responsibilities, such as 
trying to stabilize selective market assets.  
This  is  not  to  say  that  we  should  not  pay  attention  to  what  is  happening  in  financial  markets.  We 
certainly  should.  These  markets  can  convey  important  information  about  future  developments.  And 
they exert direct and indirect influences on the real economy.  
But monetary authorities must resist the siren calls for active management of financial markets and the 
pleas for regular intervention to help stabilize asset prices. It would be unfortunate if we were to repeat 
costly past mistakes for the sake of near-term expediency.  
Canada,  like  most  other  countries,  has  committed  itself  to  the  four  principles  of  sound  economic 
performance: low and stable inflation, fiscal prudence, structural reform, and trade liberalization. As a 
country, we have made great progress on all four fronts in recent years. Of course, pressures have 
emerged  which  threaten  to  undermine  those  commitments.  These  pressures  have  been  resisted 
vigorously. While particular interest groups are unhappy with this resistance, the Canadian public as a 
whole  supports  sound  policies.  Canadians  remain  convinced  that  the  authorities  will  follow  these 
policies; and that is why both household consumption and investment by SMEs continue to be strong. 
Even in the face of geopolitical and international economic uncertainties, sound medium-term policies 
are helping to maintain strong domestic demand.  
To  conclude,  the  current  uncertainties  will  dissipate,  and  stronger  growth  will  resume,  provided  we 
continue to pursue sound macro, trade, and structural policies. What is important is to anticipate the 
institutions, structures, and policies that we want to have in place once this latest turbulence subsides, 
and  not to focus too narrowly  on the  present. Although the  near-term challenges that  we face may 
seem daunting, it would be unfortunate if, in attempting to deal with them, we impaired the prospects 
for future growth and improved economic performance.  
Canada is committed to staying the course. The same is true, I hope, of all other countries gathered 
here today. We all have an important responsibility to make sure that the lessons we have learned, 
and our continuing strong commitments to prudent policies, are understood more broadly.  
2 
 BIS Review 69/2002
