 Martin Feldstein: Deflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Martin  Feldstein,  Professor  of  Economics,  Harvard  University,  and  President  of  the 
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research.  These  remarks  were  prepared  for  presentation  at  the  BIS 
Central Bankers dinner in Mexico City on 11 November 2002. 
 I am pleased to be here and honored by the opportunity to talk to this distinguished group.  
When  Andrew  Crockett  called  about  10  days  ago  and  invited  me  to  make  these  remarks,  he 
suggested  that  I  discuss  the  subject  of  price  deflation  and  asked  that  I  try  to  do  so  in  a  way  that 
provokes discussion.  
I’m very happy to do so. Deflation is certainly an important issue. It is a real problem in Japan. I’m 
frequently asked by people in business and in the general public whether the US is now experiencing 
deflation or is heading into deflation and, if so, what should be done about it. Similar concerns have 
been raised in Europe, especially with respect to Germany. And if deflation does occur in the US or 
Europe,  and  if  that  contributes  to  economic  weakness  in  either  region,  that  would  have  important 
consequences for every country here tonight. 
I will deal briefly with four questions: 
First, is the US or Germany now experiencing deflation - a persistent decline in the overall price level - 
as some of my American business friends assert? 
Second, would deflation be a bad thing? 
And, if deflation is undesirable, what should be done to prevent it and, if it occurs, what can be done to 
reverse it? 
I’ll try to deal with all four questions in the 15 minutes that Andrew suggested I talk - so you know I 
won’t examine any of these issues as fully as I might do or should do. That in itself should be enough 
to provoke discussion. 
Let me begin by summarizing my overall conclusion.  
Neither  the  United  States  nor  Germany  is  now  in  deflation  but  deflation  is  a  potential  problem  that 
should be avoided. 
The best environment for household and business decision-makers is one of price stability. Deflation, 
as well as inflation, interferes with the smooth running of the economy.  
In some ways, moderate deflation can be more damaging than moderate inflation, although moderate 
inflation is more likely to get out of hand and lead to rapid inflation. 
Nevertheless I believe that it would be a mistake to allow a fear of deflation to provide a rationale for 
policies that could lead to unwanted price inflation or to asset price bubbles. 
Are the US and Germany experiencing deflation? 
I’ll start with the question of whether the US or Germany is actually experiencing deflation. For the US 
the answer by any official statistical measure is no. The GDP price index has been increasing at 1.2% 
this  year  and  the  corresponding  index  for  personal  consumer  expenditures  is  up  at  1.9%.  The 
consumer price index has been rising at a rate of 2.6% in the first 9 months of 2002 and the core CPI 
(excluding food and energy) is up at a 2.1% rate. 
I believe the situation is roughly similar in Germany and in the Euro area more generally. Consumer 
prices in Germany are now rising at about 1.5% and in the wider Euro area the increase is faster. 
The reason that so many American businessmen believe that we are in a period of deflation is that the 
prices of the products that they sell are in fact falling. The producer price index for finished goods in 
September  was  1.9%  lower  than  a  year  ago.  And  the  prices  of  consumer  goods  and  investment 
goods in the GDP index have fallen in each quarter this year. 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 1
 This decline in the producer prices for finished goods is an inevitable consequence of the success that 
central  banks  have  had  in  achieving  virtual  price  stability.  To  see  why,  think  about  an  economy  in 
which there is literally no inflation. Since rising productivity translates into an equal rate of increase of 
real wages, such price stability implies that nominal wages must rise at the same rate as productivity. 
For a service like hair cutting, where there is no productivity gain, the price of the service must rise 
with  the  level  of  nominal  wages.  Achieving  overall  price  stability  therefore  requires  balancing  the 
inflation of service prices with declines in the prices of goods. 
Although the US has not achieved zero inflation, the general wage gains driven by productivity have 
caused service prices to rise at 3% this year while the overall consumer prices in GDP rose only 1.9%. 
Price  declines  for  goods,  especially  at  the  producer  level  before  distribution  costs,  balance  the 
increase in the prices of services.  
Some  analysts  argue  that  the  current  low  inflation  rates  may  continue  to  decline  and  eventually 
become negative because of the excess capacity in labor and product markets. While that cannot be 
ruled out for the future, there is no supporting evidence now. In spite of the US recession that began in 
early 2001, the rate of wage and salary increase in the last 12 months is 3.2%, the same as it was in 
the corresponding period in 1999.  
One further issue about whether the US is experiencing deflation is the accuracy of measuring price 
movements. Although the US price indices have been improved in the past few years, I believe that 
the official price indices still overstate inflation because of an inability to deal adequately with quality 
change and new products. Our measured inflation rate of 1.2% may correspond to a true inflation rate 
(if I may use that term) of zero or even –1%.  
The significant fact, however, is that even if true inflation is zero or slightly negative, nominal wages 
are  rising  and  nominal  interest  rates  are  positive.  Thus  deflation,  if  it  exists,  is  too  limited  to  cause 
problems in either wages or interest rates, a subject to which I turn next. 
Would deflation be a bad thing? 
That brings me to the question of whether deflation - as evidenced by a decline in the measured price 
level - would be a bad thing. In my judgement, it would be. To repeat what I said before: price stability 
- rather than either inflation or deflation - is the best environment for households and businesses to 
make decisions.  
The experience of price stability also creates confidence that it will persist. One of the problems with 
inflation or deflation is that it creates uncertainty about the future path of prices, an uncertainty that is 
itself harmful. 
Before talking about the adverse effects of deflation, let me deal with the interaction of inflation and tax 
rules. Because taxes in the US and most other countries are based on nominal capital income and 
expenses, a higher rate of inflation raises effective tax rates on capital income and thereby increases 
the distorting effect of capital taxation. Reducing inflation therefore reduces tax distortions and raises 
real  national  incomes. Although the logic of this  analysis implies  that a small negative  inflation rate 
would  reduce  tax  distortions  even  more  than  price  stability,  I  believe  that  the  uncertainty  and  other 
adverse effects of deflation would outweigh the gains from reduced tax distortion.  
The adverse effect of deflation depends on whether it is anticipated or unanticipated and on whether it 
is small or large. A small, persistent and therefore anticipated deflation can be least damaging. But like 
any mild chronic disease, we’d rather not have it.  
Before  I  talk  about  such  an  anticipated  deflation,  consider  first  an  unanticipated  shift  from  a  low 
inflation rate of say 2% to a permanent deflation rate of –2%. The nominal interest rate on new bonds 
and new mortgages would eventually decline by about 4%, more or less maintaining the initial real rate 
on  such  obligations.  But  the  unanticipated  shift  to  deflation  would  cause  the  real  interest  rate  on 
existing debt to rise by four percentage points. In the United States, this would not create a problem 
for home owners since they would generally be able to pay off their mortgages without penalty and 
refinance them at the new lower nominal interest rate.  
The more serious problem would be for companies with long term debt. The real value of their annual 
debt service would rise over time and the ratio of their debt to real capital would also increase. For 
highly leveraged companies and for financial firms with a substantial mismatch of assets and liabilities, 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2002
 this  unanticipated  shift  to  deflation  could  be  a  serious  problem.  Obviously,  the  greater  the 
unanticipated rate of deflation, the more damage that would be done.  
What about the long-term effect of a mild permanent and fully anticipated deflation at, say, a 2% rate? 
In many ways, the economy could - at least in principle - adjust to this just as it does now to a 2% 
positive  rate  of  inflation.  Real  interest  rates  on  marketable  securities  and  mortgages  would  remain 
unchanged  with  nominal  mortgage  rates  and  bond  interest  rates  declining  by  the  fall  in  anticipated 
inflation. If productivity growth is raising real wages at 2.5% year, nominal wages would rise at 0.5%.  
There are however potential problems even with such a mild anticipated deflation. When inflation is 
positive,  some  individuals’  real  wages  can  be  reduced  without  the  difficulty  of  actually  cutting  their 
nominal wages. But with deflation of just 2%, wages that have to decline relative to the average would 
often have to be cut in nominal terms. If that cannot occur, the result would be a rise in unemployment 
until the market finally adjusts to the need for nominal wage cuts. 
Deflation  would  also  create  a  problem  for  implementing  a  traditional  monetary  policy  based  on  the 
short-term rate of interest since with a zero nominal interest rate floor there would be no way to drive 
the real rate below zero to stimulate a weak economy.1 
Deflation  would  pose special problems within the  euro area. To the extent that  the  euro  area  is an 
integrated  market  for  goods  and  services,  different  rates  of  inflation  or  deflation  cannot  persist 
indefinitely. But the combination of relative price level adjustments among countries and overall price 
stability for the  euro area  as a  whole can cause  a period  of deflation  in some countries.  Moreover, 
since the interest rate on euro bonds must be the same in all countries, the real interest rates will rise 
in the deflating country. In this way, deflation within part of the euro area can cause a contractionary 
monetary environment in that part of the euro area that leads to even further deflation.  
The  problems  caused  by  anticipated  deflation  -  whether  in  the  US  or  in  Europe  -  are  substantially 
worse if the sustained rate of deflation is greater than the rate of productivity growth and than the real 
rate of interest on risk free securities. Nominal wages would have to fall2 and the real rate of return on 
riskless securities would be at least equal to the rate of deflation. Securities with greater risk or less 
liquidity would have to offer higher real returns. This upward shift in the yield on the entire range of 
private debt and equity instruments would raise the cost of capital to business, reducing investment 
and productivity.3 
The  problem  is  more  acute  for  manufacturing  firms  since  the  rate  of  change  of  their  output  prices 
would be even more negative than the overall rate of deflation. There is now a gap of more than 3% 
between the overall GDP inflation rate and the rate of change of producer prices. If the GDP prices as 
a whole were deflating at 2%, the producer prices might be falling at 5%. For manufacturing firms, the 
real cost of funds (in terms of their own product prices) would exceed the nominal interest rate by five 
percentage points. Such high real interest rates in  this part of the economy (where so much of the 
inventory  and  equipment  investment  is  concentrated)  could  have  a  contractionary  effect  and  a 
long-term adverse effect on investment and productivity.  
Preventing deflation and reversing deflation if it occurs 
Although  neither  the  United  States  nor  the  countries  of  Europe  are  currently  in  deflation,  the  low 
inflation  rates  make  a  slip  into  deflation  a  clear  possibility.  Japan’s  persistent  deflation  shows  that 
deflation can certainly happen in a modern industrial economy. 
I’ll conclude therefore by following Andrew’s request that I be provocative by asking what should be 
done to reduce the risk of deflation and to deal with it if it occurs? 
                                                      
1   The real Federal Funds rate averaged 2% over the past decade. With 2% deflation, a 2% real Funds rate would require a 
nominal rate of zero. In practice, therefore, the average real rate would have to be above 2% and there would be no way to 
drive the real rate below zero to stimulate a weak economy.  
2   For example, the combination of deflation at 6% a year and productivity gains that raise real wages at 3% a year would 
require nominal wages to fall on average by 3%. While achieving such wage declines could in principle occur, it is hard to 
believe that it could be achieved without a long period of increased unemployment.  
3   The 6% rate of deflation would imply a real return of 6% on cash. Riskier securities would require a higher real yield, thus 
raising the cost of capital.  
BIS Review 70/2002 
 3
 Some people argue that it would be better to abandon the goal of price stability and accept a low but 
significant inflation rate - say 4% - to provide a good margin of safety from actual deflation. I disagree 
with that suggestion  but  I  would be interested to know  whether anyone  here thinks that is the right 
advice. 
Some economists, including the authors of a widely cited Federal Reserve staff study, have suggested 
that  an  unusually  vigorous  expansionary  policy  -  both  monetary  and  fiscal  -  be  pursued  when  the 
economy is in danger of slipping into deflation. I take it that would mean a more expansionary policy 
when measured inflation is 1% than when it is 2% - even if either inflation rate would be acceptable as 
such and even if the real economy shows no particular sign of weakness. 
Such a strategy may be desirable but it also runs the risk of causing an unwanted increase in inflation 
and an unwarranted rise in the prices of financial assets and real estate.  
It is also difficult to know just when such a policy should be pursued. The specific context suggested in 
the Federal Reserve staff study was Japan in the years just before 1995. With the benefit of hindsight 
that looks like desirable policy. But at the time Japan appeared to be experiencing accelerating real 
GDP and a positive inflation rate. How would one know whether an expansionary monetary policy in 
such  a  context  would  prevent  deflation  or  would  lead  to  unwanted  inflation  and  a  return  of  the 
Japanese asset bubble? 
The recent easing by the Federal Reserve seems to me to be an appropriate action because of the 
weakness and uncertainty of the real economy. I believe it would have been appropriate even if the 
inflation rate were 1% higher, especially given the Fed’s well deserved anti-inflation reputation.  
The extent to which risks should be taken to avoid deflation depends in part on how difficult it is to 
reverse deflationary price movements. The obvious problem in doing so, to which I already referred, is 
that  the  combination  of  deflation  and  a  zero  floor  on  nominal  interest  rates  makes  it  impossible  to 
reduce  real  short  term  interest  rates  as  a  countercyclical  strategy.  Would  increasing  the  stock  of 
money or of the monetary base provide a way of reversing deflation even if short term nominal interest 
rates are already at zero? Would other more unusual monetary policies - including purchasing longer 
term financial assets or even equities be effective and suitable?  
My own inclination would be to look also to fiscal policy. Although substantial experience indicates that 
discretionary  fiscal  policy  is  not  useful  in  dealing  with  the  typical  short  recession  downturn,  a 
discretionary fiscal stimulus may  be appropriate  when faced  with a  long-term weakness of the type 
experienced  now  in  Japan  or  with  anticipated  deflation.  Contrary  to  the  usual  assumption,  a  fiscal 
stimulus  need  not  involve  increased  budget  deficits,  an  especially  important  point  in  countries  like 
Japan  where an even  larger national debt  would be  a very serious long-term problem and possibly 
would  outweigh  the  direct  expansionary  effect  of  the  fiscal  stimulus.  A  structural  tax  change  that 
stimulates incentives to spend by changing relative prices - for example a temporary investment tax 
credit financed with a temporary corporate tax surcharge - could stimulate spending without raising the 
budget  deficit  and  national  debt.  An  analogous  structural  tax  policy  could  be  used  to  stimulate 
consumer spending in Japan or in any other country with a value added tax.4 
Great progress has been made in recent years in bringing inflation down and achieving essential price 
stability. It is important in my judgement not to allow price stability to deteriorate into deflation. But it is 
also important that the fear of deflation not lead central banks to give up the progress against inflation. 
                                                      
4   See  my  “The  Role  for  Discretionary  Fiscal  Policy  in  a  Low  Interest  Rate  Environment,”  NBER  Working  Paper  9203 
(www.nber.org/papers/w9203), forthcoming in the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City annual Jackson Hole conference 
volume for 2002. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2002
