 Michael C Bonello: The institutional, economic and monetary policy 
implications of EMU on countries applying for accession to the EU 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at a workshop organised by 
the University of Malta, Gozo Centre, Gozo, 16 November 2002. 
 I guess we are by now all too familiar with the fact that a country’s eligibility to join the European Union 
(EU) rests on satisfying the Copenhagen criteria, including the obligation to achieve compliance with 
the EU acquis and to show a commitment to the aims of the Union, including those relating to EMU. 
Indeed,  unlike  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom,  the  current  wave  of  accession  countries  are  all 
expected  to  join  EMU  eventually.  This  implies  that  they  will  also  have  to  join  the  Exchange  Rate 
Mechanism (ERM II). Participation in ERM II is in fact one of the Maastricht criteria which must be met 
before admission to the euro area. This requires the national currency to remain within the fluctuation 
margins of this mechanism for at least two years without resorting to a devaluation against the euro.  
What makes ERM II more important than the other Maastricht criteria?  
Participation in ERM II is not the only criterion which the accession countries will have to meet before 
being able to join EMU. Prospective members of the euro area are in fact also required to satisfy the 
other four Maastricht criteria, which relate to inflation, the interest rate, the fiscal deficit and the public 
debt. I propose to focus on the ERM II criterion for two reasons. 
First, the timing of EMU membership is conditioned by the two-year period embedded in the exchange 
rate criterion. In Malta’s case, if it is part of the next enlargement in May 2004 and even if it fulfils the 
other Maastricht criteria, the earliest that it will be technically able to participate in EMU is mid-2006. 
Earlier adherence to the other criteria, therefore, becomes almost irrelevant. 
Second, the obligation to participate in ERM II has implications in terms of the preparations which a 
national central bank has to make in view of its eventual entry into EMU. This is because it impinges 
directly  on  some  of  the  central  bank’s  main  functions  –  such  as  the  formulation  of  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policy  and  the  management  of  external  reserves  –  something  which  is  not  true,  for 
example, of the fiscal criteria. ERM II is thus of particular interest to central bankers. 
Against this background, I will now review some issues which eventual participation in ERM II, and 
later in EMU, raises for policy makers in Malta. 
No significant change in the parameters governing monetary and exchange rate policy 
EMU entails the adoption of the euro and the surrender of autonomy in the area of monetary policy to 
the European Central Bank (ECB). At this point, however, it is relevant to mention that the additional 
loss of independence which EMU would represent for the formulation of monetary policy in Malta is 
minimal. This is so because the Central Bank of Malta already has limited freedom of action since it 
operates  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  and  exchange  controls  have  been  almost  entirely  removed. 
This means  that  the  Bank must  adjust  domestic  interest  rates  in  response  to  movements  in  capital 
flows in a way which is consistent with the peg. Too low an interest rate would encourage investors to 
move out of domestic assets, creating downward pressures on the currency, whereas too high a rate 
could  attract  interest-sensitive  capital  flows  which  could  create  upward  pressures  on  the  exchange 
rate. 
To  a  large  extent,  these  conditions  already  govern  monetary  policy  and  reserves  management  in 
Malta.  While  the  Monetary  Policy  Advisory  Council  does  take  domestic  economic  conditions  into 
account, decisions on official interest rates are, in fact, primarily conditioned by trends in the official 
reserves and in the interest rates on the currencies which make up the basket to which the Maltese lira 
is pegged. Malta’s eventual participation in EMU, therefore, would not involve any significant departure 
from the current situation in terms of the degree of autonomy enjoyed by the Central Bank of Malta in 
setting interest rates. 
In view of the incompatibility of monetary policy autonomy, full capital account liberalisation and a fixed 
exchange rate, EMU participants have given up independent national monetary polices in favour of the 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 1
 free movement of capital  and the adoption of a single currency. The main driving force behind this 
decision  was  the  desire  to  overcome  the  obstacles  to  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market  and  to 
progress towards monetary and, eventually, economic union. A single currency was a logical step in 
this regard.  
Given the constraints which the adoption of the single currency entails, the emphasis which the Treaty 
puts on containing fiscal deficits and on labour mobility is understandable. In this set-up, in fact, the 
adjustment to asymmetric shocks has to take place through fiscal policy and the labour market. Since 
labour  mobility  within  the  Union  is  still  weak,  however,  in  practice  this  means  that  the  onus  of 
adjustment  falls  on  fiscal  policy.  Fiscal  consolidation  thus  remains  a  necessary  precondition  for  the 
success  of  EMU.  Indeed,  whereas  it  could  be  argued  that  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  precludes 
fiscal policy from responding to short-term domestic needs, it is equally true that the constraints arising 
from that Pact are meant to ensure that governments in the euro area have the necessary room for 
manoeuvre  over  the  medium-term.  The  presumption  here  is  that  by  achieving  close  to  balance  or 
surplus positions, governments would be in a better position to deal with normal cyclical fluctuations. 
In  addition,  the  commitment  to  refrain  from  excessive  deficits  is  also  a  necessary  condition  for  the 
success of EMU itself. This is the case because if such a deficit occurs in one of the larger euro area 
members,  the  inflationary  pressures  resulting  from  that  deficit  could  instil  an  upward  bias  in  ECB 
interest rates. 
For  accession  countries,  contained  public  spending  and  flexible  labour  markets  are  also  necessary 
from the point of view of achieving nominal and real economic convergence. Excessive deficits would 
not  only  accentuate  inflation  differentials,  undermining  the  ability  of  these  countries  to  fulfil  the 
Maastricht criteria, but could also crowd out private sector investments, delaying progress in structural 
reforms and convergence in income levels. Given that large deficits and labour market rigidities tend to 
weaken  a  country’s  ability  to  achieve  both  nominal  and  real  economic  convergence,  policies  to 
address these issues are an integral part of the preparations which accession countries are making in 
advance of EMU. 
The rationale behind ERM II 
ERM II is a fixed exchange rate regime, involving the adoption of a central exchange rate against the 
euro  in  agreement  with  the  ECB.  This  rate  is  then  allowed  to  fluctuate  within  specified  margins, 
normally +/- 15%, but narrower bands may be adopted subject to mutual agreement.  
The  rationale  behind  ERM  II  is  that,  if  a  country  succeeds  in  maintaining  the  value  of  its  currency 
against the euro within the fluctuation bands for a period of two years, then it would be reasonable to 
assume that the country would be able to deal with the binding constraints of EMU. During this phase, 
accession countries will have to prove that they are able to put up with the disciplines inherent in a 
fixed exchange rate without imbalances arising in other sectors of the economy. That is why accession 
to EMU is conditional on prior participation in ERM II. Furthermore, it would be unfair on the twelve 
euro  area  countries  if  the  EU  were  to  demand  less  stringent  conditions  of  the  present  wave  of 
accession countries. 
Upon  EU  accession  and  during  the  ERM  II  phase,  Malta,  like  the  other  accession  countries,  would 
have the status of a “country  with a derogation”. Since ERM II neither entails the formal transfer of 
monetary policy responsibilities to the ECB nor the replacement of the domestic currency by the euro, 
it will not, as I have already indicated, involve any significant departure from current practice, although 
it  offers  more  flexibility  than  our  current  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  which  does  not  involve  any 
fluctuation band. Another difference is that the obligation to defend the central exchange rate under 
ERM II would be binding on both the ECB and the Central Bank of Malta. Both institutions would be 
expected to intervene to preserve that value. This in turn explains why both the central rate and the 
fluctuation bands will have to be fixed by mutual agreement.  
The current regime also differs from the conditions governing ERM II in terms of the anchor currency. 
Strategies  based  on  free  floats,  pegs  to  currencies  other  than  the  euro  and  crawling  pegs  are  not 
compatible with ERM II. Consequently, Malta’s exchange rate, which apart from the euro is also linked 
to the US dollar and Sterling as anchor currencies, will have to be revised. The question we then have 
to answer is, “What exchange rate strategy should Malta pursue in the run-up to ERM II?” 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2002
 Experience suggests a move to more flexible regimes prior to ERM II 
Whereas the strategy to be pursued during EMU is prescribed in the Treaty, and while the institutional 
framework governing ERM II limits the strategies which would be compatible with that arrangement, in 
principle any exchange rate regime is permitted during the phase preceding ERM II. What matters is 
that the selected regime should contribute to real economic convergence with the economies of EU 
member countries,  macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  the  transition  to  a  functioning  market  economy 
capable of dealing with the competitive pressures within the EU.  
Indeed, accession countries are currently pursuing very different strategies. This diversity of exchange 
rate regimes can be explained in terms of the progress made thus far by these countries in disinflating 
their  economies;  their  degree  of  openness;  the  extent  of  capital  account  liberalisation;  and  the 
adequacy of their reserves. 
Generally speaking, during the early phase of transition when many accession countries were faced 
with  the  task  of  disinflating  their  economies  and  restoring  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy,  fixed 
exchange  rate  regimes  were  the  norm.  Then,  a  credible  anchor  in  the  form  of  the  currency  of  a 
low-inflation  trading  partner  was  viewed  as  the  best  strategy  for  meeting  these  objectives.  The 
rationale is not difficult to understand. The persistence of inflation differentials under a fixed exchange 
rate regime would lead to an appreciation of the real exchange rate, undermining a country’s external 
competitiveness.  The  mere  adoption  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  indeed  signals  the  intention  to 
subordinate  monetary  policy  to  exchange  rate  policy,  adding  to  the  credibility  of  anti-inflationary 
monetary decisions.  
As these countries progressed with disinflation and as the emphasis shifted towards integration with 
the  EU,  the  continuation  of  structural  reforms  and  attracting  sufficient  capital  flows  to  enhance  real 
convergence, a gradual move to more flexible regimes become feasible.  
At  first  sight,  such  a  shift  would  also  seem  to  be  indicated  for  Malta,  particularly  as  the  capital 
liberalisation  programme  approaches  full  implementation.  Moreover,  a  flexible  regime  has  the 
additional benefit of  yielding exchange rates that reflect market forces and economic fundamentals, 
enabling the authorities to gauge the proper level of the equilibrium exchange rate as the date of entry 
of ERM II draws closer. A more thorough examination of the facts, however, suggests otherwise. 
Malta likely to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime 
Whereas the  liberalisation  of capital flows could  indeed  lead to upward pressures on the exchange 
rate in some countries, such pressures are unlikely to be overwhelming in the case of Malta, not least 
because  a  functioning  market  economy  already  exists.  Econometric  evidence  in  fact  suggests  that 
because of its openness, the Maltese economy has already been exposed to significant capital flows, 
such that the impact of full capital account liberalisation is likely to be significantly smaller than that in 
some other accession countries . To some extent, the Bank’s external reserves, which have always 
remained well above 60 per cent of its liabilities as required by law, can also act as a cushion against 
external shocks. In addition, the structure of the Maltese economy is already very similar to that of its 
main trading partner, the EU, which makes a fixed peg arrangement more appropriate in the event of a 
symmetric shock. 
Empirical evidence also shows that the fixed exchange rate has been a valuable nominal anchor in 
restraining  price  and  wage  increases.  Inflation  has  in  fact  remained  below  3%  during  the  past  five 
years. This has been confirmed in an ECB assessment of Malta’s monetary and exchange rate policy 
in connection with the Pre-Accession Economic Programme Report for 2002, where it is noted that the 
current  regime  has  served  Malta  well  in  promoting  real  and  nominal  convergence.  In  view  of  these 
considerations, and given the importance which exchange rate stability has for trade and investment, 
the current regime remains the preferred arrangement for Malta.  
Taken  together,  therefore,  the  institutional  arrangements  governing  ERM  II  and  the  successful 
experience with the current fixed exchange rate regime suggest that the way forward will consist of a 
gradual reduction in the weight of the US dollar and sterling in the currency basket, such that by the 
time  Malta  will  be  ready  to  join  ERM  II  the  euro  will  be  the  sole  reference  currency.  If  the  United 
Kingdom were to join EMU in the meantime, this would automatically raise the proportion of the euro in 
the currency basket, making the approach to ERM II that much easier. Consistently with this objective, 
the weight of the euro in the basket was increased from 56.8% to 70% last August. 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 3
 Given that Malta’s optimal exchange rate strategy in the run-up to ERM II has been identified, the next 
question concerns the choice of the central exchange rate and the fluctuation bands. 
The choice of the central exchange rate and fluctuation bands 
Some might argue that the choice of the central rate is not vitally important. After all, the central rate 
can be re-aligned if necessary, although such a move would require the agreement of the ECB and 
the other national central banks participating in the euro area. In practice, however, the initial central 
rate  chosen  is  important  because  it  conveys  a  signal  to  the  market  about  what  the  ECB  and  the 
national authorities consider to be the equilibrium exchange rate. The determination of the central rate 
is also crucial because if the selected rate turns out to be incompatible with economic fundamentals, 
market intervention by the ECB and the Central Bank of Malta could become too frequent in relation to 
the resources available.  
Determining  the  appropriate  central  rate,  however,  is  not  an  easy  task.  Nevertheless,  though  the 
available  evidence  suggests  that  in  the  current  economic  climate  the  Maltese  lira  exchange  rate  is 
sustainable at prevailing levels, work is being undertaken in order to estimate an equilibrium rate. 
The second choice concerns the fluctuation band. It is a matter of choosing between the lower degree 
of uncertainty and volatility associated with a narrow fluctuation band and the flexibility inherent in a 
wider fluctuation band. On the one hand, the flexibility necessitated by the absence of capital controls 
would strengthen the case for a wider band. On the other hand, Malta’s dependence on foreign trade 
and investment, the country’s track record with a fixed peg as well as the Central Bank’s commitment 
to  price  stability  would  seem  to  justify  the  adoption  of  a  narrow  band.  As  real  convergence  is 
progressively  achieved  and  as  structural  reforms  proceed,  the  case  for  a  narrow  band  would  also 
become stronger. 
Should this latter path be followed, the burden of adjustment to external shocks would, of course, have 
to be borne by the real economy. In the first instance, this means pursuing a prudent fiscal policy. The 
current aim of fiscal policy is indeed to reduce the deficit to GDP ratio to around 2.5% by 2004, from 
5.3% last year and over 10% in the late 1990s. By restraining domestic absorption, tighter fiscal policy 
should enhance the credibility of the exchange rate peg. Moreover, a smaller borrowing requirement 
also frees up resources for the private sector and helps to contain upward pressure on interest rates, 
thereby  stimulating  economic  growth.  Finally,  bringing  the  budget  deficit  closer  to  balance  will  then 
give fiscal policy the leeway to respond in the event of adverse shocks or cyclical downturns.  
The response to shocks will also depend on the degree of flexibility in the economy as a whole. Unlike 
most accession countries, Malta has a long experience of a functioning market economy, driven by 
private  ownership  of  productive  assets  and  with  much  of  it  exposed  to  international  competition.  In 
general, therefore, the private sector has already proved that it can cope with adverse shocks. In this 
regard, the flexibility of the labour market has been especially important. This flexibility must, however, 
be enhanced in order to safeguard competitiveness. 
As is the case with any exchange rate strategy, the sustainability of the central rate and, with that, the 
fulfilment  of  the  Maastricht  criteria,  will  hinge  on  whether  that  rate  is  compatible  with  economic 
fundamentals. Fulfilling this criterion requires an unconditional willingness to defend the external value 
of the currency. For policy makers that means a commitment to abstain from practices that could be in 
conflict  with  the  objectives  of  exchange  rate  policy.  For  participants  in  foreign  exchange  markets, 
including the central bank, it implies the need to intervene in the market without hesitation.  
Within this context, the importance which the acquis assigns to the independence of central banks is 
understandable.  Whereas  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  has  been  formulating  monetary  policy 
independently since 1994, there is no doubt that the recent amendments to the Central Bank of Malta 
Act  have  put  the  Bank  in  a  better  position  to  defend  the  peg.  The  amended  Act,  in  fact,  not  only 
establishes price stability as the primary objective of the Bank, but it also protects the Bank from any 
external  interference and provides it  with the operating flexibility  necessary for effective and prompt 
intervention in foreign exchange markets. With the coming into force of these amendments, Malta has 
achieved a high degree of compliance with Chapter 11 of the acquis on EMU.  
Another crucial precondition for maintaining the exchange rate peg and ensuring a smooth transition 
to  the  single  currency  is  financial  sector  stability.  In  this  respect,  a  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework based on high international standards is already in place. Maltese legislation in this area in 
fact  incorporates  almost  all  the  features  of  the  corresponding  EU  directives,  and  the  legislative 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2002
 amendments  I  have  just  referred  to  have  brought  about  almost  total  harmonisation.  Institutional 
responsibilities are divided between the  Malta Financial Services Authority,  which is responsible for 
the regulation and supervision of banking, insurance and investment services; and the Central Bank, 
which is charged with ensuring the stability of the system as a whole. The Bank is also responsible for 
the domestic payments system, which is being upgraded in line with developments in the euro area. 
According  to  a  recent  background  paper  prepared  by  the  ECB  ,  Malta  already  has  a  financial 
intermediation  mechanism  that  broadly  mirrors  the  composition  of  different  market  segments  in  the 
euro  area  member  states.  Despite  the  growth  of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  and  the 
development of money and capital markets, the banks remain the key financial institutions. Total bank 
assets amount to more than double GDP, whereas the ratio of domestic credit to GDP is broadly in 
line with the EU average. More importantly, the banking system is generally healthy, enjoying ample 
liquidity and a broad capital base, with the ratio between own funds and risk-weighted assets standing 
close to 14%.  
Some institutional aspects of EMU preparations 
I  shall  conclude  with  some  remarks  on  preparations  of  a  more  operational  nature  for  eventual 
integration within the ESCB. An important area in which central banks will have obligations towards 
the ECB is that of statistics. This is because the formulation of monetary policy in the euro area rests 
on  the  timely  availability  of  standardised  economic,  monetary  and  financial  data  from  participating 
national central banks. In recognition of this future obligation, the Central Bank of Malta established a 
Technical  Committee  on  Financial  Statistics  in  2000  to  identify  the  changes  required  to  the  way 
statistics are classified and reported by the Central Bank and other financial sector reporting agents in 
order to comply with ECB and Eurostat requirements. This committee, which includes representatives 
of all the interested institutions, has already agreed on the necessary changes to the reporting forms 
through which credit and financial institutions submit data to the Central Bank and the Malta Financial 
Services  Authority.  Monetary  and  financial  data  are  in  fact  already  being  reported  to  the  ECB  and 
Eurostat. In the meantime, significant progress has also been made with respect to the establishment 
of a common direct reporting database between the Central Bank and the National Statistics Office for 
the dissemination to the ECB and Eurostat of balance of payments data and data relating to Malta’s 
investment position.  
In  the  area  of  payments,  a  new  settlement  system  has  been  established  for  the  handling  of  large 
inter-bank payments in line with EU and other international standards. This system, called the Malta 
Real-time Inter-Bank Settlement System (MARIS), provides for the immediate delivery and settlement 
of  wholesale  financial  payments  in  line  with  the  principle  of  finality  adopted  in  the  acquis  and  will 
eventually be integrated with the EU’s TARGET system.  
In the meantime, the Central Bank has already set up two committees to identify the changes which 
need  to  be  made  to  the  instruments,  contracts  and  control  procedures  which  the  Bank  uses  for 
monetary and foreign exchange operations. In both cases the necessary changes have been identified 
and are in the course of implementation. With the cooperation of the Malta Police, the Central Bank is 
also strengthening its capacity to detect cases involving counterfeit notes and to report such cases to 
the  ECB  and  Europol.  Finally,  the  Bank  is  analysing  ways  in  which  the  composition  of  its  official 
reserves could be revised as Malta progresses towards EMU membership. 
As noted above, a key aspect of the smooth operation of EMU is fiscal discipline. Earlier on, I made 
reference to the Stability and Growth Pact. This, however, is but one element in the framework which 
applies to the co-ordination of economic policy and fiscal surveillance in the euro area. In particular, 
euro  area  members  are  also  required  to  submit  reports  outlining  their  policy  intentions  over  the 
medium-term. As part of the preparations for their eventual participation in EU surveillance efforts in 
this area, accession countries have already started to submit Pre-Accession Economic Programmes 
(PEP). The Central Bank of Malta has been collaborating with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry 
of  Economic  Services  in  the  preparation  of  the  necessary  documentation.  To  date,  like  all  other 
accession countries, Malta has submitted two PEPs. 
Conclusion 
The road to EMU is clearly not an easy one as the tasks involved are both numerous and difficult. For 
a small central bank with limited resources they represent a formidable challenge. On a policy level, 
BIS Review 70/2002 
 5
 there are reasons to believe that the current fixed exchange arrangement should ideally be maintained 
until Malta adopts the euro. It should also be clear, however, that the Government’s commitment to 
contain the fiscal deficit and to pursue structural reforms is a vital prerequisite for the sustainability of 
the fixed exchange rate regime. The importance of fiscal discipline and of product and factor market 
flexibility will indeed increase as Malta progresses towards EMU. 
6 
 BIS Review 70/2002
