 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global trends for the emerging market economies 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 22nd ACI 
Asia-Pacific Congress on Financial Markets in the K-economy, Kuala Lumpur, 31 October 2002. 
 The  recent  decade  has  experienced  a  dramatic  transformation  of  financial  markets  with  far  reaching 
implications on the growth prospects for the global economy. The single most important source of this 
change  has  been  the  rapid  advancement  in  technology.  Indeed,  the  revolutionary  process  brought 
about  by  the  advances  in  technology  has  created  new  challenges  and  opportunities.  These 
developments  have  been  reinforced  by  the  process  of  financial  deregulation  and  liberalization.  The 
recent  decade  has  also  witnessed  a  new  wave  of  international  crises,  although  in  the  more  recent 
episodes, widespread contagion has been contained. Nevertheless, with highly volatile financial flows 
and heightened uncertainty in the global financial markets, the potential for contagion remains.  
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  at  this  22nd  ACI  Asia  Pacific  Congress  on  Financial  Markets  in  the 
K-economy.  In  this  more  globalised,  digitised  and  knowledge-driven  environment,  the  challenge  of 
restoring  calm  in  financial  markets  is  no  longer  a  challenge  being  encountered  by  small  emerging 
market  economies  alone,  but  is  also  a  challenge  being  faced  by  the  larger  advanced  economies. 
These  developments  have  indeed  tested  policy  makers  across  the  globe.  The  focus  of  my  remarks 
today will be on the implications of these global trends for the emerging market economies in general, 
and the East Asian region in particular and the potential for achieving enhanced growth in this more 
challenging environment.  
Ladies and gentlemen  
The recent decade has also witnessed a dramatic change in the form and nature of the globalisation 
process. The initial waves of globalisation in the form of trade have been followed by globalisation of 
corporations  and  in  the  recent  years  by  globalisation  of  financial  flows.  While  it  has  been 
acknowledged  that  these  developments  have  brought  more  complex  and  new  risks,  their  impact  is 
significantly  more  pronounced  and  far  reaching  for  emerging  economies.  In  this  environment, 
emerging  economies  have  been  presented  with  a  global  landscape  in  which  their  very  ability  to 
participate effectively in the globalisation process has been rendered increasingly more difficult.  
Globalisation  is  not  a  new  phenomenon  for  the  East  Asian  economies.  Indeed,  the  globalisation 
process  has  been  an  important  element  in  the  remarkable  growth  and  prosperity  that  has  been 
achieved  by  the  East  Asian  economies.  East  Asia  was  able  to  ride  the  successive  waves  of 
globalisation in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. Many of the economies experienced a quantum leap into 
the industrialisation process as trade flows expanded at double-digit rates during most of this period. 
While  the  East  Asian  economies  benefited  from  this  global  trend,  the  economies  have  not  however, 
been  immune  to  external  shocks  arising  from  shifts  in  international  demand.  The  economies  were 
affected  by  factors  such  as  swings  in  commodity  prices,  significant  oil  price  adjustments,  and  the 
slowdown in the major economies. While the impact of these trade  - related shocks on the domestic 
economies  of  the  East  Asian  countries  involved  costs,  in  terms  of  slower  growth  and  dampened 
domestic economic activity, these economies were able to adjust to the sudden changes. In such an 
environment, there was also greater predictability in the direction of the economic trends, providing the 
basis on which appropriate policy responses were implemented to manage the economic adjustment 
process.  
Emerging  economies  in  particular,  in  the  East  Asian  region  participated  in  this  globalisation  process 
and  benefited  from  the  enhanced  trade  activities.  In  the  recent  decade  however,  there  has  been  a 
distinct change in the nature of the globalisation process. Globalisation is no longer confined to trade 
and  direct  investment,  but  increasingly  involves  large  cross-  border  financial  flows.  Over  the  recent 
decade,  these  financial  flows  have  dominated  the  global  market  place.  An  emerging  concern  is  that 
this  trend  would  result  in  a  widening  of  the  divide  between  the  developed  and  emerging  and 
developing economies.  
In  a  world  in  which  the  magnitude  of  the  financial  flows  are  significant,  in  which  the  financial 
transactions have instantaneous implications, in which the flows are unconstrained by any regulatory 
framework,  then  size,  the  degree  of  development  and  the  degree  of  resilience  of  economies  will 
matter. Countries that are small, and have less developed economic and financial systems, are open 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 1
and  liberalized,  and  that  do  not  have  the  range  of  policy  options  at  their  disposal,  will  be  highly 
disadvantaged in this global market place. It is this globalisation process that will contribute towards 
widening the existing disparities between nations.  
Against this trend, the current global economic and financial environment has been characterised by 
increased  uncertainty.  There  is  uncertainty  in  the  global  economic  outlook,  financial  markets  and 
geopolitical developments. The expected strengthening of recovery in the advanced economies has 
yet to occur. Financial reporting irregularities and the weakening of the corporate sector has affected 
confidence,  contributing  to  the  increased  volatility  in  the  global  equity  markets.  Further  risks  also 
remain on the horizon, including those emanating from structural imbalances in some of the advanced 
economies.  These  developments  have  res ulted in unstable and highly volatile conditions in both the 
asset  and  currency  markets.  However,  despite  the  major  declines  in  asset  markets,  large  shifts  in 
financial  flows,  significant  movements  in  major  currencies,  financial  stress  in  the  corporate  and 
financial  sectors  in  a  number  of  countries  followed  by  overall  economic  weakness,  the  East  Asian 
economies have emerged relatively resilient.  
Going forward, it is recognized that a higher tolerance level to sudden changes in economic conditions 
and  to  the  more  volatile  market  conditions  is  necessary.  Building  such  tolerance  levels  involves 
enhancing the capacity, strength and resilience of the economy to cope with the external shocks to the 
system. Indeed, the East Asian region has the potential to enhance its capacity to deal with the risks 
and vulnerabilities and the potential to continue its growth process.  
While countries in the East Asian region have many common characteristics, they are also diverse in 
several aspects. Common features include openness and export orientation and a high rate of growth 
of manufactured exports. Most countries have a high rate of capital accumulation supported by a high 
rate of savings. Macroeconomic stability has prevailed in most countries. Inflation has been relatively 
low and any external imbalances were of manageable proportions while the fiscal deficits have been 
modest and Government debt levels have been kept low. The countries in the region are, however, 
diverse  in  terms  of  natural  resource  endowments,  the  stage  of  financial  sector  development,  the 
degree of market orientation of their economies, the choice of exchange rate regime and the degree of 
public  policy  activism.  The  overall  growth  strategy  of  the  region  has  essentially  been  based  on  an 
export -oriented industrialisation drive. This model, which is based on high savings and investments, 
has indeed served the region well. In the current environment of slower growth, the strategies adopted 
by  several  of  the  East  Asian  economies  have  been  to  implement  a  series  of  pro-growth policies to 
contain the impact of the global slowdown on the domestic economy. The strong initial conditions in an 
environment of an improving outlook in the major economies, lends support for increased optimism for 
stronger  growth  in  the  near  term.  Going  forward,  however,  the  growth  prospects  in  the  East  Asian 
economies are likely to continue to depend to a greater extent on domestic demand. The strength of 
export growth will depend on the overall pace of the global recovery.  
The strategies  that Malaysia has adopted include initiatives to strengthen and diversify the economic 
base  and  to  develop  and  strengthen  the  financial  infrastructure  including  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework. The emphasis was on pacing the liberalisation process according to the ability 
of the system to absorb a more competitive environment, and developing important policy instruments 
to enhance the effectiveness of policy. Measures were also instituted to strengthen risk management 
practices  at  the  national  and  corporate  level,  establish  an  institutional  arrangement  to  undertake 
surveillance  and  maintain  an  appropriate  exchange  rate  regime  that  will  effectively  and  efficiently 
facilitate  international  trade  and  investment.  Finally  efforts  were  also  focused  on  promoting regional 
co-operation.  
There  are  a  number  of  other  reinforcing  sources  of  impetus  that  have  potential  of  enhancing  the 
growth prospects for the region. Demographically, Asia as a whole has a relatively young population. 
As a result, the region going forward will possess the largest pool of labour in the world. Harnessed in 
a productive and efficient manner, this pool has the potential to generate sustained growth for Asia.  
There  is  also  potential  for  intra-regional  trade  and  financial  flows  to  grow in East Asia. The ASEAN 
region  alone  consists  of  more  than  500  million  people.  The  market  within  East  Asia  provides  an 
important  new  source  of  endogenous  growth  within  the  region.  The  changing  structural  pattern  of 
trade  in  the  region  reflects  the  growing  intra-regional  trade  which  now  accounts  for  almost  half  of 
Asia's  total  trade  from  just  a  fifth  a  decade  ago.  Intra-regional  trade  has  also  been  enhanced  by  the 
opening up of large regional markets such as China. The share of East Asian exports to China has 
doubled  in  the  past  decade  to  about  10%.  While  there  has  been  significant  attention  on  the 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2002
 competition  that  China  will  create  for  other  countries  in  the  region,  the  focus  should  also  be  on  the 
complementarities that are already feeding the regional growth process.  
A third discernable trend in the region is the growing importance of domestic demand in the regional 
economies,  supported  by  domestic-oriented  policies  in  recent  years,  which  would  ensure  that  the 
gains  in  intra-regional  trade  could  be  sustained.  In  terms  of  financial  flows,  the  development  of 
regional markets is contributing towards strengthening the prospects for a deepening of Asian financial 
markets and promoting greater regional financial integration. The region is also studying the feasibility 
of establishing an Asian Bond Market to recycle part of the region's high level of savings to finance 
productive  activity  within  the  regional  countries.  To  encourage  the  regional  flows  to  be  recycled  into 
investments in the region, efforts have been taken to develop the capital market particularly in the area 
of  securitisation,  credit  guarantee  and  market  infrastructure.  The  regional  economies  recognize  the 
importance of developing these markets thus co-ordinated efforts through various initiatives have been 
undertaken  to  remove  impediments  to  these  developments.  With  further  lowering  of  trade  barriers 
under  the  ASEAN  Free  Trade  Area  and  ASEAN+3  initiatives,  intra-regional  investment  flows  would 
further increase.  
The intensification of regional co-operation has been enhanced in recent years. In the aftermath of the 
Asian  financial  crisis,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  level  of  financial  co-operation  among  the 
Asian  countries.  These  efforts  have  revolved  around  swap  facilities  to  provide  emergency  liquidity 
assistance,  regional  surveillance  and  peer  review  to  enhance  regional  financial  and  monetary 
co-operation,  regional  capacity  building  and  the  enhancement  of  skills  and  capabilities  of  regional 
financial  regulators  and  policymakers.  Regional  surveillance  and  peer  review  in  particular  is  an 
important  step  forward  as  it  will  contribute  to  confidence  building  and  would  complement  the 
implementation  of  the  various  regional  financing  schemes.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  in 
achieving  the  objectives  of  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  to  create  swap  facilities  to  provide  emergency 
liquidity  assistance  for  the  region.  Closer  co-operative  efforts  in  the  standardisation  of  systems  and 
documentation  procedures  would  also  contribute  to  facilitating  intra-regional  trade  and  investment 
among  economies  within  the  region,  as  well  as  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  Effective  co-operation in 
these  areas  will  augment  the  foundations  for  realising  the  tremendous  potential  that  this  region 
possesses for future growth and prosperity.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
An  important  transformation  in  the  international  financial  landscape  is  the  introduction  of  the  euro 
which  has  indeed  been  a  defining  event.  The  objective  was  clearly  to  facilitate  trade  and  investment 
within  the  region  by  removing  the  distortions  in  economic  relationships  introduced  by  exchange  rate 
volatility. As a result, where there were previously 12 currencies, there is now only one. Corporations 
dealing with the 12 euro countries are now able to keep their books in one set of accounts and make 
operating and investment decisions without having to be concerned about exchange rate changes. For 
the rest of the world, it has been described as “island of price stability” in addition to the dollar area, to 
which  capital  can  flow.  Four  factors  are  important  in  determining  a  currency's  international  role: 
relative stability, which would reduce the risk of holding assets in that currency; a strong exchange 
rate;  so  that  capital  losses  can  be  avoided;  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets  for  that  currency,  to 
enable  holders  to  diversify,  liquidate  and  adjust  their  investment  portfolios;  and  finally,  a  strong 
regulatory support to minimise the possibility of crises. Indeed, the international success of the euro in 
coming years would depend on the extent to which these criteria are met.  
The introduction of the euro has of course given impetus to other regional initiatives to pursue similar 
efforts to unify national currencies into a single regional currency. Such initiatives are being pursued in 
Latin America, Africa and the Middle East. In ASEAN, a taskforce has be set up to look into the issue. 
Clearly,  with  growing  regional  economic  integration,  not  just  within  ASEAN  but  also  among  the 
ASEAN+3  countres,  enhanced  regional 
financial  cooperation  would  play  a  beneficial  and 
complementary role. Regional policy makers recognise that a single currency is a long-term option for 
the region. An important pre-condition for a single currency would be a significant degree of economic 
and  financial  convergence and integration. It would also require greater labour and capital mobility in 
the region.  
While the single currency may be not in the region's immediate future, this does not preclude greater 
cooperation  on  exchange  rate  issues  and  other  forms  of  financial  co-operation  among  regional 
economies.  There  is  indeed  potential  to  benefit  from  enhanced  financial  cooperation  and  for  the 
creation of mechanisms that would enable the region to better cope with periods of highly unstable 
financial  market  conditions.  Institutional  infrastructure  such  as  regional  surveillance  and  financial 
BIS Review 62/2002 
 3
support mechanisms achieved under the Chiang Mai Initiative can be further enhanced over time to 
provide temporary liquidity support to regional countries and prevent the type of violent exchange rate 
movements  observed  during  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  Such  institutional  arrangements  need  to  be 
reinforced with greater regional economic integration.  
In addition, to encourage part of the financial flows from the region to be recycled into investments in 
the  capital  market,  efforts  have  been  taken  to  further  develop  the  capital  market,  particularly  in  the 
area of securitization, credit guarantee and market infrastructure. The regional economies recognise 
the importance of developing  the  capital  market.  Thus,  coordinated  efforts  through  various  initiatives 
have been undertaken to remove impediments to the development of these markets.  
Confronted  by  the  current  climate  of  uncertainty  in  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets,  our 
resolve  has  most  certainly  been  to  maintain  constant  vigilance  towards  all  sources  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities and to preserve economic and financial stability. Efforts are also on going in financial 
and  corporate  sector  reforms  to  strengthen  our  financial  and  economic  foundations.  The  progress 
achieved thus far has strengthened the resilience of regional economies and financial systems. At the 
same time, measures have also been put in place by many of the regional economies to manage the 
risks from both external and internal sources.  
From  the  Malaysian  perspective  as  a  small  emerging  market  economy,  the  long-term  solution  is  to 
enhance  resilience  and  increase  the  tolerance  level  to  absorb  volatility  and  to  be  in  a  position  to 
withstand  external  shocks  and  any  slowdown  in  global  growth.  It  is  the  underlying  economic  and 
financial  foundations  and  its  strength  that  will  determine  the  capacity  and  resilience,  and  thus,  the 
ability  to  ride  out  the  storms  and  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  that  the  external  environment 
accords to achieve sustainable performance over the medium and longer-term.  
4 
 BIS Review 62/2002
