 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
3 December 2002. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  continue  today  our  regular  dialogue.  I  will  start  my  opening  remarks  with  an 
explanation  of  the  European  Central  Bank's  assessment  of  economic  and  monetary  developments. 
Subsequently,  I  will  address  some  issues  related  to  the  EU  arrangements  for  financial  regulation, 
supervision and stability. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Already at the time of our last meeting in October, the expectation had faded that economic activity in 
the euro area would reach growth rates in line with trend potential by the end of 2002. In the course of 
the summer, the downside risks to economic growth had become evident, reducing the likelihood that 
upward risks to price stability would materialise. This development was mainly related to the episodes 
of  turbulence  in  financial  markets  and  to  the  persistence  of  geopolitical  tensions,  which  created 
uncertainty and affected the outlook for economic activity in the euro area and at the global level.  
Starting with the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, since our last meeting monetary growth has 
remained rather strong in the euro area. However, recent monetary data need to be interpreted with 
caution,  as  the  dynamics  in  M3  over  recent  months  have  been  considerably  boosted  by  high 
uncertainty  in  financial  markets,  which  has  favoured  portfolio  shifts  to  the  more  liquid  instruments 
included  in  M3.  At  the  same  time,  the  persisting  strong  monetary  growth  and  the  resulting  ample 
liquidity have also been driven by the low level of short-term interest rates, which stimulates demand 
for the most liquid assets which are included in the narrow aggregate M1. Loans to the private sector 
have stabilised at growth rates between 5 and 5 ½% in the most recent past. These are levels which, 
in real terms, are not low given the cyclical situation. 
Overall,  more  liquidity  is  available  than  would  be  needed  to  finance  sustainable,  non-inflationary 
growth. At the same time, in the current economic environment, we do not see the risks of this excess 
liquidity translating into inflationary pressures in the near future. 
Turning to the second pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy, and starting with economic activity, 
the  available  evidence  indicates  that  economic  activity  has  most  likely  continued  to  grow  only 
moderately in the third quarter of this year. As already noted, the hesitant pace of economic activity, as 
compared  with  our  expectations  in  early  2002,  together  with  lacklustre  confidence,  reflects  the 
significant degree of uncertainty that has been building up over recent months. Early indications for 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2002  suggest  that  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  remained  broadly 
unchanged. 
For the time being, the main scenario for the euro area remains that economic growth should return to 
rates close to potential in the course of 2003. This expectation is consistent with forecasts published 
by international organisations and private institutions. In addition, financial markets have shown signs 
of stabilisation in recent weeks, although volatility in the stock markets has remained high by historical 
standards. The expectation of an improvement in economic activity in the euro area is contingent on 
the  unwinding  of  the  current  high  level  of  uncertainty  and  on  a  recovery  of  growth  in  private 
consumption, which has shown signs of resilience in the recent past. In addition, this expectation is 
also based on a gradual recovery of world demand which, together with the low levels of interest rates, 
should help to strengthen investment.  
However,  there  are  several  downside  risks  to  this  scenario.  They  relate  to  the  persistence  of 
macroeconomic imbalances in the global economy, geopolitical tensions and the uncertainty about the 
size of the adverse effects of the past sharp declines in stock prices on aggregate demand in the euro 
area and in the other major regions of the world. Moreover, risks also stem from the fact that structural 
rigidities  in  the  euro  area  economy  do  not  facilitate  the  process  of  price  and  wage  adjustments  to 
external shocks. Thus, overall, it remains difficult to predict at this juncture the timing and strength of 
the acceleration of economic activity.  
BIS Review 71/2002 
 1
 Regarding  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  rates  have  been  slightly  above  2%  in  recent 
months. These annual HICP inflation rates are likely  to increase in the remainder of 2002 and stay 
above 2% in the early months of next year, mainly on account of base effects and increases in indirect 
taxes and administered prices in a number of countries. Subsequently, however, HICP inflation rates 
should  fall  again,  and  provided  that  oil  prices  do  not  increase  significantly  and  wage  moderation 
prevails, reach levels in line with our definition of price stability in the course of 2003. Looking further 
ahead, both the strengthening of the euro exchange rate this year and the subdued economic activity 
continue to contribute towards reducing inflationary pressures. Furthermore, for price pressures to be 
contained, it is crucial that the upward trend in labour cost indicators observed in recent years does 
not  continue.  The  notable  inertia  in  wages  despite  the  subdued  economic  expansion  has  been  of 
some  concern,  although  recent  developments  may  suggest  that  wage  costs  have  not  accelerated 
further in the course of this year. 
At our last monetary policy meeting on 7 November we discussed extensively whether or not to reduce 
the key ECB interest rates, in view of the high uncertainty surrounding future economic growth and its 
implications for medium-term inflationary pressures. Summing up, there were elements in favour and 
against both alternatives. On the one hand, the subdued trends in economic activity and the stronger 
exchange rate of the euro supported the view that inflationary pressures should decline. On the other 
hand, the stubbornly persistent rate of inflation excluding the volatile components of energy and food 
prices as well as monetary and wage trends, argued for caution. Overall, on that occasion the view to 
keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged prevailed. However, we also indicated that we needed to 
monitor the downside risks to economic growth for their impact on medium term inflationary pressures.  
Since  our  last  meeting,  the  evidence  has  strengthened  that  inflationary  pressures  are  easing 
somewhat and downside risks to economic growth have not vanished. 
Regarding  fiscal  policy  in  the  euro  area,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  budgetary  discipline  is 
indispensable  for  the  success  of  EMU.  Fiscal  discipline  strengthens  the  conditions  for  strong 
sustainable growth conducive to employment.  Sound fiscal positions also provide scope for dealing 
with  the  expected  fiscal  challenges  caused  by  population  ageing.  Clearly,  therefore,  sound  public 
finances, as enshrined in the Treaty and further developed in the Stability and Growth Pact, are in the 
interest of all Member States.  
I  want  to  stress  that  the  current  fiscal  framework  strikes  the  right  balance  between  discipline  and 
flexibility.  By  prescribing  a  medium-term  objective  of  budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in 
surplus, the Stability and Growth Pact guarantees that fiscal policies will preserve the sustainability of 
public finances while providing sufficient flexibility for automatic fiscal stabilisers to operate.  
While it is clear that, for many – partly formal – reasons, annual budgetary targets always need to be 
set  in  nominal  terms,  the  assessment  of  fiscal  policies  naturally  must  take  into  account  cyclical 
developments. Though the discussion surrounding this issue may, at times, appear confusing, it does 
not reflect a flaw in the Pact as some critics claim.  
In this context, it is worth recalling that most Member States have reached budget positions which are 
"close to balance or in surplus". Current fiscal problems in other countries have arisen not because the 
rules are inflexible, but because countries have not honoured their commitments to make progress in 
fiscal consolidation, particularly  during good times. It is now high time for the countries with deficits 
approaching or even exceeding 3% of GDP to honour their commitment to respect the rules. We very 
much support the Eurogroup agreement that all countries with remaining imbalances should undertake 
to fulfil their commitments by implementing a clear consolidation strategy. And we very much believe 
that a growth-oriented consolidation policy – which aims at strengthening the productive forces of the 
economy – will be an important means to strengthen the economic prospects for the euro area at this 
juncture. 
Additional efforts regarding transparency and timeliness in the implementation of the procedures of the 
Pact  are  also  necessary.  They  will  help  convince  the  public  that  the  current  framework  is  fully 
successful  in  preserving  discipline  and  providing  flexibility.  In  this  context,  the  Commission  recently 
issued  a  communication  which  aims  to  clarify  certain  aspects  of  the  fiscal  framework  while 
strengthening  its  main  principles  and  objectives.  The  ECB  considers  this  a  good  starting-point  for 
rebuilding confidence in the budgetary policy framework. 
Finally, neither the discussion on monetary or fiscal policy, nor the current economic outlook should 
divert  attention  from  the  need  to  implement  decisively  the  structural  reform  agenda.  We  note  with 
some concern that progress is slow in many countries of the euro area. I should like to emphasise that 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 the  benefits  of  these  reforms  for  the  economic  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  are  likely  to  be 
substantial. While these benefits will only be fully reaped over the medium term, I believe that reforms 
would be particularly important at the current juncture. Indeed, determined structural reforms in labour, 
product  and  financial  markets  should  make  a  significant  contribution  to  strengthening  confidence, 
making the euro area more attractive for investors. In the end, this will also support economic growth 
in the short term. 
Issues related to the EU arrangements for financial regulation, supervision and stability 
Today,  the  ECOFIN  Council  is  considering  adapting  the  EU  structures  for  financial  regulation, 
supervision  and  stability.  The  ECB  keenly  supports  the  basic  thrust  of  such  proposals,  namely  to 
reduce barriers to further financial integration and to maintain systemic stability in financial markets, 
which have become increasingly interconnected in a single currency area. Against this background, 
the  respect  of  the  subsidiarity  principle  in  supervisory  matters  necessitates  enhanced  co-operation 
between national authorities.  
The ECB has repeatedly stressed that in the banking sector close and effective co-operation between 
central banks and supervisory authorities is crucial for the promotion of financial stability, a point that I 
am glad to see strongly backed also in recent resolutions of the European Parliament. The ECB has 
also emphasised that technical authorities need to be represented in regulatory committees and that 
any new arrangements for financial stability should draw on the technical expertise at central banks 
and  supervisory  agencies.  All  these  points  are  reflected  in  the  proposals  endorsed  by  the  ECOFIN 
Council in October.  
Now  the  crucial  phase  is  beginning  when  the  ability  of  the  new  arrangements  to  meet  the  high 
expectations they are raising will be tested in practice. The measure of success will be whether the 
overall  rulebook,  with  which  financial  institutions  operating  throughout  the  EU  have  to  comply, 
becomes more  homogeneous  across  countries.  This  will  require  a  fine  re-balancing  of  primary  and 
secondary Community legislation and national rulebooks, which should be conducted in a transparent 
manner by the committees to be set up under the new supervisory regime, paying careful attention to 
the costs of compliance. The review of the new arrangements that was requested by the European 
Parliament  will  offer  an  appropriate  tool  for  checking  the  progress  made.  Let  me  conclude  by 
highlighting  that  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  should  step  up  information  sharing  and 
develop  joint  assessments.  This  will  also  allow  the  effectiveness  of  the  new  arrangements  in 
supporting financial stability in the Single Market to be tested. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 3
