 William L Rutledge: Implementing the New Basel Accord 
Speech  by  Mr  William  L  Rutledge,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York,  at  The  British  Banker’s  Association  Basel  2  /  CAD  3  Half  Day  Conference,  London,  UK, 
13 March 2003. 
 Introduction 
Thank you and good morning. It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to offer some thoughts on 
Basel implementation issues - thoughts that will reflect partly my role as the head of Bank Supervision 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and partly my role as a member of the Basel Committee.  
In  that  latter  capacity,  I’d  like  to  begin  by  offering  my  thanks  for  all  of  the  extremely  helpful  and 
constructive comments that the BBA has provided throughout the Basel consultative process. In my 
experience, having a candid dialogue between the industry and the supervisory community is the best 
way to develop well informed regulatory policy. Given our desire for Basel II to be consistent with the 
best existing and emerging risk measurement and management practices, getting specific feedback 
from the industry is particularly critical. It is also critical that we understand calibration issues so that 
we set appropriate numerical standards; in that connection, I’d like to offer my further thanks to all of 
the  banks  represented  here  that  participated  in  the  latest  Quantitative  Impact  Survey.  I  know  that 
gathering all the necessary data and providing it in the prescribed format was a daunting task. Just 
know that our task - analyzing the results of the exercise with data from nearly 50 countries and over 
250 institutions - is quite a challenge as well. I expect that Patricia Jackson of the Bank of England, 
who has led that effort, will comment on the QIS results later on today. 
In his remarks, Sir Andrew shared some observations on the objectives of the New Basel Accord. My 
focus  will  be  on  how  we  expect  to  achieve  some  of  those  goals,  through  addressing  various 
challenges that lie ahead to implementing the New Accord. First, I will offer some broad observations 
on  implementation  issues,  including  some  thoughts  on  the  challenges  of  applying  it  across 
jurisdictions. Then, I will get into more specific detail on the preparations banks and supervisors are 
making  to  implement  the  new  framework.  I  will  be  drawing  on  the  United  States’  experience  to 
highlight the kinds of preparations that will be needed generally.  
Implementation of the New Accord 
Overview 
As  you  know,  the  Basel  Committee  is  quite  close  to  finalizing  the  new  capital  framework  after  a 
number  of  years  of  work.  Issuance  of  the  next  consultative  paper  will  be  a  tremendously  important 
step in getting a new approach in place. But as that step is taken, other critical actions must then occur 
- in particular rulemaking processes, and preparations by the supervisors and the industry for the New 
Accord.  
With respect to the former, in each country or set of countries, processes to establish specific rules 
must occur to ensure that more local issues are addressed in an appropriate manner. In the United 
States, as in the EU, that process will be a very formal one.  
While the national rulemaking is going on, banks and supervisors around the world will also need to 
think through the practical implications surrounding implementation. To be sure, implementation of the 
New Accord will require a substantial resource commitment on the part of both banks and supervisors.  
However, I think it is important to emphasize that the efforts banks will need to undertake to comply 
with Basel II build, to a very significant extent, on the good work that many large and well-managed 
banks already have in train to improve their own risk management and measurement approaches. For 
example, many banks have for some time been devoting increased attention to the tracking of loan 
performance,  and  to  the  more  sophisticated  assessment  of  their  loan  quality.  Further,  banks  have 
been analyzing their managerial processes - making sure they have the right system of checks and 
balances,  with  appropriate  use  of  independent  experts  who  would  not  gain  from  overly  favorable 
assessments. Time and effort has also been invested in developing richer and more meaningful data 
on past, and likely future, credit performance - data that are needed to fuel management information 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 1
 and control systems for senior management use. I expect that much of the cost to banks of adopting 
the  advanced  approaches  of  Basel  II  will  come  from  pushing  ahead  on  precisely  these  types  of 
initiatives. 
This is not to minimize the costs involved in coming into full Basel compliance, but rather to emphasize 
the  extent  to  which  bank  risk  management  and  supervisory  capital  requirements  share  common 
objectives  in  pursuit  of  the  benefits  that  Sir  Andrew  described.  Those  benefits  -  both  to  individual 
banks and to the financial services sector more generally - are real and valuable. We know all too well 
the costs to society of bank weakness and failures. As the largest banks continue to grow, to prosper 
and  to  pursue  new  opportunities,  they  must  simultaneously  make  the  investments  required  to 
understand and manage their existing risks more fully, and to address any new risks appropriately.  
Likewise,  the  new  framework  is  providing  supervisors  with  both  opportunities  and  incentives  to 
enhance  their  ability  to  identify  and  respond  to  risk  in  the  banks  they  supervise.  I  will  discuss  the 
challenges  for  individual  supervisors  in  a  moment,  but  let  me  offer  a  few  thoughts  now  on  the 
challenges  for  supervisors  to  collaborate  more  effectively  with  one  another.  More  effective 
collaboration  was  of  course  a  key  reason  for  the  establishment  of  the  Basel  Committee.  The 
Committee  provides  an  excellent  forum  for  open  and  constructive  dialogue  among  banking 
supervisors.  This  spirit  of  communication  will  be  more  crucial  than  ever  as  the  new  framework  is 
adopted across national jurisdictions.  
It is clearly very important that the New Accord be implemented in a consistent manner across various 
jurisdictions. Market competition should be driven by each bank’s strengths, rather than by differences 
in  each  country’s  rules.  Accordingly,  the  Basel  Committee  established  the  Accord  Implementation 
Group.  As  you  know,  this  group  is  responsible  for  promoting  the  consistency  and  quality  of 
implementation  of  the  New  Accord  and  facilitating  the  exchange  of  information  among  national 
supervisors  about  bank  and  supervisory  practices.  Through  the  implementation  group  senior  line 
supervisors  are  beginning  to  share  among  themselves  very  practical  insights  on  how  to  assess 
internal risk management processes. We think that this detailed sharing of information among people 
who are on the front lines of supervision will go a long way to ensuring that assessments can be done 
in a more consistent fashion across jurisdictions.  
We appreciate the very strong endorsement that both the BBA and LIBA have offered in welcoming 
the formation of the Accord Implementation Group. Indeed, we know that both associations are keenly 
interested in how the group may well help ensure that a single banking organization active in many 
jurisdictions not face divergent sets of expectations from different banking supervisors under the New 
Accord. I am pleased to note that the Accord Implementation Group has taken up this concern among 
its first topics for discussion. An important goal of the coordination and information sharing is to help 
ensure that national supervisors, in assessing the eligibility of an internationally active bank’s internal 
rating system, do not arrive at different conclusions. 
Preparing for the New Accord 
Let me get into more detail now on what both banks and supervisors will need to do to prepare for the 
Accord,  by  describing  what  we  are  doing  in  the  United  States.  I  am  sure  our  experience  will  have 
parallels in the UK and elsewhere. 
Challenges for banks 
To  begin  with,  we  have  looked  to  get  our  arms  around  where  the  major  firms  actually  stand  in 
preparing  for  Basel  II,  and  to  pinpoint  the  major  challenges  that  lie  ahead  for  them  as  they  look 
towards implementing the advanced approaches to credit and operational risk.  
Importantly, our dialogue with the banks has focused on where they stand in meeting the minimum 
standards for entry to, and on-going use of, the IRB approach. Our strong sense is that banks have 
both the desire and the commitment to continue to develop their internal ratings systems in a manner 
consistent  with  the  requirements  of  the  IRB  framework.  The  discussions  with  the  industry  have, 
however,  highlighted  various  areas  where  banks  may  need  to  expand  their  efforts  in  preparing  for 
implementation. I will offer comments on four areas where more work is needed:  
a. 
b. 
the design and structure of rating systems;  
the necessary controls to ensure that ratings are accurate and up to date;  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 c. 
d. 
the availability and quality of credit data; and, finally  
the overall corporate governance approach  
Rating system design 
a. 
The first area concerns the design of a risk rating system, which is, of course, central to ensuring the 
effectiveness of the IRB approach. The Basel Committee believes that banks’ internal rating systems 
should accurately and consistently differentiate between degrees of risk. The minimum IRB standards 
in this area build on the strongest risk management practices observed in the industry. 
To illustrate the point, many organizations either already have, or are in the process of developing a 
ratings system that captures both the risk of borrower default, as well as transaction-specific factors 
that shed light on the amount of loss that would arise if default occurs. In other words, these banks’ 
systems are now oriented to capturing the several essential components in estimating credit risk under 
the IRB approach. 
Credit risk rating systems are clearly improving in various dimensions, including how finely they seek 
to distinguish differing degrees of borrower risk. To do so, banks typically look to expand the number 
of  ratings  categories  into  which  they  slot  their  exposures.  However,  just  establishing  more  rating 
categories is not enough. The challenge is for banks to define clearly and objectively the criteria for 
these  ratings  categories  in  order  to  provide  more  meaningful  assessments  of  both  individual  credit 
exposures and, ultimately, their overall risk profile. The clarity and transparency of the ratings criteria 
will be critical to ensuring that ratings are assigned in a disciplined and reliable manner. 
Controls over the rating system 
b. 
Of  course,  a  ratings  system  is  useless  without  the  necessary  system  of  checks  and  balances,  or 
control structure, which is the second area I will discuss as needing banks’ attention. Banks must have 
the proper controls in place to ensure that the rating system is performing as intended, and that its 
ratings are accurate - that is, that a "5" rating really is a "5" and that a "7" really is a "7." There are at 
least three major structural elements that are necessary in any good ratings system control structure: 
• 
The first is independence in the process of assigning ratings; the people assigning ratings 
(and  even  approving  loans)  should  be  independent  of  the  marketing  department  and 
revenue producers.  
A second check is having a subsequent review of ratings by an independent review group. 
This  group  is  charged  with  reviewing  ratings  after  the  fact  -  that  is,  after  origination  -  for 
accuracy,  timeliness  and  consistency.  Moreover,  both  the  ratings  system  and  individual 
ratings should be subject to review by the internal audit department.  
A third and final critical element is transparency in the ratings process. Here, what we would 
expect is that the ratings criteria are objective, and that the bank has in place policies and 
procedures  that  clearly  document  the  rationale  for  each  ratings  category.  The  more 
transparent the process is, the easier it is for a third party to audit the ratings through some 
form of replication of the analysis.  
  These  three  elements  -  independence  of  the  ratings  process,  internal  review  of  those  ratings,  and 
transparency - all contribute toward stronger controls over the ratings process. Such controls over the 
risk ratings  process  must be  complemented  by  the  collection  of  good  data  on  which  to  base  those 
ratings, which is the third area of focus for banks. 
Data requirements and validation 
c. 
Clearly,  a  system  is  only  as  good  as  the  inputs  that  go  into  it.  Accordingly,  banks  using  the  IRB 
approach will need to be able to measure the key statistical drivers of credit risk. I would emphasize 
that  the  Basel  Committee  clearly  recognizes  that  there  is  more  than  one  way  to  accomplish  this 
purpose. The minimum Basel standards provide banks with the flexibility to rely on data derived from 
experience,  or  from  external  sources,  as  long  as  the  bank  can  demonstrate  the  relevance  of  the 
external data to its own exposures. Regardless of source, high quality data are critical for formulating 
meaningful internal risk assessments. From a broader risk management perspective, access to such 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 3
 data will enable a bank to evaluate the performance of its internal rating and risk estimation systems in 
a consistent and meaningful manner.  
The Basel standards outline the data history banks will need in order to use the IRB approach. The 
Committee recognizes that banks may not currently have all of the required information on hand. For 
this  reason  we  have  continued  to  engage  market  participants  in  a  dialogue  on  this  issue.  As 
implementation of the New Accord approaches, we encourage banks to consider their data needs very 
seriously and to comprehend fully the techniques they will need to use to derive appropriate estimates 
of loss based on those data. In practical terms, banks will be expected to have in place - or be actively 
developing - a data "warehouse". By data warehouse, I mean a process that enables a bank to collect, 
to store, and to draw upon loss statistics in an efficient manner over time. 
Corporate governance 
d. 
The design, controls, and data that figure into a risk rating system must all be developed within the 
framework of good overall corporate governance, which is the fourth area of focus for banks that I’ll 
mention today. The involvement of senior management and directors will be critical to the successful 
implementation of the New Accord. This will be particularly true for those banks seeking to adopt the 
more advanced approaches to calculating regulatory capital.  
As a bank’s capital requirements draw increasingly on firm-specific performance and systems, there 
will be a need for its board of directors and senior management to gain a deeper understanding of the 
conceptual underpinnings, and even operational mechanics, of a bank’s internal rating systems and 
the measures of risk derived from them.  
Senior  management,  and,  to  a  significant  extent,  the  board  of  directors,  will  have  to  have  a  good 
understanding of various key elements of the organization’s ratings process - the design of the rating 
system,  the  methods  of  assigning  and  reviewing  ratings,  the  process  of  developing  and  using  the 
necessary  data,  the  approach  to  developing  reliable  quantitative  estimates,  and  ultimately  the 
consistency  of  the  system  with  Basel  standards.  Understanding  these  various  elements  will  be 
important  in  assessing  the  appropriateness  and  reliability  of  the  measures  of  credit  risk  that  are 
developed - measures that are in turn needed for senior management and the board to make more 
informed strategic decisions.  
Operational risk is another area where the Basel Committee has developed a new regulatory capital 
approach. In this area, as with credit risk, the Committee not only attempts to build on banks’ rapidly 
developing  internal  assessment  techniques,  but  seeks  to  provide  incentives  for  banks  to  improve 
those techniques, and more broadly, their management of risk, over time. This is particularly true of 
the Advanced Measurement Approaches to Operational Risk, or AMA.  
Under the AMA, banks would be able to use their internal methodologies to assess their exposure to 
operational  risk  -  subject  to  a  series  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  supervisory  parameters  that  are 
intended to ensure that the approach used is comprehensive and that it is implemented with integrity. 
Moreover, the AMA is intended to be sufficiently flexible so as to accommodate the rapid evolution in 
operational risk management practices we expect to see over the coming years.  
The  primary  criteria  of  the  AMA  could  be  summarized  as  falling  into  three  broad  areas:  first,  the 
development of strong corporate operational risk governance and management structures - structures 
that include business line integration into a firm-wide process; second, the incorporation of qualitative 
factors  such  as  control  self-assessments  into  the  overall  capital  measurement  process;  and  finally, 
loss data quantification, which includes scenario analysis. 
Our  review  of  those  major  U.S.  banks  that  intend  to  adopt  the  AMA  indicates  they  are  clearly  in 
various stages of preparation. However, most of these institutions already have in place, or are well 
along  towards  establishing,  a  corporate  level  operational  risk  management  function,  with  firm-wide 
policies for managing and assessing this risk. Moreover, many firms already have in place good, and 
improving, firm-wide control self-assessment methodologies. Finally, an increasing number of banks 
are now turning their attention to collecting internal loss data in a consistent manner across the firm. 
Some  have  already  been  collecting  such  data  for  a  year  or  two  and  some  have  been  particularly 
effective at mining their existing historical loss experience for certain risk types.  
A few leading institutions have made real progress in pulling all this together - by piloting operational 
risk quantification methodologies that combine the quantitative and qualitative elements of the AMA 
into an overall economic capital assessment for operational risk.  
4 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 While there is much work still to be done at many institutions, those banks that have obtained senior 
management  buy-in  to  embark  on  this  approach  have  been  able  to  move  ahead  fairly  rapidly.  In 
addition, these institutions have found significant value in the process of rolling out such a framework. 
The benefits include greater risk transparency within the firm, greater cost efficiency, and ultimately, 
less exposure to large losses, both in terms of dollars and additional reputational knock-on effects.  
Challenges for supervisors 
I've focused on the challenges banks will confront in implementing the new Accord. Let me now spend 
a few moments discussing how our supervisory approach is also likely to evolve over time. Naturally, 
allowing banks to rely on internal models in determining their capital requirements has led, and  will 
continue to lead, to changes in our supervisory process. Fortunately, we do have some experience on 
which to draw.  
In 1996, under the "market risk amendment" to the original Basel Accord, qualifying banks with large 
market risk positions were first permitted to incorporate internal estimates of the associated risk in their 
regulatory capital requirements. When determining whether a bank may rely on its market risk model 
for capital purposes, our examiners have had to evaluate the technical underpinnings of the model, as 
well  as  the  risk  management  and  control  processes  surrounding  its  implementation  and  use.  They 
review such issues as whether the model is based on reasonable assumptions, whether the firm is 
making  appropriate  use  of  backtesting,  and  how  the  model  performs  under  normal  and  stressed 
market conditions. In addition, they are spending significant time on key controls related to the overall 
use of models, including the model validation process and the new product approval process.  
Likewise,  as  banks  rely  increasingly  on  their  own  assessments  of  credit  and  operational  risk  when 
determining  their  capital  needs,  our  examiners  will  have  to  become  well-versed  in  the  changing 
technical  aspects  of  those  models.  Some  of  the  conventional,  static  metrics  that  we  now  use  -  for 
example, on the credit risk side, those to judge asset quality and to assess the adequacy of credit loss 
reserves - are likely to be supplanted by more sophisticated quantitative measures.  
As is the case with credit risk, we are in the process of developing a more integrated framework for 
assessing the adequacy of banks’ operational risk management and measurement approaches. We 
are focusing heavily on how banks are managing operational risk from a corporate-wide perspective. 
We begin by developing a feeling for the "tone at the top" - that is, the board of directors’ and senior 
management’s commitment to effectively manage its operational risk. Then we assess whether that 
commitment translates into an effective operational risk management and control structure - including 
the quality of management reporting, and the degree of integration of operational risk into a bank’s 
overall risk management approach.  
Our analysis includes banks’ assessments of their economic capital requirements for operational risk, 
and how this capital is allocated to business lines to reinforce efforts to improve internal controls. With 
respect to those specific business lines, we are increasingly looking to drill down to test key controls. 
The  aim  is  to  ensure  that  the  internal  processes  in  place  are  in  fact  working  and  are  effective  in 
mitigating relevant risks. 
Without  question,  it  will  be  important  to  devote  the  necessary  supervisory  resources  -  in  terms  of 
skilled personnel, technical training, and a targeted strategy - to these new supervisory efforts. In this 
regard, the Basel Committee anticipates providing much assistance, both formally and informally, to 
supervisory  agencies  around  the  world  that  are  preparing  for  the  added  responsibilities  we  will  all 
assume as the New Accord comes into force.  
Moreover,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  (or  FSI)  will  continue  its 
collaboration with the Basel Committee, especially in assisting supervisors globally in understanding 
and  implementing  all  aspects  of  the  revised  Accord.  The  FSI  anticipates  that  more  than  half  of  its 
50 seminars and programs this year will concentrate on components of Basel II. In fact, shortly after 
the  release  of  the  final  consultative  package  later  this  spring,  the  FSI  intends  to  offer  three  special 
seminars around the world to introduce other supervisors to the most important features of the new 
framework. 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 5
 Next Steps in finalizing the New Accord 
Most of my remarks today have been centered on implementation of the new framework. I’d like to 
conclude  by  spending  a  few  moments  discussing  where  we  are  in  the  process  to  finalize  the  New 
Accord.  
As  I  mentioned,  the  Committee  has  just  finished  gathering  data  from  the  industry  through  its  third 
impact study. The aim of the study was to collect and to analyze information from banks worldwide 
regarding the capital impact of the new proposals on their existing portfolios. The results are under 
review and will help us to determine whether any adjustments will be needed prior to release of the 
final  consultative  package.  That  final  consultative  paper  will  be  issued  by  early  May.  Our  goal 
continues to be to have a final Accord agreed to by the fourth quarter of this year. 
In  closing,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  effective  supervision  of  modern  banking  organizations  will 
necessarily entail a closer and more cooperative partnership between industry participants and official 
supervisors. The industry’s participation in the formulation of a more risk-sensitive capital adequacy 
framework is a good example of this kind of constructive interaction. Indeed, the three pillars of the 
proposed  framework  reflect  the  understanding  that  regulatory  requirements  alone  are  no  longer 
sufficient to address the growing complexity of banks’ activities and the associated risks. Consistent 
with this notion is the need for effective corporate governance, which plays an increasingly important 
role in a rapidly evolving banking environment. 
It  is  clear  to  me  that  only  if  the  industry  and  supervisors  work  together  -  each  meeting  our 
responsibilities  and  reinforcing  the  other  -  will  we  be  able  to  successfully  manage  and  supervise  a 
modern financial system. While perspectives may differ from time to time, our objective is the same - 
to maintain a strong and vibrant financial system over the long term. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2003
