 Eva Srejber: Future scenarios for housing finance  
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Institute  for 
Housing and Urban Research, Gävle, 19 March 2003. 
 Introduction 
Housing  finance  in  Sweden  constitutes  a  significant  part  of  the  Swedish  financial  system.  At  the 
beginning of this year, total lending from banks and mortgage institutions amounted to approximately 
SEK 2200 billion, which was fractionally higher than Sweden's GDP. Mortgage institutions account for 
just over 50 per cent of this lending, which is why it is vital that financial market players understand the 
housing finance market, its participants and how it affects and is affected by the Swedish economy. 
For this reason the seminar today can play an important role in advancing knowledge within the field.  
There are several factors that affect housing finance. These include demand factors, supply factors 
and  structural  factors.  I  will  not  be  mentioning  all  of  these  but  will  instead  be  focusing  on  three 
important factors, namely internationalisation, changed regulations and adjustments of household and 
corporate  balance  sheets.  I  will  also  be  attempting  to  make  a  connection  to  how  changes  in  these 
three broad areas influence the financing of housing. 
Allow  me  to  begin  by  outlining  the  developments  of  recent  years  as  a  point  of  departure  for  future 
prospects. 
A  process  of  internationalisation  has  been  ongoing  for  many  years  now  and  is  driven  by  several 
factors. The process is particularly evident in the capital and financial markets. It is usually said that 
when  global  production  increases  by  1  unit,  international  trade  increases  by  two  units  and  capital 
movements  by  four.  The  increased  commercial  possibilities  that  arise  as  countries  become  more 
economically  integrated  are  perhaps  the  greatest  driving  force.  Another  force  that  is  driving  the 
internationalisation process is IT. In spite of the IT crash, there is still considerable potential afforded 
by information technology. While IT companies have suffered badly on the stock market, the use of the 
technology  itself  does  not  represent  a  "bubble".  IT  has  resulted  in  better  accessibility  to  both 
customers and markets as well as to information. For example, it enables mortgage institutions to find 
buyers  of  their  services  in  several  locations  without  having  a  physical  presence  there.  Moreover,  it 
reduces costs for administration, given the initial costs, and this ought to lead to better conditions for 
consumers. Yet another driving force is the growth of international organisations such as the EU. With 
13  accession  countries,  the  EU  could  soon  be  enlarged  to  include  10  new  members,  and  this  is 
leading toward the creation of a very large and important common capital market. Contacts with our 
neighbours in the Baltic States and Poland will be stimulated even further through co-operation in the 
EU. The euro area, which is now four years old, is developing and could include a greater number of 
countries in the future.  
Another important development that has affected the financial markets is the introduction of minimum 
standards  in  a  number  of  different  areas,  e.g.  for  the  supervision  of  banks,  insurance  companies, 
securities  trading,  payment  systems,  accounting  and  auditing,  corporate  governance  and  money 
laundering. These standards were established to create a joint foundation in all countries that will form 
a basis for safe and efficient financial systems. The IMF and the World Bank have assumed the task of 
evaluating the extent to which the countries fulfil the requirements according to these standards and 
also  to  assist  them  in  addressing  the  shortcomings  that  are  found.  So  far  over  60  countries,  or 
one-third  of  the  members  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank,  have  been  assessed.  In  addition,  many 
countries  have  performed  "self-assessments"  voluntarily.  The 
implementation  of 
international  standards  is  a  very  positive  development  as  it  demonstrates  that  the  countries  are 
genuinely striving to improve their regulations and supervision and thereby also the financial systems. 
It  is  not  only  beneficial  for  the  countries  themselves  but  also  for  the  international  community,  as  it 
makes it possible to avoid the weaknesses that can otherwise spread in the international network 
The development of regulations through, for instance, the EU as well as other initiatives including a 
new, major currency in Europe will help enhance the efficiency of the financial and capital markets. It 
will affect mortgage institutions primarily in terms of their borrowing costs.  
As a third point, I would like to mention the balance sheet adjustments that have followed the share 
price  bubble  and  which  have  been  having  an  impact  in  the  financial  markets.  In  the  light  of  high 
increased 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 1
 expectations  of  future  growth,  households  financed  their  consumption,  and  companies  their 
investment, by increasing their indebtedness in the belief that these debts would be easy to repay due 
to  high  future  earnings  and  income.  Moreover,  a  large  proportion  of  the  companies'  financing  was 
obtained  via  the  stock  market.  Balance  sheets  became  inflated,  as  did  the  actual  growth  in  the 
economy. When earnings prospects later proved to be lower than expected, there was a fall in both 
share prices and the value of assets. Debt levels appeared high, particularly in the corporate sector. In 
order  to  lower  their  debts,  companies  had  to  increase  their  income  and  reduce  their  costs,  which 
resulted  in  weaker  demand  in  the  economy.  Furthermore,  the  declining  share  prices  prompted 
households  and  the  financial  institutions  that  invest  households'  money  to  seek  out  investment 
alternatives that appeared safer. The downward adjustment of the future outlook itself also resulted in 
uncertainty. This in turn was compounded by the uncertainty caused by international terrorism and the 
attempts to deal with this by putting pressure on Iraq. This contributed to an increase in the spreads 
between corporate and treasury bonds as well as to greater volatility in the markets. To counteract the 
effects of balance sheet and income statement adjustments on the real economy, monetary policy was 
eased  in  several  countries  around  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  fiscal  policy  became  more 
expansionary. The short-term interest rate fell while more subdued inflation prospects and a flight to 
"safe" investments caused a drop in long-term rates as well. The low interest rates together with the 
search for safe investments spread to other asset markets. The price of gold increased, and there was 
a rise in housing prices in several countries as households took advantage of the low level of interest 
rates to boost their housing consumption. The rising property prices counteracted the fall in the value 
of households' financial assets. This in turn has led to households in several countries continuing to 
increase their indebtedness, particularly to finance housing.  
However,  these  historically  large  changes  in  the  asset  and  debt  markets  have  thus  far  proceeded 
smoothly. In spite of the fact that we have seen the biggest decline in share prices since the 1930s, 
the  largest  suspension  of  national  debt  payments  in  history  (Argentina),  the  biggest  corporate 
bankruptcies (Enron, WorldCom), one major terrorist attack and a wave of small ones, the financial 
markets  have  been  strong  enough  to  handle  this.  Risk  diversification  and  the  emergence  of  new 
financial  derivatives  are  two  explanations  for  the  preserved  stability  in  the  financial  system.  While 
developments in the real economy have been affected by the balance sheet and income statement 
adjustments, the business cycle bottomed out at a higher level of growth than was feared, given the 
considerable  imbalances  that  existed  at  the  height  of  the  bubble  in  2000.  The  economy  is  now 
undergoing a slow recovery, driven by the normal cyclical course of events but subdued by balance 
sheet adjustments and geopolitical uncertainty. Balance sheet adjustments will continue, however, as 
there are still substantial savings imbalances between different regions of the world. At the same time, 
the risk of war has caused flight to safer assets and thereby resulted in low interest rates. Recently, 
there  has  been  an  improvement  in  earnings  and  a  slight  fall  in  credit  spreads.  Nevertheless,  the 
effects  of  asset  price  adjustments  on  pension  funds,  life  insurance  companies  and  non-financial 
enterprises are still been felt through various parts of the economy. Should the economy follow a debt 
cycle  in  the  future,  there  is  also  a  risk  that  the  currently  low  interest  rates  will  lead  to  the 
implementation of projects that would be unprofitable at normal rate levels. 
How has housing finance in Sweden been affected in recent years by internationalisation, 
regulatory changes and balance sheet adjustments? 
Developments in the Swedish asset and debt markets have largely been the same as those abroad. 
Shares and commercial property have declined in value since 2000. Investment in residential property 
and prices of permanent single-family dwellings have risen by 8 and 15 per cent respectively for the 
past  two  years.  Prices  of  tenant-owner  apartments  have  also  increased.  The  rise  in  prices  of 
owner-occupied  housing,  and  to  a  certain  extent  the  increase  in  the  rate  of  construction  of  tenant-
owner apartments, has caused mortgage institutions to continue to increase their lending over the past 
three years by an average of 8 per cent per year. The annual rate of increase surpassed 10 per cent 
toward the end of 2002. 
Over the past 20 years, lending by banks and mortgage institutions has grown by approximately 8 per 
cent per year, while lending by mortgage institutions alone has grown around 10 per cent per year. 
This implies that mortgage institutions' share of lending has risen over the years. If one studies the 
borrowing  of  non-financial  enterprises,  the  picture  becomes  somewhat  different.  Here  mortgage 
institutions have become less important. During the middle of the 1990s they accounted for just over 
40 per cent of corporate borrowing, but now their share has fallen back to just below 25 per cent. This 
is mainly an effect of increased international competition and increased bond financing.  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 The structure of the housing market and housing finance. Has internationalisation resulted in 
increased competition? 
At  the  same  time  as  we  have  seen  large  adjustments  in  the  balance  sheets  of  households  and 
companies,  other  longer-term  trends  have  continued  to  have  an  effect  on  the  structure  and 
competition  in  the  housing  finance  market.  The  market  for  mortgage  institutions  in  Sweden  is 
characterised by a small number of participants that dominate the entire market. There are presently a 
total of 10 mortgage institutions in the Swedish market, which is slightly fewer than 15 years ago. The 
five  largest  have  approximately  95  per  cent  of  the  market,  which  is  an  increase  of  just  under 
10 percentage  points  compared  with  15  years  ago.  Mortgage  institutions  operate  in  two  different 
markets. The first is a national and regional market for lending to consumers, while the second is a 
national  and  international  borrowing  market.  Mortgage  institutions'  borrowing  in  foreign  currency 
amounted last year to around 20 per cent but lending in foreign currency was negligible. If mortgage 
institutions on account of their size can obtain better terms in the borrowing market it should, given the 
competition in the mortgage market, be passed on to consumers. 
Although mortgages are a relatively simple, standardised financial product that should be well suited 
for  selling  over  national  boundaries,  such  cross-border  activities  have  so  far  been  limited.  The 
relatively small number of participants in the mortgage market both in Sweden and other countries can 
be explained  by the fact that these markets are most often highly national  in  nature  with  distinctive 
national  characteristics.  The  sluggishness  is  due  in  part  to  the  difficulty  in  comparing  the  value  of 
collateral under different national legal systems. This has implied that it is often domestic participants 
that are in competition in mortgage markets. In Europe, national mortgage markets are rather different. 
This is mainly because factors such as regulations, tax legislation, market structure, bureaucracy and 
corporate cultures are different in different countries. Moreover, it means that the costs of entry are 
high  for  new  participants,  particularly  for  foreign  competitors,  not  least  because  of  marketing.  The 
effect of distinctive national features on the market has also been apparent to  Swedish participants 
that  have  set  up  businesses  abroad  and  then  operated  under  other  regulatory  frameworks  and 
according to other practices. Another limiting factor is the fact that as long as Sweden remains outside 
the euro area, foreign companies that wish to enter the Swedish mortgage market will have to provide 
loans  in  Swedish  kronor,  as  Swedish  borrowers  do  not  generally  want  to  expose  themselves  to 
exchange rate risk. However, should Sweden join the euro, the interest rates offered by lenders in the 
different countries of the euro area will become directly comparable. With a single currency, it would 
be  easier  for  borrowers  to  judge  which  institution  in  the  euro  area  offers  the  best  terms.  Swedish 
borrowers would be able to take loans in euro without exposing themselves to currency risk, and the 
availability  of  potential  lenders  would  increase.  Differences  in  regulations  and  taxation  systems, 
however, would continue to constitute a limitation on increased competition. 
Challenges for Swedish housing finance ahead of the future 
Looking  toward  the  years  ahead,  developments  in  the  housing  finance  market  will  be  driven  by  a 
number  of  powerful  forces:  continued  balance  sheet  adjustments,  the  effects  of  the  continued 
internationalisation  process in  Europe  and  new rules for financial  institutions. I shall concentrate on 
these three challenges. 
Challenge 1 - Continued internationalisation 
Allow me to deal with the different challenges in turn and therefore begin with the challenge posed by 
internationalisation and, in particular, European integration. One of the driving forces behind the trends 
in the capital  and credit markets is increased  international competition and  increased  awareness of 
international opportunities. The diversification of both financing and investment is increasing, and risk 
management instruments are being improved. Europe affects the financial markets through the euro. 
In addition to the 12 euro countries in the EU, there are a large number of countries in which the euro 
plays a pivotal role either as a means of payment or through some form of link to the euro. In coming 
years,  when  the  current  accession  countries  gradually  introduce  the  euro,  the  euro  markets  will 
become larger. At the same time, the harmonisation of rules will continue and the markets will become 
more integrated. Meanwhile the euro has been accepted by the rest of the market; both the United 
States and the United Kingdom keep just over half of their official foreign exchange reserves in euro. 
Canada and Australia keep around 40 per cent in euro. There has therefore been a rise in demand for 
euro bonds and an increase in liquidity in the market. At the same time, the supply of bonds has risen 
as an increasing number of agents, both companies and states, are choosing to finance their activities 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 3
 through the bond market. According to the ECB, just under 30 per cent of all bond holdings in euro 
have been issued by foreign residents. The total stock of euro bonds issued by euro institutions is now 
EURO 7 400 billion. This market has grown substantially since 1999. 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  consequently  affected  the  interest  rate  markets. We  can  see  that 
there has been a dramatic reduction in the yield differentials for 5-year treasury bonds between the 
countries  that  have  introduced  the  euro  from  about  5  to  7  percentage  points  during  the  years 
1994-1996 to approximately 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points in recent years. In January and February this 
year,  the  yield  on  Swedish  5-year  treasury  bonds  was  around  80  points  higher  than  the  euro  area 
average.  Of  course,  part  of  this  reduction  in  the  euro  area  has  to  do  with  the  consolidation  of 
government finances in the EU countries to meet the convergence criteria, but the risk premium for 
exchange rate risk between the currencies that has now disappeared has definitely contributed to the 
reduction.  The  remaining  yield  differential  can  largely  be  explained  by  the  different  credit  ratings  of 
countries  in  the  euro  area  as  well  as  differences  in  liquidity  between  various  bond  issues.  The 
introduction of the euro has also helped increase the width and depth of European capital markets and 
has  at  any  rate  led  to  almost  complete  integration  of  the  part  of  the  money  market  trading  that  is 
closely  connected  to  the  Eurosystem's  monetary  policy  transactions.  The  growing  capital  market  in 
euro  is  becoming  increasingly  important  as  a  source  of  financing  for  Swedish  companies,  so  far 
primarily for major enterprises and institutions that can manage currency risk. This would provide  a 
larger financing base without currency risk for Swedish companies if we were to introduce the euro in 
Sweden. 
It is not just the interest rate markets that have been affected by European integration and the general 
trend toward internationalisation. The changed market conditions have also affected competition and 
thereby the structure among market players. 
Financial  activities  tend  to  benefit  considerably  from  large-scale  operation.  High,  fixed  costs  in  the 
form of training, highly skilled staff, large and resource-intensive computer and analysis systems, and 
information  retrieval  mean  that  unit  costs  fall  as  turnover  volume  increases.  One  way  to  attain  a 
sufficiently high turnover volume for fixed costs or to limit the disadvantages involved in large-scale 
operation  could  be  a  strong  specialisation  of  activities.  The  trend  we  can  see  today  in  individual 
countries, of banks merging to create larger entities, is a result of an attempt to reduce unit costs and 
thereby  increase  profit  margins  through  economies  of  scale.  However,  very  few  banks  have  so  far 
established operations on a large scale in other countries. Most institutions have the majority of their 
activities  and  earnings  in  their  home  country.  The  consolidation  that  has  occurred  through 
cross-border mergers and acquisitions has generally not yet led to a radically different market in the 
EU for the services traditionally provided by banks to households and small companies. In this part of 
the  banking  sector,  there  remains  substantial  overcapacity  in  the  EU  which  has  proved  time-
consuming to eradicate. Presently, we are seeing problems in the German banking system caused in 
part by overcapacity, major costs and different terms of competition for different institutions as a result 
of  a  slow  restructuring  of  the  banking  system.  On  the  other  hand,  a  number  of  banks  in  Western 
Europe  have  expanded  into  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  given  rise  to  development  and 
modernisation of the banking systems of the former planned economies. The reasons for this are that 
Central and Eastern Europe constitute a developable market that could soon be a part of an enlarged 
EU.  At  the  same  time,  this  has  contributed  to  improved  profitability  in  the  parent  banks  as  many 
countries  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  continue  to  show  favourable  growth  compared  with  the 
present EU countries. The banks being acquired are mostly full-service banks, which means that the 
parent bank gets a larger customer base for its financial services, one of which is mortgages.   
Another structural trend is a greater concentration of financial activities to certain centres in order to 
profit from cluster benefits. Companies that produce the same products and services discern benefits 
from  being  located  close  to  each  other  for  several  reasons.  These might,  for  example,  be  a  skilled 
labour  force,  accessibility  to  the  market,  suppliers  and  customers,  specialised  service  companies, 
market  information,  market  knowledge  or  infrastructure.  They  are  reinforced  by  economies  of  scale 
that benefit large financial  companies gathered together in a few locations. One such example of a 
financial centre is London. Mortgage institutions with standardised products independent of distance to 
customers and borrowing in an international capital market ought to be activities that can profit from 
these  cluster  benefits.  The  concentration  trend  that  we  have  been  able  to  perceive  over  the  past 
15 years  among  Swedish  mortgage  institutions  demonstrates  that  these  are  also  following  this 
structural trend. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2003
 Challenge 2 - International regulations 
One of the intentions behind the EU's internal market and the introduction of the euro is to create a 
more efficient market for products and services in which competition increases and customers obtain 
better products at lower prices. One aspect of this is the EU's Financial Services Action Plan that is to 
be  realised  by  2005.  The  Plan  contains  42  measures  that  aim  to  remove  remaining  obstacles  to 
cross-border  trade  in  financial  services  and  to  promote  financial  integration  in  the  EU.  At  the  same 
time, measures are been taken to support the supply of risk capital in the EU. These action plans will 
help realise the vision of making the EU the most competitive, knowledge-based economic area in the 
world  by  2010.  Three-quarters  of  the  measures  in  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  have  already 
been decided. This will also affect mortgage institutions, as they are major participants in the markets 
for both lending and borrowing.  
Another  factor  of  importance  is  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules  that  are  planned  for  introduction  in 
2006. Put simply, capital adequacy rules are rules governing how much capital a bank is required to 
hold for various borrower groups for each krona lent. 
In  the  new  rules,  it  is  intended  that  the  risk  weighting  will  better  reflect  the  actual  credit  risk.  This 
means that the banks will be more careful in assessing the relationship between the risk of a loan and 
its return. It will therefore be possible to observe increased risk in the banks' interest rates. The new 
capital  adequacy  rules  have  both  advantages  and  disadvantages.  The  proposed  rules  require  the 
banks to hold more capital if the risks in their loans increases. If they do not have more capital than 
that prescribed by the rules, they must either acquire more capital or reduce the risk in their lending. In 
such  a  situation,  a  bank  can  decide  against  renewing  loans,  which  of  course  would  entail  severe 
consequences  for  its  borrowers.  There  is  therefore  a  risk  that  the  new  rules  will  reinforce  cyclical 
developments. Nevertheless, the new rules entail several advantages: a more all-round, individual risk 
assessment that better protects savers' funds and reduces the risk of tax payers via the Government 
having to step in, opportunities for cheaper loans to low-risk borrowers as well as increased interest 
expenditure for high-risk companies. Consequently, the pricing of loans will be fairer. 
But  how  will  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules  affect  loans  and  lending  to  housing  companies  that 
thereby  affect  the  financing  of  housing?  An  initial  reflection  is  that  the  banks  will  perform  a  more 
individual assessment of the object of the loan and the associated company than before. A second 
reflection is that the banks when pricing their loans will also focus on the cash flow of the loan, which 
in this case is the same as the company's cash flow. In most cases, housing companies have a large 
amount of the value of their properties as collateral and this will continue to be positive in the future, 
but the banks currently focus on the customer's ability to repay after which they look at collateral. 
The proposed changes to the capital adequacy rules will apply from 2006, but developments in the 
capital market will probably  entail the banks adapting their lending gradually  in advance to the new 
rules.  It  is  therefore  important  that  capital-intensive  businesses  start  preparing  their  activities  for  a 
more individualised credit assessment in the future. Opportunities for finding competitive financing in 
the lending market at a low rate of interest will be available for those that can convince lenders that 
their  operations  will  generate  a  stable  flow  of  future  earnings.  Higher  risks  in  the  form  of  varying 
earnings flows, for instance, will cost more. 
Challenge 3 - The effect of balance sheet adjustments 
In the wake of the fall in share prices, we have thus far seen the effects on housing finance in the form 
of low interest rates, which have enabled households to increase their indebtedness at a slowly rising 
interest ratio. As the interest ratio has risen marginally, this in turn has led to a continued increase in 
residential  property  prices  in  several  countries,  including  Sweden.  The  lower  expectations  of  future 
earnings that have resulted from the stock market decline has so far not markedly reduced housing 
finance demand in Sweden. Thus far, the effect of the low interest rates appears to be the dominant 
factor. As the balance sheet adjustments come to an end, the geopolitical uncertainty abates and the 
economy continues to recover, risk aversion will decrease, which in turn will lead to a normalisation of 
market rates.  Consequently,  this  will  dampen  household  demand  for  housing  finance.  On  the  other 
hand,  expected  earnings  flows  will  rise  in  tandem  with  the  rise  in  economic  activity.  The  ability  of 
mortgage  institutions  to  find  "cheap"  financing  will  also  be  affected  by  the  normalisation  of  interest 
rates.  Investors  will  return  to  riskier  investments  as  risk  aversion  declines.  Furthermore,  rises  in 
long-term  interest  rates  will  reduce  the  value  of  the  bond  holdings  that  were  acquired  by  investors 
during the current risk aversion period. Consequently, mortgage institutions will face challenges in the 
time to come on both the demand and supply sides. 
BIS Review 15/2003 
 5
 Conclusion 
All in all, most factors indicate that competition in the mortgage market for borrowing and financing will 
increase. A  potential  Swedish adoption of the euro, larger markets that generate a bigger financing 
base,  the  EU's  Financial  Services  Action  Plan,  Basel  II  and  the  efficiency  improvements  in  the 
infrastructure for conducting cross-border trade in financial services are all important factors in a future 
perspective  of  the  capital  market.  As  mortgages  are  standardised  products,  lenders  will  mostly 
compete  through  prices,  i.e.  interest  rates  on  mortgages.  Competition  will  ensure  small  variation  in 
prices, which is why the question of financing will be of primary importance for mortgage lenders. As 
competition  in  the  mortgage  market  increases,  the  borrowing  costs  of  mortgage  institutions  will 
become the decisive factor in their ability to conduct profitable, competitive operations. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2003
