 Edgar Meister: EU banking sector stability  
Statement  delivered  by  Mr  Edgar  Meister,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and 
Chairman of the BSC, Frankfurt, 24 February 2003. 
 In  my  capacity  as  Chairman  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  (BSC),  I  am  very  pleased  to 
present to you the committee’s report on EU banking sector stability, which has been prepared with 
the assistance of the Working Group on Macro-prudential Analysis, chaired by Jan Brockmeijer from 
the  Dutch  central  bank.  The  report  summarises  the  outcome  of  one  of  the  main  lines  of  the 
committee’s  activity,  namely  our  regular  monitoring  of  banking  sector  stability  in  Europe.  This  is  an 
activity that we have developed over the past few years through the cooperation of the EU national 
central banks, the EU banking supervisors and the ECB. We have now reached a stage where we felt 
we could share our findings with a wider audience. 
The stability analysis is based on a wide range of quantitative and qualitative information drawn from 
national supervisory data sources and the ECB, as well as on an exchange of information among the 
member organisations of the BSC, the EU central banks and supervisory  authorities. The BSC has 
already  achieved  substantial  progress  in  terms  of  harmonising  consolidated  bank  profitability  and 
balance sheet data -  something which is of pivotal importance for macro-prudential analyses.  
I  am  confident  that  today’s  presentation  will  be  the  starting  point  for  what  will  develop  into  a  good 
tradition. The main purpose of the document is to provide an overview -  from an EU-wide perspective 
-  of the resilience of the EU banking sector and of the potential threats to its stability. The report also 
places  into  the  public  domain  new  EU-level  information  on  bank  profitability  and  solvency 
developments. 
I believe that the report -  and, more generally, the monitoring activity of the committee reflected in the 
report -  will bring two main benefits. First, the EU-wide scope of our analysis complements the similar 
analysis  carried  out  by  the  competent  authorities  at  the  national  level  with  reference  to  domestic 
banking  systems.  Second,  the  close  cooperation  among  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities 
produces substantive value added in terms of forming an assessment of the relevant issues.  
Let me now turn to the main findings of the review. We find that banks’ profitability weakened in 2001 
and showed a further weakening in the first half of 2002. The downward trend in profitability has come 
about  as  a  result  of  two  adverse  developments  in  the  EU  banks’  operating  environment.  First,  the 
deterioration in the  economic cycle  and in borrowers’ credit quality  has led to increasing provisions 
against loan losses. Second, the plunge in global and, in particular, European stock markets has given 
rise to greater risk aversion and uncertainty in other financial markets. This has reduced banks’ non-
interest income from investment banking and trading activities.  
We  also  find  that,  for  many  large  banks,  diversification  has  not  generated  the  desired  benefits,  as 
several businesses have deteriorated at the same time. In particular, internationally operating banks 
have  been  affected  by  the  adverse  capital  market  behaviour  owing  to  the  high  proportion  of  their 
investment banking and asset management business. Banks that focus on retail banking and have a 
strong franchise in domestic markets have fared best under the prevailing circumstances. 
In  our  analysis  we  have  focused,  in  particular,  on  banks’  heightened  credit  risks.  Banks’  loan  loss 
provisioning has already accelerated and banks have generally anticipated the increase in loan losses 
by improving provisioning reserves. The strain on banks’ profitability could therefore continue over the 
short term. Nevertheless, the profitability of EU banks at mid-2002 was not much below the average 
between1995  and  1999  and  the  level  of  provisioning  is  still  in  line  with  what  tends  to  be  normal 
provisioning levels in an economic downturn. 
EU banks’ solvency levels have remained unaffected in all size groups of EU banks, allowing them to 
withstand the shocks in their operating environment. The aggregated total regulatory capital ratio for 
the EU banking system as a whole in 2001 stood at 12%, i.e. well above the required minimum level of 
8%. EU banks have made efforts not only to maintain but also build up capital levels. Their resilience 
in the face of adverse developments owes much to the satisfactory capital buffers that are in place as 
well as to improved risk management, active cost-cutting efforts and continuous access to wholesale 
market liquidity. However, attention should be paid to the preservation of adequate capital levels, since 
a deterioration in profitability reduces banks’ ability to withstand further shocks.  
BIS Review 9/2003 
 1
 Given  the  present  circumstances,  EU  banks’  lending  policies  are  an  issue  of  particular  current 
relevance.  The  quantitative  and  qualitative  information  collected  at  the  committee  level  does  not 
provide  strong  evidence  of  supply-side  constraints  in  any  member  state.  EU  banks  seem  to  have 
appropriately  tightened  credit  standards  -    pricing  as  well  as  collateral  requirements  -    in  line  with 
increased risks, rather than becoming restrictive in lending because of capital shortages. 
Finally, let me try to give an outlook for risks to EU banks stability. In this context, we find that the risk 
outlook is crucially dependent on the timing and speed of the recovery in the EU economy. However, 
the outlook for growth in the EU also hinges on global recovery. Developments in the US and possible 
military action against Iraq are key external factors in terms of potential risks. Adverse macroeconomic 
developments  would  impact  quite  strongly  on  EU  banks’  profits  owing  to  a  significant  increase  in 
provisioning needs and a reduction in income from traditional retail banking. Nevertheless, we remain 
confident that the EU banking sector will continue to display a notable capacity to withstand any further 
shocks in the economic and financial market environment.  
Given this situation, efficient banking supervision is  of paramount importance. Given the challenges 
posed  to  EU  banks  and  potential  cross-border  implications,  coordination  among  supervisors  and 
central banks in the EU is essential. In particular, the BSC is taking due account of this necessity and 
providing a common forum. In this connection, it is worth mentioning that stability analyses and the 
monitoring  of  structural  developments  in  the  EU  banking  sectors  form  the  core  of  the  BSC’s  work. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 