 Birgir Ísl Gunnarsson: The policy and objectives of the Central Bank of Iceland 
Article  by  Mr  Birgir  Ísl  Gunnarsson,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland, published in the Morgunbladid Newspaper, in Reykjavík, 28 February 2003. 
 When  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  became  an  independent  institution  in  1961  it  was  generally 
believed, both here in Iceland and abroad, that several different simultaneous objectives could be set 
for  central  banks.  Low  inflation,  full  employment  and  strong  economic  growth  were  among  the 
objectives that people felt central banks should be able to achieve. Gradually it became clear that this 
would not work. In the work of a central bank, these objectives can come into conflict with one another, 
resulting in an economic fiasco. 
As a result, in recent years legislation on central banks has been altered in many countries and the 
banks  assigned  one  principal  objective:  ensuring  price  stability.  Inflation  is  primarily  a  monetary 
phenomenon, persistent inflation being the result of insufficient restraint in monetary policy. In the long 
term,  monetary  policy  thus  has  an  impact  on  price  levels  but  less  on  economic  growth  and 
employment. With free movement of capital between countries, the principal instrument of a Central 
Bank is interest rates; in the long run this instrument can only achieve one macroeconomic objective, 
i.e. to ensure price stability. 
New legislation 
When  new  legislation  was  adopted  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  in  2001,  these  international 
developments were taken into consideration and the Icelandic Act patterned on recent legislation in 
other industrialised countries. There was broad political consensus on this, as people realised that low 
inflation is one of the cornerstones of economic growth and improved living conditions. In addition to 
the legislation, inflation targeting was introduced as the Bank’s objective in a joint declaration by the 
government and the Central Bank. The decision to float the Icelandic króna was taken at the same 
time, since experience had shown that in the long run it was impossible to ensure a specific exchange 
rate  with  free  movement  of  capital  in  and  out  of  the  country.  In  such  case  the  exchange  rate  is 
determined by the market where supply and demand control the value of the króna.  
This new framework for monetary policy was immediately subjected to a baptism of fire. The Icelandic 
economy  was  overheated  and  inflation  rising  rapidly.  The  Central  Bank  had  to  respond  by  raising 
interest rates. The fall of the króna played a part in the elimination of the current account deficit much 
more  rapidly  than  anyone  had  dared  to  hope  two  years  ago.  The  economy  is  more  stable  at  the 
moment than it has been for some time and, acccording to the outlook, the current slight slowdown will 
be short-lived. The Central Bank’s tight monetary stance has, on the other hand, brought results, as 
last November inflation dropped below the target of 2½ %.  
Old theories reappear 
Recently there has been extensive discussion concerning the Central Bank of Iceland, its policy and 
objectives. Now that inflation has been subdued, old theories to the effect that the Central Bank should 
pursue multiple objectives have once more come to the fore. The Bank is to ensure full employment, it 
should  have  specific  exchange  rate  objectives  and  ensure  economic  growth.  These  views  reflect 
considerable over-estimation of the power of the Central Bank and the instruments at its disposal. It is 
also an oversimplification to focus exclusively on interest rates, as many people do, and expect that 
further interest rate reduction will solve all the problems. 
The Central Bank has, over the past two years, cut its rates thirteen times, and the bank’s policy rate 
is currently 5.3%. While this is naturally a higher rate than in the Euro zone, the problems which have 
to  be  grappled  with  there  include  long-term  economic  stagnation  and  high  unemployment,  and  the 
future is by no means bright. In Norway, on the other hand, the Central Bank rate is 6%, to take an 
example  of  a  neighbouring  industrialised  country.  The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  real  policy  rate  is 
currently around 2¾% considering future  prospects,  which  is slightly  under current estimates of the 
equilibrium interest rate. The Bank’s interest thus has a stimulating effect on the economy, and note 
that real interest rates at present are lower than they have been since the spring of 1996. It should 
BIS Review 12/2003 
 1
 also  be  borne  in  mind  that  changes  in  interest  rates  only  affect  demand  and  inflation  with  a 
considerable time lag, so that the full effect of interest rate cuts in recent months will not be felt for 
some time yet. 
ISK exchange rate 
No one doubts the importance of the ISK exchange rate for the Icelandic economy. The exchange rate 
has enormous impact on price levels and the performance of the export and competitive sectors. On 
the  other  hand,  people  must  realise  that  the  Central  Bank  has  only  limited  long-term  effect  on  the 
exchange rate. Many aspects of the economy affect the exchange rate. These include, for instance, 
foreign  trade,  foreign  investments  in  Iceland  and  investment  by  Icelanders  abroad,  not  to  forget 
expectations  of  future  economic  developments.  There  is  little  doubt  that  expectations  concerning 
power-intensive industry developments have influenced the exchange rate in recent months. Interest 
rates certainly affect the exchange rate, but experience both in Iceland and elsewhere shows that this 
effect  eventually  disappears,  as  long  as  monetary  policy  aims  at  maintaining  long-term  inflation 
comparable to that of the country’s trading partners. At the same time, intervention by central banks 
can have a temporary impact. If, however, the exchange rate is forcefully headed in a certain direction, 
no  central  bank  can  withstand  this  trend  for  any  length  of  time.  This  has  been  the  experience 
throughout the world, wherever there is free movement of capital between countries. This was also the 
experience  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  when  it  attempted  to  check  the  slide  of  the  króna  from 
mid-year 2000 to autumn 2001. To demand now that the Central Bank adopt exchange rate objectives 
is  unrealistic.  The  only  option  to  peg  the  currency  is  to  return  to  former  practices  and  introduce 
currency restrictions, but who wants to go back to that? Cutting interest rates beyond what the Bank’s 
inflation  targets  allow,  in  order  to  force  down  the  exchange  rate,  would  be  highly  inadvisable.  The 
nominal  exchange  rate  might  temporarily  drop  somewhat,  but  it  is  practically  certain  that  inflation 
would once more heat up and soon we would end up with the same real exchange rate as before, in 
addition to having kindled the flames of the next period of overheating and instability. 
Slowdown in the economy 
After a protracted period of high economic growth, which ended in overheating, we now have a slight 
slowdown  in  the  economy  and  increased  unemployment.  It  has,  among  other  things,  been  claimed 
that this slowdown is in particular the result of a tight monetary policy. Our experience, as well as that 
of other countries, shows that a temporary slowdown is often an unavoidable consequence of strict 
economic management, aimed at controlling over-expansion and holding inflation in check. This is one 
reason  why  it  is  so  important  to  prevent  such  waves  from  becoming  too  high.  It  is,  however,  an 
oversimplification  to  claim  that  monetary  policy  alone  makes  the  decisive  difference.  Interest  rates 
primarily affect demand in the economy. There are, on the other hand, many other factors which affect 
both demand and supply in the economy. These include, for instance, fishing quotas, public finances 
and public investment, foreign investment, e.g. in  heavy industry, and the  wage policy  of the social 
partners. People who make these decisions control important economic instruments which are beyond 
the reach of the Central Bank. There are thus many parties involved in managing economic affairs and 
the Central Bank is far from the only party responsible here. 
Actions to boost economic growth and reduce unemployment 
Recently a number of actions have been announced to relax restraint in the economy. The full effect of 
major  interest  rate  cuts  in  recent  months  has  yet  to  be  felt.  The  Central  Bank has  also  announced 
imminent  relaxation  of  reserve  requirements,  which  will  release  funds  in  the  banking  system  and 
should  lead  to  interest  rate  decreases  there.  Each  day  the  Central  Bank  has  puchased  foreign 
currency, in so doing placing some ISK 11 billion in circulation since September, which has certainly 
slowed the exchange rate rise. The government has decided to accelerate certain projects on which it 
will spend ISK 6 billion. Local authorities and other parties have announced measures aimed at the 
same objective. So it is clear that much has been done which can be expected to increase economic 
growth and reduce unemployment in the coming months. 
Ahead of us are the most extensive construction projects in Icelandic history, which will have a major 
impact  on  the  economy  in  both  the  short  and  long  term.  They  will  require  sound  economic 
management. It is important to foresee early enough what effects this development could have if no 
  action were taken. It would be completely irresponsible to simply allow things to take their course as if 
nothing needed to be done to compensate for these developments, as has actually been proposed in 
some quarters recently. The Central Bank’s analysis of the proposed development indicates that, with 
appropriate economic management actions, it should be possible to maintain economic stability and 
keep  inflation  under  control.  The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  will  do  its  utmost  to  achieve  this,  as  it 
naturally bears an indisputable legal responsibility to do so. 
 