 Guy Quaden: Ageing and welfare systems: what have we learned? 
Introductory  speech  by  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  a  conference 
organised  by  CEPS  in  the  framework  of  The  European  Network  of  Economic  Policy  Research 
Institutes (ENEPRI), in Brussels on 24-25 January 2003.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you all at the National Bank of Belgium and to open this ambitious two-
day conference on population ageing. 
The steadily increasing life expectancy in our countries is very good news but, as you know, combined 
with the dramatic decline of birth rates after the baby boom in the 1950s and the 1960s it implies that 
populations in a large number of countries are ageing rapidly. Ultimately, the elderly dependency ratio 
will rise gradually but substantially. To put it more clearly: our children will have to cater for a growing 
number of pensioners. 
Even  if  ageing  pressures  will  in  most  cases  only  culminate  from  the  second  decade  of  the  current 
century  onwards  -  when  the  baby  boom  generation  starts  to  retire  from  the  labour  market  -  the 
economics  profession  has  a  long-standing  interest  in  population  ageing.  As  early  as  the  1980s, 
individual  authors  or  international  bodies  singled  out  ageing  as  one  of  the  biggest  economic 
challenges of the future. 
The first task at hand for economic researchers was obviously to estimate the  size  of the problem: 
what  is  it  that  we  are  facing?  How  bad  will  it  be?  Most  studies  initially  focused  on  the  pensions 
problem and the budgetary impact of ageing. Two remarks in that respect. 
– 
Subsequent studies revealed that, contrary to what is still often thought, pension expenditure 
is  not  the  only  budgetary  item  that  will  soar  because  of  population  ageing.  The  ageing 
problem is as much a health care problem, for instance, as it is a pension problem. On the 
other hand, one should not forget that ageing will have a beneficial effect on other spending 
categories like child allowances and education expenditure. Hence, the net budgetary cost of 
ageing  can  be  somewhat  lower  than  the  projected  increase  in  pension  and  health  care 
spending. All in all, even taking into account the large degree of uncertainty inherent in this 
kind  of  exercise,  ageing  will  undoubtedly  weigh  substantially  on  future  governments' 
budgets. 
One should refrain, however, from simplifying a problem as complex as population ageing 
into a kind of bill for the governments to pay. Ageing will have a substantial impact on a wide 
range  of  economic  variables  -without  speaking  of  other  serious  aspects  of  the  social  life-, 
from  activity  growth  to  unemployment,  from  national  saving  to  the  composition  of  private 
consumption and -yes, I am a central banker- from asset prices to inflation. Hence, it goes 
without saying that ageing requires a holistic approach on our behalf. 
 From  the  very  beginning  central  bankers  have  always  been  keen  observers  of,  if  not  active 
contributors to the research on ageing. Any shock that has a sizeable impact on the macroeconomic 
environment should be taken into account when setting monetary policy and, as we have seen, the 
potential consequences of population ageing, for the government accounts, for instance, can hardly be 
underestimated. Considering the impact that the combination, in a number of European countries, of 
sizeable tax cuts and an, altogether, limited slump in activity growth currently has on public finances, it 
is  quite  unsettling  to  imagine  what  kind  of  havoc  can  be  wreaked  in  government  budgets  by 
inappropriate  policy  responses  to  population  ageing.  If  what  we  are  currently  witnessing  is  the 
budgetary fall out of a mild economic storm, then, surely, the ageing problem should be compared to a 
genuine earthquake. 
All in all, it is a problem that can only be countered by a well-balanced and consistent strategy that 
should  be  put  into  action  as  soon  and  as  determinedly  as  possible.  The  lines  along  which  action 
should be taken have been clearly identified. First, governments should get their fiscal houses in order 
before ageing really starts to kick in; excessive deficits should be avoided and countries that still face a 
high public debt ought to continue and, if necessary, intensify debt reduction. Second, economic policy 
has to be geared towards increasing productivity growth and the employment rate - especially of older 
BIS Review 3/2003 
 1
 workers - so as to broaden the tax base as much as possible. Third, the buoyant growth of health care 
spending needs to be analysed and the individual pension entitlements, both in the private and in the 
public sector, need to be thoroughly assessed taking into account also the development of second- 
and third-pillar schemes. In addition, governments of some countries should consider in what way the 
latter  schemes  can  be  encouraged  further,  either  by  tax  abatement  or  by  regulation.  Considering 
present market returns, it's probably needless to add, however, that second and third pillars based on 
capitalisation in the stock market, can not by themselves provide a miracle solution, contrary to what 
some people advocated previously. 
Any viable solution to the ageing crisis is bound to be a blend of those three ingredients: it would be 
very easy, for instance, to offset the upward pressure on government spending coming from the rising 
number of elderly by simply reducing the average pension to a basic-needs level and to turn the health 
care system into a two-tier one, where public insurance is very limited and only the richest part of the 
population has access to new technologies via private schemes, but that would simply amount to a 
hollowing out of the welfare state, which our fellow citizens and myself do not wish.  
Taking stock of the policy response to the ongoing research on ageing, I guess it is fair to say that the 
results so far have been mixed. 
 On the plus side, one can not deny that ageing features prominently on the political agenda and, in 
many countries, significant steps are being taken. Several countries are reforming or are set to reform 
their  pension  systems  with  a  view  to  improving  the  sustainability  of  public  finances.  Considerable 
progress towards sound fiscal positions is also made in some countries. In a high-debt country  like 
Belgium - and you will hopefully forgive me that I take this example - a special pension fund, the so-
called Silver Fund, has been created within the government sector in order to clearly visualise the link 
between debt reduction and the impending costs of ageing and to enhance public support for further 
fiscal consolidation. 
However, there are also some worrying trends. First, fiscal consolidation has not been commendable 
everywhere  with  some  countries  in  the  euro  area  clearly  showing  signs  of  post-Maastricht  fiscal 
fatigue. Even worse is the fact that, following the problems that those countries are experiencing now, 
the  credibility  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  whole  institutional  framework  is  constantly 
undermined either by calling into question sensible rules or by resorting to creative accounting. The 
ECB Governing Council has recently confirmed in the strongest possible terms its support for both the 
Pact, which, if applied correctly, offers enough leeway to reconcile short-term flexibility and long-term 
sustainability of public finances, and the 3 p.c. of GDP deficit ceiling. 
Second,  policies  geared  towards  market  liberalisation,  increased  research  and  development  and 
human capital formation, which could spur long-run productivity growth, have been hesitant at most in 
many cases. 
Third,  even  if  some  initiatives  have  aimed  at  increasing  the  employment  rate  of  older  workers, 
progress has generally been slow, partly due to popular resistance. Still too often, negative temporary 
demand  shocks,  both  at  the  macro  and  the  micro  level,  crystallise  into  permanent  institutional 
arrangements  that  put  downward  pressure  on  the  effective  retirement  age  and,  hence,  undermine 
future governments' capacity, if not to ward off the ageing crisis, then at least to soften its impact. 
If we do not want the famous Lisbon objectives to become just a slightly offbeat alternative scenario in 
our projections, rather than realistic targets, then, clearly, more action is needed in these areas. 
All in all, it is essential that policy makers fully understand that the window of opportunity that we have 
now, will not last forever. We should be aware of the fact that we still have a lot of convincing to do. 
Earlier  on  I  have  likened  the  ageing  problem  to  an  earthquake.  Contrary  to  a  regular  earthquake, 
however, we can predict almost exactly when and where it will hit us. In addition, the quake will not 
take the form of a big bang but will reach its full impact only very gradually: its disrupting ripples will be 
felt throughout the following decades. 
And although it is hard to give precise estimates of the amount of damage that it will do, this is the kind 
of earthquake that is certain to shake the very foundations of our modern welfare states. It is our task, 
as  economic  researchers,  policy  advisors  and,  ultimately,  policy  makers,  to  make  sure  that,  by  the 
time ageing really starts to kick in, these foundations can withstand the blow. 
  I  firmly  believe  that  conferences  like  this  one  bringing  together  a  host  of  distinguished  researchers 
from both sides of the Atlantic are a crucial step in reaching this objective.  
 