Bank of Japan’s July report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 16 July 2003. 
 The Bank’s view2 
Economic activity remains virtually flat. 
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment is on a gradual recovery trend, albeit showing 
some fluctuations. Meanwhile, private consumption continues to be weak, housing investment remains 
sluggish, and public investment is declining. Net exports are virtually flat.  
Industrial  production  continues  to  be  basically  level  in  response  to  these  developments  in  final 
demand.  Corporate  profits  continue  to  recover,  although  the  pace  is  moderating.  Under  these 
circumstances,  uncertainty  regarding  the  economic  outlook  is  diminishing  somewhat,  and  business 
sentiment  is  improving  to  some  extent,  mainly  among  large  manufacturing  firms.  As  for  the 
employment situation, the number of employees including non-regular employees such as temporary 
workers has almost stopped declining. However, the increase in the overtime hours worked and new 
job offers has come to a halt. Firms are maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses, and 
household income still continues to decrease as wages are on a downtrend, albeit gradual. Thus the 
employment and income situation of households overall remains severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared view of the prospect for overseas economies is that 
the  growth  rate,  especially  that  of  the  U.S.  economy,  will  accelerate  in  the  second  half  of  this  year 
reflecting diminished geopolitical risks. For the time being, however, the pace of recovery in the U.S. 
economy  is  projected  to  remain  very  gradual.  Moreover,  economic  activity  in  East  Asia  has 
decelerated somewhat, due partly to the slower growth of domestic demand in South Korea and the 
epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). In this situation, both exports and industrial 
production are projected to remain virtually flat for the time being. 
With  respect  to  domestic  demand,  public  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  declining  trend,  and 
private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income 
situation. Meanwhile, the uptrend of business fixed investment is expected to become established in 
the  period  ahead,  mainly  in  large  manufacturing  firms,  whose  investment  has  been  thus  far 
significantly restrained despite the recovery in their profits. However, the pace of increase in overall 
business investment is likely to remain modest, as long as uncertainty regarding a recovery in exports 
and production remains. 
Overall, assuming that the growth rate of overseas economies accelerates in the second half of this 
year,  the  uptrend  in  exports  and  production  will  resume  gradually,  which  in  turn  will  initiate  the 
momentum  for  an  economic  recovery  in  Japan.  However,  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic 
demand  is  unlikely  to  gain  momentum  for  some  time,  since  production  is  expected  to  be  virtually 
unchanged  for  the  time  being  while  downward  pressures  such  as  excessive  labor  input  and  debt 
persist.  As  for  the  outlook  for  the  external  environment,  although  the  downside  risk  has  subsided 
slightly with the SARS epidemic coming to an end, there still continues to be substantial uncertainty 
about  the  recovery  of  the  U.S.  economy.  On  the  domestic  side,  the  recovery  in  stock  prices  is  a 
positive  factor.  However,  given  the  fragility  of  the  financial  system,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the 
possibility of a further upsurge in long-term interest rates and its influences. 
On the price front, import prices and domestic corporate goods prices are declining, mainly reflecting 
crude  oil  prices  that  fell  back  in  early  spring.  Corporate  services  prices  continue  a  year-on-year 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
July 14 and 15, 2003. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on July 14 and 15, 2003 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 33/2003 
 1
decrease of slightly over 1 percent; the rate of decline expanded in April, as many firms reprice at the 
beginning  of a new fiscal  year. The rate of decline  in consumer prices remains virtually unchanged 
from April, when the rate diminished due mainly to the rise in medical treatment costs in line with the 
reform of the medical insurance system. 
Looking  at  the  conditions  influencing  price  developments,  import  prices  are  expected  to  continue 
declining for the immediate future, but are likely to stop declining before long since crude oil prices 
have recently been firm after they fell back in early spring. On the other hand, turning to the domestic 
side,  the  supply-demand  balance  in  the  macroeconomy,  ongoing  technological  innovations  in 
machinery, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to exert downward pressure on 
prices.  In  addition,  the  increase  in  domestic  commodity  prices  has  peaked  out.  Based  on  these 
factors, domestic corporate goods prices are likely to continue declining. Meanwhile, consumer prices 
are projected to continue falling at the current moderate pace on a year-on-year basis. 
As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank of Japan is 
moving  at  around  29  trillion  yen,  as  the  Bank  has  been  providing  ample  liquidity.  Under  these 
circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to move at around zero percent. Longer-term interest 
rates remain steady at low levels. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  declined  further  until  mid-June,  as  investors  increased  their 
demand for the bonds. After that, the yields rose sharply partly because the bonds were sold at a profit 
on a large scale. Recently, they are moving at around 1.0 percent. Meanwhile, yield spreads between 
private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds continue to be at low levels. 
Stock  prices  are  recovering,  reflecting  a  gradual  improvement  in  market  participants’  view  on  the 
outlook for Japan’s economy and foreign investors’ active investment stance on Japanese stocks. The 
Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at the 9,500-10,000 yen level. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen depreciated toward the end of the month, due mainly to an 
improvement  in  some  U.S.  economic  indicators.  After  that,  the  yen  rebounded  reflecting  further 
investment  in  Japanese  stocks  by  foreign  investors,  and  is  currently  traded  in  the  range  of 
117-119 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high 
credit risks, while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. Their 
lending attitudes seem to be becoming slightly more accommodative in areas such as interest margin 
charges. Meanwhile, the lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are improving 
somewhat, although small firms continue to perceive them as severe. In the corporate bond and CP 
markets,  the  issuing  environment  for  firms  with  high  credit  ratings  continues  to  be  favorable  on  the 
whole, although some firms seem to be taking a wait-and-see stance in the corporate bond issuance 
market in view of the rise in long-term interest rates. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because business fixed 
investment is at low levels and firms are continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2.0-2.5 percent on a 
year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued is slightly above the 
previous year’s level. 
Meanwhile, according to business surveys, financial positions of firms are improving slightly, although 
those of small firms in particular remain severe. 
The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base rose and is around 20 percent. The year-on-year 
growth rate of the money stock is somewhat less than 2 percent. 
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions  continue  to  be  extremely  easy.  Meanwhile,  long-term  interest  rates  are  rising  and  stock 
prices  continue  to  recover.  The  money  stock  and  the  monetary  base  maintain  high  growth  rates 
relative to that of economic activity as a whole. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment has 
not changed significantly, that is, the environment for firms, particularly with high credit risks, remains 
severe,  although  the  issuing  environment  of  corporate  bonds  and  CP  continues  to  be  favorable, 
mainly for firms with low credit risks. Developments in the financial and capital markets, the behavior 
of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate finance continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2003
