 Alan Bollard: The New Zealand housing market 
Extract from an address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
Property Council of New Zealand, 9 September 2003. 
 I(cid:146)d like now to consider in more detail the New Zealand housing market, it being one of the factors 
behind our strong domestic economy, at a time when many exporters have seen their incomes retreat 
in recent months. 
New Zealand(cid:146)s housing sector has experienced a strong cyclical upswing over the past 18 months. It(cid:146)s 
not just Auckland. Sales growth and rising house prices are prevalent in many parts of New Zealand. 
Building consents are at cyclically high levels. That(cid:146)s both including and excluding apartments. 
Residential  investment  is  expanding  the  nation(cid:146)s  housing  stock  rapidly,  yet  demand  continues  to 
outstrip supply. We see this in rising prices and a shortage of properties listed for sale. The median 
time it takes to sell a house currently sits at an unprecedented low of just 26 days. As a consequence, 
recently house prices have been rising rapidly. 
What(cid:146)s driving this? The answer is demand exceeds supply. Demographics are part of the story. New 
Zealand has had rapid population growth in recent years, driven by net immigration. This includes not 
just  people  coming  here  but  people  here  choosing  not  to  leave.  The  longstanding  drift  of  New 
Zealanders north and into  town is also a factor. In addition, social changes are seeing the average 
number  of  persons  per  home  reduce.  Life-style  changes  are  increasing  demand  for  new  kinds  of 
accommodation, such as inner-city apartments and coastal and lakeside properties. 
Some of these factors have been  at  work for a long time. Even in the  late 1990s, when population 
growth  was  relatively  weak,  there  was  substantial  construction  activity.  However,  more  recently 
population  growth  has  been  marked.  The  natural  increase  in  population  currently  is  slower  than  a 
decade  ago,  but  recent  immigration  has  been  very  strong.  In  terms  of  permanent  and  long-term 
migration we had a net outflow of 10,000 persons per year in early 2001 and a net inflow of more than 
40,000 per year in mid-2003. That too undersells the story. In addition we have short-term stays, such 
as students and those on work permits, and those who apply for residency once they are here. Total 
migration has been running at more than 60,000 persons per annum over the past two years. This is 
well in excess of the mid-1990s. Of course, more people means more demand for accommodation. 
Is  there  more  to  this  story?  Yes,  we  think  so.  In  part  the  demand  for  housing  reflects  the  fact  that 
people  with savings to invest have become disenchanted  with the share market and other financial 
instruments. Savers still remember the 1987 share market crash and more recent tumbles in the US 
and  Europe.  As  well,  savers  have  seen  global  interest  rates  fall  to  historic  lows  and  headlines  of 
pension  funds  losing  money.  At  the  same  time  property  markets  have  stayed  uncharacteristically 
buoyant and so there(cid:146)s been a flight to (cid:147)bricks and mortar(cid:148). 
The  proportion  of  the  housing  stock  owned  as  rental  property  has  been  rising  over  recent  years. 
Increasing  numbers  of  people  prefer  to  hold  wealth  in  housing  assets,  as  opposed  to  other 
investments.1 Property investment has been rising over the past year. 
Of course this isn(cid:146)t all bad. If lifestyles are changing and housing needs are changing and if aggregate 
demand is up because more people live here, then we want more house construction. If supply meets 
demand without bottlenecks that(cid:146)s good. 
There are, however, some initial signs that housing market activity and expectations of future activity 
are  starting  to  exceed  demand  as  indicated  by  demographic  fundamentals.  Credit  demand  has 
accelerated  over  the  last  year.  Borrowing  has  begun  to  accelerate.  Debt-to-income  ratios,  which 
began to level out in the late 1990s, are starting to rise again. 
People  working  in  real  estate  and  financial  planning  indicate  a  marked  increase  in  the  numbers  of 
would-be  investors.  The  newspapers  are  running  advertisements  for  seminars  offering  to  coach 
people on how to invest in property, often promising significant returns. 
                                                      
1  Census and Household Expenditure Survey. 
BIS Review 40/2003 
 1
 I am concerned, as I said at the release of the Reserve Bank(cid:146)s Monetary Policy Statement last week, 
that this could end in disappointment, especially for unsophisticated investors who are rushing to get 
on the housing-investment bandwagon. 
My worry is what if things reverse and supply exceeds demand? What if recent buyers, heavily in debt, 
find that rents have fallen, making outgoings more than incomings? What if they decide to exit property 
and then can(cid:146)t sell at prices paid a few months earlier? 
How could supply exceed demand? We think that net immigration is likely to ease a little over the next 
two years. Partly that will reflect Government policy. Also the number of New Zealanders who want to 
begin their OE may go up again, as the economies of other advanced countries do better relative to 
ours.  
As other investments like equities regain their gloss the person who has bought a house to sell it to 
another buyer may find that the next prospective buyer has put his or her money elsewhere. When 
pension funds prosper again, that too will have the same effect. 
To those who say (cid:147)Hold on, nothing is as safe as houses,(cid:148) I would say separate nominal from real 
house  prices.  Real  house  prices  are  what  matters.  In  our  recent  past  there  have  been  extended 
periods where real house prices have dropped, as illustrated.  
 In  the  past  price  falls  were  often  concealed  by  high  inflation.  Also,  as  the  graph  confirms,  when 
property  prices  really  skyrocket  real  property-price  deflation  often  follows  soon  after.  Rising  house 
prices and, by inference, increasing rentals are by no means a certainty. As some New Zealanders 
found in the 1970s, the late 1980s and to a lesser degree in the late 1990s house prices can fall in real 
terms. 
Other countries, such as the UK, have experienced even more pronounced weakness in their housing 
markets  at  stages  over  the  last  20  years.  Prudent  property  investors  need  to  ensure  their  ability  to 
withstand falling prices and rents at some time in the future.  
People  thinking  of  borrowing  to  buy  a  rental  property  should  also  factor  monetary  policy  into  their 
calculations. If inflation starts to gain momentum in New Zealand, interest rates, nominal and real, will 
have to be higher to keep that inflation in check. Prospective buyers should ask (cid:147)Could my gearing 
face that - would I stay above water come higher interest rates?(cid:148) 
To conclude, why as a central banker should I care about any of this? The narrow answer is that a 
stretched housing market contributes to inflation. However, the wider answer is that the stability of the 
New  Zealand  economy  and  the  security  of  New  Zealand  households  are  linked  in  terms  of  risk 
concentration. For the wider economic interest and for New Zealand households, spreading risk needs 
to be a higher priority. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2003
