 R Basant Roi: Regulatory and supervisory infrastructure in Mauritius 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Annual Meeting of the Offshore 
Group of Banking Supervisors, Pointe aux Piments, 22 July 2003. 
 Honourable Minister of Economic Development, Financial Services and Corporate Affairs 
Mr Colin Powell, Chairman of Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning 
I am delighted to welcome you to the Annual Meeting of the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors in 
Mauritius. It  is my  privilege to  welcome Mr Colin Powell  who  has been the Chairman of the OGBS 
since  1981.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  a  seminar  on  the  New  Capital  Accord  and  Corporate 
Governance was held yesterday with the collaboration of the Financial Stability Institute. 
Mauritius  is  a  member  of  the  Offshore  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  as  from  the  time  offshore 
banking activities started here. I wish to stress right at the outset that the Bank of Mauritius has been 
pursuing a selective licensing policy with a view to bringing into our jurisdiction players of international 
repute. The maintenance of a clean international image has always been an overriding consideration. 
Of late there has been mounting demand for tighter surveillance of offshore centres to guard against 
money  laundering  and  international  financial  instability.  More  than  ever  it  is  necessary  to  enhance 
supervisory  co-operation  between  banking  supervisors  in  offshore  financial  centres  through  the 
implementation  of  international  standards  for  cross-border  banking  supervision.  The  globalisation  of 
financial  services  companies,  coupled  with  the  development  in  information  technology  have  greatly 
facilitated movements of funds from one jurisdiction to another. Often funds are moved by a (cid:145)simple 
click  of  the  mouse.(cid:146)  It  is  imperative  for  all  jurisdictions  to  observe  acceptable  standards  of  banking 
supervision. The efforts made in one jurisdiction to combat money laundering can be nullified by the 
deficiencies  and  lax  regulations  existing  in  other  jurisdictions.  We  fully  appreciate  the  role  of  the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) that carried out evaluations of anti-money laundering regimes in 
different countries. Naming and shaming non-cooperative countries does seem to produce the desired 
results. 
I wish to express my appreciation of the Customer Due Diligence (CDD) document - a joint product of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors. While 
the  document  recognises  the  cross-border  implications  of  financial  transactions,  it  also  favours 
exchange  of  information  pertaining  to  customer  adoption  policies  and  procedures  of  financial 
institutions.  The  essence  of  the  Customer  Due  Diligence  paper  has  been  included  in  the  revised 
version  of  the  Guidance  Notes  on  AML/CFT.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  issued  the  new  Guidance 
Notes to the industry on a consultative basis. 
The  Customer  Due  Diligence  document  also  attributes  the  responsibility  to  national  supervisors  for 
ensuring  that  banks  have  minimum  standards  and  internal  controls  that  allow  them  to  know  their 
customers.  Given  the  increasing  responsibilities  of  bank  supervisors,  I  have  proceeded  with  a 
significant  capacity  building  in  the  Supervision  Department  of  the  Bank.  The  staff  has  been  almost 
doubled and is being intensively trained to meet the challenges in the years ahead. 
Last  year,  we underwent an FSAP assessment at our own request. The Bank of Mauritius Act and 
Banking Act are being revised to further enhance compliance with the (cid:147)Core Principles(cid:148) and to take 
into consideration the recommendations made by the FSAP team following its detailed assessment of 
compliance  with  the  25  core  principles  for  Effective  Supervision  and  Transparency  of  Banking 
Supervision. The Bank issued on November 2002 a Guideline on Public Disclosure of Information by 
financial institutions. 
Rigid  bank  secrecy  laws  are  no  longer  acceptable  in  the  global  fight  against  money  laundering. 
Information has to be shared with competent authorities. In this connexion, the Financial Intelligence 
and Anti-Money Laundering Act 2002 established the Financial Intelligence Unit. The FIU has explicit 
power to gather, analyse and disseminate information. 
BIS Review 36/2003 
 1
 In the last few years we have made a great leap forward in improving the regulatory and supervisory 
infrastructure  in  Mauritius.  We  have  since  quite  sometime  adopted  a  prophylactic  approach  in  our 
regulatory and supervisory policies in respect of our banking industry. 
The job of regulators and supervisors has never been an easy one. It is often misunderstood. It(cid:146)s a 
highly  complex  one  full  of  invisible  hurdles.  The  hurdles  stemming  from  inside  the  country  are 
relatively easy to overcome. Those stemming from abroad are not that easily overcome. Regulators 
and  supervisors  across  the  world  have  however  been  doing  an  excellent  job.  They  are  never 
congratulated  for  their  good  performance.  And  never  expect  to  be  congratulated.  So  let  us 
congratulate ourselves. 
Let me wish the Annual Meeting of the OGBS the very best of success. May I also wish you a pleasant 
stay in Mauritius. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2003
