 Lars Heikensten: The Riksbank and the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Society  of  International 
Treasurers Convention, Stockholm, 17 June 2003. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak on the subject of EMU. 
Approximately three months remain until 14 September when the Swedish people will vote on whether 
to  participate  in  monetary  union.  In  the  event  of  a  (cid:147)yes(cid:148)  vote,  Sweden  will  enter monetary  union  in 
2006 and introduce the euro as its currency. The right of determination over our interest rate level will 
then be transferred to the European Central Bank (the ECB). On the other hand, a (cid:147)no(cid:148) vote would 
generally imply (cid:147)business as usual(cid:148) for the Riksbank. 
Today, I will be speaking about some of the implications for the Riksbank and our operations in the 
event of a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) vote in the referendum. I will begin by speaking about the preparatory phase, that is, 
from  14  September  until  1  January  2006,  during  which  time  preparations  will  be  conducted  in  the 
Swedish economy for a changeover to the euro, and the krona will join the exchange rate mechanism, 
ERM2. Subsequently, I will talk on the issue of monetary policy as it will be conducted by the ECB and 
point to differences as well as similarities with how it is conducted today. Thereafter, I will touch upon 
the  effects  of  a  changeover  on  our  work  with  financial  stability.  Finally,  I  will  mention  a  number  of 
issues  concerning  the  role  of  the  Riksbank  in  the  event  of  entry  into  monetary  union  and  the 
implications for our operations. 
But before I go into these issues I would like to emphasise a number of points. This is not a campaign 
speech.  In  1994  and  1997,  the  Riksbank  adopted  a  position  in  favour  of  Sweden  joining  monetary 
union  from  its  inception.  The  General  Council  of  the  Riksbank  was  then  of  the  opinion  that  the 
advantages  of  participation  outweighed  the  disadvantages.  However,  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Riksbank has decided against taking a position on the issue. We have interpreted our role as being a 
provider of factual information to make it easier for the Swedish people to form their own opinion on 
the matter. Having said that, there is nothing to prevent individual members of the Executive Board 
from expressing their personal opinion on the issue. We have all done that. I myself am in favour of 
Swedish participation in monetary union. 
The preparations 
Should a majority of the Swedish vote (cid:147)yes(cid:148) to the euro, work will begin to pave the way for Swedish 
entry into monetary union. The Riksdag is then expected during the autumn to make a formal decision 
that will enable Sweden in practice to become a member of monetary union. At the same time, it is 
necessary  that  the  legal  and  practical  adaptations  that  are  a  precondition  for  our  participation  be 
prepared and decided upon before the EU(cid:146)s finance ministers within the scope of the ECOFIN Council 
take the final decision. 
If the referendum results in a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) vote, the Riksbank will be required to help ensure that entry into 
monetary union proceeds in a stable, smooth manner. 
Since the middle of the 1990s, the Riksbank has been collaborating with the financial sector via the 
SIFS group - Consultation and Information with the Financial Sector - with a view to ascertaining the 
adaptation measures necessary ahead of a potential Swedish changeover to the euro and how long 
these measures would take to implement. The aim has been to make the time between a Swedish 
Riksdag  decision  in  favour  of  participation  and  entry  itself  as  short  as  possible.  The  Swedish 
government  has  recommended  that  Sweden,  in  the  event  of  a  (cid:147)yes(cid:148)  vote,  should  strive  to  enter 
monetary union on 1 January 2006, and that this should be carried out through a direct changeover or 
(cid:147)big bang(cid:148). The switch-over of all electronic transactions in society would then be made simultaneously 
with the cash changeover. This proposal has been welcomed by the financial sector, and there are 
good chances therefore of a smooth, efficient changeover to the euro at the beginning of 2006. 
For  the  Riksbank,  a  changeover  to  the  euro  would  of  course  be  a  major  project.  The  practical 
preparations  would  include  ensuring  the  production  of  new  banknotes  and  coins,  as  well  as  the 
replacement of the old ones. The latter would entail a considerable logistical operation. For example, a 
couple of hundred large lorries would be required simply to deliver the necessary coins at the time of 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 the introduction. But there is more to it than that. Computer systems would need to be converted, not 
least at the Riksbank, but also in many other areas of society. The Riksbank would also expend a lot 
of  effort  on  providing  information  to  the  general  public  about  the  implications  of  a  changeover.  In 
addition, there would be a number of changes in our own operations, which I will return to later. 
Participation in ERM2 
One  important  question  that  would  become  relevant  during  the  preparatory  phase  is  how  best  to 
ensure  exchange  rate  stability  against  the  euro  within  the  scope  of  the  exchange  rate  mechanism 
ERM2, the successor to the ERM system. 
In  this  regard,  there  may  be  reason  to  say  something  about  history.  The  Riksbank  has  previously, 
mainly over the years 1995-1997, considered the issue of ERM participation and the possibilities for 
combining this with the inflation target policy that has been conducted for a number of years. During 
that  time,  the  Riksbank  was  legally  responsible  for  the  exchange  rate  regime,  and  the  reasons 
therefore  for  considering  ERM  participation  were  quite  simply  to  prevent  the  regime  of  floating 
exchange rates from constituting a formal obstacle to Swedish participation in monetary union, in the 
event this was to become a possibility. When the government then decided that there was insufficient 
popular support for Swedish participation in monetary union, the question of changing the exchange 
rate regime was dropped. 
In  connection  with  the  Riksbank  being  made  formally  independent  in  1999,  new  legislation  on 
exchange rate policy was also introduced. Nowadays, it is the government that decides upon the issue 
of our exchange rate regime, although the Riksbank determines how it is to be implemented. In other 
words, it is the government that would decide whether and when the krona should join the exchange 
rate mechanism ERM2. Following that, the ministry of finance and the Riksbank would decide what 
rate  between  the  krona  and  euro  we  assess  to  be  consistent  with  a  stable  development  of  the 
economy. There are very good reasons to agree upon a common line of action. This is why we are 
holding discussions already among toplevel officials about an appropriate line of reasoning, the results 
produced by different estimation methods, etc. If we do not reach agreement, it is likely to be difficult to 
hold effective discussions with our European partners. 
A decision on participation in ERM2 and on the central rate and fluctuation bands at which the krona 
should join would be taken through common accord of the finance ministers in the euro area Member 
States, the ECB, the central bank governors and finance ministers of the applicant country and the 
other ERM2 countries, i.e. Denmark at present. In practice, a decision would be preceded by contacts 
between representatives of the ministry of finance and the Riksbank as well as with our colleagues in 
a number of euro area Member States and Denmark. The first official step in the negotiations would be 
taken within the framework of the EU(cid:146)s economic and financial committee (EFC). Only if the committee 
should  fail  to  reach  agreement  would  direct  negotiations  between  the  concerned  central  bank 
governors and finance ministers take place. Then, when the irrevocable conversion rate against the 
euro  is  to  be  determined  in  connection  with  entry  into  monetary  union,  this  would  be  decided 
unanimously by the ECOFIN Council members from the euro area Member States and Sweden. 
Central rate in ERM2 
The central rate is the krona/euro exchange rate against which the criterion of exchange rate stability 
would be evaluated prior to entry into monetary union. It is natural to seek to ensure that the central 
rate is set at a level which also becomes the conversion rate for the Swedish krona in monetary union. 
Generally, this has also been the norm; only in a couple of cases has a central rate been changed 
during the two years preceding entry into monetary union. 
It is important to point out that it is not possible to exactly determine a (cid:147)best(cid:148) central rate or irrevocable 
conversion rate. What may appear to be the best value of the exchange rate for the economic climate 
today does not have to be the most appropriate for all time when new data on the economy has been 
received. A certain capacity for adjustment is therefore necessary within the economies to manage the 
consequences of the altered circumstances with a fixed exchange rate. 
With  the  aid  of  various  models,  we  can  describe  conceivable  development  paths  for  the  exchange 
rate,  given  certain  assumptions  about  how  the  economy  will  develop  in  other  respects.  When 
performing these kinds of forecasts, the analysis is usually carried out in terms of the real exchange 
rate  instead  of  the  nominal  rate.  The  real  exchange  rate  is  the  nominal  rate  adjusted  for  any 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 is 
that 
the  most 
the  real  exchange  rate 
to  perform  analyses  using 
differences  in  the  price  level  between  the  countries  in  question.  The  reason  that  it  is  often  more 
interesting 
important 
macroeconomic relationships and theories about these are based on real instead of nominal exchange 
rates. The real exchange rate is a relative price between baskets of goods in different countries, thus 
reflecting both international competitiveness and purchasing power. 
In principle, a suitable central rate for the krona could be estimated by producing a forecast for the 
nominal  krona/euro  rate  for  the  exact  date  on  which  ERM2  membership  is  expected  to  begin. 
However, all of this is complicated by the existence of several theories for exchangerate determination 
and  the  uncertainty  of  the  forecasts  themselves.  Nor  are  models  capable  of  encapsulating  all  the 
relevant aspects that could conceivably affect the development of the exchange rate, which is why it 
would  be  necessary  to  complement  the  modelbased  analysis  with  different  kinds  of  expert 
assessments.  This  implies  that  we  have  to  confine  ourselves  to  narrowing  in  on  an  interval  of 
conceivable central rates. 
In  various  situations,  including  the  December  Inflation  Report  in  2002,  the  Riksbank  has  shown 
forecasts of the krona(cid:146)s real exchange rate against the euro according to a number of models under 
the assumption of a floating nominal exchange rate in the future. Forecasts of this kind underline what 
I(cid:146)ve just said: the forecast outcome is highly dependent on the chosen model of application. Common 
to all models, however, is that they predict a strengthening of the real exchange rate over the coming 
years. According to the models, this strengthening is due to the expected development of a number of 
factors including relative GDP, Sweden(cid:146)s relative net assets, our terms of trade, relative demography, 
etc. 
When we adjust the forecast of the real exchange rate for the expected difference in inflation between 
Sweden  and  the  euro  area,  we  get  similar  development  paths  for  the  nominal  krona/euro  rate.  As 
differences  in  inflation  are  expected  to  be  small,  the  forecast  strengthening  of  the  real  rate  is  also 
reflected in the nominal rate. Towards the end of the forecast period, the rate should lie, according to 
the assessments of the Riksbank, within an interval of approximately 8.20 to 9 kronor per euro. The 
forecast  for  the  rate  at  the  end  of  2003,  however,  consists  of  a  narrower  interval,  around  8.50  to 
around 9 kronor per euro. 
Consequently,  should  Sweden  join  ERM2  around  the  end  of  the  year,  this  kind  of  estimate  would 
advocate a suitable central rate between the interval 8.50 to around 9 kronor per euro. It should be 
noted that the models imply an expected strengthening in both real and nominal terms but that this 
strengthening from next year onward will be rather limited. 
When  choosing  a  central  rate,  it  is  vital  to  find  a  rate  vis-(cid:224)-vis  the  euro  that  is  consistent  with  a 
balanced  development  in  the  Swedish  economy  in  both  the  short  and  long  term.  It  is  important  to 
remember that the real exchange rate, i.e. the relative price between baskets of goods in Sweden and 
the euro area Member States would be variable even if were to introduce the euro as our currency. 
But the adjustment would then occur through the relative rate of price increases. A central rate that is 
overly  weak  would  therefore  provide  stimulus  to  the  Swedish  economy  that  could  lead  to  higher 
inflation  than  in  the  other  participant  countries  as  well  as  unemployment  at  a  later  stage  when  the 
impact of the weaker competitiveness makes itself felt. With an overly strong rate, the risk instead is of 
lower  inflation  than  in  the  other  countries,  initially  having  a  negative  impact  on  growth  and 
employment. This line of reasoning also clearly demonstrates the connection to fiscal policy. A weaker 
exchange rate requires tighter fiscal policy and vice versa. 
In  practice,  it  is  not  possible  to  base  the  choice  of  the  central  and  conversion  rate  only  on  model 
estimates  of  what  is  a  desirable  longterm  rate.  It  is  also  important  to  take  into  account  expected 
developments  in  the  coming  years.  It  is  not  in  the  interests  of  either  Sweden  or  the  other  involved 
countries to have problems arise during the period of Swedish participation in ERM2. In this respect, 
the  economic  climate  is  a  factor  that  demands  attention.  Previous  experience  also  indicates  that 
negotiations of a central rate would be influenced by the rate that has prevailed between the krona 
and the euro in recent years. Recent market assessments have been in an interval between 8.50 and 
9 kronor per euro, as I mentioned earlier. 
Monetary policy strategy in ERM2 
If Sweden were to join monetary union, the responsibility for ensuring a balanced development in our 
economy would essentially lie with the government and the Riksdag. There is reason to underline the 
fact  that  this  would  already  occur  during  the  ERM2  period,  even  if  the  shift  in  responsibility  for 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
 stabilising the economy from monetary policy to fiscal policy would be a gradual one. As the effects of 
economic policy are exerted with a time lag, this is something that fiscal policy decisionmakers should 
already be considering. 
For  the  Riksbank,  the  issue  would  be  to  define  a  strategy  for  monetary  policy  in  the  light  of  the 
boundaries imposed by fiscal policy and the central rate and conversion rates chosen for the krona 
versus the euro. Essentially, it is a question of conducting monetary policy in a way that would make 
the conditions as favourable as possible for ensuring both the attainment of the price stability target 
and the objective of holding the exchange rate close to the central rate. This is a pre-requisite if we are 
to meet the entry requirements, or convergence criteria, of monetary union. From this perspective, it is 
interesting  that  the  forecasts  of  the  development  of  the  exchange  rate  and  inflation  indicate  that  a 
relatively stable development for both of these variables is to be expected over the coming years. 
In ERM2, the Riksbank would still have control over the repo rate. Given the boundaries established 
by fiscal policy in particular, this should be set with the aim of ensuring price stability, as is the case 
today. Normally, this should not constitute a problem as regards the exchange rate. ERM2 provides 
considerable  scope  for  targeting  monetary  policy  at  price  stability.  This  applies  of  course  for  the 
normal band widths of –15 per cent, but would also apply for the narrower bands of –2.25 per cent, 
which the European Commission has used in its evaluations. Just like today, there is therefore reason 
to continue publishing inflation reports and to hold regular monetary policy meetings. 
Swedish experiences from recent decades of fixed exchange-rate regimes have, as we all know, not 
been entirely positive. The events of 1992 are still fresh in our memories. But a lot has happened over 
the past ten years. Our economic policy has become credible and successful. In recent years, it has 
followed  the  same  principles  as  those  in  the  euro  area  and  has  been  characterised  by  efforts  to 
achieve price stability and sound public finances. Participation in ERM2 would not change the stance 
or  objective  of  policy  of  course.  Tensions  stemming  from  a  lack  of  competitiveness  in  the  Swedish 
economy are also unlikely; the rate is set partly to ensure a reasonable level of competitiveness, while 
inflation over the coming years can be expected to be more or less in line with that of the euro area. 
Moreover, the process for other countries(cid:146) entry into monetary union was smooth in spite of the fact 
that  the  circumstances  in  many  cases  were  less  favourable  at  the  time  than  in  Sweden  today.  For 
instance, the uncertainty surrounding the implementation of the third stage and the introduction of the 
euro is now gone. In light of this, there is no reason for concern over participation in ERM2. 
The objective of keeping the exchange rate stable and close to the central rate would be facilitated by 
the  fact  that  the  central  rate  chosen  for  ERM2,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  can  be  expected  to  be  the 
conversion rate vis-(cid:224)-vis the euro on a known date in the future. This is an absolutely crucial difference 
compared with the systems of fixed exchange rates previously adhered to by Sweden. If the exchange 
rate  nevertheless  should  unexpectedly  move  to  an  extent  considered  inappropriate,  interventions 
could be made in the foreign exchange market. Such interventions would have certain potency due to 
the fact that they would involve the purchase and sale of currencies that will be traded at the same 
price for all time. To clarify this, interventions could be made in the form of futures contracts with a 
maturity date beyond the date of entry. 
The single monetary policy 
Entry  into  monetary  union  would  imply  Sweden  becoming  part  of  the  euro  area  and  the  European 
Central Bank assuming responsibility for monetary policy. 
Target and strategy 
Both the Riksbank and the ECB have the task of maintaining price stability and, to the extent that it 
does  not  conflict  with  the  price  stability  target,  promoting  a  balanced  development  of  economic 
activities. 
The  Riksbank(cid:146)s  inflation  target  entails  keeping  annual  inflation  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price 
index, CPI, at 2 per cent with a tolerance for deviations of 1 percentage point upwards or downwards. 
Given  that  monetary  policy  exerts  its  impact  on  the  economy  with  a  time  lag,  our  work  is  based  in 
practice on ensuring that future expected inflation is 2 per cent. Our underlying assumption is that the 
time  lag  in  policy  is  mainly  one  to  two  years.  However,  there  is  sometimes  reason  to  refrain  from 
achieving  the  target  as  defined  in  this  way.  This  may  be  the  case  when  inflation  is  affected  by 
transitory  effects,  such  as  quickly  rising  or  falling  energy  prices  or  changes  in  indirect  taxes  or 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 mortgage interest expenditure. For this reason, the Riksbank also makes use of measures of inflation 
that exclude such effects. Inflation measured by the index UND1X is one example. Moreover, there 
may be reason after a shock to bring inflation back to the target in the somewhat longer term. This 
enables us to avoid overly negative implications for production and employment. 
The ECB measures price stability as a year-on-year increase in consumer prices of below, but close 
to, 2 procent. The target relates to inflation measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, 
HICP. The idea is to reach the goal in the medium term, which implies that the ECB also disregards 
transitory effects on inflation. Consequently, the ECB(cid:146)s definition is similar to our own. There are some 
differences, however. 
One is that the ECB(cid:146)s target is defined in terms of HICP. The consumption basket in HICP is narrower 
than in CPI due to the fact that areas for which statistics are not yet harmonised have been excluded. 
The  differences  between  HICP  and  the  different  measures  normally  used  by  the  Riksbank  are 
generally rather small. 
Another difference is the target level. The Riksbank works with a definite central target surrounded by 
a symmetrical interval. Previously, the ECB(cid:146)s target was for inflation to be below 2 per cent. It was at 
the ECB Governing Council(cid:146)s evaluation of its monetary policy strategy in May this year that the target 
of keeping inflation close to 2 per cent was specified. With this, the ECB has become more precise in 
its definition. Compared with the Riksbank, the difference in target level is small and should not make 
any great difference in practice. 
The most significant difference in target definition is that the ECB(cid:146)s target relates to inflation for the 
euro area as a whole, while the Riksbank(cid:146)s target applies of course to Sweden only. The ECB(cid:146)s policy 
implies therefore that the rate of inflation in individual Member States can be both higher and lower 
than  2  per  cent  without  constituting  neglect  of  the  ECB(cid:146)s  target.  This  is  also  the  case  in  reality,  as 
shown clearly by the inflation outcomes that have been measured. The same applies to Sweden but 
on a smaller scale; inflation can be different in Norrbotten and Sk(cid:229)ne. 
When formulating monetary policy, the ECB attaches special importance to monetary aggregate and 
credit variables. A reference value for the annual increase in the monetary aggregate has been set, 
currently amounting to 4.5 per cent. In general, however, the interest rate adjustments implemented by 
the ECB have not been justified on the basis of developments in the monetary aggregate. This has 
been clear on several occasions in recent years, when the refi rate has been lowered in spite of the 
fact  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  monetary  aggregate  clearly  exceeded  the  reference  value.  The 
evaluation of the strategy in May also resulted in measures of the monetary aggregate being given a 
role primarily as indicators of future inflation. Naturally, the Riksbank also follows monetary aggregate 
and credit variables, even if we have not assigned them special significance when assessing inflation. 
Therefore, the formulation of policy nowadays is also quite similar in this respect as well. 
Finally, allow me to point out that despite the similarities in the formulation of policy, it can not be ruled 
out that price and wage increases in Sweden may sometimes be both too high and too low. The main 
reason is that the ECB(cid:146)s policy is targeted at average price increases in the euro area as a whole. 
Partly as a result of this, there is reason to discuss both the role of fiscal policy and the functioning of 
the labour market in the event of an introduction of the euro in Sweden. It is particularly important that 
fiscal  policy  be  conducted  in  a  way  that  ensures  that  reserves  will  be  available  during  economic 
declines and that institutional conditions are created to facilitate necessary decisions for tighter fiscal 
policy to be taken on time. 
Decision-making and communication 
In the event of participation in monetary union, the Riksbank Governor would become a member of the 
ECB Governing Council, which is the highest decision-making body of the European Central Bank. I 
would then, just like all the other members of the Governing Council, have the opportunity to say what 
interest rate level I believe to be the best taking into account developments in the entire euro area. I 
would be a member of the Governing Council in a personal capacity, i.e. I would not be permitted to 
seek or receive instruction from other individuals or institutions. 
One  issue  that  has  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion  is  the  voting  modalities  in  the  Governing 
Council. Initially, the Riksbank Governor would always have the right to vote on interest rate decisions. 
This  would  change  in  the  future,  however.  Once  the  number  of  Member  States  in  the  euro  area 
exceeds  15,  a  new  decision-making  arrangement  will  enter  into  force.  The  Member  States  will  be 
divided into groups according to size, and the voting rights will be rotated between the participants in 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 5
 the respective groups. For Sweden, the long-term implication is that the central bank governor, once 
all current and new EU Member States are participating in monetary union, would be able to vote on 
approximately  60  per  cent  of  the  decisions.  The  central  bank  governor  of  a  large  country  like 
Germany, on the other hand, which has around nine times as many inhabitants, would be able to vote 
at 80 per cent of the meetings. However, all central bank governors would have the right of attendance 
and  expression  at  all  meetings.  From  a  Swedish  perspective,  this  appears  to  be  a  rather 
advantageous solution in my opinion. 
The  ability  to  exert  influence  on  the  formulation  of  policy  is  important  of  course,  particularly  from  a 
democratic point of view. But it is not simply a question of voting rights, which is the impression one 
gets sometimes when listening to the debate. Firstly, it is important to remember that the central bank 
governors must act in the interests of the entire euro area when setting interest rates. In other words, 
they must not give priority to national interests. Thus far, there have not been any votes held in the 
ECB Governing Council; rather, monetary policy has been determined through consensus. In addition, 
all  central  bank  governors  have  the  right  of  attendance,  even  under  the  new  proposal,  and  can 
therefore be involved in discussions on the stance of policy. My own experience from other, similar 
discussions  in  the  central  bank  sphere  is  that  solid,  wellfounded  arguments  weigh  heavily  and,  in 
practice, play a more important role than the size of the country and the possibility to press a voting 
button.  What  I  know  about  how  the  ECB  Governing  Council  works  in  monetary  policy  discussions 
supports this viewpoint. 
For my own part, I believe that too much attention has been paid to the voting modalities. Other factors 
can be particularly important in ensuring effective monetary policy. Personally, I would emphasise the 
internal  discussion  processes,  which  I  believe  to  be  vital.  These  should  be  of  high  quality  and 
transparent,  and  provide  scope  for  different  decision-makers  to  become  involved  on  equal  terms. 
Clarity and transparency is also important externally, ensuring more precise and meaningful criticism, 
which in turn can improve and speed up internal thought processes. 
Also in these respects, there are a number of similarities between the Riksbank and the ECB. Both 
institutions publish assessments of inflation prospects, hold press conferences in connection with their 
interest rate decisions and justify and explain their formulation of policy before various political bodies. 
In addition, a gradual evolution of intellectual thought takes place  within  both the Riksbank and the 
ECB. It is likely that this will bring us closer together. The most significant differences, in my opinion, 
relate to the clarity of the assessments, where the Riksbank and other countries that work with explicit 
figurebased  targets  and  publish  inflation  reports  are  clearer.  The  Riksbank  also  has  an  internal 
preparation  process  with  broad  participation.  Finally,  we  publish  the  minutes  of  Executive  Board 
meetings in which the opinion of each member is evident. The latter issue has a different (cid:147)charge(cid:148) at 
European level since there is a risk that a genuinely single monetary policy would be undermined if 
individual positions were made public. 
Monetary union and financial stability in Sweden 
The Riksbank not only has the task of maintaining price stability but also that of promoting a safe and 
efficient  payment  system.  In  light  of  this,  allow  me  also  to  say  something  about  the  potential 
implications of entry into monetary union from this perspective. 
The financial markets in Europe have developed rapidly over the past decade, partly as a result of the 
fact  that  the  freedom  to  trade  financial  services  is  fundamental  to  the  cooperation  in  the  EU. 
Competition for the national banks has hardened. The single currency has contributed to the evolution 
of a far better capital market outside the banks, which has increased competition further. In several 
large European countries, a process of structural transformation in the banking systems is underway, 
much like that  experienced in Sweden in connection with the banking crisis at  the beginning of the 
1990s. 
When competition grows stiffer, it can of course pose a threat to stability, especially if the banks are 
not accustomed to competition and are also weakly capitalised. In Sweden, the banks have operated 
in a competitive environment since the deregulation of the 1980s and have been forced into a process 
of considerable rationalisation. Capitalisation is also satisfactory. There is reason to believe that the 
Swedish banks would be able to take advantage of the less expensive borrowing conditions in a single 
currency  market  and  that  they  would  be  able  to  spread  their  risks  over  a  greater  number  of 
counterparties, which would be positive for stability. In the long run, the banks(cid:146) customers may find it 
easier  to  come  into  contact  with  other  European  banks.  This  is  an  important  aspect  of  increased 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 competition, although wise lenders nevertheless respect the (cid:147)church tower(cid:148) principle, namely to lend 
only to those that you know well - those that you can see from the local church tower. I do not believe 
that a single currency in itself would increase credit risk in the banks. 
If monetary union in the long run were to result in a more integrated market for financial services, the 
current Swedish banks would most likely be rather small participants in this market, and each bank 
would  be  less  important  for  the  effective  functioning  of  the  payment  system.  Their  significance  for 
financial  stability  would  decrease  and  the  need  for  public  intervention  to  safeguard  stability  in  the 
financial system would therefore also be reduced. The reason for this quite simply is that the effect of 
one or a number of participants failing would not be as big if the system was supported at European 
level  by  a  large  number  of  participants,  as  opposed  to  being  dependent  on  a  small  number  of 
participants, as the Swedish system is today. A more advanced securities market would also serve as 
a buffer, both for borrowers and savers. This would make the banks less systemically important. 
All in all, I believe that the Swedish banks are well equipped to face stiffer competition and that the 
effects of monetary union on stability in the financial system would primarily be positive. 
The  securities  markets,  both  stock  exchanges  and  systems  for  the  clearing  and  settlement  of 
transactions, are presently undergoing rapid development in Europe. It is likely that the principal force 
driving this development is technological advances that enable cost savings, and Sweden will be able 
to take part in this whether we use kronor or euro. However, as with trade in other markets, trade on 
stock exchanges is of course facilitated by a single currency. 
As regards the system for large-value interbank payments - the real-time system for gross payments 
known  as  RIX  in  Sweden  and  managed  by  the  Riksbank  -  monetary  union  would  involve  major 
changes. It is likely that we would not have a separate system for such payments after membership, 
but  in  some  way  would  connect  to  the  new  European  system  (TARGET2).  There  would  be 
considerable  efficiency  gains  to  be  made  here.  However,  the  stability  aspect  of  this  must  be  given 
attention. The operational risk would increase when a greater number become dependent on one big 
system. 
With  regard  to  the  Riksbank,  the  direct  effects  of  participation  in  monetary  union  on  the  work  with 
financial  stability  would  not  be  particularly  large.  Even  if  Sweden  were  to  join  monetary  union,  the 
Riksbank,  under  present  rules,  would  be  responsible  for  making  decisions  on  providing  emergency 
liquidity  assistance  to  Swedish  institutions.  Furthermore,  the  vulnerability  of  the  banks  and  the 
payment system would not change overnight but would continue to be largely national in nature, as 
long  as  the  European  banks  and  payment  systems  have  not  become  genuinely  integrated.  The 
oversight  and management of crises would therefore have to  be carried out by national authorities. 
The big difference is that international cooperation would become even more important. 
In  the  long  term,  as  banks  and  securities  markets  become  increasingly  more  integrated,  new  and 
interesting issues would arise on how best to carry out international supervision and oversight. In this 
discussion, if Sweden were to join monetary union, our voice would carry greater weight as a member 
of the ECB Governing Council and in the cooperation of finance ministers. This is also important for 
our ability to influence how integration in general proceeds and thereby also for the financial sector(cid:146)s 
conditions in Sweden.   
The role of the Riksbank 
If  Sweden  were  to  join  monetary  union,  the  Riksbank  would  become  part  of  a  bigger  whole,  the 
Eurosystem. This does not mean that the Riksbank(cid:146)s tasks would disappear, however, as claimed time 
and again by one of my predecessors Lars Wohlin. The majority of the Riksbank(cid:146)s tasks would remain 
relatively  unaffected  by  our  participation.  As  I  just  mentioned,  this  applies  to  our  work  on  financial 
stability,  which  would  essentially  remain  a  national  responsibility  for  the  foreseeable  future.  The 
Riksbank(cid:146)s operational tasks such as monetary policy transactions, the management of the Riksbank(cid:146)s 
assets, the collection of statistics, the management of banknotes and coins and various administrative 
tasks would also remain. 
I also object to the claim that the Riksbank would become a branch office of the ECB. In actual fact, 
the national central banks of the Eurosystem own the ECB. If Sweden were to join the Eurosystem, we 
would become a member of the board and be able to influence how the system as a whole develops 
in the future. That is hardly an opportunity available to local offices of other organisations. In addition, 
the Eurosystem is a decentralised system, in which the vast majority of tasks are carried out by the 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 7
 national  central  banks.  Many  tasks  are  also  performed  at  national  level  completely  outside  the 
framework of the Eurosystem.    
The  main  change  if  Sweden  were  to  participate  in  monetary  union  would  be  that  decisions  on  the 
interest  rate  level  in  Sweden  would  be  taken  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council  instead  of  by  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank. The  decisive  factor  for  the  setting  of  rates  would  be  the  inflation 
prospects for the euro area as a whole. As Riksbank Governor, I would become a member of the ECB 
Governing Council and take part in the monetary policy decisions there. 
Naturally, this would affect our work on monetary policy. Prior to taking its interest rate decisions, the 
ECB does not perform its own assessments of inflation prospects for smaller Member States such as 
Sweden, so this would remain our responsibility. In light of this, it is natural that we should continue to 
publish assessments of the Swedish economy a couple of times per year. In this way, we would be 
able to make a contribution to the economic policy debate in Sweden. These assessments would also 
be important when we motivate, explain and justify the single monetary policy in Sweden. 
As part of the Eurosystem, the Riksbank would participate in the comprehensive analysis activities of 
the ECB. If we are to have any influence in this process, it is important that we have performed good 
analyses that are tailored to the essential, relevant issues prior to the ECB(cid:146)s meetings. This points to a 
certain  shift  in  focus  from our  day-to-day  forecasting  activities  to  in-depth  analyses  that  are  also  of 
relevance to policy. 
One  consequence  of  the  Riksbank  no  longer  setting  the  interest  rate  level  in  Sweden  would 
undoubtedly be a decrease in the level of attention paid to our activities in the media and elsewhere. 
This would primarily have direct effects for the members of the Executive Board but is not something 
that worries me. However, it could also affect our ability to attract employees. Certain categories of 
employee may no longer consider us to be as exciting a workplace. For others, the opposite may be 
the case, particularly for those that want to work in a more international environment. 
Transparency  is and has  been  a guiding  principle of the Riksbank for many  years. Should  Sweden 
decide to join monetary union, the Riksbank would continue to be a transparent institution. In some 
respects, our actions would be naturally restricted by the common regulations for the euro area. To the 
extent  we perceive this to be a problem for our operations and an obstacle to  the transparency  we 
safeguard, we would of course seek to effect a change.   
Concluding remarks 
Approximately three months remain until 14 September, when the Swedish people will be saying (cid:147)yes(cid:148) 
or  (cid:147)no(cid:148)  to  the  euro  in  a  referendum.  In  light  of  this,  I  have  addressed  some  issues  today  that  are 
directly relevant to the Riksbank(cid:146)s operations and the preparatory work that we are carrying out in the 
event of a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) vote. 
During the preparatory phase, Sweden may - if the government so decides - join ERM2. We are well 
prepared for this, having an economy that is in step with that of the euro area. Membership in ERM2, 
for a country  on its  way  into monetary  union,  is different to the systems of fixed exchange rates in 
which Sweden has previously participated. This is partly due to the fact that the central rate chosen 
can  be  expected  to  become  the  conversion  rate  for  entry  into  EMU.  This  would  reduce  the  risk  of 
uncertainty over the krona(cid:146)s development. As a member in ERM2, there would still be scope for the 
Riksbank to promote price stability, although this scope would diminish the closer to entry we come. 
Responsibility for stabilising the economy would gradually shift over to fiscal policy. 
If  Sweden  were  to  join  monetary  union,  the  interest  rate  level  would  be  set  by  the  ECB.  The 
differences that exist between the Riksbank(cid:146)s and ECB(cid:146)s work methods should not be exaggerated. 
With the ECB(cid:146)s latest clarifications, this has become even more obvious. But as regards the internal 
preparation  processes,  clarity  and  transparency,  a  number  of  differences  remain.  If  the  referendum 
results in a (cid:147)yes(cid:148) to the euro, I will be talking an active part in these issues as a member of the ECB 
Governing Council. 
The Riksbank also works with financial stability. In this area, the institutional changes would not be 
that  great  as  a  result  of  Sweden  joining  monetary  union.  In  the  long  term,  however,  the  financial 
system in Europe would be reshaped. It is important that we have both insight and influence in this 
process  in  order  to  be  able  to  do  a  good  job  at  the  Riksbank  and  also  to  be  able  to  contribute  to 
creating the best possible conditions for the Swedish financial sector. 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 Finally, I mentioned the Riksbank(cid:146)s own activities after a potential entry into monetary union. Media 
interest in the Riksbank would certainly diminish somewhat if we no longer set the repo rate. However, 
our work tasks and operations would not be affected that much. Most important would be changes in 
the area of monetary policy. Our perspective would have to become more European, while we would 
also be an important part of the domestic debate on economic policy. 
In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  note  that  a  (cid:147)no(cid:148)  to  the  euro  would  not  entail  any  major  changes  for  the 
Riksbank(cid:146)s day-to-day business. I expect that we would continue to conduct our operations in much 
the  same  way  as  before.  There  is  a  risk,  however,  that  our  significance  in  the  international  arena 
would diminish further. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 9
