 David Dodge: Monetary policy - meeting the challenges of an uncertain world 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Speakers  Forum,  Toronto, 
Ontario, 29 January 2003.  
 I want to talk today about some of the uncertainties surrounding Canada's economic prospects and 
how the Bank of Canada is dealing with them through its conduct of monetary policy. In particular, I'll 
discuss  what's  happening  to  prices  in  the  economy  and  how  Canada's  macroeconomic  policy 
framework protects it from the risks of persistent inflation or deflation. Finally, I will update our outlook 
for the Canadian economy.  
Two  weeks  ago,  I  was  in  Basel,  Switzerland,  for  one  of  our  regular  meetings  at  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements. This meeting, as well as others during the past year, have been particularly 
interesting for Canadians. Other participants always ask us, "How come you Canadians are doing so 
well, when the rest of us seem to be struggling?"  
We have been telling them that one of the reasons why Canada has been less affected by the recent 
worldwide  economic  slowdown  is  that  we  made  extraordinary  efforts  during  the  1990s  to  get  our 
macroeconomic framework—that is, our monetary and fiscal policies—right. We all know it was painful 
to adjust to free trade and to conquer inflation in the early 1990s, and to eliminate public sector deficits 
over that decade. Canada paid an economic price for those efforts during the 1990s. But they are now 
yielding clear economic dividends.  
Of course, we've also had some good luck. We are less exposed to sectors that are struggling the 
most.  But  Canada's  economic  strength  during  the  past  two  or  three  difficult  years  for  the  world 
economy reflects, for the most part, the fact that Canada stuck to its basic policy framework. As we 
move forward, this underscores the importance of maintaining that framework—especially now, when 
the near-term world economic outlook is not strong, and the geopolitical climate is uncertain.  
With all this economic uncertainty, it is not surprising that we hear concerns these days about both the 
risks of accelerating inflation and the risks of deflation.  
I  think  it  is  important  to  place  these  concerns  into  some  context,  so  that  Canadians  can  better 
understand  the  risks  and  implications  of  price  shifts  in  the  economy.  That  is  why  I'm  going  to 
concentrate most of my comments today on this subject. After all, the goal of the Bank of Canada's 
monetary policy is to maintain low, stable, and predictable inflation.  
For over a decade, following a joint agreement with the federal government, the Bank has operated 
with  a  system  of  inflation  targets.  We  aim  to  keep  the  trend  of  consumer  price  inflation  at  the 
2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. Because we have managed to keep inflation inside the 
target  range  through  most  of  the  past  decade,  Canadians'  expectations  for  inflation  have  become 
firmly anchored around the 2 per cent target.  
Right off the top, let me assure you that the Bank of Canada will continue to pursue a monetary policy 
focused on returning inflation to that 2 per cent target, should it deviate in either direction. Canada's 
inflation-targeting  framework  operates  symmetrically;  that  is,  we  minimize  the  chances  of  both  a 
sustained upward drift in inflation and the threat of deflation.  
Recently, rates of inflation in Canada have come in higher than expected. At the same time, a weak 
global  economic  environment,  the  huge  drop  in  equity  prices,  and  declines  in  the  prices  of  some 
manufactured goods are raising fears of deflation in other countries. Let's look at both these risks.  
The upside risk: inflation  
First,  let's  consider  the  upside  risk  of  accelerating  inflation.  It  has  been  more  than  a  decade  since 
Canada has experienced prolonged high inflation. Since the targeting system was put in place, both 
the trend of inflation and inflation expectations have come down to near 2 per cent and stayed there.  
In recent months, CPI inflation has risen substantially, for several reasons. We've seen higher oil and 
gas prices, higher home and auto insurance premiums, higher tobacco taxes, and, in Ontario, higher 
BIS Review 4/2003 
 1
 electricity prices. There has also been the "echo effect" of temporary price discounting in late 2001, 
following the 11 September terrorist attacks.  
At the same time, stronger demand in Canada has been pushing up prices in some sectors, such as 
housing and some services. These pressures are starting to show up somewhat more broadly in the 
CPI data; and, without offsetting declines in other components of the CPI, these pressures are having 
an impact on all our measures of trend inflation. This suggests to us that demand conditions may be 
strong enough now to make it easier to raise prices and widen profit margins.  
The Bank's policy aims to maintain total CPI inflation at 2 per cent, or to return it to that point within 
18 to  24  months. With  that  horizon  in  mind,  we  need  to  look  through  any  short-term  volatility—and 
there's  been  a  lot  of  short-term  volatility  in  recent  months.  Mostly,  we  do  that  by  focusing  on  our 
measure of core inflation, which excludes the eight most volatile components of the CPI, as well as the 
effect of changes in indirect taxes on the remaining components.  
Of course, any measure of core or underlying inflation won't perfectly predict future inflation. We also 
look carefully at what is happening to individual CPI components, to gauge the size and persistence of 
any price changes. So, for example, recently we have spent a lot of time examining the factors driving 
the prices of electricity, insurance, and some foods.  
Many  of  the  relative  price  movements  churning  the  current  inflation  numbers  will  likely  prove  to  be 
temporary. But the recent pattern of persistently higher-than-expected rates of inflation, together with 
other signs of capacity pressures, may be indicating that our economy is operating closer to capacity 
than the Bank had previously thought.  
The downside risk: deflation  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  potential  downside  risks  on  the  price  front—deflation,  which  is  a  persistent 
decline over time in the average prices of goods and services.  
We  have  all  heard  a  lot  about  the  toll  that  deflation  has  taken  on  Japan.  In  some  other  countries, 
including the United States, concerns about deflation have also arisen because prices for goods have 
been  falling.  Their  economies  have  been  operating  below  capacity,  and  the  resulting  output  gap  is 
putting downward pressure on prices.  
Why is the possibility of falling prices so worrisome? Well, when North Americans think of "deflation," 
they usually think of the 1930s and the terrible economic and social consequences of the Depression. 
Back then, deflation was the result of a spectacular drop in demand.  
That kind of deflation can lead to a vicious circle of declining profits and share values, increased debt 
burdens, business bankruptcies, lower investment, and a further weakening of demand. The goal of 
macroeconomic  policy  should  be  to  avoid  this  type  of  situation.  It  is  precisely  for  this  reason  that 
Canada's inflation-targeting framework operates symmetrically.  
But weak demand isn't the only thing that may pull down prices. A drop in prices that is triggered by 
increased  productivity  would  not  harm  an  economy,  because  the  higher  productivity  would  boost 
profits, stimulate business spending, and improve real incomes.  
With that in mind, let's look at what has been happening to prices around the world. In many of the 
world's  biggest  economies—Japan  being  the  exception—inflation  has  been  averaging  around 
2 per cent. That's low by historical standards, but still well above zero. In some of these economies, as 
I've mentioned, the prices of goods are actually falling. But much of that drop has come about as a 
result of higher productivity.  
Productivity growth has been more concentrated in goods-producing industries. That is why we see 
sharp divergences in goods and services prices. In the United States, for example, over the past year, 
goods prices—based on the core measure of inflation—fell 1½ per cent, while services prices rose by 
about 3½ per cent, resulting in an overall core inflation rate of about 2 per cent. A similar scenario is 
playing out in the United Kingdom.  
If  technological  advances  and  productivity  growth  cause  lower  goods  prices,  profitability  in  the 
goods-producing industries will be preserved, wages and salaries can increase, and there will be no 
adverse effects on total employment and spending.  
In Canada, goods prices are rising more slowly than services prices. However, we're not seeing actual 
declines  in  the  overall  price  of  goods.  Although  this  may  have  something  to  do  with  structural 
  differences  in  our  economy,  fundamentally  it  reflects  the  fact  that  domestic  demand  in  Canada  is 
stronger than in the United States, and our economy is operating closer to capacity.  
Here  is  some  of  the  evidence  we  have  to  date  to  support  this  view.  Capacity  utilization  among 
Canadian goods producers is getting close to the point where production constraints start to emerge. 
In  some  sectors,  businesses  are  reporting  shortages  of  skilled  labour.  And  profit  margins  for 
consumer-related industries trended up through the first three quarters of 2002. All of this suggests 
that most goods prices in Canada are not being discounted because of weak demand, as appears to 
be the case in the United  States. Moreover, Canadian corporate balance sheets are improving and 
are, indeed, in relatively good shape compared with those in other countries.  
Symmetrical monetary policy minimizes the risk  
So, those are both sides of the price picture. I've laid out for you some of the factors that are moving 
prices  at  home  and  abroad.  Now,  I'd  like  to  spend  some  time  explaining  how  Canada's  monetary 
policy framework reduces the risk of both persistent inflation and persistent deflation.  
As  I  said  before,  Canadian  monetary  policy  acts  in  a  symmetrical  manner—that  is  to  say,  we  pay 
equal attention to any significant movement in inflation, whether above or below the 2 per cent target. 
We respond to shocks that would push inflation trends away from that target. For example, following 
the 11  September 2001 terrorist attacks, we quickly  and  aggressively cut  our policy  interest rate to 
shore up confidence. Then, in the spring of 2002, evidence started to build that demand was growing 
faster than the economy's potential. So, even though this was not yet showing up in prices, we raised 
our key policy rate three times between  April and July, by  a total of three-quarters of a percentage 
point.  
Last fall, when inflation was rising, we refrained from raising rates because we expected that global 
economic weakness would restrain total demand for Canadian goods.  
As  we  go  forward,  the  Bank  will  be  acting  to  prevent  the  current  high  headline  inflation  rates  from 
feeding into expectations and to return inflation to the 2 per cent target. We will also be assessing all 
measures of capacity pressures in the economy.  
The outlook for the Canadian economy  
And  this  brings  me  to  the  Bank's  economic  outlook  for  the  next  18  months  or  so.  While  Canada's 
economy  has  outperformed  those  of  our  major  trading  partners,  our  prospects  are  still  very  much 
influenced by developments abroad. After all, we sell to the world. So let me start with the external 
outlook.  
Since last summer, we have been worried about financial headwinds and geopolitical uncertainty and 
their effect on global demand.  
In our Monetary Policy Report Update that we just published, we said that global economic prospects 
may  have  weakened  further  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  However,  we  continue  to  expect  global 
economic growth to pick up in the second half of the year and into 2004.  
We also expect that risk premiums in financial markets will continue to decline, which should further 
improve the environment for business investment later this year.  
But  on  the  geopolitical  front,  the  possible  outbreak  of  war  in  the  Middle  East  remains  the  great 
uncertainty.  Let  me  outline  the  implications  of  some  of  the  scenarios  we  face.  A  negotiated  early 
resolution of the standoff in Iraq, or even a short, decisive conflict, could reduce geopolitical tensions 
fairly quickly. But a prolonged war would make the world economic outlook even more uncertain and 
would hurt business and consumer confidence. In the case of a war, oil supplies might be disrupted, 
which  would  lead  to  higher  oil  prices,  further  restrain  global  economic  activity,  and  raise  total  CPI 
inflation around the world.  
I would note, however, that higher oil prices would raise the value of Canada's oil and gas exports. 
Finally, a prolonged war could boost US government spending and, hence, US demand.  
Of course, we don't know how the situation in the Middle East will be resolved. So, we have made an 
assumption that the related uncertainties will dissipate in the second half of 2003. Our projections for 
the global and Canadian economies are based on this assumption.  
  So, let me now turn to the Canadian outlook. After growing significantly faster than potential during the 
first half of 2002, Canada's economy slowed to a growth rate close to potential in the second half of 
the year. Even with this slowdown, the level of demand has remained near capacity since the middle 
of last year.  
As we look forward, we foresee below-potential growth in the first half of the year. But we anticipate 
increased  demand  pressures  in  the  second  half  of  2003  and  into  2004,  as  global  uncertainties 
diminish. However, with an appropriate reduction in the amount of monetary stimulus, we see the level 
of output remaining close to capacity during 2003 and into 2004.  
As  I  said  earlier,  recent  inflation  rates  have  come  in  somewhat  higher  than  expected.  This  reflects 
certain one-off price increases, such as higher insurance premiums, but also some broadening of price 
pressures as a result of stronger demand.  
The one-off factors will hold the core rate of inflation well above the 2 per cent target in the first half of 
this  year.1  In  the  second  half  and  into  2004,  we  expect  the  core  rate  to  ease,  as  the  effect  of  the 
one-off factors diminishes and the removal of monetary stimulus keeps demand pressures in check.  
The outlook for total CPI inflation this year will continue to be importantly affected by developments in 
crude oil prices. With oil and gas prices where they are now, we could see CPI inflation rates between 
4 and 4.5 per cent in the first quarter. If oil and gas prices decline in the second half, as futures prices 
suggest they will, then total CPI inflation would move back down in line with core inflation.  
Let's  remember  that  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  remains  stimulative.  To  return  inflation  to  the 
2 per cent target over the medium term, we will need to remove some of the stimulus. In other words, 
we will need to raise interest rates.  
A number of elements will come into play in determining the pace at which we will reduce monetary 
stimulus. Let me reiterate them. First, although much of the recent run-up in inflation was the result of 
special factors, we can't rule out the possibility that demand pressures are becoming more prominent. 
So,  we  will  watch  these  pressures  carefully.  Second,  the  Bank  must  guard  against  the  risk  that 
inflation above the 2 per cent target might lead to an increase in inflation expectations. These, too, we 
will monitor closely. Third, the confidence of investors and financial markets has improved but remains 
fragile  because  of  geopolitical  and  world  economic  uncertainty.  We  will  be  watching  credit  and 
financial market developments to gauge the climate for business investment. Fourth, the way in which 
events in the Middle East unfold could affect demand and inflation, globally and in Canada.  
 To conclude, let me repeat that this is not an easy time to predict the course of the global economy. 
But Canada's economy, while feeling the impact of world uncertainties, is showing sustained strength. 
That  strength  reflects  the  extraordinary  work  Canadians  have  done  in  creating  and  maintaining  a 
sound  macroeconomic  framework.  I  can  assure  you  that  monetary  policy,  as  a  key  part  of  that 
framework, will continue to serve Canadians well in meeting the challenges of an uncertain world.  
                                                      
1  
In December, core inflation moved down to 2.7 per cent, largely reflecting rebates for electricity in Ontario. But this is expected to be 
reversed in January. Indeed, what we take from the December numbers is a continuation of recent price trends. So, inflation is 
projected to be above the 2 per cent target for the rest of this year. 
 