 David Dodge: Policies to sustain growth domestically and internationally 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Foreign Bankers’ Association in 
the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 13 May 2003. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I have been  looking forward to coming to Amsterdam since 
Governor Wellink extended the invitation last year. I must say that when you consider what has been 
happening in the world economy, it is certainly an interesting time to be a Canadian at international 
meetings such as the BIS meeting I attended yesterday. My colleagues from other central banks have 
often  commented  on  Canada’s  relatively  strong  economic  performance  over  the  past  two  or  three 
years.  In  response,  I  have  told  them  that  there  is  certainly  an  element  of  good  fortune  in  that 
performance. But, fundamentally, it reflects the extraordinary efforts made during the 1990s to put a 
coherent economic policy framework in place, and I want to begin by talking about that framework. 
The four principles of economic policy 
Let  me  quickly  add  that  this  is  not  simply  a  Canadian  story.  The  framework  that  I’m  talking  about 
emerged from international discussions and has relevance for all national economies. In the 1980s, a 
consensus was reached among OECD countries on a set of economic policies that would provide the 
strongest  base  for  sustained  economic  growth.  This  consensus  is  based  on  four  principles:  trade 
liberalization,  structural  reform,  fiscal  prudence,  and  inflation  control.  I  will  spend  a  few  minutes  on 
each one of them, drawing on Canada’s experience in recent years. 
Let me begin with trade liberalization. Your own mission statement acknowledges the importance of 
the free flow of goods and services, as well as of capital and people, within the European community. 
Freer  international  trade  allows  countries  to  better  exploit  the  gains  made  from  increased 
specialization and enhanced productivity. 
Canada  has  promoted  reduced  barriers  to  multilateral  trade  since  the  Havana  Conference  of  1947, 
which launched the General Agreement on Tarriffs and Trade. In 1989, Canada signed a free trade 
agreement (FTA) with the United States. In 1994, Mexico joined the group through the North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Both of these agreements initially sparked a great deal of political 
controversy in Canada. However, they have opened up markets and created tremendous opportunities 
for Canadian entrepreneurs. Our exports have flourished as a result. 
But freeing up trade means more than setting up regional free-trade blocs, such as NAFTA and the 
European  Union.  Canada  is  hoping  to  see  meaningful  progress  at  the  World  Trade  Organization’s 
Doha round of multilateral talks. Clearly, agriculture and a number of other sectors are going to require 
a major effort. This effort must be made so that the global economy can benefit. It won’t be easy, but 
in the long run, it will be worth it. 
The second principle in the OECD policy consensus has to do with structural reform. There are two 
goals  here:  one,  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  our  economies  in  order  to  adjust  to  changing  world 
economic  conditions;  and  two,  to  ensure  the  longer-run  viability  of  our  social-  and  income-security 
arrangements. These adjustments are always difficult, because reforms will affect various groups in 
different, and often painful, ways. Further, the economic benefits of the increased flexibility may take a 
fairly long time to emerge. But these difficulties should not sway us from the task of reducing rigidities 
and increasing efficiency. 
Canada has made some progress in a number of areas. The federal government has made changes 
to its system of unemployment insurance, trying to base the program more on insurance principles and 
to  improve  the  employability  of  labour.  Canada  has  also  taken  steps  to  reduce  distortions  in  the 
personal income tax system and has slashed industrial subsidies by roughly two-thirds. 
More recently, we made some major changes to our public pension system, to better prepare for the 
inevitable  pressures  that  will  develop  as  our  population  ages.  This  meant  some  restructuring  of 
benefits  and  a  sharp  increase  in  contributions—moves  that  were  not  popular,  but  were  certainly 
necessary. In addition, the federal and provincial governments agreed to set up the Canada Pension 
Plan Investment Board, an entirely independent body. Its sole mandate is to invest the contributions in 
markets, in order to generate the best possible returns over the long term, with due consideration for 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 1
 prudence. Demographic pressures are also being felt, perhaps even more strongly, in some European 
countries, where various governments have dealt with, or are struggling with, this issue. 
The third principle in the OECD policy consensus has to do with fiscal prudence and the need for a 
disciplined  approach  to  managing  the  public  purse.  In  the  years  leading  up  to  the  mid-1990s, 
provincial  and  federal  governments  in  Canada  ran  large  budget  deficits.  These  deficits  built  up  as 
governments continued to borrow, primarily to finance current consumption. It was an unsustainable 
situation,  made  more  serious  by  our  aging  population.  Clearly,  social  spending  had  to  be  put  on  a 
viable long-term course. And so fiscal policy needed to be based on a plan that would put the ratio of 
public debt to GDP on a steady downward track. This was a difficult hurdle to overcome, and the fiscal 
consolidation of the 1990s was painful. 
Now, here’s the good news. Since that time, the vicious circle of rising deficits and debt has become a 
virtuous circle of balanced budgets and falling debt. Reducing, and ultimately eliminating, the deficit in 
the 1990s helped with Canada’s international credibility. And this led to a reduction in the risk premium 
demanded by investors. The fiscal improvement meant that the Bank of Canada was in a position to 
lower  interest  rates  more  easily  when  economic  circumstances  warranted.  The  lower  interest  rates 
reduced debt-servicing costs, stimulated economic growth, and boosted government revenues, which 
led  to  an  even  better  fiscal  position.  The  main  point  here  is  that,  while  the  initial  work  of  fiscal 
consolidation is certainly difficult, it is necessary in order to enjoy the fiscal dividends later on. 
The  final  policy  principle  is  the  one  that  relates  most  directly  to  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  primary 
responsibility—monetary policy. The OECD consensus holds that price stability is the appropriate goal 
for monetary policy over the medium term. In Canada, we try to achieve this goal through an inflation-
targeting system. The Bank of Canada reached an agreement with the federal government in 1991 to 
try to keep inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 
per cent target range over the medium term. 
Importantly, we take a symmetric approach to our inflation target. This means that we worry as much 
about the trend of inflation falling below the target as we do about inflation rising above the target. We 
have  found  that  this  symmetric  approach  has  been  very  effective  in  promoting  low,  stable,  and 
predictable inflation in Canada. Following a period of higher and more variable inflation in the 1970s 
and 1980s, the inflation-control targets helped to anchor monetary policy. Inflation quickly fell into the 
target range, and inflation expectations became focused on the target. This has helped to smooth out 
the ups and downs of the business cycle and, more generally, has led to stronger economic growth in 
the long term. 
Those  are  the  four  principles  on  which  the  OECD  policy  consensus  is  based:  trade  liberalization, 
structural  reform,  sound  fiscal  policy,  and  monetary  policy  focused  on  inflation  control.  Canadians 
spent a great deal of effort putting the four elements of this framework into place over the past decade 
or so. It certainly was not easy. It involved a fair bit of short-term economic pain. But the phrase “short-
term pain for long-term gain” is more than just a cliché. Canada is now reaping the economic benefits 
of that effort. In the face of all the negative shocks that hit the global economy in the past two or three 
years—war,  terrorism,  corporate  governance  and  accounting  concerns,  and  the  collapse  of  the 
technology sector—our economy has proven resilient. 
With all of the uncertainty in the global economy, it is more important than ever that national authorities 
around the world stick to a sound economic policy framework. It is only by staying the course that we 
can establish a steady base for sustained economic growth over the longer term. 
I  don’t  want  to  leave  the  impression  that  the  way  Canada  has  implemented  the  OECD  policy 
consensus is the only way to go. Nor do I want to suggest that we have achieved perfection. There is 
still  work  to  be  done  in  all  four  areas  of  the  framework,  particularly  in  relation  to  microeconomic 
policies. Policy-makers should always be looking for ways to improve economic performance. In that 
vein, I now want to return to the topic of monetary policy and talk briefly about the potential role of 
asset prices in monetary policy. 
Asset prices and monetary policy 
Let me emphasize that I believe that our monetary  policy framework, based on an explicit inflation-
control target and a floating exchange rate, is the best choice for Canada. Our floating currency helps 
facilitate  the  economic  adjustments  that  will  always  be  necessary  when  shocks  occur.  This  is 
particularly important for a relatively small and open economy such as ours. All told, Canada has a 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2003
 coherent monetary policy regime that has proven its worth—one that gives us a solid base for sound 
long-term economic growth. 
But the recent dramatic fall in the share prices of so many technology firms—the so-called bursting of 
the  tech  bubble—highlighted  the  debate  about  the  role  of  asset  prices  in  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. It somehow seems appropriate that I should talk about this question here in the Netherlands, 
the  location  of  one  of  the  most  famous  asset-price  bubbles  in  history—the  tulip  bubble  of  the 
seventeenth century. 
This episode, where mass speculation led to the dramatic rise and subsequent collapse in the price of 
tulip  bulbs,  illustrates  that  asset-price  bubbles  can  have  serious  repercussions  for  a  country’s 
economy when they burst. There has been a tendency recently, particularly in the United States, to 
ask whether central banks “should try to pop bubbles when they see them, before they get too large”. 
Let me be clear: I do not believe that central banks should try to target asset prices in the same way 
that  we target the inflation rate.  And  I do  not  believe that  we should be  in  the  business of popping 
bubbles.  To  do  so  would  be  unrealistic.  It  would  presume  that  central  bankers  know  better  than 
anyone else what represents fair value for assets. We don’t. 
Instead, the real issue is, What is the role of asset prices in the setting of monetary policy? Central 
banks—and  here  I’m  speaking  about  the  Bank  of  Canada  in  particular—do  take  into  account  the 
information contained in asset prices in a number of ways. When we set interest rates, we look at cost-
of-capital effects and wealth effects, as well as the impact of changes in asset prices on confidence. 
And there are some asset prices, expressed as the yield spread between high- and low-risk bonds, 
that give an indication of credit conditions in the economy, so we look at those too. Other asset prices, 
such as the cost of new houses, form part of the Bank of Canada’s core measure of consumer prices, 
and are therefore taken into account directly. 
So clearly, movements in asset prices do play a role and are taken into consideration when we set 
monetary policy. All of these ways of looking at asset prices provide some information about the future 
inflation  environment  within  our  18-  to  24-month  horizon  for  inflation  targeting.  But  the  broader 
question  is,  Are  there  ways  in  which  asset  prices  can  give  central  banks  information  about  price 
pressures beyond this medium-term horizon? If so, what should be done about it? 
Let me give you a more concrete example. Consider the following scenario for an inflation-targeting 
central bank. Let’s assume that inflation is near its target, but demand in the economy is weak, and the 
output gap is widening. This situation would normally call for an easing of monetary policy. But what if, 
at the same time, there was evidence that the prices of assets such as equities or real estate were 
rising well above historical norms, or that there was a real surge in credit issuance relative to historic 
levels,  or  evidence  of  speculative  overinvestment?  Should  a  central  bank  then  adopt  a  somewhat 
tighter policy than it otherwise would? And if it did, would this be effective in limiting the rise in asset 
prices? Should the central bank run the risk of inflation falling below the target, to help guard against a 
much  more  serious  disinflationary  correction  of  financial  imbalances  later  on?  There  are  no  easy 
answers to these questions, but we have to continue to think hard about them. 
The role of the exchange rate 
That hard thinking must equally  be applied to  what is, in effect, another class of asset prices. I am 
referring to the price of a country’s currency—the exchange rate. This is particularly true at times when 
we see large movements in exchange rates. So it is an issue that faces us all, given the recent sharp 
depreciation of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar, the euro, the pound, the Australian dollar, 
and others. 
What does this movement mean for the Bank of Canada? As with other asset prices, the Bank does 
not  have  a  target  level  for  the  currency.  Its  price  is  determined  by  the  markets,  and  the  floating 
exchange rate is an important part of our monetary policy system, as I mentioned earlier. 
Thus,  in  setting  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  this  system,  we  do  take  into  account  these 
movements, and what they tell us about demand and inflation. Insofar as movements in the exchange 
rate do affect the prices of imported goods, we must take them into account because they bear directly 
on what we do target; that is, the inflation rate. However, we have found in recent years that the pass-
through  from  exchange  rates  to  prices  has  been  less  pronounced  than  in  the  past.  We  also  try  to 
ascertain the primary causes of the movements in exchange rates, and whether these movements are 
giving any information about factors that are affecting real economic performance. To the extent that 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 3
 movements in the Canadian dollar reflect fundamental factors at work in the Canadian economy, such 
as strong economic performance or higher prices and stronger demand for non-energy commodities, 
then we clearly need to take these into account. 
 Let me close by reiterating that aiming for low, stable, and predictable inflation is a crucial component 
of  the  OECD  policy  framework,  along  with  sound  fiscal  policy,  structural  reform,  and  trade 
liberalization.  In  my  view,  the  debate  about  the  role  of  asset  prices  in  monetary  policy  is  not  an 
argument for moving away from inflation targeting. But I hope that my discussion of the potential role 
of asset prices in monetary policy underscores the idea that we should never stop looking for ways to 
improve our  economic policy framework, so that  we  can continue to promote sustainable  economic 
growth and prosperity. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2003
