 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Launch of the consumer education programme  
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of 
the consumer education programme at the Central Bank of Malaysia, 30 January 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The consumer education programme being launched today is a further development that represents 
an  important  step  forward  in  the  modernisation  of  our  financial  system. We  have  already  seen  the 
significant  progress  that  has  been  achieved  by  the  banking  sector  in  the  restructuring  and  reform 
process, in the capacity enhancement of the banking institutions and in the overall development of our 
financial infrastructure.  
The ultimate objective of this progress is to contribute towards enhancing the growth and development 
prospects of our nation. The strengthening of the banking sector needs to be translated into enhanced 
effectiveness and efficiency  of the banking institutions in meeting the changing requirements of our 
economy. How consumers can expect to benefit from this progress will depend on how well informed 
they are on matters relating to financial services being provided.  
The  consumer  education  programme  being  launched  today  represents  an  important  element  in  the 
overall  strategy  of  enhancing  the  consumer  protection  infrastructure.  Consumer  education  and 
awareness  is  essential  in  an  environment  that  is  becoming  increasingly  more  complex  and 
sophisticated. As outlined in the Financial Sector Master Plan, the strategies to achieve an adequate 
and effective consumer protection infrastructure involves:  
• 
• 
A comprehensive and structured consumer education programme;  
Increased  transparency  by  the  financial  institutions  on  the  products  and  services  being 
offered;  
Legal redress for consumers to deal with grievances arising from the purchase of financial 
products and services;  
Expansion  in  the  role  of  the  Banking  Mediation  Bureau  to  cover  the  full  range  of  retail 
banking  related  consumer  complaints  and  educating  banking  consumers  of  the  ways  in 
dealing with the available courses of action;  
The implementation of Anti-Trust regulation to define the process by which abuses that are 
detrimental to consumers can be addressed; and finally  
Establishing a deposit insurance fund to not only create incentives for prudent management 
by the banking institutions but also to assure protection to small depositors. The objective is 
to promote a more market oriented consumer protection framework.  
    Ladies and Gentlemen,  
This new millennium brings with it new opportunities and challenges to both the financial institutions 
and to the consumers. As we advance forward we can expect an increasing array of choices open to 
consumers.  
In making financial decisions, consumers require information on a wide range of matters and details 
about the processes and documentation involved, the relevant fees and charges to be incurred and 
the  risks  and  benefits  of  each  type  of  product  or  service.  The  aim  of  the  setting-up  of  a  one-stop 
consumer education centre is to address information gaps that may exist. The programme also aims 
to  broaden  the  consumers'  horizon  by  enhancing  their  knowledge  on  the  new  and  more  innovative 
ways  of  conducting  banking.  Internet  banking,  for  example,  is  a  fast  and  convenient  mode  of 
conducting  banking  transactions  that  has  yet  to  gain  widespread  acceptance  amongst  banking 
consumers.  With  greater  access  to  information  on  this,  consumers  can  be  better  informed  on  the 
advantages  of  this  form  of  banking.  Any  fears  or  apprehension  on  this  mode  of  banking  may  be 
removed thus allowing for greater convenience derived from banking via desktops in the comfort of the 
home or office.  
BIS Review 4/2003 
 1
 Increased access by the public to information will also increase the level of awareness not only of the 
rights  of consumers but also on the responsibilities  of both the consumers and financial institutions 
with regard to the financial products and services being offered. Consumers should be aware of their 
rights and how best to seek redress if there is dissatisfaction with the products or services purchased. 
Through  active  consumerism,  banking  products  and  services  will  need  to  keep  up  with  the 
expectations of consumers and this will inherently contribute towards improved banking products and 
services.  
As consumers become more aware of the financial product characteristics and the choices of financial 
providers, they will be in a better position to demand for a broader range for products and services 
customized to their requirements, at more competitive prices and through more convenient channels. 
This will contribute to the development of the financial sector as it will prompt increased innovation in 
response  to  these  demands.  Indeed,  product  life  cycles  can  be  expected  to  shorten  in  the  retail 
financial  services.  For  example,  checking  accounts  are  being  fast  being  replaced  by  cash 
management accounts.  
Well  informed  and  discerning  consumers  are  a  powerful  force  in  shaping  and  driving  the  market. 
Banking institutions will thus have to continually innovate in order to meet consumers' preferences and 
expectations. Consumers' demand will thus be able to drive business competitiveness, spur greater 
innovation  and  challenge  banking  institutions  to  strengthen  their  competitive  advantage.  Educated 
consumers  are  without  doubt,  a  powerful  force  to  drive  performance  improvements  in  banking 
institutions to attain the desired efficiency and effectiveness in a market driven environment.  
Financially savvy consumers will demand greater clarity and transparency in the way banking products 
and  services  are  provided  to  customers.  Communication  policies  by  banking  institutions  therefore 
needs to ensure clear and effective communication of key information to customers, especially  with 
regard to the more complex products. Indeed, increasingly knowledgeable customers would not only 
allow for good financial decisions, but there would also be pressure for banking personnel to not only 
enhance their own knowledge but also their customer service orientation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Currently, consumers are not fully aware of the avenues for redress when they have complaints on the 
financial services being produced. In a survey undertaken by the consumer associations indicate that 
the level of awareness of the existence of the Banking Mediation Bureau was very low. The consumer 
education programme seeks to provide consumers with information on the avenues available to them 
if  they  have  issues  relating  to  the  financial  services  or  products  they  have  acquired.  Banking 
institutions are required to have a special unit to deal with complaints. Where this cannot be resolved, 
it can be referred to the Banking Mediation Bureau. In addition to the Banking Mediation Bureau, there 
is also the Unit in Bank Negara Malaysia. With the infrastructure in place, banking customers therefore 
have a number of channels to address grievances in a consultative and constructive manner.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The existence of a single  point  of reference on retail banking products and services  is expected to 
provide  consumers  with  a  fast  and  convenient  way  of  looking  for  information  and  accelerate  their 
learning  curve.  It  is  hoped  that  this  one  stop  centre  will  improve  financial  literacy  amongst  the 
Malaysian banking population and create a more financially savvy population. This has prompted the 
development  of  a  long  term  programme  to  promote  consumer  education  in  Malaysia.  The  primary 
objective of the programme is to raise the level of financial literacy among the Malaysian public. The 
programme  hopes  to  develop  banking  customers  who  will  make  better  informed  financial  decisions 
and be confident in exercising their rights.  
To facilitate recognition of the programme by the public, the consumer education programme has been 
given  an  identity  and  logo  of  its  own.  The  programme  is  known  as  "BankingInfo"  and  will  be 
implemented in phases and in a structured and incremental manner. Each phase of "Bankinginfo" will 
reach  out  to  certain  target  groups  to  ultimately  achieve  its  long-term  goal  of  reaching  out  to  all 
segments  of  the  banking  population.  Consumers  are  not  homogenous  and  the  information  to  be 
transmitted will have to take into account the different needs and preferences. The level of awareness 
of this programme will be monitored with a view of improving the content and enhancing the mode of 
dissemination and communication of the information.  
  In this first phase of the programme, the information will be disseminated to the public in the form of 12 
information  booklets  and  via  the  BankingInfo  web-site.  The  areas  covered  include  information  on 
consumer  banking  products,  information  on  new  and  innovative  banking  channels  as  well  as 
educational  information  on  aspects  of  banking  and  currency.  It  also  includes  information  on  Islamic 
banking,  the  Credit  Bureau  and  the  Malaysian  currency  and  on  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  All  these 
booklets can be obtained from branches of the commercial banks and finance companies and can be 
accessed from the BankingInfo website.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today is just the first step forward in the consumer education programme. BankingInfo is a 10-year 
programme,  and  over  time,  the  plan  is  to  cover  a  greater  range  of  banking  products  and  services. 
Consumer associations can contribute to this process. Consumer associations play an important role 
in  disseminating  and  educating  consumers  on  their  rights  and  responsibilities.  Through  your  direct 
contact  with  consumers,  you  can  in  the  education  process  encourage  reference  to  the  one-stop 
information  center  established  for  this  purpose  and  highlighting  the  importance  and  benefits  of 
becoming financially literate. The wide network and access to consumers, the consumer associations 
also represent an important source of reference to improve the programme. Through this process, I 
am sure that the programme will become an important and beneficial source of information on banking 
matters for consumers.  
As part of the consumer protection infrastructure, it is also planned that the scope of issues which can 
be mediated by the Banking Mediation Bureau be expanded. The guidelines on minimum standards 
on  product  disclosure,  including  prescribing  and  adopting  standard  terms  and  definitions  are  now 
being reviewed. These initiatives will ensure avenues to seek redress at reasonable costs be further 
strengthened while transparency in the financial marketplace will be improved.  
The  Banking  Mediation  Bureau  (BMB),  was  established  almost  eight  years  ago.  It  is  timely  that  a 
review is carried out in terms of its role as well as the scope of its activities. Currently under review is 
the proposal to merge the mediation bureau for the banking sector with its insurance counterpart to 
create a new entity that would not only handle issues on banking but also on insurance services being 
offered as well as by other institutions under the supervision of BNM. These include the Islamic banks, 
takaful companies and development financial institutions.  
Another  initiative  is  the  development  of  a  framework  to  increase  product-specific  and  institutional 
transparency, with the view to move towards full disclosure at a later stage. The initiative to improve 
transparency  for  all  retail  financial  products  aims  to  ensure  that  consumers  receive  sufficient  and 
relevant  information  they  can  use  to  make  informed  decisions  on  financial  products.  In  a  move  to 
make  Islamic  banking  products  more  easily  distinguishable  and  better  understood,  the  letter  'i'  has 
been suffixed to the generic names of Islamic banking products. In addition, the generic names have 
been standardised to enable customers to easily recognise the type of Islamic banking products. This 
measure will be progressively implemented by banking institutions offering Islamic banking products 
and services and will seek to enhance the level of awareness of Islamic banking products.  
Transparency  in  retail  financial  products  emphasizes  disclosing  accurately  and  fairly  the  price  and 
terms of a financial  product as well  as the timeliness of the receipt of information by consumers. A 
guideline to standardise disclosures of retail financial products for the Malaysian banking industry and 
standard definitions and terminology will also be introduced.  
 