 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 6 March 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today's meeting of the 
Governing Council of the ECB. 
We have comprehensively reviewed monetary, financial and economic developments today. We 
concluded that the outlook for price stability over the medium term has improved in recent months, 
owing in particular to the subdued pace of economic growth and the appreciation of the exchange rate 
of the euro. As a result, the Governing Council has decided to lower the key ECB interest rates by 
25 basis points. 
Let me explain our assessment of recent economic developments in more detail. 
As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3  was  7.1%  in  the  period  from  November  2002  to  January  2003, 
compared with 6.9% in the period from October to December 2002. The continued strong monetary 
growth  reflects  an  ongoing  pronounced  preference  for  liquidity  in  an  environment  of  high  financial, 
economic and geopolitical uncertainty. Although liquidity remains ample, it is not expected at this stage 
to  give  rise  to  inflationary  pressures,  given  the  current  economic  context  and  the  expectation  that 
some of the portfolio shifts will be reversed once the financial market uncertainty diminishes. Recent 
data on loans to the private sector, notably the weak growth in loans to non-financial corporations in 
late 2002, confirm this assessment. 
Turning to the analysis under the second pillar, available data and surveys indicate that economic 
activity  in  the  euro  area  remained  sluggish  in  late  2002  and  in  the  first  months  of  2003.  In  light  of 
recent  developments,  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  2003  has  weakened 
compared with previous expectations, owing especially to the geopolitical tensions and the associated 
rise in oil prices. Accordingly, only a very modest rate of economic growth should now be expected 
this year. 
Considering  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat,  annual  HICP  inflation  is  estimated  to  have 
been 2.3% in February 2003, slightly up from 2.2% in January. The main factor behind this change 
seems  to  be  the  rise  in  oil  prices.  In  addition,  some  base  effects  related  to  food  prices  may  have 
contributed to the renewed increase in annual inflation in February.  
The  ongoing  volatility  in  oil  markets  makes  it  difficult  to  forecast  short-term  inflation  developments. 
However, once some normalisation in these markets has occurred, more fundamental factors should 
dominate price developments. First, the significant appreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate 
of the euro  over the  past  year  is expected to continue to feed through the  economy  into consumer 
prices, via import and producer prices. Second, the moderate pace of economic growth should also 
reduce inflationary pressures, influencing price and cost-setting behaviours. If oil prices moderate in 
the future, as currently expected by markets, the most likely outcome will be that inflation rates will fall 
below 2% in the course of 2003 and remain clearly at levels in line with price stability thereafter.  
This  baseline  scenario  relies  on  the  assumption  that,  especially  in  an  environment  of  subdued 
economic growth, wage moderation will prevail. In fact, some recent indications suggest more modest 
wage developments towards the end of last year, but this picture would need to be confirmed in the 
future. 
Overall, ECB key interest rates have reached levels which are very low. On the basis of the currently 
available information, this policy stance, while contributing to the preservation of price stability over the 
medium  term,  provides  some  counterbalance  to  the  various  factors  which  are  currently  having  an 
adverse effect on economic activity.  
Looking ahead, the most likely scenario is that economic growth will gradually recover once the factors 
contributing  to  the  high  economic  uncertainty  have  diminished. While  the  expected  weak  economic 
activity at the beginning of this year will imply low average economic growth in 2003, a rise in quarterly 
growth rates should materialise in the course of the year. Over time, the euro area economy should 
BIS Review 13/2003 
 1
 benefit from a global economic recovery and the prevailing low levels of interest rates, as well as from 
falling inflation supporting real disposable income and underpinning private consumption growth.  
However,  any  judgement  on  future  developments  is  overshadowed  at  present  by  the  geopolitical 
tensions  and  their  potential  resolution.  Monetary  policy  cannot  address  this  kind  of  uncertainty. 
Depending  on further developments, the Governing  Council stands ready to act decisively  and  in  a 
timely manner.  
The prospects for the euro area economy will depend very much on measures taken in other policy 
areas. As for fiscal policy, adherence of all countries to the framework laid down in the Treaty and the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  will  support  stable  and  sustainable  public  finances,  and  will  thereby 
contribute significantly both to confidence and to favourable financing conditions for the private sector. 
In  most  cases,  the  fiscal  policy  stance  implicit  in  the  updated  stability  programmes  strikes  a 
reasonable  balance  between  letting  automatic  stabilisers  operate  and  seeking  further  consolidation 
where  needed.  In  some  cases,  current  consolidation  ambitions  are  weak.  In  order  to  further  boost 
confidence  in  the  fiscal  framework  and  the  economic  environment,  it  is  essential  that  appropriate 
consolidation  plans  are  implemented  in  all  countries  with  remaining  imbalances.  Hence,  the 
commitments made in the stability programmes and the requests to further improve fiscal positions, as 
subsequently  agreed  in  the  ECOFIN  Council,  must  be  implemented  in  full.  In  this  respect,  the 
measures should be part of a comprehensive and growth-oriented strategy, which for most countries 
means  putting  the  focus  on  both  restraining  the  volume,  and  reforming  the  structure,  of  public 
expenditure. 
Finally,  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy  could  be  significantly  improved  if  governments 
strengthen their efforts to implement structural reforms in labour and product markets. Such reforms 
are  important  to  ultimately  raise  the  euro  area's  production  potential,  improve  the  flexibility  of  the 
economy,  and  make  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  external  shocks.  In  particular  at  the  current 
juncture, when economic activity is subdued, taking measures to make the euro area a more attractive 
place to invest in can contribute substantially to fostering confidence. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2003
