 Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent financial and economic developments in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 13 June 2003. 
 The National Bank has decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 
0.0%-0.75%.  For  the  time being,  the  three-month  Libor  is  to  be  kept  at  the  lower  end  of  the  target 
range  at  0.25%.  In  the  past  two  years  we  took  decisive  steps  in  response  to  declining  economic 
growth and to the upward  trend of the Swiss franc. Owing to the low inflationary pressure  we have 
narrowed the target corridor for the three-month Libor by a total of 3.25 percentage points since March 
2001. Interest rates were last lowered on 6 March of this year. The recovery of the global economy is 
likely to be delayed still further so that in Switzerland, too, any perceptible economic upswing can only 
be expected to materialise during the course of 2004. We are therefore maintaining our expansionary 
monetary  policy  and  shall  keep  the  attractiveness  of  Swiss  franc  investments  low.  This  does  not 
jeopardise  price  stability.  Assuming  that  the  three-month  Libor  rate  will  remain  stable  at  0.25%, 
average annual inflation is expected to amount to 0.6% this year, 0.4% next year, and 1.2% in 2005. 
For 2003 we anticipate real economic activity to stagnate overall. 
Let me continue by saying a few words about the financial markets. After that, I will focus on the Swiss 
economy  and  our  new  inflation  forecast.  The  last  part  of  my  remarks  will  concentrate  on  the  latest 
adjustment to the ECB(cid:146)s monetary policy concept and the National Bank(cid:146)s profit distribution. 
Financial markets 
After  the  war  in  Iraq  the  financial  markets  reassessed  the  economic  situation.  The  risks  emanating 
from the international political situation lost significance, and the markets returned their focus on the 
fundamentals. The different markets have been giving off mixed signals. 
On the one hand, yields on long-term bonds in the major currencies fell to their lowest level in years. 
This is a reflection of the fact that bond markets expect low inflation and subdued economic movement 
for  an  extended  period.  Equity  markets,  on  the  other  hand,  recovered  somewhat  in  the  second 
quarter.  Risk  premiums  on  corporate  bonds  went  down  as  well.  This  is  a  sign  that  some  market 
participants are quite confident that corporations will make a stronger showing. 
Exchange rates underwent a revaluation too. The marked decline of the US dollar against the euro 
can partly be interpreted as a normalisation after the previous exaggerations, and partly be attributed 
to the widening disequilibrium in the balance of payments and in the US budget. Moreover, given the 
extremely  low  US  dollar  interest  rates,  currency  risks  could  be  hedged  at  favourable  conditions  by 
concluding  forward  contracts  -  an  attractive  option  in  times  of  decreased  risk  capability.  With  the 
resulting forward sales the dollar came under further pressure. As regards the Swiss franc, we have 
noted that the euro/franc exchange rate has for the first time reached its pre-9/11 level.   
The price losses on equities of the past few years - the SPI today is approximately 40% below its peak 
- have had a significant effect in Switzerland. They put pressure on both corporations and individuals, 
with  foreseeable  higher  old-age  provisions  and  nascent  insecurity  in  this  area  being  one  of  the 
concerns. The Swiss financial sector, which makes an above-average contribution to gross national 
product, has been particularly hard hit by the stock market correction. The cut-backs which are now 
necessary  in  the  financial  sector  will  put  a  strain  on  the  Swiss  economy  for  an  extended  period  to 
come.  
Economic activity 
Economic  activity  in  Switzerland  weakened  in  the  first  quarter  of  2003.  According  to  preliminary 
estimates of seco, real gross domestic product contracted compared with the previous period and was 
again slightly below the previous year(cid:146)s level. The renewed deterioration in the economic situation did 
not come unexpectedly. It was primarily the result of the recurring downturn of the global economy, 
which  is  partly  a  reflection  of  the  uncertainties  in  connection  with  the  Iraq  war.  Swiss  exports  were 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 1
 down  again  in  the  first  quarter,  and  the  foreign  trade  contribution  became  distinctly  negative. 
Consumer spending had a slightly stabilising effect while investments continued to decline overall.  
Even though geopolitical uncertainties have meanwhile largely given  way, the economic situation in 
Switzerland  remains  difficult.  The  marked  deterioration  in  the  labour  market  makes  for  more 
uncertainty  and  depresses  consumer  sentiment.  Even  though  there  are  first  signs  suggesting  a 
stabilisation of demand for capital goods, corporate investment activity is still at a low ebb. Despite the 
weaker franc against the euro, incoming orders and the order backlog stayed at an unsatisfactory level 
up until April. Capacity utilisation in the industry remains inadequate. Swiss gross domestic product is 
therefore not likely to grow in the second quarter of 2003 either. 
Any recovery of the Swiss economy is dependent on a sustained increase in growth in exports, which 
should  then  lead  to  a  turnaround  in  the  currently  still  weak  capital  spending.  We  expect  that  this 
upswing will set in gradually in the second half of 2003 and then continue at a more vigorous pace 
next  year.  Private  consumption  should  also  pick  up  a  little  more.  GDP  growth  is  therefore  likely  to 
increase somewhat in the second half of the year but will nevertheless remain moderate. In the current 
year we anticipate real economic activity to stagnate overall. For next year we expect a perceptible 
economic upswing. We are likely to see a continued rise in unemployment to the end of the year and 
do not expect the labour market to improve before the middle of 2004.  
Inflation forecast 
I shall now turn to the course of inflation and our new inflation forecast. Annual inflation, as measured 
by the national consumer price index, stood at 1.0% both in the fourth quarter of 2002 and the first 
quarter  of  2003.  In  April,  inflation  dropped  to  0.7%  and  amounted  to  0.4%  in  May.  This  decline  is 
primarily attributable to a basis effect. While inflation of domestic goods has remained fairly stable as 
of late, inflation of imported goods was relatively volatile. This is a result of oil prices having fluctuated 
sharply in the recent past. With regard to domestic goods, it is striking that rents have not risen for a 
while now while prices for other services - particularly public services - have augmented at an above-
average rate. The core rate of inflation calculated by the National Bank has stood at slightly below 1% 
for a while.  
This  year the National Bank began publishing  its inflation forecast once every  quarter. Our  inflation 
forecast  of  March  2003  (the  dash-dotted  green  curve  in  the  graph)  shows  that  at  that  time  we 
assumed,  based  on  a  stable  three-month  Libor  rate  of  0.25%,  that  inflation  would  gradually  rise  to 
2.5%  in  the  fourth  quarter  2005.  This  inflation  forecast  was  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  US 
economy  would  see  a  decisive  recovery  already  from  the  second  quarter  of  2003,  followed  by  an 
upswing in Europe toward the end of 2003. This proved to be too optimistic a scenario. 
In our latest inflation forecast (red dashed curve) we anticipate a renewed delay in the global recovery 
of  just  over  half  a  year.  Growth  in  the  US,  however,  is  likely  to  pick  up  as  early  as  2003.  The  US 
economy  is  not  expected  to  reach  its  growth  potential  before  the  end  of  2004,  however.  Economic 
activity  in  Europe  will  only  see  modest  growth  for  the  time  being.  We  anticipate  that  a  significant 
acceleration of growth will not set in before the middle of 2004, with potential growth being reached in 
the course of 2005. We assume that the dollar/euro rate will remain at about the current level and that 
the oil price will be around $25 per barrel. 
On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 0.25% during the next three 
years, average inflation should amount to 0.6% in 2003, drop to 0.4% in 2004 and climb to 1.2% in 
2005.  It  is  thus  forecast  to  remain  under  1%  until  mid-2005.  In  the  course  of  2005,  however,  an 
acceleration will get under way, with forecast inflation reaching the 2.5% mark in the second quarter of 
2006.  
The new forecast is consistently below that of March 2003. The low inflation at the beginning of 2004 
is attributable to a basis effect as a result of the development of oil prices. The lower inflation forecast 
for  the  period  thereafter  is  due  to  the  delayed  economic  upswing.  According  to  the  new  forecast, 
inflation in 2006 is no longer in the range that the National Bank equates with price stability. It should 
be noted that these forecasts assume that monetary policy will remain expansive over the next three 
years. We can preempt such a rise in inflation by tightening monetary policy at a later time. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2003
 Relaxed monetary policy 
Our  interest  rate  cut  of  50  basis  points  last  March  was  the  last  possible  downward  interest  rate 
adjustment. Our intention was to resolutely counter the appreciation of the Swiss franc vis-(cid:224)-vis the 
euro in the current difficult economic environment. So far, it has been a successful step: the Swiss 
franc  has  depreciated  markedly  against  the  euro.  Monetary  conditions  have  again  become 
considerably more relaxed. For the time being, we intend to continue to implement an expansionary 
monetary policy and to support the economic recovery in Switzerland. Swiss franc investments are to 
remain unattractive in the foreseeable future. 
Economic recovery is still uncertain. There is even recurring talk of a deflation risk in Switzerland. We 
consider this to be a minimal risk. In a few months, inflation may well be negative. An actual deflation 
spiral leading to a strong decline in the demand for goods and in output is, however, highly unlikely as 
long as the Swiss franc does not appreciate inordinately. We shall therefore continue to take decisive 
steps to combat a tightening of the monetary conditions brought about by any significant rise of the 
Swiss franc against the euro.  
You will certainly have taken note of the high growth rates of the money supply aggregates in the last 
few quarters. The money supply aggregates are currently growing at rates last seen at the end of the 
eighties. The question arises to what extent this expansion in the money supply  has an inflationary 
effect.  First,  let  it  be  said  that  we  are  deliberately  conducting  an  expansionary  policy.  That  partly 
explains  the  above-average  money  supply  growth.  It  also  must  be  noted,  however,  that  the  painful 
experiences  investors  have  made  on  the  stock  markets  and  the  uncertain  economic  situation  have 
significantly heightened the preference for liquidity. A look at credit statistics confirms that the money 
supply did not grow as a result of credit creation and therefore does not serve to finance any existing 
demand for goods. Moreover, our economy currently has free capacities so that increased demand will 
not  immediately  push  up  prices.  We  are  therefore  convinced  that  we  have  sufficient  time  at  our 
disposal to keep inflation within the bounds of price stability by tightening monetary policy at a later 
point in time.  
I should like to emphasise once more that in the present situation other efforts are needed besides an 
expansionary monetary policy in order to maintain or to enhance the attractiveness of Switzerland as 
an  industrial  and  business  centre.  Such  efforts  include  a  further  liberalisation  of  the  domestic 
economy, an increase in competitiveness in the structurally weak sectors, and sound public finances. 
Adjustment of the monetary policy concept of the ECB 
A  few  weeks  ago,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  finalised  a  monetary  policy  assessment  and 
slightly adjusted its monetary policy concept. In future, the ECB will no longer lay down the reference 
value for the money supply  M3 every  year but  will keep it  unchanged for longer periods of time. In 
communicating its monetary policy decisions, the ECB will, other than in the past, first comment the 
general price and economic development and only afterwards the development of the money supply. 
Furthermore, the ECB has confirmed its definition of price stability. It considers price stability to have 
been achieved when the inflation rate is below 2%. At the same time, the ECB has announced that it 
will now be aiming at an inflation rate of nearly 2% in the medium term. 
The  National  Bank  defines  price  stability  in  the  same  way  as  the  ECB.  The  question  thus  arises 
whether we, too, should as a principle aim at the upper level in the range of price stability. We see no 
reason to make any changes in our concept. Switzerland is a small open economy and the proportion 
of imported goods in the national consumer price index amounts to 25%. As a result of exchange rate 
fluctuations, the inflation rates are significantly more volatile than in the euro area. There is therefore 
no sense in aiming at an excessively narrow range of inflation. Such temporary fluctuations in inflation 
do  not  pose  a  problem  for  the  Swiss  economy  and  should  not  be  countered  by  means  of  special 
monetary policy actions. Furthermore, the euro area also has the problem that there is a large spread 
in inflation between the peripheral countries and the countries at the centre. In striving for an inflation 
rate of less than, but close to, 2% in the medium term in the entire euro area, the ECB is trying to 
prevent inflation in the central countries from being pushed down towards zero, or even below zero, for 
any  length  of  time.  In  Switzerland,  this  problem  does  not  exist  as  only  inflation  measured  in 
Switzerland is relevant for our monetary policy.  
BIS Review 27/2003 
 3
 Additional agreement between the Federal Department of Finance and the SNB on the 
distribution of profits on the free assets 
At  yesterday(cid:146)s  meeting  the  Bank  Council  of  the  National  Bank  agreed  to  an  additional  agreement 
between the Federal Department of Finance and the Swiss National Bank on the distribution of profits 
on  the  free  assets  (income  on  reinvested  proceeds  from  gold  sales).  The  profit  distribution  of  the 
National Bank will thus increase by Sfr 300 million to a total of Sfr 2.8 billion (for the financial  year 
2003)  in spring  2004. In 2005  and  2006,  it  will be  gradually raised  up to Sfr 3  billion. The National 
Bank(cid:146)s profit distribution has so far not taken account of this income on reinvested gold proceeds.  
On discussing this transaction, the bank authorities of the National Bank expressed their concern that 
it was now even more obvious that the National Bank(cid:146)s profit transfer was reaching a level that cannot 
be maintained in the long term. The Governing Board shares the bank authorities(cid:146) concern that a later 
return  to  the  (cid:147)normal  level(cid:148),  which  will  only  amount  to  approximately  Sfr  1  billion,  is  likely  to  create 
considerable political difficulties.  
From  today(cid:146)s  vantage  point,  it  cannot  be  ruled  out,  moreover,  that  as  a  result  of  the  additional 
distribution  on  the  income-yielding  free  assets  the  National  Bank(cid:146)s  provisions  will  be  reduced  more 
rapidly than had been assumed when the main agreement on the National Bank(cid:146)s profit distribution 
was concluded in April 2002. At 2.9% a year, the income forecast on which this agreement was based 
is rather optimistic given the low yield level on the financial markets for some time to come. It may 
therefore well be that a downward adjustment will become necessary as early as 2007, when, in terms 
of the agreement, the level of distribution will be reconsidered. In any case, the National Bank does 
not  consider  an  annual  profit  distribution  of  Sfr  3  billion  from  2007  onward  as  by  any  means  a 
certainty.  
We think it is important to draw attention to these risks well in time. We also explained them to the 
Head of the Federal Department of Finance and asked him to advise the responsible persons of the 
cantons of our misgivings.  
Inflation Forecast June 2003 with Libor at 0,25%   2003  2004  2005 
Annual average inflation in % 
    0.6 
  0.4 
 1.2 
   4 
 BIS Review 27/2003
