 Zdeněk Tůma: The role of rules in public finance 
Introductory remarks by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the International 
Institute for Public Finance, Prague, 25 August 2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  honour  for  me  to  join  the  previous  distinguished  speakers  with  some 
introductory remarks to this high level conference. 
As a central banker, I would not pretend to be an expert in specific details of public finance. Therefore, 
I have chosen a general topic that is common to both central banking and fiscal policy. That topic is 
the  application  of  rules  in  stabilisation  policies  Over  the  last  twenty  years,  the  philosophy  of 
stabilisation  policies  has  evolved  substantially.  The  rules-versus-discretion  debate  has  led  to  a 
preference  for  a  rule-based  approach  to  policy  making.  This  has  been  supported  by  the  negative 
historical  experience  with  discretionary  policies,  as  well  as  by  a  realisation  that  successful  public 
policies  in  first  place  have  to  be  credible  and  transparent,  so  as  to  direct  private  expectations  in  a 
desirable way. 
In  terms  of  the  actual  institutional  design,  monetary  policy  has  played  a  leading  role,  the  shift  to 
greater  central  bank  independence  with  a  clear  anti-inflationary  mandate  marking  this  trend. 
Nonetheless,  three  serious  questions  have  emerged  as  a  result.  First,  whether  independence  and 
reliance on strict policy rules has too high costs in terms of macroeconomic instability. Second, how to 
co-ordinate monetary policy with governmental actions to make a consistent policy mix. And third, how 
to compensate for the democratic deficit of technocratic monetary policy decision-making. 
Concerning the first issue, empirical research has found out that greater central bank independence is 
on  average  associated  with  lower  inflation,  but  not  with  higher  volatility.  This  (cid:147)free  lunch(cid:148)  was  a  bit 
surprising  in  the  light  of  the  (cid:147)conservative  central  banker  theory(cid:148).  It  reflects  the  fact  that  the  actual 
institutional  and  policy  design  has  evolved  over  time  to  guarantee  that  the  mandate  to  achieve  low 
inflation  is  not  interpreted  rigidly.  In  fact,  most  central  bankers  pay  attention  to  real  economic 
developments  in  their  policies.  In  the  last  decade,  this  fact  has  been  formally  and  institutionally 
reflected  in  the  (cid:147)flexible(cid:148)  inflation-targeting  regime.  This  regime  is  often  described  as  (cid:147)constrained 
discretion(cid:148), meaning that it aims at making the monetary policy-making constrained by understandable 
procedures and at the same time flexible in responding to unforeseen shocks. 
As  far  as  the  democratic  deficit  is  concerned,  this  issue  has  been  addressed  by  moving  to  greater 
transparency and accountability of central banks. The burden of proof in central banks(cid:146) communication 
has shifted over the last two decades. At present, it is necessary to give convincing arguments if one 
thinks that the central bank should not give out some information, rather than to argue why something 
should be revealed. This has been a significant shift in the central banks(cid:146) mentality. 
Regarding the issue of communication and co-operation between the central bank and government, 
no universal solution has been found so far. There are many institutional arrangements, ranging from 
formal contracts between the government and central bank to non-formalised consultations between 
the two bodies. The efficiency of such arrangements, however, depends in most cases on their actual 
implementation. 
Now  I  come  to  the  fiscal  sphere.  A  trend  towards  rule-based  policy  can  be  observed  here  as  well, 
albeit  with  some  time  lag  and  in  a  different  form  compared  with  monetary  policy.  The  difference 
originates  mainly  from  the  fact  that  fiscal  policy  is  by  definition  a  political  issue  with  strong 
redistribution  aspects,  which  cannot  easily  be  mandated  out  of  direct  democratic  control.  The 
independence  solution  is  thus  not  readily  available  here,  even  though  there  have  been  such 
suggestions in the economic literature. This contributes to the fact that no single elegant model has yet 
been found in practice. The existing rules usually take the form of self-imposed constraints, such as 
legal constraints (balanced-budget acts in some countries) or international treaties (S&G Pact). 
Apart from this difference, though, the aim to implement rules stems from the same reasons and faces 
similar challenges as in monetary policy. The idea that policy should be designed in a way that does 
not put short-term political gains above the longer-term interests of society, that takes into account its 
impact on private expectations, and that is transparent to the public, is common to the monetary and 
  fiscal  spheres.  Similarly,  the  rules  must  also  address  the  issue  of  their  costs  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic stabilisation and finding a proper policy mix. 
The teething problems with the Stability and Growth Pact have been an example of these challenges. 
One of the key motivations of the Pact was an effort to avoid free riding by national governments in a 
multinational currency area. In other words, the desire to achieve a proper policy mix was present at 
the birth of this rule. In spite of that, the Pact is now criticised for being too rigid, not allowing for a 
proper  policy  response  in  times  of  distress,  and  thus  ultimately  leading  to  poor  real  economic 
performance. This naturally undermines its credibility and supports calls for various (cid:147)escape clauses(cid:148), 
to use the inflation-targeting terminology. 
The Pact is thus fighting the same battle that the conservative central banker was some time ago. It 
should evolve towards a (cid:147)constrained discretion(cid:148) system that will fulfil its major goals - sustainability, 
credibility  and  co-ordination  of  stabilisation  policies  -  yet  at  the  same  time  be  sufficiently  flexible  to 
allow for proper responses in adverse periods. It has yet to convince policy-makers and the public that 
it  can  deliver  the  lunch  without  them  having  to  pay  too  high  a  price  for  it  in  terms  of  cyclical 
stabilisation. 
So far, the Pact has seemed to be losing the battle. This is somewhat unfair, as the adverse period 
came  before  most  EU  countries  had  achieved  the  target  of  balanced  structural  budgets,  which 
reduced their manoeuvring space considerably. In a sense, the Pact is thus paying a price for being 
too lax in the previous period, i.e. not defining a binding convergence path to the target, rather than a 
price  for  being  too  rigid.  On  the  other  hand,  I  also  agree  with  many  of  the  critiques  and  proposed 
adjustments  to  the  Pact.  Defining  a  convergence  path,  looking  at  structural  rather  than  headline 
budgets, taking into account public debt levels and sustainability of public finance, etc., are certainly 
steps towards achieving the (cid:147)constrained discretion(cid:148) in fiscal policy I am talking about. The adverse 
period should thus be taken as an opportunity to modify the rule in a favourable way, rather than as a 
reason to scrap it completely. I believe that pursuing this opportunity will secure a future for the S&G 
Pact. I am convinced that some rule of this kind will always have to be in place in the eurozone, and 
not only because of its multinational nature, but also due to the general advantages of rules. 
Let  me  also  mention  briefly  the  importance  of  the  S&G  Pact  for  the  Czech  Republic  and  other  EU 
accession  countries.  The  Czech  Republic,  like  many  other  CECs,  is  facing  the  problem  of  rising 
budget deficits. This is partly a reflection of the previous transition costs, but these are gradually fading 
away. The root of the problem is structural, similar to the challenges faced by advanced EU countries 
as  well  -  population  ageing,  an  overgenerous  social  system,  etc.  At  present,  most  countries  are 
preparing consolidation programmes aimed at reversing the negative trends. Usually, the ambition is 
to bring the public deficits close to, or below, the 3% Maastricht level. For example, the target in the 
Czech Republic is not to exceed 4% of GDP in 2006. 
Nonetheless, it has not yet been fully appreciated that upon EU accession, the Stability and Growth 
Pact will become relevant to the new member states. Admittedly, the application of sanctions will be 
postponed until a country becomes a member of the eurozone. But even if a country is not a subject to 
sanctions, as a member of the EU club it should have in place at least a credible programme towards 
achieving its objectives. Moreover, if a country targets relatively early  eurozone entry,  it should first 
create a sufficient safety margin above the 3% deficit limit to be insured against distress - i.e. it should 
avoid the mistake that has been made by some of the current eurozone members concerning the S&G 
Pact. I hope that the uncertainty surrounding the Pact(cid:146)s future would not be viewed as an excuse for 
delaying  necessary  fiscal  and  structural  adjustments.  Even  if  redefined  in  a  more  flexible  way,  it  is 
quite  clear  that  the  structural  deficits  currently  observed  in  many  of  the  CECs  will  not  be  tolerable 
under the Pact, as they will not pass the sustainability and policy mix tests. Therefore, the existence of 
the S&G Pact makes the case for fiscal consolidation even more appealing than it might look at first 
sight. 
To  conclude,  let  me  wish  you  a  very  fruitful  discussion  during  this  conference,  as  well  as  a  very 
pleasant stay in Prague. Thank you for your attention. 
 