 Joseph Yam: Financial stability issues, dollarisation and price dynamics 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at 
HKIMR Summer Workshop 2003, Hong Kong, 27 August 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to welcome you to this first (cid:147)HKIMR Summer Workshop in Money and Finance(cid:148). This is 
an  event  that  we  hope  from  now  on  will  take  place  annually.  The  organisers  have  put  together  an 
interesting programme with three papers dealing with issues that are of current or potential importance 
for Hong Kong. 
The first paper, to be presented by Professor Charles Goodhart, focuses on financial stability issues. 
These issues are of particular interest to an international financial centre, as the success or otherwise 
in  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability,  and  therefore  the  efficiency  of  financial  intermediation,  not 
only has an  impact upon the domestic economy  but  also on the economy of the region that centre 
serves.  
The  second  paper,  to  be  presented  by  Professor  Genberg,  deals  with  the  subject  of  dollarisation. 
Dollarisation, in the traditional sense of the US dollar replacing or displacing the Hong Kong dollar as a 
medium of transaction in respect of domestic economic activity, is in my opinion unlikely to occur here 
in Hong Kong. This is notwithstanding the operation of a currency board system with the US dollar as 
the  anchor  currency.  But,  from  another  perspective,  we  are  seeing  continuing  economic  integration 
between Hong Kong and Mainland China. We are also noticing the inevitable trends, on the one hand, 
of greater use of the Hong Kong dollar on the Mainland and, on the other hand, of continuing financial 
liberalisation on the Mainland: this will, in the fullness of time, culminate in the RMB becoming freely 
convertible. The subject of dollarisation, whether the predominant currency is the Hong Kong dollar or 
the RMB, is a fascinating one.  
On a different dimension, in our attempt to enhance our status as an international financial centre, we 
have adopted the strategy of providing a financial infrastructure to facilitate the conduct of international 
financial  intermediation  activities  in  Hong  Kong.  This  financial  infrastructure  is  characterised  by  a 
platform on which financial activities can be transacted and settled real time in this time zone in the 
major  currencies  without,  for  example,  Herstatt  risk.  We  now  have  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
systems for the US dollar and the euro, and of course the Hong Kong dollar. And the lead-time for the 
inclusion  of  another  currency,  such  as  the  RMB,  in  our  settlement  platform,  if  that  is  considered 
appropriate, could be as little as six months. If this strategy is successful, it is not difficult to envisage 
an  increasing  proportion  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the  banking  system  denominated  in  foreign 
currencies, and the greater use of, say, the US dollar in both the equity and debt markets. I am not 
sure if this is a dimension covered in Professor Genberg’s paper on Endogenous Dollarisation, but it is 
of particular relevance to Hong Kong.  
The third paper, to be presented by Professor Kumhof, deals with issues regarding price dynamics. 
Professor  Kumhof’s  paper  focuses  on  pricing  policies  and  inflation  inertia,  at  a  time  when  we  are 
experiencing deflation in Hong Kong: I am sure, however, that there are insights that we can derive 
from the paper and the discussion. Research on price formation is high on the agenda of the HKIMR 
and the HKMA, and possibly in academic and other organisations active in economic research in Hong 
Kong. We have had deflation for some five years now and we are still debating the relative importance 
of  cyclical  and  structural  factors  behind  that  deflation.  There  is  also  debate  on  whether  measures 
could and should be taken to limit the damaging effects of deflation, notwithstanding the fact that Hong 
Kong  is  a  highly  externally  oriented  economy.  Views  on  price  dynamics  will  contribute  to  these 
debates.  
As  you know, the HKIMR  was established by the HKMA. This reflects the importance  we  attach to 
thorough  analysis  of  monetary  and  financial  issues  that  Hong  Kong  is  facing.  Developments  in  the 
local,  regional  and  global  economies  provide  many  opportunities  for  Hong  Kong,  but  also  serve  as 
potential  sources  of  risks.  It  is  therefore  critical  that  we  actively  seek  to  understand  these 
developments. To promote economic research of the highest quality, it is essential that the research 
activities of the HKIMR are, and are seen to be, carried out freely, without interference from interested 
parties,  including  the  HKMA.  It  is  therefore  not  desirable  for  the  HKMA  to  exercise  control  of  the 
BIS Review 38/2003 
 1
 HKIMR’s  day-to-day  activities.  But,  of  course,  the  professional  quality  and  academic  integrity  of  its 
activities need to be monitored and ensured. For this reason, a Council of Advisors, whose members 
are all distinguished economists working in and outside of Hong Kong, has been established. Many of 
them are in fact here today. The role of the Council is to ensure the quality of the HKIMR’s activities 
and to alert the Board of Directors if shortcomings become apparent. While the relationship between 
the HKIMR and the HKMA remains close, the HKIMR does enjoy independence in research matters. 
One consequence of this is that the views expressed in its different publications do not necessarily 
reflect those of the HKMA.  
One  of  the  distinguished  members  of  the  HKIMR’s  Council  of  Advisors  is  our  first  speaker  today, 
Charles Goodhart,  and it is my  great  pleasure  to  introduce  him. It  was  very much his  visit to Hong 
Kong that gave the HKIMR the idea of organising this workshop.  
As you all know, Charles is one of the world’s foremost monetary economists and an expert on central 
banking issues. But what some of you may know is that he has had a very long involvement in, and 
influence on, monetary issues here in Hong Kong. This began almost exactly twenty years ago when 
Hong Kong, suffering from a crisis of confidence in its political future, and without any effective form of 
monetary  control,  was  on  the  brink  of  a  financial  meltdown.  The  exchange  rate  was  depreciating 
sharply and Charles was brought in from the Bank of England to advise us on how Hong Kong could 
be rescued. He gave valuable advice on a proposal to return to a fixed exchange rate system through 
the currency board arrangement of linking the Hong Kong dollar to the US dollar. As you all know, that 
exchange rate link was subsequently established, in October 1983, and it is still in operation now. It 
commands a high degree of confidence and credibility. It has served Hong Kong extremely well in the 
past  twenty  years.  In  his  advice,  Charles  also  covered  other  strategic  issues  of  central  banking  for 
Hong Kong.  As the only remaining person in the public sector continuously  involved  in this area of 
work from then until now, I can say with some authority that the views of Charles have exerted much 
influence on the development of the monetary system of Hong Kong.  
I do not know whether you remember, Charles, your piece of advice to the then Financial Secretary, 
the late Sir John Bremridge, written on 6 October 1983. I have kept a copy of it, and I often refer to it 
for inspiration in the past twenty years. Fortunately for me, but not perhaps for others, the advice is so 
highly classified that it will probably never see the light of day. But it should be all right for me to quote 
from your covering letter to Sir John, where you said: (cid:147)I have put in all the points of substance that I 
wanted to make, and I hope and believe that they will stand the test of time.(cid:148) They certainly did. And 
so did your suggestion that it might be desirable for the Exchange Fund in time to adopt (cid:147)more of a 
feature of a Central Bank(cid:148): hence the HKMA, which was formed ten years after the advice you gave. 
Of  course,  we  also  had  the  privilege  of  your  involvement  over  the  period  from  1990  to  1997  as  a 
member of our board, the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee, and in your occasional trips to Hong 
Kong.  
So,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  now  invite  Charles  to  speak  in  our  first 
session of this HKIMR first Summer Workshop.  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2003
