 Willem F Duisenberg: Another step in the direction of a united Europe 
Address by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of an 
audience by Dr Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, President of the Italian Republic, in the context of the meeting of 
the Governing Council of the European Central Bank in Rome, Rome, 2 April 2003. 
 On behalf of the European Central Bank (ECB) and all members of the Governing Council, I should 
like to thank His Excellency - Dottore Carlo Azeglio Ciampi - for his kindness and hospitality to receive 
us today, on the eve of the Governing Council meeting in Rome, despite the geopolitical tensions we 
are currently facing. Moreover, I should like to thank Governor Dottore Antonio Fazio and the Banca 
d’Italia for organising this meeting of the Governing Council outside Frankfurt am Main. 
The Governing Council has decided to meet, in principle, two times a year outside the ECB premises 
in Frankfurt, in order to emphasise the federal character of the Eurosystem, the collective consisting of 
the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  Member  States  that  have  adopted  the  euro.  The 
decentralised set-up of the Eurosystem - with the  ECB representing the  hub  of the system and the 
national central bank its spokes - has contributed to the acceptance of the euro as the single currency 
of more than 300 million citizens, as in particular the national central banks are well-equipped, in terms 
of knowledge of language and national backgrounds, to communicate to the general public. Contrary 
to  the  public  perception  about  other  European  institutions,  the  Eurosystem  is  being  perceived  as 
relatively close to the heart of the public. 
I am very pleased to chair tomorrow’s meeting of the Governing Council here in Rome. The fact that 
the Governing Council meets in Rome is symbolic, in many aspects. 
First, Rome is regarded as the cradle of the European-Christian civilisation, as we know it nowadays. 
The Roman Empire was the first attempt to create a unified Europe. Although this period in history has 
greatly contributed to the development of the European continent, this experience has also made clear 
that Europe cannot be unified by means of force, with some nations or peoples subordinated to others. 
Unfortunately,  this  was  a  lesson,  which  Europe  had  to  learn  the  hard  way.  It  took  us  almost  2,000 
years to realise that the continuous perils of war and oppression had to end. This leads to a voluntary 
allegiance of the countries of Europe, initiated by a number of great Europeans, amongst whom Carlo 
Ciampi, who - in my mind - has also shown that central bankers can become visionary politicians ; but 
then Carlo Ciampi was not an ordinary central banker, but already a visionary in his days as Governor 
of the Banca d’Italia. Carlo Ciampi and many others were convinced that Europe could only prosper in 
unity. For the first time in the history of Europe, nation states voluntarily decided to transfer part of their 
sovereignty to a ‘higher’ collective body, nowadays referred to as the European Union. 
In this respect, Rome is also a symbolic place for the Governing Council to meet, as the first Treaty, 
establishing  the  European  Economic  Community,  was  concluded  here  -  45  years  ago  -  and  hence 
bears its name. 
Finally, this meeting of the Governing Council takes place  in a nation that belongs to the founding-
countries of the European Community, and which has always been among the staunchest supporters 
of the European integration process, as a road towards peace and prosperity. Admittedly, when the 
so-called Maastricht Treaty was concluded - in 1992 - the expectation was that only a small group of 
European countries would be in the position to adopt the euro. For some, this small group would not 
include Italy.  Looking  back, the convergence  process that  was triggered, after the ratification of the 
Maastricht Treaty, was very impressive, in particular in Italy, eventually paving the way for this country 
to  be  among  the  first  to  adopt  the  euro.  This  convergence  process  has  also  contributed  greatly  to 
macro-economic stability and sound economic policies, both in this and in other European countries, a 
practice nowadays entrenched in the Treaty, in particular in the so-called Stability and Growth Pact. 
Where  many  did  not  have  considered  this  to  be  possible,  Italy  has  thus  become  a  member  of  the 
stability-oriented family of  European nations.  Also  in  this respect, it is  a pleasure for the Governing 
Council to meet here. 
We are living in a period in which history is made, almost every day. In two weeks time, ten countries 
will sign the so-called Accession Treaties, making it possible for these countries to become a member 
of the European Union, in the spring of next year. This enlargement of the European Union to the east 
  and south of our continent is another historical event, ending the rift that was created after the Second 
World War. 
The benefits of this enlargement, both in political as well as economic terms, are clear. However, this 
does not make it less of a challenge, also for the ECB and the national central banks. From mid April 
onwards, the national central banks of the  Acceding  Countries  will  participate -  as an observer - in 
meeting  of  ESCB  Committees  (in  extended  composition)  and  meetings  of  the  General  Council. 
Enlargement involves a number of technical efforts from the side of the ECB and the national central 
bank,  in  terms  of  adaptations  to  the  infrastructure,  but  also  creates  a  new  dimension  to  economic 
convergence  and  monetary  stability  in  the  European  Union.  I  am,  however,  convinced  that  the 
Eurosystem  will  also  master  this  challenge,  as  it  has  done  before,  on  occasions,  which  demanded 
even more breath-taking efforts. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I should now like to conclude. Again, my gratitude goes to His Excellency Carlo 
Ciampi and Governor Antonio Fazio. I am deeply convinced that this meeting of the Governing Council 
will contribute to the team-sprit of the Eurosystem and hence will be one more step in the direction of a 
united Europe. 
 