 Alan Bollard: Making sense of a rising exchange rate 
Address  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Canterbury 
Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 24 January 2003. 
 My subject today is “Making sense of a rising exchange rate”. The exchange rate has risen sharply 
over the last year or so, and has become the stuff of media headlines in ways not seen for some time, 
and the concern of exporters which I acknowledge. I’m going to sketch out our broad interpretation of 
what has been going on, and outline for you something of the way that the Reserve Bank thinks about 
the exchange rate in making monetary policy. 
For several years, of course, the New Zealand dollar fell quite sharply. It settled at levels that, against 
almost any yardstick, were too low to be sustained. That is so whether measured against the US dollar 
or in effective (trade-weighted) terms. Little more than two years ago, our dollar was trading at only 
39 US cents - 30% below the average for the whole of the last 10 years. Even in trade-weighted terms, 
our exchange rate spent most of 2001 almost 15% below its 10 year average. 
When New Zealanders think about our exchange rate, we tend to think about what is going on here. In 
fact, that is only half (or less) of the story. The exchange rate is the price of our money in terms of 
other countries’ currencies, so what is happening in other countries, and what investors are thinking 
about opportunities elsewhere, matters greatly.  
In the long run - and, if you are a struggling exporter, that can be a very long time - exchange rates 
reflect long-term actual economic fundamentals: things to do with the underlying competitiveness of 
our  economy  and  its  firms.  If  our  productivity  performance  outstrips  that  of  other  countries,  our 
exchange rate will tend to rise. If our inflation rate is consistently higher than those of other countries, 
our nominal exchange rate will tend to fall. And so on. But that is for the long run.  
In the shorter-term it is largely a matter of making sense of fluctuations in the demand for funds and in 
the willingness of the world’s savers and investors to supply them. The demand for investors’ funds 
(loosely,  the  state  of  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments)  does  not  tend  to  shift  very 
quickly. Instead, changes in the attitudes and perceptions of financial market participants - changes in 
their willingness to supply funds - tend to be behind most exchange rate changes. To be concrete, in 
which  country  and  in  which  sorts  of  assets  do  they  think  that  returns  will  be  greatest?  Those 
perceptions  and  attitudes  can  be  well-founded,  or  out  of  line  with  reality  for  a  number  of  years.  At 
times, they can shift quickly.  
In  an  ideal  world,  perhaps,  the  exchange  rate  would  move  simply  to  reflect  actual  economic 
fundamentals  -  both  long-term  factors  such  as  structural  changes  in  our  relative  productivity 
performance,  and  medium-term  differences  in  economic  cycles.  The  exchange  rate  would  provide 
accurate signals to producers, and act as a buffer to temporary pressures. In fact, exchange rates are 
more volatile than this. Sometimes the moves prove to be well-grounded in economic fundamentals, 
but by no means always. And exchange rates (like share prices) fluctuate more than the underlying 
economic  fundamentals.  New  Zealand’s  exchange  rate  is  a  little  more  variable  than  most,  partly 
because  our  economic  fundamentals  are  more  variable  than  those  in  larger  and  less  commodity-
dependent countries. So when it comes to exchange rates we live in an imperfect world - less than 
ideal, but in my judgement (and we have done a lot of work in this area over the years) still better than 
the alternatives realistically on offer. 
Turning back to our own experience in recent years, the framework I outlined a moment ago does help 
make  sense,  broadly  speaking,  of  the  exchange  rate movements  in  the  last  few  years.  For  several 
years, investors globally were taking a gigantic punt on events in the United States, the leader of the 
“new  economy”.  They  convinced  themselves  that  the  United  States  offered  the  best  returns  -  the 
economy  was  growing rapidly, corporate profits  were expected to get  ever better, and share prices 
rose seemingly inexorably.  
The  enthusiasm  of  international  investors  to  hold  US  dollar  assets  outstripped  the  American 
economy’s need for those funds. Unsurprisingly, the US dollar rose sharply, to levels too high to be 
sustained for very long. And it rose against almost every other currency. Even with our OCR at 6.5% 
through much of 2000, investors just weren’t that interested in New Zealand - high tech equity markets 
were where the good returns were expected. Despite a stellar economic growth performance in the 
BIS Review 6/2003 
 1
 1990s, markets were just  as uninterested in Australia.  Both our currency  and  Australia’s fell further 
than most.  
For us, the fall in the exchange rate was something of a mixed blessing. That is perhaps always the 
case. A falling exchange rate does tend to be good for producers - firms and farmers in Canterbury for 
example - but it is bad for consumers. It tends to feel better in the countryside than in the cities. It 
makes our wages look less attractive to prospective skilled migrants, but our beachside houses also 
appear cheaper to those wealthy foreigners looking for an Antipodean holiday home, and so on. From 
a macroeconomic perspective, how we feel about these departures from “equilibrium” (and our best 
assessment of that equilibrium level is somewhere in the range of 54-60 on the trade-weighted index) 
depends a lot on what else is going on. In this case, the low exchange rate happened to provide a 
timely buffer when the world economy slowed down sharply: for exporters of manufactured goods and 
services,  in particular,  it provided an  offset to the impact of the sharp slowdown in  world economic 
activity. But for a variety of reasons, our economic growth proved so robust that New Zealand was one 
of only a small number of countries that needed to raise interest rates quite a bit last year to help keep 
medium-term  inflation  pressures  in  check.  The  exchange  rate  had  become  too  low  for  too  long  to 
really be helpful. 
And eventually, as these things do, the exchange rate began to correct - although no one could really 
reliably predict when this correction would get under way. In trade-weighted terms, our exchange rate 
has now risen by around 20% since the end of 2001; one of the largest twelve-monthly changes that 
we have seen in the 18 years since the exchange rate was floated. It is important to put this in context 
though: even after a striking 30% rise against the US dollar, that exchange rate is still only now around 
its average level for the last 10 years. On a trade-weighted basis, the exchange rate is now only a few 
per cent above its long-term average.  
As I noted earlier, changes in investors’ attitudes and expectations tend to be the main prompts for 
substantial exchange rate moves. How did those attitudes change last year?  
For investors, the US “miracle” has turned sour. Share prices have fallen for three consecutive years, 
and even US interest rates are unattractively low by international standards. America’s need to attract 
foreign capital - its huge current account deficit - remains as strong as ever. But when the US is no 
longer flavour of the decade, there was only one way for the US dollar to go. Down. That adjustment 
was both inevitable (eventually) and healthy.  
Pretty much every country in the developed world has seen its currency rise in value against the US 
dollar.  But  our  currency  has  appreciated  more  than  most  in  the  last  year.  While  on  average,  the 
currency has only returned to more normal levels, against the Australian dollar it has risen to levels 
that are not far off record highs. While many New Zealanders have been trying to make sense of our 
currency’s sharp rise, many commentators across the Tasman have been grappling with the question 
of why the Australian dollar has risen so little against other currencies so far. Indeed, in one recent 
global survey  in  which financial market commentators were  asked which currency  was likely to rise 
most this year, the Australian dollar was the overwhelming favourite.  
Two  things  seem  to  explain  much  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar’s  sharp  rise.  First,  our  economy  has 
performed  very  well  indeed,  surprisingly  well  in  the  last  year  or  so.  New  Zealand  is  one  of  the  few 
developed countries where economic forecasts were revised up last year. Amid a rather gloomy world 
outlook, investors have been attracted to favourable growth surprises. And second, it was a year when 
solid  secure  fixed  income returns  seemed  to  come  back  into  focus  among  the  investor  community. 
Moody’s now rate New Zealand as AAA, and of course New Zealanders’ appetite for debt has meant 
we have long had interest rates that have been somewhat above those of most developed countries. 
Two of the other strongest currencies last year were the Norwegian krone and the South African rand, 
both economies with higher interest rates than those in New Zealand.  
At  the  margin,  the  fact  that  our  current  account  deficit  has  been  smaller  than  usual  may  also  have 
contributed the world has been keen to put money here at just the time when we’ve needed a bit less 
than usual. The US, of course, scored poorly all round: it has had a high and widening current account 
deficit, low interest rates, and a continued disappointing growth outlook. 
But what of the rise against the Australian dollar? First, we’ve had higher interest rates than Australia 
(and  the  gap  has  increased  somewhat)  in  a  period  when  secure  fixed  income  returns  have  been 
particularly attractive. Second, validly or otherwise, markets have taken the view that the New Zealand 
economy  is  growing  more  robustly  than  Australia’s  at  present  (the  drought,  fires,  and  all  that).  And 
  third, when both the New Zealand and Australian dollars are rising or falling, our currency has often 
gone a little further than theirs: perhaps something to do with our smaller size and less-liquid markets.  
It is not my main topic today but can I make just a few quick observations about interest rates. First, 
our  interest  rates  are  currently  low  by  our  historical  standards  (lower  than  they  were  when  the 
exchange rate was falling, and only lower than this on three occasions in the last 20 years). Even after 
adjusting for inflation, interest rates are lower than they have been for most of that time. Second, while 
the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy has a big influence over the level of short-term interest rates over 
short  periods  of  time,  the  average  or  normal  level  of  interest  rates  over  periods  of  years  is  mainly 
determined by New Zealanders’ willingness to save and appetite to borrow. For reasons that are not 
fully understood, over the years New Zealanders have continued to have a higher appetite for debt, at 
any  particular  level  of  interest  rates,  than  do  citizens  of  most  other  countries  we  typically  compare 
ourselves with. Only when that changes will our interest rates settle, on average, around the level of 
those in other countries. 
I want to turn now to outline something of how we think about the exchange rate in setting monetary 
policy.  
In setting the Official Cash Rate, we are always very conscious of exchange rate changes, and how 
those developments will affect the outlook for growth and inflation a little down the track. Those effects 
have changed through time. For example, not just in New Zealand but internationally, prices seem to 
be less responsive to exchange rate movements than they were 15 years ago. Suppliers seem to be 
absorbing  more  of  the  impact  of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate.  And  as  an  increasing 
proportion  of  our  exports  are  moving  up  the  value-chain,  our  firms  are  getting  a  little  more  pricing 
power  themselves,  and  hence  are  less  immediately  exposed  to  the  effects  of  exchange  rate 
fluctuations.  And,  of  course,  access  to  sophisticated  financial  derivatives  gives  many  firms  some 
breathing  space  to  adjust  to  changes  in  the  exchange  rate.  But  as  a  trading  nation,  exchange  rate 
fluctuations will always be a big influence on the short-term economic outlook, and monetary policy. A 
rising exchange rate has a very real impact on exporting firms, and those supplying them - here in 
Christchurch and throughout the country. And it does so particularly when individual cross-rates move 
rather differently, for reasons that have nothing to do with events in New Zealand: for example, a firm 
which is sourcing inputs from Australia and exporting to the United States. 
What else is going on at the same time also matters critically. Sometimes an exchange rate change 
will helpfully offset some other development here or abroad, but by no mean always. Making these 
assessments  is  very  far  from  being  a  mechanical  or  mechanistic  exercise.  Formal  models  and 
estimates of `equilibrium’ exchange rates help, and we use them extensively. But they only take us so 
far.  A  lot  of  wisdom,  and  experience,  and  informed  judgement  has  to  be  brought  to  bear  -  and  a 
willingness to acknowledge our mistakes and reassess at the next regular review.  
And, of course,  we had a  review of the OCR just  yesterday,  when  we had to  work through exactly 
those sorts of judgements, making sense of the unexpectedly strong rise in the exchange rate since 
the November Monetary Policy Statement. We put a great deal of effort into understanding both what 
might  have  driven  the  exchange  rate,  and  into  assessing  what  impact  the  rise  might  have.  We 
concluded that the recent rise in the exchange rate, if sustained, will dampen economic activity looking 
ahead - at least as compared to what we were expecting in November. At the same time, we noted 
that domestic spending appears to have been more robust than we had anticipated - that means that 
the  economy  has  still  been  growing  strongly.  Household  spending  appears  to  have  remained  high, 
and house sales and construction activity have been very buoyant. It is important to remember that the 
starting point has been one of quite intense pressure on resources - many of you, for example, are no 
doubt among the firms who report that they are finding it very hard to get good staff. For the moment, it 
is appropriate to leave the OCR unchanged, but the balance of risks has shifted. We will need to look 
closely  at  the  data  over  the  next  few  months,  for  evidence  that  points  to  reduced  pressure  on 
resources and medium-term inflation. If that evidence emerges, and if the exchange rate remains at 
around current levels, or even rises further, there may be scope for a cut in the OCR later in the year. 
Some prices are already falling as a direct result of the rising exchange rate. That, in itself, would not 
prompt us to adjust monetary policy - any more than the sharp rises in prices in 2000 and 2001 after 
the  substantial  exchange  rate  fall  led  us  to  adjust  the  OCR  in  response.  We  focus  on  the  more 
sustained  impact  of  exchange  rate  changes;  the  effects  on  economic  activity  and  medium-term 
inflation pressures. Short-term changes in prices can affect people’s expectations about inflation, but it 
has usually been sensible for us to “look through” these effects. If we did not, we would typically be 
  over-reacting,  and  pushing  interest  rates  around  more  than  medium-term  considerations  would 
warrant - and that might even exacerbate exchange rate fluctuations over time.  
Some, of course, would suggest that we should be more active and should adjust the OCR, not just to 
offset the dampening impact of the exchange rate, but to try actively to reverse, or slow, the rate of 
increase in the exchange rate. In this case, of course, it is important to remember that the exchange 
rate  has  simply  recovered  to  more  normal  levels,  pricing  New  Zealand  assets  and  products  more 
sensibly, albeit adjusting more quickly than is comfortable. And more generally, we need to be very 
cautious.  We  would  be  the  first  to  acknowledge  that  monetary  policy  affects  exchange  rates,  but 
modest changes in interest rates only rarely do so in a stable and predictable manner over periods 
that  matter  to  people  in  the  real  economy.  Understanding,  after  the  event,  what  has  driven  the 
exchange rate is one thing, but reliably forecasting it, or using monetary policy to influence it, is quite 
another. 
What we constantly do, however, is to look behind developments in the exchange rate. We want to 
understand as well as we can what has been going on and why, and we continually test our reasoning 
and  judgements  to  ensure  that  our  monetary  policy  decisions  are  not  unnecessarily  exacerbating 
exchange rate changes. This prudent and sensible approach has in fact been written into our mandate 
-  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  with  the  Minister  of  Finance  -  since  1999.  It  keeps  our  focus  on 
medium-term price stability, but requires us to ensure that in pursuing that medium-term goal we avoid 
unnecessary instability in output, interest and exchange rate. There are no simple answers as to how 
to apply these provisions to our policymaking; to know just what is “unnecessary”, not just right now, 
but over the medium-term. Sometimes, an OCR rise will exacerbate pressure on the exchange rate, 
but rises  in both  will  be  a  necessary response  to  pressures on output and  inflation. At other times, 
there will be scope for trade-offs, but there are rarely easy or reliable ones. 
For us, those choices might come more sharply into focus if we were to see another sharp rise in the 
exchange rate this year. You will note that I have not said much today about what I think might happen 
to the exchange rate in the coming year. And that is for a very good reason. However much we can 
understand,  after  the  event,  what  has  driven  the  exchange  rate,  neither  economists  and  central 
bankers (nor anyone else) has a great track record forecasting exchange rates. And that is especially 
so when the exchange rate is no longer well away from sustainable long-term levels. Most observers 
do expect some further rise in our exchange rate, mainly because the US dollar is widely expected to 
fall  further.  But  a  year  is  a  long  time  in  financial  markets,  and  much  can  change  over  that  time  in 
investors’ attitudes to likely returns both here and in other countries. 
I  would  emphasise  in  closing  that  the  Reserve  Bank  will  never  be  complacent  about  the  sorts  of 
exchange rate swings we have seen in recent years. We are limited in what we can do to prevent or 
moderate  them,  but  we  recognise  the  impact  they  have  both  on  you  as  business  people,  and  on 
consumers  up  and  down  the  country.  As  I  noted  at  the  start  of  this  address,  if  New  Zealand  can 
achieve a superior long-run economic performance that will lead to a trend increase in the exchange 
rate,  but  quite  marked  fluctuations  around  that  trend  will  be  an  uncomfortable  fact  of  life  for  us  all. 
While keeping the goal of medium-term price stability constantly in view, the Reserve Bank will always 
be  asking  whether,  and  how,  our  decisions  and  comments  can  best  avoid  undue  and  unnecessary 
volatility in the economic environment we face - not just today, but over the full course of the economic 
cycle. The fact that some volatility is inevitable is no excuse for simply being oblivious to it. You cannot 
be, and we are not either. 
 