 Michael C Bonello: Population ageing - a major challenge for policymakers 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the opening session of 
two  workshops  on  pension  reform,  organised  in  Floriana,  Malta,  by  the  World  Bank  Institute, 
9 June 2003. 
 I  should  first  of  all  like  to  thank  the  World  Bank  Institute  for  choosing  Malta  as  the  venue  for  this 
Workshop  and  to  welcome  you  all  to  our  country.  Your  presence  here  continues  a  centuries-old 
tradition whereby Malta exploits its location at the centre of the Mediterranean and its reputation for 
hospitality to bring people and ideas together. 
Malta  is  currently  undergoing  a  rapid  transformation  in  a  bid  to  seize  the  opportunities  arising  from 
accession to the European Union and from the further consolidation of its trading relationship with its 
Southern and Eastern neighbours. The economy, albeit small, has a number of vibrant sectors ranging 
from  high-tech  manufacturing  to  world-class  conference  tourism.  As  in  the  case  with  many  other 
countries,  however,  the  long-term  prospects  for  economic  development  in  Malta  will  be  inevitably 
affected by  the  impact of population ageing. Given that the population support ratio,  defined as the 
number  of  persons  of  working  age  to  those  of  pension  age,  is  expected  to  halve  over  the  next 
25 years to just over 2, this impact is likely to be significant. 
The global and regional dimensions of population ageing 
Malta is by no means an exception in this regard. By the middle of this century, the median age of the 
world population is expected to increase by 10 years to 36 years. Globally, the proportion of persons 
aged 60 years and older is forecast to double. The fastest growing group of the older population is 
made up of those who are 80 years old or more. This age category is projected to increase more than 
five-fold over the next 50 years. 
While ageing is indeed a global phenomenon, it is likely to represent a more onerous challenge for 
developing countries than for developed ones. The majority of persons aged 60 and over will be found 
increasingly  in  developing  countries;  and  as  the  pace  of  population  ageing  is  much  faster  in  these 
countries,  they  will  have  less  time  to  adjust  to  its  effects  than  the  developed  countries.  Developing 
countries,  moreover,  will  have  to  meet  this  challenge  starting  from  a  lower  level  of  socio-economic 
development. For instance, the elderly in developing countries will be living mostly in rural areas and 
hence will face additional difficulties compared to their counterparts in developed countries who tend 
to live in urban centres. 
These  differences  imply  that  the  policymaking  capacity  of  developing  countries  will  be  tested  more 
severely. More specifically, there will be important decisions to take regarding social security schemes, 
particularly  traditional  pension  systems  in  which  today(cid:146)s  workers  pay  for  the  benefits  of  today(cid:146)s 
retirees.  This  will  no  doubt  involve  making  difficult  choices,  some  of  which  may  have  painful 
consequences in the short run, but which are essential for sustained economic development. 
The economic consequences of population ageing 
This  is  the  case  because  population  ageing  is  expected  to  have  wide-ranging  and  long-lasting 
economic effects, involving not just government revenue and expenditure but also national saving and 
investment ratios as well as the labour market. 
The main issue that comes to mind when mentioning population ageing is its impact on government 
finances.  Most  countries,  including  Malta,  presently  operate  pay-as-you-go  pension  systems.  The 
ageing  phenomenon  undermines  the  financial  viability  of  pay-as-you  go  systems  by  reducing  the 
number of contributors relative to beneficiaries. Ageing also entails increased government expenditure 
on health, and especially on the care of the elderly. The challenge to public finances is even greater if, 
as is the case in Malta, the budget is already in deficit. 
Changes  in  the  age  distribution  of  the  population  are  also  likely  to  affect  a  country(cid:146)s  private 
consumption and saving patterns. The (cid:145)life-cycle hypothesis(cid:146) suggests that individuals tend to even out 
consumption outlays over their lifetime, such that a person saves during the working years in order to 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 1
 finance  consumption  during  retirement.  A  rising  trend  in  the  proportion  of  elderly  people,  therefore, 
tends to be accompanied by a decline in the national saving ratio. OECD projections, in fact, point to a 
reduction in saving rates of between 5 and 12 percentage points of GNP over the period 1980 to 2025. 
Such  a  contraction  could  lead  to  a  vicious  circle,  as  the  resulting  higher  interest  rates  reduce 
investment,  adversely  affecting  economic  growth  and,  in  turn,  the  ability  to  finance  social  security 
commitments. 
Ageing could also have a negative impact on financial markets. Pension funds are at present major 
players in most stock markets. As the baby boom generation retires during the current decade, most of 
these funds will have to gradually liquidate their assets, probably leading to downward pressures on 
share  prices.  This  would  in  turn  create  a  negative  wealth  effect,  as  declining  asset  prices  dent  the 
purchasing power of households and give rise to a reassessment of consumption patterns. 
The  simultaneous  decline  in  fertility  rates,  meanwhile,  is  expected  to  adversely  affect  the  supply  of 
labour  and  its  quality.  A  smaller  labour  force  would  act  as  a  drag  on  potential  output  growth,  and 
impact  negatively  on  competitiveness  by  tightening  labour  market  conditions,  leading  to  upward 
pressures  on  wages  and  inflation.  An  older  work  force  is  also  likely  to  be  less  mobile  and  flexible, 
albeit more experienced. 
Policy measures to address the challenge 
In economic terms, population  ageing is tantamount to a negative supply shock, of which the fiscal 
impact  is  but  a  manifestation.  More  fundamentally,  the  ageing  phenomenon  undermines  the 
economy(cid:146)s productive base and its competitiveness. The adverse effects of the reduction in output are 
meanwhile compounded by higher consumption, which tends to crowd out investment expenditure and 
exert adverse pressures on price levels and the external balance of payments. 
The  desirable  outcomes  of  policies  intended  to  meet  population  ageing  are,  therefore,  not  hard  to 
identify.  Such  policies  must  aim  at  producing  an  increase  in  productive  capacity  and  output,  and 
stimulating saving and investment, thereby alleviating pressures on inflation, fiscal resources and the 
external account. Indeed, these outcomes are desirable independently of population ageing, but are 
rendered even more urgent by the onset of the phenomenon. It is the way in which this strategy is to 
be implemented that is often subject to contention. 
Opinions  tend  to  diverge  because  it  is  not  always  appreciated  that  any  course  of  action  chosen, 
including  a  passive  stance,  involves  sacrifices.  An  increase  in  resources  devoted  to  pensions  must 
imply  higher  taxation,  a  reduction  in  funds  allocated  to  other  equally  worthy  causes,  or  burdens  on 
society  as  a  whole  in  terms  of  higher  inflation  and  interest  rates.  On  the  other  hand,  reforms  that 
should engender a win-win situation in the long run could perhaps impose sacrifices on a number of 
individuals  in  the  short  term.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  promote  an  informed  debate  which  takes 
account of the costs and benefits involved in any course of action, with a view to reaching agreement 
on viable solutions. 
The nineties, in fact, saw many governments implementing pension reform initiatives, generally based 
on the three-pillar approach advocated by the World Bank. Under this approach, individuals may have 
up to three different sources of revenue during retirement, namely a basic state pension, the balance 
accumulated  in  a  mandatory  pension  account  and  voluntary  saving  arrangements.  A  number  of 
international studies show that the replacement of pay-as-you-go pension regimes by funded systems 
provides  more  incentives  for  private  saving,  and  reduces  the  scope  for  tax  evasion  by  linking 
contributions  paid  into  the  system  directly  to  the  benefits  received.  This  contributes  to  increased 
investment  and  augments  the  productive  base,  thereby  facilitating  the  financing  of  social  security 
expenditure commitments. 
Apart from specific reforms in the social security system itself, an improvement in the fiscal position 
would  have  an  overall  positive  macroeconomic  effect,  compensating  in  part  for  the  addition  in 
aggregate  demand  brought  about  by  ageing.  The  lower  absorption  of  resources  by  the  State  could 
also lead to a higher average level of productivity and to an improvement in the country(cid:146)s balance of 
payments. Productive capacity would also be enhanced if the State creates fiscal and other incentives 
for individuals to provide for their own needs after retirement, leading to an increase in the household 
saving rate and, consequently, also to a faster accumulation of capital. 
Fiscal consolidation will, however, only solve part of the problems created by population ageing. The 
negative  supply  shock  caused  by  this  phenomenon  must  also  be  countered  by  a  positive  shock. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2003
 Supply-side reforms aimed at increasing the availability and the efficient use of economic resources 
are,  therefore,  essential.  The  efficiency  of  markets  can  be  improved  by  implementing  a  vigorous 
competition policy and reducing public sector involvement in the economy. Productive capacity would 
also be improved through  such policies as market liberalisation, greater  investment in infrastructure 
and education, and a market-driven industrial policy. Structural rigidities in the labour market must be 
eliminated in order to decrease their disincentive effects in terms of the labour supply and the work 
ethic.  A  labour  market  policy  intended  to  increase  skills,  and  consequently  the  employability  of 
individuals, is also desirable. 
Conclusion 
This (cid:147)grey cloud(cid:148) on the horizon, therefore, appears to have a silver lining in the form of appropriate 
policy  responses  that  would  effectively  enhance  the  welfare  of  populations.  Moreover,  as  the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, has said: (cid:147)Trees grow stronger over the years, 
rivers wider. Likewise, with age, human beings gain immeasurable depth and breadth of experience 
and  wisdom.  That  is  why  older  persons  should  be  not  only  respected  and  revered;  they  should  be 
utilized as the rich resource to society that they are.(cid:148) The wealth of skills and experience that older 
people  bring  to  the  workplace,  to  public  life  and  to  the  family  are  generally  not  recognized. 
Technological advances and new ways of organizing society can be put to good use to increase the 
participation of older people in work and to make appropriate socio-economic changes. 
BIS Review 29/2003 
 3
