 Nicholas C Garganas: Exchange-rate regimes on the road to EMU: lessons 
from Greece’s experience 
Luncheon address by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Seminar on 
“Monetary  Strategies  for  Accession  Countries”,  Hungarian  Academy  of  Sciences,  Budapest, 
28 February 2003. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Bank of Greece’s website. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  Magyar  National  Bank,  the  Institute  of  World  Economics  of  the  Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, and the Center of European Integration Studies of the University of Bonn for 
inviting me to speak to you today.  
In contemplating the subject of this seminar, one is struck by how dramatically things have changed in 
the  course  of  a  decade.  In  1992  and  1993,  when  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  -  or  ERM  - 
underwent a series of speculative attacks, the prospects of a European monetary union were viewed, 
by many observers, with considerable skepticism. This skepticism was not  without foundation. After 
all, hadn’t there been previous false starts on the road to EMU? Hadn’t the Werner Report prescribed 
a European monetary union by the end of 1970s? Yet, here we are today, having fulfilled the dreams 
of Pierre Werner and his colleagues and having celebrated the fourth birthday of EMU.  
Today, I would like to address some lessons from the experience of Greece, the newest member of 
the euro area, in its quest for EMU membership. I will confront what appears to be a dilemma. As we 
have heard this morning, much of the economics profession appears to have been converted to the 
“hypothesis of the vanishing middle”; for economies well integrated into world capital markets, there is 
little, if any, middle ground between floating exchange rates and monetary unification. Effectively, this 
hypothesis  rules  out  intermediate  regimes.  Yet,  a  requirement  for  entering  the  euro  area  is 
participation in ERM II, which is, after all, an intermediate regime. How can this dilemma be resolved? 
The Retreat from Intermediate Regimes 
Before  I  discuss  Greece’s  experience,  let  me  address  the  reasons  underlying  the  retreat  from 
intermediate  regimes.  What  has  caused  this  retreat?  First,  an  explosive  increase  in  capital  flows 
during the 1990s has made the operation of intermediate regimes problematic. As has already been 
discussed at this seminar by Jorge Braga de Macedo and Helmut Reisen, according to the thesis of 
the Impossible Trinity, developed in the 1980s, under a system of pegged exchange rates and free 
capital  mobility,  it  is  not  possible  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy  on  a  sustained  basis. 
Eventually,  current-account  disequilibria  and  changes  in  reserves  will  provoke  an  attack  on  the 
exchange rate. 
The  enormous  increase  in  capital  flows  has  been  accompanied  by  abrupt  reversals  of  these  flows. 
Whereas the logic of the thesis of the Impossible Trinity suggests that exchange-rate attacks typically 
originate in response to current-account disequilibria and build up gradually, in fact, recent speculative 
attacks  have  often  originated  in  the  capital  account,  have  been  sudden  and  difficult  to  predict,  and 
have included the currencies of countries without substantial current-account imbalances. Capital-flow 
reversals  have  involved  a  progression  of  speculative  attacks, mostly  against  pegged-exchange-rate 
arrangements.  These  reversals  of  capital  inflows  and  resulting  exchange-rate  devaluations  or 
depreciations have often been accompanied by sharp contractions in economic activity and have, at 
times, entailed “twin crises” - crises in both the foreign-exchange market and the banking system.  
Finally, there has been a tendency of instability in foreign-exchange markets to be transmitted from 
one pegged-exchange-rate regime to others in a process that has come to be known as “contagion”. 
The  victims  of  contagion  have  seemingly  included  innocent  bystanders  -  economies  with  sound 
fundamentals  whose  currencies  might  not  have  been  attacked  had  they  adopted  one  of  the  corner 
solutions.  
BIS Review 11/2003 
 1
 This  triad  of  factors  -  (1)  the  difficulty  of  conducting  an  independent  monetary  policy  when  the 
exchange  rate  is  pegged  and  the  capital  account  open,  (2)  sudden  capital-flow  reversals,  and  (3) 
contagion - have profoundly affected the way we think about exchange-rate regimes.  
The Experience of Greece: Pre-ERM 
The  foregoing  factors  significantly  affected  the  Greek  economy  in  the  1990s.  Through  1994,  the 
performance of the Greek economy was pretty dismal. Growth was almost flat, and inflation and the 
fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP, were in the double-digit levels throughout the period. Other EU 
countries were moving forward in their quests to become members of EMU while Greece was falling 
farther and farther behind. Clearly, a regime change was called for. 
It came in 1995. The signing of the Maastricht Treaty  in 1992 and the  government’s publicly-stated 
objective of joining the euro area provided powerful incentives for mobilising broad public support for 
policy adjustment. Among the policy measures undertaken were the following:  
• 
Fiscal  policy  was  progressively  tightened.  The  fiscal  deficit,  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  fell 
from over 10 per cent in 1995 to around to 4 per cent in 1997.  
Financial deregulation, which had begun in the late 1980s, was completed and in 1994 the 
capital account was opened. The deregulated financial system facilitated the use of indirect 
instruments of monetary policy so that small, frequent changes in the instruments became 
feasible, enabling rapid policy responses.  
The Greek Parliament approved independence of the Bank of Greece and provided the Bank 
with a mandate to achieve price stability.  
  For its part, beginning in 1995, the Bank of Greece adopted what became known as a “hard drachma 
policy”, under  which the  exchange rate  was used as a nominal anchor. For the first time, the Bank 
announced  a  specific  exchange-rate  target.  Underlying  this  policy,  both  in  Greece  and  elsewhere 
during the 1990s, was the belief that the adoption of a visible exchange-rate anchor could enhance the 
credibility of the dissinflationary effort because (1) the traded-goods component of the price level could 
be stabilised and (2) wage-settling and price-setting behaviour were restrained.  
I will not go into details of the operation of the hard-drachma policy. Suffice it to say that, during the 
years 1995-97, real interest rates at the short-end were kept in the vicinity of 5 per cent. Fairly specific 
targets  for  the  exchange  rate  were  announced  in  each  of  the  three  years  and  were  achieved. 
Importantly, inflation fell from about 11 per cent in 1994 to under 5 per cent at the end of 1997 while, in 
the first three years of the policy, real growth almost tripled compared with the rate of 1991-94.  
Yet,  as  is  typically  the  case  with  all  nominal-anchor  exchange-rate  pegs,  this  regime  produced 
difficulties.  As  predicted  under  the  thesis  of  the  Impossible  Trinity,  the  ability  to  conduct  an 
independent  monetary  policy  under  an  exchange-rate  peg  and  open  capital  account  became 
increasingly  demanding.  The  wide  interest-rate  differentials  in  favour  of  drachma-denominated 
financial  instruments  led  to  a  capital-inflows  problem.  The  Bank  of  Greece  responded  by  sterilising 
these  inflows,  limiting  the  appreciation  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  reducing  the  impact  of  the 
inflows  on  the  monetary  base,  and  buying  time  for  other  policies  to  adjust.  Still,  the  sterilisation 
entailed quasi-fiscal costs and, by preventing domestic interest rates from falling, tended to maintain 
the yield differential that had given rise to the inflows. Additionally, the Greek economy experienced a 
fundamental problem associated with all exchange-rate nominal-anchor pegs during the move to lower 
inflation;  the  real  exchange-rate  appreciated  significantly  contributing,  along  with  strong  domestic 
demand, to a widening current-account deficit. 
This  circumstance  brings  me  to  the  second  and  third  of  the  triad  of  factors  -  sudden  capital-flow 
reversals and contagion. The widening current-account deficit, combined with rapid wage growth, fed 
market expectations that the drachma was overvalued and provided the basis for contagion from Asia, 
which commenced with the devaluation of the Thai baht in July 1997. The sharp rise in interest rates 
required to support the drachma increasingly undermined growth and fiscal targets. A further regime 
shift was needed.  
That regime shift was provided by the ERM. Effective March 16, 1998, the drachma joined the ERM at 
a central rate that implied a 12.3 per cent devaluation against the ECU. As I will explain, entry into the 
ERM allowed Greece to orient its policies to stability, fostering convergence. Because participation in 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2003
 the ERM, without severe tensions, plays a role in the convergence criteria for joining the euro area, it 
acts as testing phase for the central rate as well as for the sustainability of convergence in general.  
Lessons from the ERM  
Before  I  discuss  the  drachma’s  experience  in  the  ERM,  let  me  posit  a  question:  What  kind  of  an 
intermediate exchange-rate regime do we have in mind when we refer to the ERM? In my view, the 
present ERM system is the result of an evolutionary process. Like all Darwinian evolutions, several 
distinct  versions  of  the  species  can  be  distinguished.  To  provide  analytic  focus,  I  think  it  useful  to 
distinguish among the following. 
ERM Mark 1. This species lasted from the inception of the EMS, in 1979, to 1987. Compared with the 
2  per  cent  bands  under  the  Bretton-Woods  system,  the  ERM  bands  of  fluctuation,  at  4.5  per  cent, 
were fairly wide and the system was supported by capital controls. For some currencies, the bands 
were even wider, at 12 per cent. Small realignments occurred frequently. Between March 1979, when 
the  system  started,  and  January  1987,  realignments  occurred  on  eleven  occasions.  The  foregoing 
features of the system allowed France, for example, to devalue the franc by shifting the  upper and 
lower limits of its band without affecting the market exchange rate, helping to forestall the possibility of 
the large profit opportunities that give rise to speculative attacks.  
ERM Mark 2. What has been dubbed the “new EMS” began to take shape in 1987. Increasingly, the 
deutsche mark was used as a nominal anchor, with the Bundesbank’s reputation as a stalwart inflation 
fighter  supporting  the  monetary  authorities  of  some  participating  countries  in  their  efforts  to  attain 
anti-inflation credibility. Except for an implicit devaluation of the Italian lira in January 1990, when that 
currency moved from the wide band to the narrow band, realignments ceased to be a characteristic of 
the system. In 1990, the remaining capital controls were eliminated by participating countries. German 
reunification required a tight monetary policy to counterbalance the large fiscal deficits generated by 
reunification. With other ERM countries in recession and requiring a loosening of monetary policy, the 
ERM was confronted with a classic (n-1) problem. 
ERM  Mark  3.  Beginning  in  September  1992,  many  of  the  currencies  participating  in  the  ERM  were 
subjected to attacks, eventuating in a series of devaluations and the suspension of the pound sterling 
and  the  Italian  lira  from  the  system.  These  attacks  were  sudden  and  massive.  Thus,  they  were 
different from the currency realignments of the 1980s, which were mainly the result of pressures that 
had build up gradually in response to current-account disequilibria. With the lifting of capital controls, 
the  attacks  in  1992-93  arose  on  the  capital  account  and  sometimes  infected  the  currencies  of 
countries  with  seemingly-sound  fundamentals,  such  as  France.  Several  new  terms  made  their  way 
into the lexicon of economists: (1) capital-account-driven crises, (2) sudden-stops, and (3) contagion.  
ERM Mark 4. In a last-ditch effort to rescue the system, in August 1993 the ERM bands were widened 
to ± 15 per cent. As things turned out, this move helped salvage the system. It provided necessary 
breathing space for nominal convergence to occur. 
ERM Mark 5, or formally, ERM II. Under the present arrangement, exchange-rate stability is explicitly 
subordinated to the primary objective of price stability for all participating currencies and obligations 
under  the  system  are  deliberately  more  asymmetric  than  under  the  previous  ERM.  The  notion  of 
asymmetry  is particularly important in underlining the principle that it  is the country  whose currency 
comes under pressure that has to undertake the necessary policy adjustments.  
Let me now return to the case of the drachma and the ERM. By the time that the drachma entered the 
ERM,  in  March  1998,  the  participating  countries  had  demonstrated  their  determination  to  form  a 
monetary union by attaining considerable nominal convergence, as specified in the Maastricht criteria. 
This  convergence  took  place  under  a  backdrop  of  market-based  economies  that  could  compete 
effectively  in  an  open  economic  and  financial  system.  In  these  conditions,  the  system  built  up  a 
considerable  amount  of  trust.  As  Otmar  Issing  has  pointed  out  in  several  recent  papers,  the  trust 
evoked  by  governments,  including  in  their  ability  to  deliver  credible,  non-inflationary  policies,  is  a 
prerequisite for the existence of a stable currency, both internally and externally. 
When  the  drachma  entered  the  ERM,  it  became  a  beneficiary  of  the  credibility  established  in  the 
system over the previous years. It also benefited from the market’s knowledge of the availability of the 
system’s  mutual  support  facilities,  such  as  the  Very  Short-Term  Financing  Facility.  Yet,  Greece’s 
participation was not a free ticket. The other participants in the system did not wish to endanger the 
BIS Review 11/2003 
 3
 credibility that had taken so long to achieve. They rightly asked for an entry fee. This fee included the 
following elements.  
• 
The new central rate -  which as I have noted, involved a 12.3 per cent  devaluation -  had 
been agreed by all members.  
The  devaluation  of  the  drachma  was  both  backward  looking  and  foreward  looking.  The 
magnitude of the devaluation took account of both past inflation differentials between Greece 
and  other  EU  countries  and  prospective  differentials  in  the  period  leading  up  to  Greece’s 
expected entry into the euro area. Thus, the new central rate was meant to be sustainable.  
A package of supportive fiscal and structural measure was announced. Efforts to restructure 
public  enterprises  were  stepped  up.  The  aim  of  the  measures  was  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of the drachma’s new central rate. In other words, the ERM was meant to be a 
testing phase for EMU participation, not a free pass into the euro area.  
  Unlike many other devaluations of the mid-1990s and late-1990s, the drachma’s devaluation was not 
followed by further rounds of speculative attacks, nor by a financial crisis. Unlike other devaluations, it 
was not followed by contraction in economic activity, but by an acceleration. Moreover, and again in 
contrast with the other devaluations of this period, the impact of the drachma’s devaluation on inflation 
was  strictly  contained.  What  accounts  for  the  drachma’s  successful  exit  from  one  central  rate  to 
another? In my view, the key ingredients of the successful devaluation were the following.  
• 
Unlike  other  currencies  that  were  devalued  during  the  mid-1990s  and  late  1990s,  the 
drachma  exited  a  unilateral  peg  and  entered  a  systems’  arrangement,  benefiting  from  the 
credibility of the ERM.  
Fiscal tightening continued following the devaluation. The fiscal deficit, as a per cent of GDP, 
fell  to  about  1  per  cent  in  1999,  from  4  per  cent  in  1997.  Labour-market  policy  gradually 
adjusted to the needs for fiscal discipline and for enhancing international competitiveness.  
Prudential regulation and supervision of the banking system had been strictly enforced and 
there  was  no  net  foreign  exposure  of  the  banking  system.  Thus,  there  was  no 
currency-mismatching  problem  -  i.e.,  large,  uncovered  foreign-currency  positions,  which, 
under  conditions  of  currency  devaluations, 
the  debt  burden  of  domestic 
foreign-currency borrowers, resulting in bankruptcies and financial crises.  
raise 
  In addition to placing the Bank of Greece’s disinflation strategy within a new institutional framework 
that gave it added credibility, the ERM provided another important advantage. Entry at the standard 
fluctuation  bands  of  ±  15  per  cent  gave  the  Bank  ample  room  for  manoeuvre.  Thus,  when  capital 
inflows resumed following ERM entry, the Bank allowed the exchange rate to appreciate relative to its 
central rate, helping to maintain the tight monetary-policy stance and to contain the inflationary impact 
of the devaluation. The exchange rate remained appreciated relative to its central rate throughout the 
rest of 1998 and for all of 1999. In 1999, for example, the drachma traded (on average) 7.7 per cent 
above its central rate while, for most of that year, the three-month interbank rate stood about 700 basis 
points above the corresponding German rate. As a result of the tightened and consistent policy mix, 
inflation reached a low of 2 per cent during the second half of 1999. Then, in order to limit the degree 
of depreciation that would be required for the market rate to reach its central rate and the resulting 
inflationary pressures, the central rate was revalued by 3.5 per cent in January 2000. The rest, as they 
say,  is  history;  having  fulfilled  all  the  Maastricht  criteria,  on  January  1,  2001  Greece  became  the 
12th member of the euro area.  
Concluding Remarks  
What are the key lessons that emerge from Greece’s experience? Let me highlight the following.  
First,  an  intermediate  exchange  rate  regime  can  be  viable  in  today’s  world  of  high  capital  mobility 
provided that (1) the participants adhere to sound and sustainable policies, including those that ensure 
the  existence  of  a  well-functioning  market  economy,  and,  (2)  the  intermediate  regime  is  used  as  a 
transitional  arrangement  on  the  road  to  the  corner  solution  of  a  monetary  union.  There  is  no 
contradiction between the existence of ERM II and the hypothesis of the vanishing middle regime.  
Second, ERM II provides the credibility of a systems’ arrangement, built up in a Darwinian evolution, 
and  flexibility  through  the  wide  fluctuation  bands  that  may  be  necessary  to  achieve  nominal 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2003
 convergence.  The  credibility  derived  by  participating  in  the  ERM  II  should  not,  however,  be 
endangered  by  use  of  frequent  adjustments  of  the  central  parity.  As  the  ERM  experiences  of  the 
1980s  and  1990s  vividly  demonstrated,  frequent  adjustments  of  central  parities  within  a  pegged 
regime are feasible only in the presence of capital controls. In today’s world of high capital mobility, 
exchange-rate  changes  are  not  instruments  that  policy-makers  can  use  flexibly  and  costlessly.  The 
more often they are used, the less can be the credibility of a pegged exchange-rate system. 
Third, the need of a consistent policy mix is crucial and has important implications in terms of how we 
need to view policy analysis. An implication of both the Mundell-Fleming model and Mundell’s famous 
assignment  problem  is  that  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  constitute  two,  separate  policy 
instruments. Yet, the simple accounting fact that government expenditure has to be financed by either 
taxation, borrowing, and/or money creation, implies that any analysis of monetary policy must make 
consistent assumptions about fiscal policy. Monetary policy and fiscal policy, in other words, are not 
independent policy instruments. They must work in tandem on the road to EMU, and in EMU.  
Fourth, ultimately, a credible exchange-rate regime depends upon the trust evoked by governments. A 
governance structure that enforces the rule of law and sanctity of contracts and a political system that 
delivers credible, non-inflationary policies are prerequisites for the existence of a stable exchange-rate 
regime. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 11/2003 
 5
