Denny Kalyalya: Regulatory framework for microfinance institutions in Zambia 
Keynote address by Dr Denny Kalyalya, Deputy Governor - Operations of the Bank of Zambia at the 
2nd AFRACA Microfinance Forum, Lusaka, 3 and 4 April 2003. 
 Honorable Deputy  Minister of Finance and National  Planning, The Secretary General of the African 
Rural and Agricultural Credit Association (AFRACA), 
The Chairperson, 
The Honorable Member of Parliament and Chairperson for Economic Affairs - Labour, 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, 
Your Excellencies, 
Representatives of International Organisations, 
Distinguished Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour for me to be given this opportunity to address this important workshop and share a 
few  words  with  you  this  morning.  I  therefore  wish  to  sincerely  thank  AFRACA  and  Micro  Bankers 
Trust, the organizers of this workshop, for extending this invitation to me. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
AFRACA’s decision to host this workshop in Lusaka has come at an important time for us when, as a 
country,  we  are  working  towards  finalisation  of  the  development  of  a  regulatory  framework  for 
microfinance institutions in Zambia, with a view to foster balanced growth in our financial sector. Our 
staff will therefore listen extra attentively to the deliberations of this workshop so that we get as much 
information and ideas as possible to assist us in this very important exercise. It is also our hope that, 
you, the participants, will share your views and experiences freely at this workshop. I have noted from 
the  programme,  with  excitement,  that  in  addition  to  the  presentation  on  the  Process  of  Product 
Development  by  Microsave,  there  will  be  several  presentations  on  the  experiences  of  different 
institutions from various countries. In this regard, it is our sincere hope that these experiences will not 
only  provide  a  rich  learning  ground  to  upcoming  microfinance  institutions  to  enable  them  establish 
themselves  in  the  market,  but  also  that  these  experiences  will  enable  established  microfinance 
institutions to consolidate their positions in the market. 
Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As you may all be aware the microfinance industry has emerged to meet the financial needs of people 
who  have  had  limited  or  no  access  to  the  traditional  sources  of  credit  and  other  financial  services. 
Lack  of  credit  facilities,  rural  and  agricultural  finance  is  one  of  the  major  contributing  factors  to  the 
poverty  of  this  rather  large  segment  of  our  populations.  Microfinance  institutions  are  and  can  be 
efficient  and  effective  channels  for  mobilizing  savings,  credit,  in-country  remittances,  and  insurance 
services  to  lower-income  people,  particularly  in  those  areas  where  traditional  financial  services  are 
hardly  there  or  do  not  exist.  Microfinance  is  also  increasingly  being  seen  as  an  effective  tool  for 
poverty  reduction.  Moreover,  when  microfinance  is  provided  in  an  environment  where  there  are 
sufficient alternatives for diversified household income generation, and where access to information, 
appropriate physical infrastructure, and integrity in loan repayments are present, can be and it is a key 
success factor in reducing poverty. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Looking  back  through  history,  one  of  the  best-known  microfinance  success  stories  is  perhaps  the 
Grameen Bank of Bangladesh. Its success may be expressed in terms of its staying power and that it 
has offered to help disadvantaged groups to enable them meet basic needs. This has been attributed 
mainly to its concentration on lending to women groups. 
Around the world, various Grameen models have been replicated, especially in South America. Within 
Africa,  microfinance  organizations  have  emerged  in  Bukina  Fasso,  the  Gambia,  Ghana,  Kenya, 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 1
Malawi, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zimbabwe, to mention a few. However, what appears to 
be the common factor in all these areas is the lack of adequate supervision for the sector.   
In the Zambian case, the principal financial legislation, the Banking and Financial Services Act of 1994 
(BFSA) did not provide for the regulation and supervision of microfinance organizations until the 2000 
amendment. 
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  most  developing  and  transitional  countries,  microfinance  institutions  are  using  field-based  “best 
practices”  that  have  emerged  from  many  years  of  world-wide  experience  in  providing  credit  and 
savings  to  lower-income  groups.  However,  best  practices  alone  cannot  guarantee  the  success  of 
microfinance  programmes  in  the  absence  of  an  appropriate  legal  and  regulatory  framework. 
Practioners  and  policy  makers  worldwide  now  realize  that  without  appropriate  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework,  support  from  commercial  banks  and  appropriate  infrastructure,  most 
microfinance services will continue to be donor-dependant and will remain limited in outreach.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since  I  have  been  given  the  floor  I  now  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  briefly  share  with  you  the 
Zambian experience with regard to the microfinance market. 
Despite  its  land-based  wealth,  Zambia  faces  very  significant  development  challenges.  The  rapid 
structural adjustment process that took place during the 1990s has had a harsh impact on our people, 
with the result that poverty is now widespread in our country. 
Currently, a significant number of the 10 million or so Zambians strive for survival on far less than one 
US  dollar  a  day  and  like  in  many  other  African  countries  there  are  high  HIV/AIDS  rates  and 
indebtedness  which  have  contributed 
low  economic  performance.  Thus,  our 
government’s  focus  with  assistance  from  cooperating  partners  has  to  increasingly  be  on  poverty 
alleviation via income generation and micro enterprise stimulation, using small business development 
and microfinance as mechanisms to improve household standards.  
Following the structural adjustment period, particularly from the early 1990s, affordable and publicly 
funded  rural  financial  services  have  collapsed.  A  private  microfinance  movement,  though  still  in  its 
infancy,  has  had  to  emerge  offering  modern  microfinance  services.  Today  in  Zambia  we  have  an 
interesting  blend  of  microfinance  institutions  that  are  private  sector,  for-profit  firms,  and  non-profit, 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Although expansion is much slower in rural areas, growth is 
evident along the line of rails and the peri-urban areas of our country.  
to  persistent 
Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In 1999, a survey of the microfinance market in Zambia was conducted to determine the status of the 
microfinance market and its players, and the basis for establishing regulation and supervision of the 
industry. The survey revealed that although most microfinance institutions were exceptionally  weak, 
they  had  the  potential  to  grow  as  an  industry  and  to  provide  sustainable  financial  services  to  the 
majority Zambians.  
The  results  of  the  survey  enabled  us  to  recognize  that  appropriate  legislation,  regulation  and 
supervision were essential to assist this young industry to grow and be able to find investors, expand 
and provide sustainable services to an increasing number of low-income groups. Accordingly, we have 
placed  our  focus  on  the  establishment  of  a  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  would 
encourage  responsible  growth  and  create  a  safe,  sound,  stable  and  efficient  environment  in  which 
microfinance institutions can operate. 
The regulation development process that we have adopted has been a regular system of consultations 
with stakeholders and various interested parties. We have managed to achieve this through public and 
focus group discussions and one-to-one meetings with key players in the market. 
Further,  we  have  also  made  consultations  with  supervisory  bodies,  practitioners  and  other 
stakeholders from other countries at various workshops as well as regional and international training 
forums.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  some  of  the  countries  we  have  been  sharing  ideas  with  are 
represented at this forum. 
I wish to acknowledge the valuable information and lessons that these different forums have provided 
to us in developing the regulatory and supervisory framework for microfinance in Zambia. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2003
I therefore wish to urge all of you participants to take this workshop seriously and participate fully in 
the various activities that have been lined up. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I now wish to conclude by informing you that we now have Draft Microfinance Regulations in place, 
which  are  being  circulated  to  all  stakeholders  and  interested  parties  for  comments  before  they  are 
finalized. These regulations can also be downloaded from the Bank of Zambia website: www.boz.zm.  
Finally, Chairperson, allow me to pay tribute to AFRACA and our co-host, Micro Bankers Trust, for 
bringing  this  workshop  to  our  country.  I  therefore  wish  all  the  participants  a  very  good  stay  in  our 
country and I hope that you will all have a chance to visit our City of Lusaka. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 22/2003 
 3
