 E E Ngalande: The importance of financial system modernisation in Africa 
Keynote address by Dr E E Ngalande, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the Perago User 
Group Conference, Johannesburg, 24-25 April 2003. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Thank you for the invitation to speak, and thank you all for being here. I have been asked to share 
some thoughts on the importance of financial system modernisation, with specific reference to Africa 
and in particular the SADC region. 
Being  a  central  banker,  I  am  confronted  with  reaching  macroeconomic  objectives  such  as  price 
stability, economic growth, balance of payments equilibrium and financial stability. A mammoth task 
indeed,  and  living  in  Africa,  one  that  proves  to  be  extremely  challenging  at  the  best  of  times.  Most 
countries  in  Africa  are  confronted  with  pressing  socio-economic  problems  such  as  poverty, 
unemployment, lack of education, lack of housing, and famine, to name but a few. One is constantly 
tempted to try and address these symptoms, but is faced with the reality that, in the long run, these 
problems can only be solved by addressing the causes thereof. 
It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  sound  financial  infrastructure  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  sound  financial 
system, which is in turn a key factor in increasing the economic growth potential of a country, and of a 
region.  Given  the  rapid  rate  of  globalisation  and  the  dynamic  nature  thereof,  there  is  tremendous 
pressure on a country to modernise its financial system in compliance with global trends, standards 
and  best  practices,  and  to  avoid  being  left  behind  in  the  dynamic  drive  to  faster,  better  and  safer 
financial transactions. 
Today  I  hope  to  affirm  the  causal  link  between  a  sound  and  modern  financial  system  and 
macroeconomic objectives, not only in my country, but also in the whole SADC region. I am going to 
focus on the role of the central bank in this regard, both as payment service provider and overseer of 
the financial system as a whole. Finally, I would like to use this opportunity to take stock of where the 
countries in SADC stand in the whole modernisation process and to share my views on a possible way 
forward from here.  
From the outset, however, I wish to clarify what I understand under the term (cid:145)financial system(cid:146). It is 
often interpreted as physical infrastructure such as clearing and settlement systems, but is in fact a 
much  wider  concept  which  encompasses  the  different  financial  markets,  the  legal  and  regulatory 
framework,  role  players,  business  processes,  systems  and  technology  required  to  provide,  support 
and manage the financial system in a country. 
Why is it important to build financial infrastructure? 
A  sound  and  robust  financial  system  is  a  key  contributing  factor  to  financial  stability  in  a  country. 
Although a definite causal link exists between real economic stability and financial stability, sound and 
robust financial systems play an important role in reducing the risk that distortions in the real economy 
will develop into a financial crisis and could even minimise the adverse effects of such a crisis in the 
event of it occurring. 
A sound and robust financial system is essential for mobilising capital that is necessary for sustainable 
economic  growth.  The  major  objectives  of  macroeconomic  policy  in  a  country  are  the  level  of 
employment,  price  stability,  GDP-growth  as  a  measure  of  economic  growth  and  equilibrium  on  the 
balance  of  payments,  especially  in  open  economies  such  as  those  in  the  SADC  region.  Domestic 
financial system weaknesses have potential repercussions on exchange rate stability and the balance 
of  payments.  An  unsound  domestic  banking  system  will  be  less  capable  of  providing  an  efficient 
foreign  exchange  market  and  will  complicate  monetary  policy  decision  making  by  distorting  the  link 
between  interest  rates,  economic  activity  and  inflation.  This  will  by  implication  make  monetary 
targeting more vulnerable to policy errors. Underdeveloped or developing economies are dependant 
on investment and uncertainty about the soundness of the national payment system in a country may 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 1
 trigger capital flight or deter foreign investors, thereby putting pressure on the balance of payments 
and deepening economic recessions. This is likely to, in turn, have an adverse knock-on effect on the 
level of employment and the general inflation level. 
Furthermore, a country that does not conform to international standards and best practices with regard 
to  its  financial  system,  risks  isolation  from  the  international  economic  community.  Globalisation  is  a 
global trend toward the freer flow of trade and investment across borders, resulting in the integration of 
the international economy. In a globalised world, no country can afford being isolated, as there is no 
room  in  a  globalised  world  for  an  economy  isolated  from  world  trade  and  foreign  investment. 
Globalisation also brings many benefits such as access to foreign capital, global export markets and 
advanced technology much needed in underdeveloped and developing countries. These benefits have 
positive social and economic consequences such as faster economic growth, which, in turn, alleviates 
poverty, leads to higher labour and environmental standards and facilitate democratisation. Countries 
that  resist  globalisation,  risk  being  marginalized.  In  order  to  become  a  role  player  in  regional  and 
international  trade,  countries  have  to  ensure  that  their  financial  system  is  stable,  as  measured  by 
international standards. 
From a regional perspective, problems in a domestic financial system often spill over to neighbouring 
countries, especially if the countries in the region are involved in close economic co-operation, which 
is  one  of  the  primary  objectives  of  the  Southern  African  Development  Community.  It  is  therefore 
important  that  the  region  as  a  whole  should  ensure  that  their  financial  systems  comply  with 
international best standards, as this would play a large role in facilitating regional integration. Regional 
integration, as we know, holds a number of advantages for participating countries. Firstly, the region 
benefits from the resultant expansion of trade between member states which will be supported by a 
simultaneous integration of the financial sector. Closer trading links between countries in a region also 
strengthens their capacity to participate in world trade, allowing countries to become more competitive 
outside the trading block. Cross-border payments and settlements will be facilitated by the removal of 
unnecessary  financial  obstructions  and  constraints.  Secondly,  the  elimination  of  geographic 
constraints  will facilitate the extension  of services and the movement of people across borders and 
finally,  optimum  use  will  be  made  of  scarce  resources.  The  co-ordination  and  sharing  of  limited 
resources such as skills, technological infrastructure and financial systems will contribute to a higher 
rate  of  economic  development  for  the  region  as  a  whole.  It  is  also  important  from  an  international 
perspective, where increasing emphasis is being placed on the financial sector in the global economy, 
that SADC economies meet international expectations as far as possible in such areas as payment, 
clearing and settlement systems, banking supervision and monetary policy. 
The role of the central bank 
The  central  bank(cid:146)s  core  responsibilities  in  an  economy  are  the  maintenance  of  monetary  stability, 
ensuring financial system stability and the promotion of the efficiency and effectiveness of the financial 
system. 
The maintenance of monetary stability; 
This role of the central bank involves the formulation and implementation of monetary policy objectives 
with the overall objective of achieving low inflation and protecting the value of a country(cid:146)s currency. A 
strong relationship exists between monetary and broader financial stability in that financial stability is a 
prerequisite for the effectiveness of monetary policy, and therefore the monetary stability in a country. 
The maintenance of financial system stability. 
The central bank performs a pivotal role in ensuring the smooth and efficient functioning of markets 
and infrastructure such as the payment system in a country. This role of the Bank is multidimensional 
and includes the following: 
   2 
 The  provision  of  physical  infrastructure,  for  example  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS) 
systems; 
The operation of such infrastructure; 
Mitigating  systemic  risk  by  providing  the  liquidity  needed  to  oil  the  wheels  of  the  financial 
system; 
BIS Review 27/2003
   Oversight  of  infrastructures  such  as  the  national  payment  system  as  well  as  financial 
markets in order to ensure the smooth and efficient functioning thereof; and 
Supervising the financial system on an ongoing basis. The central bank acts as the guardian 
of financial stability, which is necessary to efficiently allocate resources and absorb liquidity 
shocks.  The  Bank  has  to  continuously  and  comprehensively  monitor  potential  threats  to 
financial  stability.  This  is  necessary  for  prevention  of  crises,  but  in  the  event  that  they  do 
occur,  also  for  swift  crisis  resolution.  The  central  bank  should  consider  regulatory  and/or 
operational intervention in cases where financial stability is threatened. 
The promotion of the efficiency and effectiveness of the financial system. 
The  central  bank  is  concerned  with  the  robustness  of  the  financial  system  both  on  a  national  and 
global level as disruptions in settlement in securities markets have the potential to spread to payment 
systems  and  to  the  financial  sector  in  general.  The  central  bank  has  to  ensure  compliance  with 
international  best  practices  and  standards  as  laid  down  by  institutions  such  as  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  Standards  such  as  the  BIS  Core 
principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems  and  the  Group  of  Thirty  Recommendations 
Regarding Securities Clearance and Settlement are the result of collaboration and shared experiences 
between  the  major  financial  institutions  in  the  world  and  provide  a  blueprint  that  a  country  should 
consider to become a global player and be internationally competitive. 
The role of the central bank in this regard can thus be summarised as: 
   Ensuring that policies relating to the efficiency and safety of payment systems are designed 
to  comply  with  the  aforementioned  international  standards,  bearing  in  mind  that  the 
implementation of such standards should be done with the appropriate degree of flexibility to 
adequately cater for the individual circumstances of each country; 
Monitoring,  but  also  participating  actively  in  the  development  of  standards  relating  to 
payment systems and cooperating with stakeholders in improving such standards; and 
Fostering and developing public policy that supports the financial system in a country. This 
would  include  addressing  legal  and  regulatory  impediments  to  the  effective  and  efficient 
functioning of the financial system. 
Key features of a sound and robust financial system1 
A  sound  financial  system  is  one  that  remains  stable  and  efficient  in  the  wake  of  shocks  such  as 
interest rate hikes, severe exchange rate fluctuations, financial crises in other systems, but also non-
economic events such as terrorist attacks. Robust financial systems are characterised by three basic 
characteristics: flexibility, resilience and internal stability. 
A financial system is flexible in that it continues to function efficiently under a full range of economic 
circumstances.  This  implies  that  the  system  is  adaptable  to  market  developments  and  the  dynamic 
forces  of  demand  and  supply  and  is  able  to  adequately  perform  its  role  in  mobilising  savings, 
diversifying risks and allocating resources. The system is also not rigid and can adapt to support the 
functioning of financial markets. 
The system is resilient in that it remains capable of allocating resources efficiently, timeously and with 
certainty,  even  in  times  of  financial  crises  or  external  shocks.  Technological  and  infrastructure 
vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  have  also  been  adequately  addressed.  The  system  therefore 
possesses  the  necessary  redundancy,  recovery  and  resumption  capabilities  required  to  prevent, 
mitigate and manage disasters. 
The  financial  system  is  also  internally  stable  in  the  sense  that  the  system  itself  is  not  a  source  of 
economic  shocks.  The  system  has  a  high  degree  of  predictability  and  integrity,  and  has  sufficient 
internal controls in place to mitigate operational risk. 
                                                      
1   From a report of the Working Party on Financial Stability in Emerging Market Economies, (cid:147)Financial Stability in Emerging 
Market Economies. A strategy for the for the formulation, adoption and implementation of sound principles and practices to 
strengthen financial systems.(cid:148) Bank for International Settlements. Basle, April 1997.  
BIS Review 27/2003 
 3
  From a macroeconomic point of view, central banks should focus on policies that promote financial 
stability, that is those that are aimed at containing fluctuations in aggregate economic activity as far as 
possible, promote sustainable growth and avoid economic uncertainty.  
From a structural point of view, policies should ensure that relative prices are in line with economic 
fundamentals and that structural conditions promote the efficient and sustainable allocation of real and 
financial  resources.  Such  policies  include  tax  policies  and  policies  pertaining  to  the  allocation  of 
productive factors. 
The key elements of a sound and robust financial system can be divided into three categories, namely 
the infrastructure building blocks that support effective market functioning, institutional governance and 
regulation and supervision. 
Infrastructure building blocks that support effective market functioning include the following: 
A legal and judicial framework which provides legal certainty in financial matters; 
Accounting systems capable of providing accurate, relevant, transparent and comprehensive 
information timeously; 
Other mechanisms and institutions for the application of codes of conduct, conventions and 
best  practices  to  limit  price  manipulation,  fraudulent  behaviour  and  other  detrimental 
practices; 
Sound  payment  and  settlement  systems,  as  these  provide  mechanisms  through  which 
payments can be made in risk-free money and as such are essential to the smooth operation 
of market economies; and 
Market diversity and depth. Financial systems need to have a broad array of instruments and 
markets and to provide a sufficient range of services if they are to be efficient and flexible 
and  resilient  enough  to  continue  to  function  effectively  in  the  face  of  major  economic 
changes. 
    On the topic of institutional governance, deficiencies in management and control have been common 
elements in banking and other financial crises. The quality of the institutional governance of financial 
businesses  is  crucial  to  reducing  the  likelihood  that  crises  will  emerge,  as  well  as  to  limiting  the 
severity of the crises when they do occur. 
Finally,  financial  regulation  and  supervision  play  an  essential  role  in  fostering  financial  robustness. 
Official oversight of the financial system encompasses financial regulation, including the formulation 
and  enforcement  of  rules  and  standards  governing  financial  behaviour  as  well  as  the  ongoing 
supervision  of  individual  institutions.  Regulators  should  seek  to  support  and  enhance  market 
functioning, rather than to displace it, by establishing basic rules of the game and seeing that they are 
observed. Regulatory/supervisory authorities should promote the reliability, effectiveness and integrity 
of the market infrastructure, in particular payments and transactions systems. 
The Malawian experience in payment system reform 
At this juncture let me briefly share with you our own experiences in Malawi our efforts in modernising 
the payment system. 
The  transformation  of  the  payment  system  in  Malawi  has  been  influenced  to  a  great  extent  by  the 
structural  reforms  that  have  been  implemented  in  the  financial  sector  since  the  early  1980s.  These 
reforms  were  initiated  by  the  Malawi  Government  as  part  of  the  overall  Structural  Adjustment 
Programmes  (SAPs)  that  the  country  has  implemented  since  1981  with  the  assistance  of  the 
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The reforms were specifically aimed at making the 
whole  financial  system  more  responsive  and  efficient  so  that  it  can  adequately  support  the 
development requirements of the country by providing the required financial resources. 
There are also other factors that influenced payment systems reforms in Malawi. These include: the 
need to attract foreign investors into the country, the effects of liberalised economic policies adopted in 
the 1990s and the introduction of the  Southern African Development Cooperation (SADC) Regional 
Payment  Systems  Modernisation  Project  by  the  Committee  of  SADC  Central  Bank  Governors.  The 
introduction  of  the  SADC  Payment  Systems  Regional  Modernisation  Project  added  impetus  to  the 
reform process that was initiated under SAPs. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2003
 The financial system in Malawi, like in many developing countries, is relatively small, underdeveloped 
and  dominated  by  a  few  financial  players  who  offer  a  limited  range  of  services.  The  economy  is 
predominantly rural-based and cash is the dominant mode of payment. Against this backgroung our 
efforts have been geared towards promoting the use of cash-less payment instruments in line with our 
vision and strategy. 
In  order  to  effectively  coordinate  the  reform  process  we  formed  a  mother  body  -  the  National 
Payments Council (NPC) which is chaired by the Reserve Bank of Malawi. Membership of the Council 
includes  all  financial  institutions  and  service  providers  like  telecommunications  company  and  power 
supply company. Thus all major stakeholders have been actively involved in payment systems reform 
initiatives in Malawi. We have found this to be of critical importance because in our view we consider 
that the task of forging the country(cid:146)s payment system vision and strategy is a shared responsibility. 
Through  this  collaborative  effort  we  have  today  made  tremendous  progress  in  modernising  our 
payment system. The Reserve Bank of Malawi spearheaded and fully financed the establishment of a 
proprietary  Wide  Area  Network  (WAN)  infrastructure  and  a  transaction  switch  -  called  the  Malawi 
Switch Centre (Malswitch). The switch centre, which was a dream three  years ago, is now a reality 
and this has been our major achievement. Under the Malswitch Model, Malawi has managed to link up 
all  the  commercial  banks  and  other  major  players  in  the  financial  system  in  a  single  network 
infrastructure providing a number of products including the following: 
Smart Card 
The smart card is intended to reduce cash usage. Some of the commercial banks operating in Malawi 
have entered into an agreement with Malswitch to become issuers of the smart card. In addition, some 
private  companies  and  Government  Departments  have  started  paying  salaries  to  their  employees 
through the smart card scheme. Retailers and merchants are also actively using the smart card. 
Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
This is part of the Malswitch system that offers a national online system linking all small commercial 
banks  (a  corporate  Wide  Area  Network)  to  transact  with  each  other  while  maintaining  complete 
security and confidentiality of their data. This facility could also be used by government departments 
and large retailers who have branch networks across the country. 
The Electronic Bidding System 
This enables the Financial Market Operations Department of the Reserve Bank of Malawi to accept 
bids  for  Treasury  Bills  and  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  Bills  electronically.  Capturing,  cancellation  and 
notification of bid results is also done electronically. 
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System 
As  you  are  all  aware  Malawi  was  the  first  country  to  implement  an  RTGS  system  using  Perago(cid:146)s 
Central Real Time Inter-bank Settlement Processor (CRISP) software. The CRISP System in Malawi 
became live on 19th March 2002. We initially started with nine participants including the Reserve Bank 
of  Malawi,  but  within  the  one  year  period  the  number  of  participants  has  increased  to  eleven.  The 
system is working well and meeting our requirements. 
Government Credit Ceiling Authority System (CCAS) Project 
The project to automate Government funding arrangement is aimed at replacing the current manual 
process which involves physical movement of Government officers and paper between Treasury on 
one  hand  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  and  the  commercial  banks  on  the  other.  All  funding 
processes and reimbursements to commercial banks will be done electronically. 
Electronic Cheque Clearing House (ECCH) Project 
The  ECCH  is  expected  to  be  operational  by  the  end  of  this  year  and  will  be  running  on  Malswitch 
infrastructure. The project is spearheaded by commercial banks. 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 5
 Since this is an RTGS gathering I thought I should also briefly share with you the benefits we have 
derived  from  the  CRISP  System  during  the  one  year  period  it  has  been  operational.  The  CRISP 
System provides the Reserve Bank of Malawi with up to the minute liquidity position of the financial 
market which is essential for proper decision making in as far as risk management is concerned. In 
addition  commercial  banks  are  able  to  determine  their  treasury  positions  and  make  informed 
investment  decisions.  The  fast  transmission  of  funds  through  the  CRISP  System  has  also  enabled 
economic agents outside the banking system to make cost effective investment plans since funds are 
no longer unnecessarily tied up in the payment system as was the case before. 
The CRISP System has also enabled us to retrieve in a timely manner statistics on liquidity of money 
market players. The statistics are invaluable for the formulation and conduct of monetary policy. You 
will  agree  with  me  that  in  the  absence  of  an  RTGS  system  which  does  not  have  a  comprehensive 
statistics  module,  data  on  liquidity  might  be  difficult  as  well  as  time  consuming  to  acquire.  This 
obviously leads to misdiagnosis and its resultant wrong monetary policy prescription. 
Before I conclude the Malawian experience I would like to request participants to discuss and share 
experiences on the following RTGS related issues. 
   Provision  of  intra-day  liquidity  is  one  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  an  efficient  RTGS 
system. In Malawi the Reserve Bank provides intra-day liquidity at a cost. Some participants, 
especially discount houses, suggest that intra-day liquidity should be free. These players do 
not hold liquidity reserve requirement (LRR) balances with the central bank. The question is, 
should these participants be given preferential treatment? 
After establishing an RTGS system, what is an appropriate cost recovery policy the central 
bank should adopt to sustain the operations of the system while at the same time ensuring 
that  the  system  is  affordable.  Malawi,  in  particular  would  like  to  learn  how  others  have 
approached this issue within their own countries. 
Through the use of the RTGS the float the banks used to enjoy is totally reduced. This used 
to be one of the sources of profits for banks. After the introduction of the RTGS what are the 
alternative sources of revenue which our banks should now rely on? 
Ladies and gentlemen, I also wish to urge you to seriously debate on the issues relating to the role of 
this CRISP User Group and how often should its members meet. The issues to be tackled by the user 
group should also be discussed and agreed. This is particularly important at this stage to avoid this 
group  simply  being  a  social  club. We  need  to  derive  some  benefit  from  it  and  assist  each  other  to 
ensure that our systems are efficiently managed. 
What is the status of financial system modernisation in SADC and what are the next steps? 
Various steps can be taken to help strengthen financial systems. On a macro-economic level, sound, 
market-orientated  banking  and  financial  systems  should  be  promoted  by  undertaking  structural 
reforms  necessary  to  remove  distortions  in  the  economy  that  weaken  the  financial  system  and 
undermine effective supervision. Stronger supervisory regimes and the  institutional strengthening of 
the  supervisory  agency  in  a  country  should  be  undertaken.  Countries  should  acquire  high-quality 
payment and settlement systems and other market infrastructures such as effective clearing and book-
entry  systems,  and  ensure  that  such  reforms  are  supported  by  the  necessary  legal  reforms.  More 
generally, countries should ensure that the general financial business practices and processes are in 
line  with  international  best  practices.  In  taking  these  steps  to  modernise  or  strengthen  the  financial 
system in a country, the help of international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, the 
World Bank and the Bank for International Settlements, or companies that specialise in financial sector 
reform can also be employed. 
Most countries in the SADC region have already taken an important first step in developing a sound 
and robust domestic payment system, which is to define a payment system strategy and development 
plan. Many countries already have the legal framework required to support such a payment system in 
place,  while five countries  in SADC  have gone further and have  already acquired a real-time gross 
settlement system. Seven others are set to move in this direction within the foreseeable future. 
Regular consultation with other countries and market participants is important, especially on a regional 
level, to ensure coordination of policies and strategies, but also to share views and possibly learn from 
one  another.  In  order  to  share  these  views  with  and  get  input  from  a  wider  audience,  and  to 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2003
 communicate  their  achievements  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  countries  may  consider  publishing  their 
experiences  in  payment  system  reform  by,  for  example,  publishing  a  so-called  (cid:145)Red  Book(cid:146)  in 
consultation  with  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  with  the  objective  of  providing  a  clear  and 
reasonably comprehensive description of that country(cid:146)s payment systems. I would like to challenge the 
SADC countries that have already undertaken comprehensive payment system reform programs since 
the  completion  of  the  (cid:145)Green  Book(cid:146)  on  SADC  payment  systems,  to  update  these  by  now  outdated 
descriptions by publishing a (cid:145)Red Book(cid:146) that reflects the current status of the payment system in that 
country.  And  of  course,  conferences  such  as  this  Perago  User  Group  Conference  also  provide  a 
platform  for  sharing  experiences,  keeping  abreast  of  new  financial  system  developments  and 
international best standards and practices. 
1998 
Annual figures 
Angola 
DRC 
Malawi 
Mauritius 
Mozambique 
Seychelles 
South Africa 
Tanzania 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
Total exports to 
other SADC 
countries 
(USD million) 
Exports to other 
SADC countries as 
% of total exports 
Total imports from 
other SADC 
countries 
(USD million) 
Imports from other 
SADC countries as 
% of total imports 
3.26 
5.33 
101.16 
25.44 
106.50 
1.33 
2,607.51 
32.86 
201.94 
494.34 
0.09 
0.51 
21.14 
1.49 
43.52 
1.47 
9.70 
5.58 
19.78 
28.58 
222.35 
230.43 
375.60 
248.19 
354.00 
57.62 
407.49 
181.79 
564.13 
1,058.84 
9.96 
25.91 
66.38 
11.36 
43.31 
15.04 
1.39 
11.57 
51.88 
40.40 
Source: Direction of Trade Statistics Yearbook. 2002. International Monetary Fund, Washington. Comparable figures were not 
available for Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. 
This slide shows import and export statistics of selected countries in the SADC region and is based on 
the 1998 Direction of Trade Statistics published by the International Monetary Fund. These statistics 
show that a significant portion of the foreign trade of many SADC countries is with other countries in 
the SADC region. It therefore makes sense to start thinking of closer co-operation among countries 
within  the Community  with the  aim of eventually  having a shared regional infrastructure in line  with 
international  trends  in  regional  groupings  such  as  the  European  Community.  A  prerequisite  for 
participating  in  such  a  regional  infrastructure  will  be  for  countries  to  ensure  that  their  domestic 
payment  systems  are  sound  and  robust,  which  has  been  the  main  focus  of  the  SADC  Payment 
System Project. Perhaps we need to start thinking of linking our RTGS-systems in some way as to 
take the first steps towards regional settlement and interbank clearing systems. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I wish to once again stress the importance of the financial sector in a regional economic 
strategy.  There  is  a  need  throughout  SADC  to  improve  existing  financial  systems  in  order  to 
encourage  both  domestic  and  foreign  savings,  which  can  then  be  channelled  into  productive 
investments.  SADC  payment  system  initiatives  can  play  a  role  in  this  process  by  promoting  co-
operation between role players in the financial sector. Financial co-operation is expected to result in 
greater economies of scale, a pooling of expertise, and the enhanced credibility of the reform process. 
It can also lay the groundwork for financial integration initiatives further down the line. These initiatives 
should be undertaken as part of a more holistic integration process, which also takes into account both 
the political and economic realities faced by  the countries of Southern Africa.  Central banks should 
work together to establish a sound basis for full economic integration in the region. Attention should be 
BIS Review 27/2003 
 7
 focussed  on  the  building  of  a  compatible  financial  infrastructure  in  the  region.  The  challenge  is  a 
mighty one, but it is time for SADC, as well as every other country and region, to meet it. 
Lastly, I would like to commend Perago for taking this initiative of forming a User Group for the CRISP 
System. I believe this group will prove to be valuable to all of us as members since we will be able to 
share views and experiences to ensure efficient utilisation of the CRISP system. I only hope that this 
forum will continue for the benefit of all its members.  
Once again I thank you very much. 
8 
 BIS Review 27/2003
