 Henrique de Campos Meirelles: Inauguration speech 
Inauguration speech delivered by Mr Henrique de Campos Meirelles, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Brazil, at the Ministry of Finance in Brasilia on 7 January 2003. 
 I am honored to take up this position that requires permanent and rigorous defense of the currency. 
In these past elections, society expressed its legitimate wishes. We all want high economic growth, 
low inflation, a stable exchange rate, high levels of international reserves, a low external deficit, low 
interest rates, abundant credit, and a fair distribution of income. These are certainly goals of both the 
government  and  society  at  large.  The  ultimate  target  of  any  policy  is  economic  growth  and  social 
welfare. Among the several government entities and institutions that seek to fulfill society's wishes and 
achieve the government's targets, the task assigned to the Central Bank is to maintain a low level of 
inflation. 
The  outgoing  government  chose  price  stability  as  a  priority  target,  or  at  least  that  is  what  was 
perceived by society. There were several consequences of this choice, among which we highlight the 
extraordinary public attention drawn to Central Bank's role. We will work to keep price stability as a 
centerpiece of the Brazilian economic landscape, and we will work with resoluteness and long term 
horizons. 
President Luis Inácio Lula da Silva's government has clearly stated its objectives of economic growth 
and social inclusion. Many misunderstood this as a precipitously abandonment of monetary discipline 
and fiscal austerity. This analysis contains an important misperception. Stability is not an end to itself. 
It is a necessary condition for growth and social justice. 
An  environment  of  stable  prices  establishes  a  necessary  condition  for  output  growth  by  reducing 
uncertainties  and  distortions,  lengthening  decision-making  horizons  and  allowing  for  an  increase  in 
investments and productivity gains. 
There  is  no  dichotomy  between  price  stability  and  economic  growth,  as  stability  paves  the  road  for 
growth.  Price  stability  allows  the  country  to  plan  government  actions.  Moreover,  it  should  be  made 
clear  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  choice  of  higher  sustainable  growth  with  higher  inflation.  No 
country in the world has experienced prolonged periods of economic growth with high rates of inflation. 
Nonetheless,  examples  abound  of  short  periods  of  growth  driven  by  mistaken  policies,  usually 
inflationary, which were followed by recession and stagnation that lasted for much longer periods. The 
Central Bank's goal is, therefore, to contribute to economic growth by maintaining price stability. 
In the long run, higher productivity is the element that underpins economic growth. To achieve higher 
productivity growth, it is essential to increase the public sector's savings rate, thereby allowing society 
to invest in production as opposed to primarily financing the public sector.  
Aside from its effect on output growth, a permanent reduction in inflation inherently and unmistakably 
brings  about  a  reduction  in  poverty,  with  the  consequent  social  inclusion,  in  addition  to  sowing  the 
seeds for reducing inequality.  
This  government  is  committed  to  price  stability,  the  inflation  targeting  framework,  fiscal  austerity,  a 
realistic economic policy, and a quest for management excellence. My level of comfort has increased 
with every meeting  in  which I have participated,  with  every speech  and the first decisions made by 
Minister Palocci, as well as by our friends at the other Ministries and by the President of the Republic. 
In regard to the autonomy of the Central Bank, I would like to emphasize that this is a proposal of the 
government, and not the Central Bank. This issue was not part of the discussions I had when I was 
invited by President Lula and Minister Palocci to take this position. The Central Bank's autonomy as 
proposed  by  Minister  Palocci  aims  at  institutionalizing  the  Central  Bank's  role  as  a  guardian  of  the 
currency and signals  Brazil's permanent commitment to price stability. The modern central banks in 
the  world  count  on  clear  rules  in  regard  to  their  roles,  composition  and  renewal  of  the  board  of 
directors. In this context of the transition to a new Central Bank law, it was important to count on the 
contribution of the entire board of directors of the Brazilian Central Bank, so as to avoid problems in 
the conduct of their actions. This is the case of the inflation targets that are defined by the government. 
BIS Review 3/2003 
 1
 This government is entirely committed to Democracy, to the federal Constitution, and to the Codes of 
Law.  We  will  honor  the  laws  of  the  nation  and  our  international  agreements.  There  will  be  no 
imprudent adventures. 
The social and political choices will be carried out within the federal budget, with a review in priorities 
and a quest for excellence in management of the resources. 
I am positive of this evaluation. As the head of a financial institution for 28 years, of which 12 were 
served as President in Brazil, I have carefully followed the President's and his party's trajectory since 
1989, when I first met with the President and his team. I had many chances to interact with the Party, 
including  in  successful  partnerships  in  the  social  area.  This  allowed  for  increasing  comfort  with  the 
personal relationship. In summary, President Lula and I started from different points of view but Brazil 
brought us close together. 
On the other hand, within my duties in the administration of a Global Corporation I was the person with 
ultimate responsibility for the Bank's investments and those of its clients in all countries in which we 
operated. Under these responsibilities, it was required that we track the evolution of the governments 
and economic policies of some 30 countries around the world. I saw amazing examples of success 
and  of  failure.  I  can  assure  you  that  my  experience  allows  me  to  be  confident  in  what  I  see  from 
President Lula's government. Brazil is on the right track. 
It is important to note, however, that the main focus of an investment policy evaluation rests in the 
model  of  the  Central  Bank's  actions.  Having  been  responsible  for  the  areas  of  Capital  Markets, 
Currency, Operations Desks, and Corporate and Sovereign Credits,  I am confident in concluding that 
there is a consensus in the world today that the Central Banks that have been assigned a multiplicity 
of  functions  and  targets  are  doomed  to  fail.  Successful  Central  Banks  are  those  that  have  price 
stability as their only mandate.  
In this regard, I would like to emphasize that competence, seriousness and patriotism are a legacy of 
Arminio  Fraga's  administration  at  the  Central  Bank. There  is  no  doubt  that  the  implementation  of  a 
floating exchange rate regime and of the inflation targeting regime in Brazil at a critical moment for the 
Brazilian economy in 1999 are a hallmark in the history of Central Banks in emerging economies. The 
substantial improvement in transparency and credibility that has taken place over the past three years 
has been incorporated into the working structure of the Brazilian Central Bank. Arminio, thank you for 
the loyalty and professionalism you showed in the transition process. 
Although there are many instruments a government can use to implement its economic policy, the task 
assigned to the Central Bank is to keep the rate of inflation at a low level, mostly because the Central 
Bank has only one instrument, which is monetary policy. 
Even  with  only  one  goal  and  with  only  one  instrument,  in  theory  Central  Bank  actions  can  be 
organized in different ways. For a long time in the past, monetary policy was conducted through the 
control  of  monetary  aggregates.  This  practice,  however,  proved  to  be  increasingly  inefficient  as 
economic systems designed new substitutive mechanisms to create money that had not been supplied 
by the monetary authority. With advances in information technology and its effects on the productive 
processes  of  commercialization  and  of  consumption,  this  element  of  endogenous  money  creation 
made control of money ineffective, which in turn led Central Bankers to abandon the use of targets for 
monetary  aggregates.  It  is  important  to  highlight  that  this  does  not  mean  that  the  evolution  of  the 
monetary aggregates will be watched or treated carelessly. They are still closely monitored, but they 
have ceased to be the policy variable. 
Another choice available to the Central Bank is to conduct monetary policy through the control of the 
exchange  rate,  which  implies  that  the  focus  of  the  monetary  authority  is  aimed  at  managing  the 
exchange rate's trajectory. This option has been also abandoned due to its high costs and to its limited 
effectiveness when the economy goes through significant changes and shocks. 
The option that  has proven to be most efficient to conduct monetary  policy  is the inflation targeting 
regime. This system has explicit targets for the monetary authority, which brings transparency to the 
targets being pursued and allows for reporting to society the absolute commitment to the control of 
inflation. It is a system that reduces the monetary authority's discretion, and is especially effective in 
eliminating the risks of political influence in policy decisions. Many countries have adopted this regime, 
among  the  developed  economies,  these  include  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada  and  Sweden;  while 
among emerging economies they include Chile, Thailand and South Africa. 
  A key purpose of the inflation target regime is to coordinate inflation expectations. Tthat contributes to 
fulfilling the targets and once the targets are achieved, credibility is enhanced. Therefore, it is essential 
that we work towards preserving this credibility, eliminating any doubt as to the commitment to fight 
inflation. It is important to highlight that this fight against inflation should be carried out with no artificial 
measures, as the  effectiveness of such measures is  temporary, and they  introduce short  and long-
term distortions in the economy. 
An  ally  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime  is  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime.  In  our  country,  where 
there  is  still  dependence  on  foreign  capital,  this  regime  is  adequate,  as  it  directly  absorbs  part  of 
external shocks. The exchange rate in this regime has as a purpose  establishing equilibrium in the 
balance  of payments. Its flexibility  helps ensure that  the demand for foreign currency  will equal the 
supply without draining the Central Bank's international reserves. 
The  inflation  targeting  regime  helps  to  buffer  the  shocks  hitting  the  economy.  The  flexibility  of  this 
system facilitates the  absorption of these shocks, while  transparency  in the rules allied  with explicit 
targets reinforce credibility in the fight against inflation. 
Last  year,  due  to  a  confidence  crisis  and  doubts  on  the  Brazilian  public  debt  and  the  Brazilian 
economy the exchange rate depreciated strongly and, as a result, we have observed an increase in 
the current inflation rate and a contamination of future inflation expectations. The conduct of monetary 
policy will have as strategic priority the avoidance of this transitory hike in inflation being perceived as 
permanent. We will fight, unrelentlessly, against the expectation of an increase in the level of inflation 
and the indexation of the economy. 
The goal is to bring inflation back to the trajectory defined in the targets already set by the National 
Monetary Council (CMN). The Central Bank will pursue a path of convergence to the already defined 
inflation  targets,  taking  into  account  that  this  convergence  will  not  occur  instantaneously.  It  is  a 
common practice among Central Banks in the world to dilute the convergence of inflation to the targets 
over a period longer than a year. This is particularly important when an inflationary bubble arises due 
to a supply shock, as has been the case in Brazil. Therefore, we will proceed by aiming at an inflation 
rate  that  takes  into  account  the  inertia  inherited  from  inflation  in  2002,  and  the  supply  shocks 
stemming from the increase in administered and monitored prices in 2003. 
Therefore, monetary policy will maintain the goal of ensuring that inflation will return to its target path 
within a time period that does not result in unnecessary costs to the economy. Transparency in the 
process is essential. 
At this juncture, the transparency of the process is fundamental through the detailed explanations of 
the  actions  and  of  the  context  in  which  the  decisions  were  taken.  Following  the  purposes  of  the 
inflation-targeting regime, the timely release of the Monetary Policy Committee minutes provides the 
public  with  the  Committee’s  view  on  the  economy  and  its  prospects,  providing  the  rationale  for  the 
policy adopted by the Copom. (At the same time, contact with analysts from several segments of the 
public was enhanced by the creation, especially for this purpose, of an Institutional Communications 
Group,  which  allows  a  more  efficient  two-way  communication  through  the  use  of  surveys  of 
expectations and other specific research.) 
The  production  of  reports  and  the  release  of  studies  and  research  is  also  fundamental    aiming  at 
increasing the transparency of the Bank's activities to the public. In addition to the monthly bulletins 
and annual reports, other key reports are the Inflation Report, which deals with the inflation-targeting 
framework,  the  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  deals  with  the  stability  of  the  Brazilian  Financial 
System, the Banking Economics and Credit Report, development of the Interest Rates and Banking 
Spread Project, the Working Papers Series and the Technical Notes Series of the Central Bank. 
Thus, the Central Bank will emphasize not only the improvement of statistics and models, but also its 
transparency and communication. For instance, the increase of information and data available to the 
public on the Central Bank website has been outstanding. More than eight thousand statistical series 
are already available, with increasingly easy access.  
In  accordance  with  the  goal  of  stability  and  its  role  as  guardian  of  the  currency,    the  CB  has  as  a 
permanent  objective  the  maintenance  of  a  sound  financial  system.  The  quest  for  excellence  in 
supervisory standards, in line with the best international practices, is a permanent challenge for the 
CB.  
In  this  respect,  it  is  important  that  the  modernization  process  be  sped  up  in  the  supervision  and 
regulation  areas,  with  the  aim  of  solidifying  the  Country’s  position  in  risk  management  and  the 
  prevention of banking crises. There are many examples of severe financial system crises in emerging 
countries which led to significant losses of income and production, with disastrous impacts on society. 
Brazil may face challenges but will work to avoid crises. Banking supervision and the set of prudential 
rules play a major role in this process.    
In the short run, important challenges include the improvement of methods to evaluate the quality of 
financial  system  information,  and  the  implementation  of  the  new  Credit  Risk  Center,  which  aims  at 
enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  off-site  supervision.  In  the  long  run,  we  will  seek  to  enhance 
supervisory transparency and the implementation of the new Basel capital accord, without forgetting 
the issues related to supervisory autonomy and legal protection for supervisors.  
I am committed to maintaining rigorous supervision procedures, because this is the only way to assure 
the stability of the system. But it is also important for inspections to have a beginning, a development 
and an end. To sum up, supervision is something that must work based on a regime of verification, 
analysis and conclusion. 
It is important to highlight the intensity and deepness of government-owned banks supervision, which 
brought us the knowledge of their existing problems and the costs involved in their recovery.  
Significant restructuring has been carried out in federal banks, after deep and comprehensive general 
consolidated  inspections  done  by  the  CB.  The  adjustments  that  were  made  aimed  at  making  the 
government-owned financial institutions sounder, more efficient and more competitive, rendering them 
apt to meet the same requirements faced by the private financial system.  
The maintenance of this behavior will reveal the true costs of governmental programs and will avoid 
recursive expenditures, which could become skeletons (hidden liabilities) in the public accounts.   
The continuation of reforms is important in other areas of the CB. In the external area, the CB must 
aim at intensifying transparency and communication with the markets and investors, while seeking to 
increase  flexibility  and  to  simplify  the  regulations  on  foreign  currency  operations,  within  a  process 
intended to increase the country’s participation in world trade and international financial markets.  
In the banking area, the restructuring of the Brazilian Payment System improved risk reallocation, and 
favored a higher efficiency of the system. This is due to the fact that the Central Bank no longer has 
any  role  in  financing  the  institutions  that  did  not  have  the  necessary  funds  for  their  operations, 
reducing moral hazard. Moreover, there must be additional efforts to induce the entities in charge of 
clearing  and  settlement  services  to  become  more  effective,  as  well  as  to  popularize  the  use  of 
electronic payment instruments, which will gradually reduce the use of paper instruments. 
The area of financial system regulation and organization will increasingly be focused on the following 
aspects:  
• 
improvement  of  prudential  rules  and  practices,  aiming  at  maintaining  the  soundness  of  the 
financial system as a whole; 
improvement of the analysis of several authorization processes related to financial institutions 
and alike; 
creation and improvement of financial instruments and activities, including those intended to 
broaden and cheapen credit; 
adoption of international standards and practices. Additionally, it is  a priority to  improve the 
regulation of mechanisms that broaden the population's access to the financial system, as in 
the  case  of  “banking  correspondents,”  credit  cooperatives,  and  credit  concessions  to  small 
and micro firms.  
   I would also like to acknowledge the employees of the Central Bank for their competence, “esprit de 
corps”  and  qualification.  I  have  a  human  resources  goal  of  qualifying  and  offering  even  more 
opportunities for this outstanding group of public servants. 
I thank President Luis Inácio Lula da Silva and Minister Palocci for their confidence in myself. 
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that the most effective and lasting way to ensure a more stable and 
prosperous future, with lower interest rates for both private investment and public sector financing, is a 
clear  commitment  to  fiscal  and  monetary  responsibility  and  progress  in  micro  and  macroeconomic 
reforms. The attainment of stability is a permanent and complex challenge, but it will be accomplished, 
as long as there is consistency in economic policies over time. 
  In Brazil, we have experienced periods of high inflation, periods of high interest rates, and both, with 
deleterious consequences for society. An important factor in this scenario has been the low quality of 
the public sector accounts and credit. We must create conditions to keep both low inflation and interest 
rates, at the same time. But this is not a matter of Central Bank's desire. The Central Bank's role is to 
set the necessary and sufficient interest rate so that the inflation target is achieved. This is what we 
will do. 
A fiscal surplus,  which unmistakably guarantees the stability  of the public debt, associated  with the 
social security reform, as a first step, and of tax reform, in a second round, together with the Monetary 
Responsibility Law, are the most direct way to reduce country risk and interest rates. Minister Palloci's 
speech in this auditorium clarifies this matter.  
These  actions  and  measures  must  be  complemented  by  microeconomic  measures,  such  as  the 
proposals to reduce banking spreads, the new bankruptcy law, aiming at cheapening and increasing 
credit,  which  also  includes  the  micro  credit  project,  together  with  the  credit  dissemination  through 
cooperatives, the deepening of the capital markets, of the funding mechanisms and of the on-lending 
of domestic and external resources to foster investment.  
I  publicly  assume  the  commitment  of  working  at  the  limit  of  my  possibilities,  to  make  feasible 
investments, economic growth, employment creation and the inclusion of millions of people excluded 
from  the  formal  economy.  Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  these  achievements  of  the 
Brazilian people. Thank you very much.   
 