 Willem F Duisenberg: 175 anniversary of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
175 anniversary of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles in Willemstad, Cura(cid:231)ao, Netherlands Antilles, 
4 February 2003. 
 Introduction 
Your Excellencies, 
Mr. Tromp, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  honour  and  pleasure  for me  to  speak  to  you  here  just  two  days  before  the  actual  day 
175 years ago, on  which Johannes van den Bosch, the Dutch Commissioner-General for the Dutch 
West-Indian Possessions, signed the Proclamation on a Statute for the Cura(cid:231)ao Bank, as the Bank 
van de Nederlandse Antillen was initially called. The history of this Bank and that of the central bank I 
presided over for 16 years, namely De Nederlandsche Bank, are largely comparable. The Charter of 
De Nederlandsche Bank was used as the basis for the Statute of the Cura(cid:231)ao Bank, as there was no 
comparable financial institution anywhere in the Caribbean region or Latin America at that time. Thus, 
the  Cura(cid:231)ao  Bank  could  truly  be  considered  a  pioneer  in  this  part  of  the  world.  Both  banks  were 
founded with the active support of King William I, with the aim of promoting trade and of reforming the 
fragmented currency system prevailing in the Netherlands and in Cura(cid:231)ao and Dependencies, as the 
Netherlands Antilles and Aruba were called at the time. Also, both were set up as commercial credit 
banks,  a  function  that  they  have  maintained  until  the  middle  of  the  20th  century,  when  they  were 
formally  transformed  into  central  banks  with  sole  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision  as  well  as  other  central  bank-related  tasks.  For  a  very  long  time  now,  and  from  the 
different  positions  I  have  held,  I  have  closely  followed  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the 
Netherlands Antilles and the key role played by the Bank van de Nederlandse Antillen in this regard. 
Please  allow  me  to  use  this  opportunity  to  underscore  that  this  is  also  the  case,  albeit  from  a 
somewhat  different  perspective,  in  my  current  position.  For  a  major  central  bank  like  the  European 
Central Bank (ECB), the broad trends in economic and financial developments in Latin America and 
the  Caribbean  do  matter  and  are,  therefore,  followed  closely.  In  its  short  history,  several  initiatives 
have thus been taken by the ECB to build up relations with this region. Among these were a seminar 
held last year for Eurosystem and Latin American central banks to discuss selected policy issues of 
common interest. And just last week, the Executive Board of the ECB decided to initiate the procedure 
for  the  ECB  to  become  a  collaborating  member  of  Centre  for  Latin  American  Monetary  Studies 
(CEMLA).  Over  the  past  few  years,  ECB  officials  have  already  participated  in  CEMLA  Governors(cid:146) 
meetings on a regular basis. We felt, however, that a collaborating membership would enhance our 
possibilities  for  building  up  relations  with  the  central  banking  community  in  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean. 
Close  relations  between  the  euro  area  and  the  Latin  American  and  Caribbean  region  provide  a 
platform for an exchange of views and experience in the field of - in our case - economic and financial 
policies. Topical issues for both the euro area and Latin America and the Caribbean are fiscal policies 
and debt sustainability. In the euro area, as in other economic and monetary unions, fiscal policies are 
enshrined in rules or pacts. Whereas the use of clear strategic frameworks for the conduct of monetary 
policy is already broadly accepted, this appears to be less so in the case for fiscal policy rules. Against 
this background, I should like to discuss today the benefits of fiscal rules compared with discretionary 
fiscal policies. 
The rationale for fiscal policy rules 
When  referring  to  fiscal  rules,  I  mean  a  rule-based  framework  for  the  adoption  of  fiscal  policy 
decisions. In practice, almost all such rules take the form of a medium-term target for the government 
budget balance, but the debt ratio is often also the subject of a fiscal rule. Setting fiscal policy in a rule-
BIS Review 5/2003 
 1
 based framework contrasts with an ad hoc, discretionary approach to fiscal policy-making. Under an 
ad hoc approach, the decision on the budgetary  target is made without having  to adhere to explicit 
criteria when determining the size of the budget balance in a particular year, or over the medium-term. 
Conducting  budgetary  policy  on  the  basis  of  disciplining  rules  has  become  increasingly  popular, 
following  disappointing  experience  with  discretionary  fiscal  policies.  One  of  the  main  problems  of 
discretionary policies is to be found in the long time-lag between the preparation of , the decision on 
and the implementation of discretionary measures, in particular those aimed at stabilising the business 
cycle. Consequently, policy measures frequently only become effective when the economic cycle has 
already  changed,  often  resulting  in  a  pro-cyclical  policy  stance.  This  may  destabilise  economic 
developments.  Furthermore,  discretionary  policies  are  often  conducted  asymmetrically,  driven  by 
short-term electoral considerations. While governments show little hesitation in increasing expenditure 
or  decreasing  taxes  in  periods  of  economic  slowdown,  there  is  reluctance  to  initiate  unpopular 
consolidation measures once prosperous times return. As a result, a ratchet effect occurs: deficits only 
go up, not down. 
Appropriate  fiscal  policy  rules  add  to  macroeconomic  stabilisation.  While  discouraging  discretionary 
fine-tuning,  they  allow  a  full  operation  of  automatic  stabilisers.  These  automatic  stabilisers  result  in 
lower  tax  receipts  and  higher  unemployment-related  government  expenditure  in  the  event  of  an 
economic  downturn,  thus  supporting  aggregate  demand  and  income.  An  appropriate  medium-term 
reference value for the government budget balance also prevents the sustainability of fiscal policies 
from becoming a problem, a subject on which I will say more in a few moments. 
More  generally,  a  rule-based  system  for  fiscal  policy  provides  clear  yardsticks  against  which  other 
policy-makers and the public can measure the current and future course of policies. It sets up a stable 
and predictable environment, which allows markets to operate more efficiently, and supports longer-
term  decision-making  by  the  public  and  by  corporations.  Moreover,  fiscal  rules  regarding  budget 
deficits have the advantage of promoting an efficiency analysis of government plans. If a government 
wants to increase certain expenditure when the route to deficit-financing is blocked, it has to weigh the 
benefits of such expenditure against the cost of increasing taxes or decreasing other expenditure. 
The case for fiscal rules is even stronger in a monetary union like the euro area. With a centralised 
monetary policy and decentralised fiscal policies, there could be a temptation to have higher deficits. 
This is because part of the consequences of lax fiscal policies, in the form of higher real interest rates, 
will be borne by all the other participants in the monetary union. Thus, in order to avoid such spillovers 
to countries pursuing sound fiscal policies, a fiscal framework is required, even more so than in the 
case of an individual country. 
While there are thus many advantages to fiscal rules from a fiscal and general macroeconomic angle, I 
also support the conduct of fiscal policy on the basis of predetermined rules from a monetary policy 
point  of  view.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  are  interacting,  as  they  both  have  an  impact  on  key 
macroeconomic  variables.  Fiscal  policy,  for  one  thing,  affects  prices  via  its  effects  on  aggregate 
demand,  or  via  changes  in  indirect  taxes.  Monetary  policy,  on  the  other  hand,  affects  short-term 
interest  rates,  which  influences  the  government  budget  and  the  economic  environment  in  which 
governments  operate.  This  implies  that  actions  by  one  authority  have  an  impact  on  the  variables 
underlying the policy objectives of the other. 
Given these linkages and spillovers, it is crucial to have a clear institutional framework, which governs 
the interactions between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Important in this context is the issue of the 
division of responsibilities. Those taking macroeconomic action should be given clear mandates which 
they  can  fulfil  and  for  which  they  can  be  held  accountable.  Monetary  policy-makers  should  be 
responsible for price stability and fiscal policy-makers should keep public finances sound with a view 
to  providing  the  best  contribution  to  enlarging  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  Such  a  clear 
separation  of  mandates  avoids  problems  with  regard  to  implementation  and  incentives  that  would 
otherwise be bound to occur if monetary and fiscal policies had constantly to be co-ordinated on an ad 
hoc or a discretionary basis. 
The euro area experience 
Having elaborated on the need for a clear institutional framework, let me now turn specifically to the 
euro  area,  and  discuss  how  these  insights  have  found  their  way  to  the  policy  framework  of  the 
European  Union  (EU).  The  introduction  of  the  euro  posed  a  unique  challenge  to  devise  principles 
reflecting the considerations I have just highlighted. 
  As to the common monetary policy, the Treaty establishing the European Community unambiguously 
identifies  price stability  as  the  primary objective for the  ECB,  as this is  the only  objective monetary 
policy  can  be  expected  to  deliver  in  the  long  run.  The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the 
Eurosystem are granted independence in the pursuit of this objective, so that they are shielded from 
possible short-term political interference by governments. 
At the same time, fiscal policies remain the exclusive responsibility of national governments, although 
they are subject to EU-wide rules. The Maastricht Treaty states that countries should avoid excessive 
deficits. Important reference values for this assessment are a government deficit level of 3% of GDP 
and a debt-to-GDP ratio of 60%. In addition, countries have committed themselves in the Stability and 
Growth Pact to respect the medium-term objective of a budgetary position of (cid:147)close to balance or in 
surplus(cid:148)  .  Attaining  this  position  implies  that  automatic  stabilisers  can  operate  freely  over  the  cycle 
without  running  the  risk  of  exceeding  the  3%  reference  value.  Additional  elements  in  the  EU  policy 
framework  that  have  an  impact  on  fiscal  policies  are  the  prohibition  of  any  monetary  financing  of 
government deficits, which implies that governments cannot resort to central banks for the financing of 
their budgets, and the no-bail-out clause. Under the latter provision, none of the participating countries 
can be held responsible for the debt of any other governments. This provision provides an additional 
incentive for governments to (cid:147)keep their own house in order(cid:148). 
As to the monetary side of the EU policy framework, the ECB has announced a medium-term-oriented 
monetary policy strategy setting out how it goes about fulfilling its mandate under the Treaty. In order, 
in particular, to enhance clarity, to anchor expectations and to offer a yardstick against which the ECB 
can  be  held  accountable,  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  has  been  provided.  Longer-term 
inflation  expectations  indicate  that  the  ECB(cid:146)s  definition  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  an 
annual rate of inflation of less than 2%, is perceived to be credible, both by market participants and the 
general public. Furthermore, on the basis of its strategy, the ECB regularly explains its monetary policy 
decisions and its assessment of economic developments. With this high degree of transparency, the 
ECB provides the public and the fiscal authorities with extensive information on how to understand, 
and  thus  to  anticipate,  responses  of  monetary  policy  to  economic  developments,  including  those 
concerning fiscal variables. 
Current experience with this policy framework in the EU is satisfactory. The Maastricht Treaty provides 
for  a  clear  and  consistent  allocation  of  mandates  and  objectives  to  the  policy-makers.  It  includes 
transparent frameworks and procedures. Monetary and fiscal policy are offered steady guidance for 
action, while short-sighted behaviour is discouraged. 
Fiscal  policy  developments  in  the  euro  area  have  been  somewhat  mixed  recently.  Many  euro  area 
countries had undertaken major efforts to reach budget deficits of less than 3% of GDP by 1997, which 
was  a  precondition  for  adopting  the  euro.  Later  on,  a  majority  of  countries  reached  the  required 
medium-term positions of budgets close to balance or in surplus. However, some euro area countries 
still face very high deficit levels that sometimes even exceed the reference value of 3% of GDP. This 
reflects the fact that these countries did not use the strong economic upturn in 1999 and 2000 to bring 
their structural fiscal deficits down. As I have already outlined, budgetary discipline is indispensable for 
the proper functioning of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). The rules are not the problem, but 
failing to comply with them is. 
Debt sustainability 
One of the reasons, perhaps the most important one, for adopting a fiscal rule-based system such as 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  the  need  to  reduce  the  risk  of  building  up  unsustainable  fiscal 
positions. In most euro area countries, the debt-to-GDP ratios have been falling over recent years, but 
they  still  remain  at  high  levels.  Certainly,  the  current  high  debt  to  GDP  ratios  need  to  be  reduced. 
However,  even  low  debt  levels  today  are  no  guarantee  that  sustainability  is  secured  in  the  future. 
Many  economies,  yours  not  excluded,  will  be  confronted  with  a  gradual  but  steady  ageing  of  the 
population. In Europe, there are currently about four persons in the work force supporting one person 
of pensionable age. This ratio will deteriorate substantially in the future - it is estimated to go to two 
workers for every pensioner in 2050. 
Such a huge increase has many macroeconomic consequences, including fiscal ones. Conservative 
projections indicate that annual government expenditure on pensions and health care in the EU could 
increase in the order of 4 to 8 percentage points of GDP. Unless there is further policy action, public 
expenditure would rise significantly, resulting in increases in the public deficit and debt ratios. 
BIS Review 5/2003 
 3
 There  is  every  reason  to  prevent  such  a  scenario  from  occurring.  High  deficits  and  unsustainable 
public debt levels have serious adverse macroeconomic consequences. First, public debt crowds out 
private  investment,  thereby  hampering  economic  growth  in  the  medium  term.  Unsustainable  fiscal 
positions have a negative impact on market interest rates, because of the high additional demand for 
funds and because of the ensuing negative development of inflation expectations. Ultimately, if risks 
regarding  the  future  course  of  fiscal  policy  are  substantial,  and  if  its  credibility  is  undermined, 
unsustainable  fiscal  policies  will  have  an  impact  on  the  creditworthiness  of  the  government.  In  the 
extreme, this may lead to reduced access to capital markets for funding debt. But even more moderate 
debt  levels  are  problematic.  They  impair  the  operation  of  automatic  stabilisers.  In  addition,  the 
effectiveness of fiscal policy measures could decrease as awareness increases among the public that 
the  fiscal  policy  course  is  not  sustainable,  so  that  countervailing  measures  in  the  future  are 
anticipated. Furthermore, increasing debt ratios lead to rising tax burdens, either now or in the future. 
This exacerbates current tax distortions and reduces work incentives, thus leading to less economic 
growth. 
The  adverse  consequences  of  high  and  unsustainable  debt  point  to  the  need  to  prevent  such 
situations. There is an urgent need for policy adjustments in many EU countries. Measures should be 
sought in three complementary areas. First, fostering productivity and economic growth broadens the 
economic  basis  for  financing  ageing-related  costs.  Second,  reforming  the  social  security  systems 
should  reduce  expenditure  pressures.  Finally,  a  swift  and  decisive  reduction  of  current  debt  levels 
should contribute to alleviating fiscal burdens and to preparing financially for upcoming ageing. Low 
debt levels reduce the interest burden on the budget, thus creating more room for growth-enhancing 
tax cuts or for financing expenditure relating to ageing populations. 
Although the ageing of populations is a gradual process, this should not induce us to regard it as less 
urgent.  In  Europe,  a  major  acceleration  of  the  ageing  process  is  expected  to  set  in  around  2010. 
Postponing the implementation of the required policy response would, over time, further increase the 
extent of necessary adjustments, and may shift a larger part of the debt burden to future generations. 
Fiscal policy frameworks in other monetary unions 
Before addressing the relevance of fiscal rules for Latin America and the Caribbean, let me first say 
something about the use of fiscal rules in other monetary unions of interest, notably the West African 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (WAEMU),  the  Central  African  Economic  and  Monetary  Community 
(CEMAC) and - closer to the Netherlands Antilles - the Eastern Caribbean Monetary Union (ECCU). 
The programmes agreed upon by the two African monetary unions - the name of one of which has 
even been based on arrangements in the EU, namely the WAEMU(cid:146)s Convergence, Stability, Growth, 
and Solidarity Pact - require annual fiscal balances to be in surplus or in balance, a limitation of the 
domestic  and  foreign  debt  ratio  to  70%  of  GDP  and  a  reduction  of  the  inflation  rate  to  3%.  The 
Monetary Council of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, which comprises the finance ministers of its 
eight  member  states,  has  adopted  so-called  benchmarks,  limiting  budget  deficits  to  3%  of  GDP, 
outstanding public sector debt to no more than 60% of GDP and debt service revenues to no more 
than 15% of current revenue. 
It may be useful to assess the institutional set-up of these agreements on the basis of EU experience, 
in  particular  with  regard  to  the  required  monitoring,  the  incentive  structure  and  the  time  frame.  As 
regards  monitoring,  on  the  basis  of  EU  experience,  a  regular  and  frank  regional  surveillance  of  all 
participating countries forms an important incentive to compliance. The same applies to the obligation 
for  countries  that  fail,  or  that  are  expected  not  to  comply  with  the  rules,  to  define  a  programme  of 
corrective measures. Finally, sanctions in the form of public reprimands and fines should complete this 
framework.  While  the  West  African  Treaty  includes  rather  detailed  provisions  and  procedures  for 
monitoring, corrective policy programmes and sanctions, none of these have been put in place in the 
Eastern  Caribbean  Currency  Union.  Furthermore,  as  is  the  case  in  the  EU  fiscal  policy  framework, 
fiscal rules will be more effective when linked to a realistic time frame. In contrast to the two African 
monetary unions, the Caribbean Union has not explicitly specified such a time path. EU experience 
confirms  the  importance  of  a  strong  institutional  set-up  for  stability  programmes.  Against  that 
background, I am convinced that the success of such programmes in other monetary unions will to a 
large extent also depend on their frameworks for monitoring, incentives and sanctions. 
  The need for enhanced fiscal discipline in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Let me close my presentation by now discussing the need of more fiscal discipline in this region. Both 
in Latin America and in the Caribbean, fiscal discipline has been low in a large number of countries. 
On  average,  public  debt-to-GDP  ratios  in  Latin  America  are  not  out  of  tune  with  those  in  other 
emerging market regions, but - overall - vulnerabilities are comparatively larger. These vulnerabilities 
stem from the fact that a larger share  of public debt  is financed externally  as a result of, inter alia, 
relatively  low  savings  ratios,  while  the  region(cid:146)s  ability  to  service  the  associated  external  debt 
obligations  is  hampered  by  a  relatively  low  level  of  exports.  There  are  positive  exceptions  to  this 
general trend of weak fiscal positions, one of which is Chile. Such countries do, indeed, perform much 
better in terms of national savings and trade openness. 
In many countries in the Caribbean, public debt-to-GDP ratios are much higher than in Latin America, 
although  public  debt  there  is  not  financed  externally.  Domestic  financing  of  public  debt,  however, 
creates a different source of vulnerability. Due to the absence of broad and deep financial markets, 
government debt is often held by a relatively small number of financial institutions, which creates risks 
to financial sector stability. 
The different factors behind debt vulnerability in Latin America and the Caribbean are often interlinked 
and  mutually  reinforcing.  In  particular,  this  applies  to  low  savings  ratios.  The  relatively  low  national 
savings  ratios  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  are  largely  a  reflection  of  higher  public  sector 
deficits. Higher public savings are needed not only to reduce the vulnerabilities associated with high 
public  debt  positions,  but  also  to  fund  public  investment  and  to  create  reserves  for  emergency 
situations.  Indeed,  in  the  absence  of  natural  resources  and  a  limited  availability  of  the  usual 
mechanisms for increasing competitiveness, enhancing the public infrastructure is considered crucial 
for  economic  growth  in  this  region.  In  that  sense,  higher  public  savings  to  help  funding  increased 
public investment should be considered a necessary complement to a pegged exchange rate, which is 
also often the rule in this region. 
Against  this  background,  I  am  of  the  view  that  increased  fiscal  discipline  is  needed  to  reduce 
vulnerabilities  or, to put it  more positively,  in setting  conditions for stable economic growth in many 
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Like other central banks in this region, the Bank van de Nederlandsche Antillen plays an important role 
as advisor to the government, also in the field of fiscal policy. Against this background, too, I hold the 
view that the Bank(cid:146)s main assets are not, as many may think, its foreign reserve holdings, but rather 
its human capital. My main wish for the future of the Bank van de Nederlandse Antillen is, therefore, 
that it will be successful in maintaining its position as a centre of excellence in this part of the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands, to the benefit of the beauty of the islands of the Netherlands Antilles and of all its 
people. 
BIS Review 5/2003 
 5
