TT Mboweni: Empowerment and the South African economy 
Speech by Mr TT Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the City Press/ Peoples 
Bank Success Club Forum, Johannesburg, 6 August 2003. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen. Thank you for inviting me to speak at this forum. I am told that this platform 
often provides for robust debate and I am always pleased to participate in such debates. My remarks 
today will, however, probably not add as much fuel to the fire as you might have hoped. Nevertheless I 
am  pleased  to  be  here  this  evening  to  make  a  contribution  to  what  should  be  an  ongoing  general 
discussion about the economy of South Africa.  
Domestic output and expenditure 
2. 
South  Africa's  growth  performance  of  3  per  cent  in  2002  was  relatively  sound  given  the  continued 
underlying weaknesses in the international economy. However, the quarterly GDP growth rate which 
decreased to 1,5 per cent in the first quarter of this year from 2,4 per cent in the fourth quarter of last 
year confirmed a slowdown in domestic economic activity. Although manufacturing production grew by 
2,7 per cent between the first quarter of 2002 and the first quarter of 2003, on a quarter-on-quarter 
basis it fell at an annualised rate of 0,3 per cent in the first quarter of 2003. Other indicators also point 
to a slight slowdown in activity in certain sectors. 
But there are indications that domestic final demand in both the government and consumer sectors 
remains fairly robust. A promising aspect of this is the increase in domestic capital formation in recent 
quarters.  Gross  fixed  capital  formation  increased  by  8,3  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2003,  after 
reaching  11,6  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2002.  Indications  are  that  because  the  capital 
expenditure  of  all  spheres  of  government  is  improving,  there  is  greater  capacity  for  delivery,  and 
much-needed infrastructural expenditure is now also taking place.  
On the whole, both domestic and global improvements in growth seem to be on the horizon.  
Inflation developments 
3. 
The  depreciation  of  the  rand  during  the  last  quarter  of  2001  resulted  in  a  surge  in  inflation  which 
prevented the Bank from realising the inflation target for 2002. Fortunately CPIX inflation peaked in 
November last year at 11,3 per cent and there has been a significant decline ever since, with the latest 
rate for June down to 6,4 per cent. Although still above the target range of 3 to 6 per cent, the Bank's 
forecasts indicate that inflation should be within the range in the third quarter of this year and remain 
comfortably within the band in 2004. 
There are a number of factors that support the outlook for a sustained reduction in inflation. Firstly, the 
quarter-on-quarter  figures,  which  give  a  better  indication  of  short-term  trends,  show  that  on  an 
annualised basis CPIX decelerated from 12 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2002 to 2 per cent in the 
second quarter of 2003. What was particularly significant was that the main driver of inflation in 2002, 
food price inflation, fell steeply from an annualised rate of 17,7 per cent to only 1 per cent over the 
same period. 
Secondly, producer price inflation, which tends to lead consumer price inflation, has fallen from a peak 
of  15,4  per  cent  in  August  2002,  to  2,3  per  cent.  The  imported  component  of  the  PPI  in  June  was 
down to minus 3,4 per cent, and the domestic component was down to 4,4 per cent.  
Thirdly,  weak  global  growth  and  inflation  developments  mean  that  South  Africa  remains  in  a  low 
inflation  international  environment,  which  will  help  to  contain  inflation  domestically.  Finally,  the 
improved inflation outlook is supported by other factors such as the relatively low levels of capacity 
utilisation, a responsible fiscal policy, lower money supply growth and the continued recovery of the 
   1/5 
rand.  The  improvement  in  the  inflation  outlook  enabled  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  reduce 
interest rates by 150 basis points at its last meeting in June. 
The major threat seen to the inflation target is the trend in unit labour cost, which plays an important 
role in the inflation process in South Africa. During 2002, wage settlements trended higher as inflation 
rose.  According  to  the  Survey  of  Average  Monthly  Earnings  by  Statistics  South  Africa,  nominal 
remuneration  per  worker  increased  by  10,6  per  cent  in  2002  and  by  10,0  per  cent  in  the  year  to 
February 2003. The slowdown in economy-wide productivity growth and rising nominal wage growth 
resulted  in  non-agricultural  unit  labour  cost  accelerating  from  a  year-to-year  rate  of  4,1  per  cent  in 
2001 to 7,0 per cent in 2002.  
Our concern is that wage settlements tend to be backward-looking, particularly in the case of multi-
year agreements. Wage increases that are consistently above the actual inflation rate constrain the 
downward  movement  of  inflation  and  interest  rates.  The  Bank  would  like  to  see  wages  and  prices 
being set in a forward-looking manner, on the basis of the inflation rate that is expected to prevail over 
the period for which wages are being set. This will not only ensure a faster decline in inflation, but also 
a lower cost in terms of output and employment. 
On balance, the inflation outlook is indeed promising.  
Balance of payments  
4. 
The current slowdown observed in the manufacturing sector is not simply a question of a recovering 
exchange rate, but more significantly the weak state of global demand. South African exporters will 
have  to  focus  even  more  on  improving  competitiveness  through  productivity  enhancements.  The 
slowdown in exports, combined with a relatively buoyant import demand due to increased investment 
expenditure, resulted in a current account deficit of R6,8 billion (approximately 0,6 per cent of GDP) in 
the first quarter of 2003. This followed a surplus of R4,3 billion in the fourth quarter of 2002. The most 
recent trade figures, however, suggest that although the current account deficit is likely to persist in 
the second quarter, it is not a major cause for concern.  
The financial account also recorded a deficit of R4,2 billion in the first quarter which reflected in part 
activities of non-residents in the share  and  bond markets. During the first quarter of this  year, non-
residents'  total  net  sales  of  shares  and  bonds  amounted  to  R7,6  billion.  In  the  second  quarter 
however, non-residents were net purchasers of shares and bonds amounting to R10.9 billion.  
Reserves management  
5. 
The South African Reserve Bank is responsible for managing the country's foreign reserves outside of 
the  reserves  held  by  private  sector  banks. The  role  of  foreign  reserves  held  by  a  central  bank  has 
changed  considerably  since  the  early  1970s.  Under  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange 
rates,  which  was  in  place  until  the  early  1970s,  countries  had  to  accumulate  reserves  in  order  to 
maintain fixed exchange rates. Later on, many countries, including South Africa, adopted floating or 
flexible  exchange  rate  regimes  where  reserves  were  used  to  smooth  temporary  fluctuations  in  the 
exchange rate. 
With  the  adoption  of  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework  in  2001,  South  Africa  has 
abandoned the almost archaic practice of aggressive intervention in the foreign exchange market with 
the purpose of influencing the level of the rand's exchange rate. In addition, the Bank and the National 
Treasury made a concerted effort to eliminate the negative net open foreign currency position (NOFP) 
from a high of –$23,2 billion in September 1998. This goal was achieved in May 2003 and opened the 
way towards steadily increasing the Bank's reserves. At the same time, the Bank also streamlined its 
reserve management structures and processes.  
As at 30 June 2003, the gross foreign exchange reserves of the Bank amounted to US$7,7 billion. Of 
this, US$6,5 billion consisted of foreign exchange, mainly US dollar, and US$1,2 billion consisted of 
gold.  The  Bank's  borrowed  reserves  (foreign  loans)  amounted  to  US$2,9  billion.  The  net  reserves 
therefore  amounted  to  US$4,8  billion.  Given  the  level  of  reserves  and  an  oversold  forward  foreign 
exchange book to the amount of US$3,7 billion as at 30 June 2003, the positive NOFP of the Bank 
amounted to US$1,1 billion, with the negative position having been expunged during May 2003.  
In  managing  its  reserves,  the  Bank  strives  to  balance  three  main  objectives.  The  most  important 
objective is to preserve the capital value of the reserves. The level of the Bank's reserves is closely 
   2/5 
monitored by the international financial community and contributes to South Africa's overall rating as a 
stable and safe investment destination. Therefore, any erosion of the capital value of reserves will not 
only  dent  the  general  perception  of  the  Bank's  ability  to  manage  its  reserves,  but  will  also  harm 
perceptions  about  South  Africa  as  a  country.  The  second  objective  is  to  have  adequate  liquidity  to 
enable  the  Bank  to  meet  its  day-to-day  foreign  exchange  commitments  without  incurring  significant 
penalties arising from liquidating investments. The Bank needs foreign exchange on a daily basis for 
its own transactions and commitments to its correspondent banks, to provide to its clients, such as the 
National  Treasury,  and  to  manage  liquidity  within  the  domestic  money  market  as  part  of  its 
implementation of monetary policy. The third objective is to earn a market related return on the Bank's 
gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  within  a  framework  of  acceptable  risks.  Although  the  main 
objective of a central bank is not to maximise profits, it should still generate sufficient income to cover 
its operational costs and to facilitate the implementation monetary policy. 
In order to balance the Bank's objectives of having adequate  liquidity for its  daily foreign  exchange 
commitments  and  earning  an  acceptable  return  on  the  investment  of  its  reserves,  the  foreign 
exchange part of the reserves was divided into two broad tranches, namely a liquidity tranche and an 
investment  tranche.  The  main  purpose  of  having  a  liquidity  tranche  is  to  have  sufficient  foreign 
exchange available for the Bank's daily foreign exchange transactions. The size of the liquidity tranche 
has  to  be  sufficient  to  provide  for  all  operational  requirements  of  the  Bank,  and  also  to  enable  the 
financing of unpredictable cash flows. 
The stable portion of the Bank's reserves over time, that is the portion that is not required for day-to-
day  cash  needs,  was  allocated  to  the  investment  tranche  of  the  reserves.  This  tranche  is  used  to 
increase  the  return  on  the  Bank's  reserves.  A  portion  of  the  investment  tranche  is  managed  by  a 
number of external fund managers and another portion is managed internally. Investments are subject 
to conservative investment guidelines in order to limit fund managers' risk exposures, and the results 
are measured against pre-defined benchmarks at regular intervals.  
A risk-management section within the Financial Markets Department continuously monitors the returns 
and risk exposures of both the internally and externally managed portfolios and promptly follows up 
any negative deviations.  
Exchange rate developments 
6. 
The behaviour of the rand continues to perplex many observers. Following the 26 per cent recovery of 
the nominal effective exchange rate during 2002 as a whole, the rand continued on its recovery path, 
albeit characterised by periodic volatility. In recent weeks the rand has remained relatively stable, and 
as of this morning the trade-weighted appreciation of the rand since the beginning of the  year  was 
13,3 per cent. 
The  behaviour  of  the  rand  has  continued  to  confound  many  pessimists  who  argue  that  there  is 
insufficient evidence which supports the recent value of the rand. The depreciation of the rand in 2001 
was  clearly  overdone.  Prior  to  that,  there  was  not  a  general  view  that  the  rand  was  overvalued.  If 
anything, the current fundamentals are now in better shape than they were at that time, so it should 
not be a surprise that the rand is making such a significant recovery.  
Although there can be no doubt that interest rate differentials have played a role in the recent recovery 
of the rand, even market analysts are sharply divided as to the extent of this effect. Although many 
argue  that  if  interest  rates  come  down  lower  in  South  Africa,  the  rand  will  retrace  its  value  to 
significantly  lower  levels,  others  point  to  the  fundamentals,  and  in  particular  commodity  price 
developments, and argue that the rand is around 'fair value' levels. It is perhaps significant that even 
though  the  recent  decline  in  the  repo  rate  exceeded  market  expectations,  the  rand  in  fact 
strengthened following the announcement of the rate cut. 
The focus of the South African Reserve Bank, however, is on the inflation target. The Bank does not 
have a view on the appropriate value of the rand. Obviously from an inflation perspective, a stronger 
rand is preferable than a weaker one, as we have emphasised on numerous occasions.  
Progress with employment equity at the Bank 
7. 
Turning to empowerment and equity issues, the Bill  of Rights, as detailed in the Constitution of the 
Republic of South Africa, has served as an incentive for transformation in all aspects of South African 
   3/5 
society. And the Bank has been sensitive to developments concerning transformation issues since the 
advent of democracy in 1994. 
By the time the Employment Equity Act was promulgated in 1998, the Bank had already begun to plan 
the interventions necessary to achieve employment equity. The Reserve Bank as an employer of more 
than 300 people is required to comply with the requirements of the Employment Equity Act, (No. 55 of 
1998). The Bank has prepared its employment equity plan.  
The  objectives  of  the  employment  equity  plan  reflect  a  balance  in  the  Bank's  approach  between 
achieving compliance with the requirements of the Act and achieving enhanced performance through 
embracing  the  spirit  of  equity.  According  to  the  plan  by  2005  the  Bank  intends  to  have  at  least  50 
percent black employees and 33 percent female in all categories. The Bank has already attained an 
overall  representation  of  50  percent  black  in  its  workforce  and  has  exceeded  its  target  for  female 
representation.  
A special unit, the Vulindlela Unit, was formed in 2000 to oversee the employment equity process. At 
this time there were only three black people in general management. Today the number stands at 41 - 
this represents a 25 percent increase in the number of blacks in general management in less than five 
years. The Bank has also made serious strides in the employment of female managers in the past five 
years.  When  the  process  of  transformation  was  started  in  1998,  there  were  only  two  females  in 
general management - now there are 19  women in general management constituting 30 percent of 
total managers.  
The Bank has developed more than twenty new staff policies over the last three years to ensure the 
Bank keeps abreast with the pace of transformation. This refers not only to transformation in terms of 
race and gender, but also to the transformation of processes and systems and the way in which issues 
are  approached  in  the  Bank.  Existing  policies  have  also  been  extensively  audited  to  rid  them  of 
discrimination. 
But the journey has only just begun. There are many miles ahead and we cannot afford to rest.  
through 
is  ongoing.  You  can  register  your  company  online 
The South African Reserve Bank's procurement approach 
8. 
The Bank is likewise committed to furthering the necessary objective of affirmative procurement and 
has  made  significant  strides  in  affording  previously  disadvantaged  individuals  (PDIs)  greater 
opportunities for involvement in contract work for the Bank. The Bank applies a targeted procurement 
policy which is effected through a supplier database which is maintained on the Bank's website. All 
interested companies were invited in the year 2000 to register on the database and this registration 
process 
the  Bank's  website 
www.reservebank.co.za. Registration allows the Bank to pre-qualify companies before a request for a 
quotation (RFQ), a request for a proposal (RFP) or a tendering process is initiated. The Procurement 
Committee,  which  is  the  custodian  of  the  Procurement  Policy,  is  mandated  to  ensure  that  every 
purchase, where applicable, takes into account the imperative of affirmative procurement. 
In  pre-qualifying  suppliers,  the  Bank  has  certain  selection  criteria,  which  seek  to  highlight  the 
composition of the companies' Board of Directors, shareholders and the management structures. In 
particular,  the  focus  is  on  the  involvement  of  previously  disadvantaged  individuals,  notably  women, 
black people, and people with disabilities. Price, ability to deliver and quality of service, are also major 
components of our adjudication and selection processes. Large companies that operate in the broad 
business  sector  but  do  not  have  an  adequate  black  empowerment  component,  are  encouraged  to 
form joint ventures with emerging black companies in order to comply with the Bank's requirements. 
One  of  the  Bank's  recent  experiences  in  the  procurement  process  has  been  the  newly  completed 
extensions to its head office building. This project has amounted to R250m. Among the criteria taken 
into  account  for  the  selection  of  the  contractors  were  financial  considerations;  the  companies' 
transformation  strategy  and  commitment  to  transformation;  capability  and  composition  of  the 
organisation and supervisory staff. I am happy to announce that the project was completed timeously 
and the outcome is a state-of-the-art office block and conference centre.  
The banking sector and transformation 
9. 
The broader transformation issues affecting South Africa have touched the financial sector too. The 
banking sector started a process towards developing a Transformation Charter on 20 August 2002 at 
   4/5 
the  Nedlac  Financial  Sector  Summit.  Discussions  have  been  extended  to  cover  the  entire  financial 
sector  and  organisations  currently  involved  include  the  banks,  life  officers,  short-term  insurers, 
retirement  fund  managers,  the  securities  exchange,  the  unit  trust  funds,  the  fund  managers  and 
representatives of black interests in the sector. 
The  broad  principles  for  transformation  have  been  agreed  on,  and  targets  are  currently  being 
considered  for  various  categories  of  transformation.  These  include  ownership  transfer,  employment 
equity,  procurement,  access  to  financial  services,  low-income  housing  finance,  SME  finance, 
agricultural finance and infrastructure finance.  
Of critical importance for the South African Reserve Bank is that the Charter should assist rather than 
hamper  the  stability  of  South  Africa's  banking  and  financial  sector  which  is  one  of  the  important 
responsibilities of the Reserve Bank. The Bank Supervision Department at the Bank uses a risk-based 
approach  to  supervision  and  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Transformation  Charter  should  contribute  to 
these risk management principles. 
The critical challenges for black business in the financial sector are to ensure equitable empowerment 
within  the  context  of  a  stable  and  growing  sector,  that  maintains  and  solidifies  its  international 
standing. A critical category within this is that of ownership transfer. This is currently being considered 
very carefully and will encompass both direct and indirect ownership of financial institutions by black 
people.  
Another issue in the transformation arena is the involvement of black auditing firms in the auditing of 
banks. Because of the importance of banks in the financial system, several requirements are placed 
on audit firms before they may engage in the audit of a bank. These requirements are necessary and 
onerous  because  of  the  highly  specialised  nature  of  banking  activities  and  include  issues  such  as 
experience and resources, and these are seen to be preventing black audit firms from participating in 
the  audits  of  banks.  The  Bank  Supervision  Department  and  the  Financial  Services  Board  have 
embarked on a project to investigate possible options on how to engage smaller black audit firms in 
the  audits  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Options  being  considered  include  the  sub-
contracting  of  parts  of  an  audit  to  smaller  empowerment  firms  so  that  they  are  able  to  gain  the 
appropriate experience required to audit banks and financial institutions. The South African Reserve 
Bank  is  leading  by  example  in  this  regard.  Our  Bank  is  now  audited  by  PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 
Deloitte and Touche and SizweNtsaluba VSP Inc, the latter being a black auditing firm.  
Conclusion 
10. 
Indeed  it  has  been  my  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  forum.  I  hope  I  have  shed  some  light  on  the 
issues that are currently occupying the efforts of the South African Reserve Bank. It is correct to say 
that ultimately the functions of the Reserve Bank are to make a contribution towards an environment 
which would see the growth and prospering of a black business class; the improvement in economic 
and social conditions of the majority of our people; and the maintenance of macro-economic stability 
for growth and employment creation.  
Thank you. 
   5/5 
