Jaime Caruana: The European monetary policy - main challenges in the current 
environment 
Speech  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  España  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  “Euro  Conference”  organised  by  Nomura  International, 
Tokyo, 13 November 2003. 
 Let me first thank the organisers of this Euro Conference for their invitation to participate in this forum. 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to discuss with this distinguished audience the current situation 
and  prospects  of  the  euro  area  and  the  main  challenges  that  the  ECB  and  other  monetary 
policymakers face in the present international environment.  
In the last three years the world economy has undergone a period of low growth and some turbulence 
on financial and foreign exchange markets. The prevailing geopolitical uncertainty and the heavy stock 
market  corrections  -  linked  to  reassessments  of  corporate  profitability  in  the  ICT  sector  and  to  the 
accounting scandals - have curtailed economic activity worldwide in a significant manner. Against this 
background, inflation rates stabilised at relatively low levels and some discussion about the risks of 
deflation emerged in the United States, while the Japanese economy remained stagnant.  
Most recent data would suggest that some economies are already recovering and others are at the 
end  of  the  tunnel.  In  particular,  the  US  economy  is  growing  at  a  high  rate,  substantially  above 
potential, although a negative output gap appears to remain in place. Moreover, economic activity in 
many  emerging  market  countries  -  singularly  China  -  is  expanding  fast  and  economic  conditions  in 
Japan  have  improved  significantly.  In  the  euro  area,  activity  was  flat  in  the  first  half  of  2003  but  a 
gradual  recovery  might  already  be  under  way  as  a  consequence  of  the  more  favourable  external 
scenario, the increase in the market valuations of private securities and the strengthening of agents’ 
confidence as reflected in survey indicators. Therefore, although the lack of harder data in Europe and 
other areas attesting to this new scenario obliges us to remain cautious, it is now very likely that world 
growth and trade will expand significantly next year. 
I think it is worth emphasising that while the phase of weak economic activity has spread worldwide, 
the intensity of the slowdown has been relatively moderate in most cases. It is fair to acknowledge that 
this  is,  at  least  to  some  extent,  attributable  to  economic  policies.  In  fact,  in  the  last  few  years  the 
expansionary stance of monetary and budgetary policies has strongly supported demand across the 
globe. I believe it is no exaggeration to say that this response might have been partially inspired by the 
recent Japanese experience, which has brought the question of deflation prevention to the core of the 
economic debate. In my view, this debate about deflation was over dramatize in some cases. 
At the same time, we should be mindful that the relative mildness of the slowdown coupled with strong 
policy impulses have not been conducive to the correction of the macroeconomic imbalances that built 
up  during  the  expansionary  phase.  More  specifically,  while  instrumental  in  keeping  the  economy 
running,  the  low-interest-rate-high-public-deficit  policy  of  the  US  authorities,  set  against  intense 
productivity growth in the economy, might arguably also have contributed to the expansion of private-
sector indebtedness (particularly of households), to the inflation of housing prices and to the build-up 
of  substantial  fiscal  and  current-account  deficits.  I  do  not  believe  that  these  imbalances  are  an 
immediate threat for the ongoing world recovery. But, together with the lack of flexibility of exchange 
rate regimes in some dynamic emerging markets, they pose risks for the orderly evolution of the global 
foreign exchange markets. Financial imbalances, in the form of high private-sector debt or excessive 
asset valuations, are also present in other economies around the world and they represent an ongoing 
challenge for their monetary authorities. 
Against this background of low inflation rates, low growth, some turbulence on financial markets and 
the interaction of financial imbalances and the real economy, what is the role of the monetary policy?. I 
would like to devote the next part of this address to some reflections on the role of monetary policy in 
promoting macroeconomic stability and the relevance of financial stability in that respect. I shall then 
try to draw some lessons for the proper design of monetary policy and look at how the Eurosystem’s 
strategy  -  as  recently  reviewed  -  copes  with  what  I  believe  are  basic  principles  for  the  definition  of 
monetary  policy  frameworks.  I  shall  also  attempt  to  cover  some  of  the  main  policy  challenges  we 
currently face in the euro area. Finally I will say a few words about a different topic, financial stability 
policy and the status of the New Capital Accord. 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 1
 Possibly, one of the most relevant contributions of macroeconomic theory to the evaluation of public 
policy over the last few decades has been the development of a suitable dynamic framework which 
economists call the intertemporal utility approach. If, as is to be hoped, individuals do live for a number 
of years, their utility is not mainly related to consumption or income in a particular period but to the 
amount and temporal distribution of their life-time resources available for consumption. In that setting, 
social  welfare  is  positively  related  to  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  as  this  simply  implies  a 
larger size for agents’ opportunity set. Moreover, as agents are normally averse to large fluctuations in 
consumption,  aggregate  welfare  would  also  be  positively  affected  by  a  stable  course  of  economic 
activity.  
In such a framework, the old and long-standing debate initiated in the 1930s on the effectiveness of 
fiscal or monetary policy in affecting output loses much of its relevance, as higher output over a short-
term horizon does not guarantee welfare gains. Rather, the priority appears to be the analysis of the 
ability of different macroeconomic policy tools and approaches to enlarge the potential output of the 
economy and to mitigate the fluctuations of business cycles.  
In  terms  of achieving  higher sustainable  growth, monetary  policy  has  a  clear role  to  play. This  is a 
consequence of accepting two hypotheses for which there is ample theoretical and empirical support 
and about which there is broad consensus among economists, a rare event in the profession. The first 
is that inflation - even if moderate - prompts an inefficient allocation of resources, thereby damaging 
the economy’s growth potential. The second is that inflation is essentially a monetary phenomenon in 
the long run. The corollary of these two results is straightforward. Monetary policy can contribute to 
maximising agents’ welfare by delivering price stability over the medium term. It remains, however, to 
be seen whether it can also effectively achieve a lesser variability of real economic activity. 
Arguably, in principle, price and output stability might not be contradictory targets as they could both 
be pursued in parallel. Indeed, inflation - insofar as it is linked to excessive demand pressure in goods 
markets - and GDP deviations from trend are related variables to some extent, at least in the short 
term. The problem is that this relationship is far from stable and, more importantly, tends to disappear 
when the economy is subject to supply shocks, as they typically push prices and output in opposite 
directions. Therefore, while price stability would normally favour smaller output fluctuations, they are 
not equivalent targets. This makes it necessary to set clear priorities since, as is well known, a single 
instrument is not suitable for achieving two different objectives.  
The case for monetary policy as a powerful device to address excessive GDP variability is, however, 
much weaker than that of targeting price stability. In principle, there is little doubt that monetary policy 
actions do directly affect output in the short run, as they influence variables - mainly interest rates - 
which  are  among  the  main  determinants  of  GDP  components,  such  as  private  consumption  and 
investment. But it is well known that the effects of changes in policy-controlled interest rates on real 
economic  variables  and  prices  are  typically  subject  to  long  (sometimes  two  years  or  more)  and 
variable  lags.  This  is  always  an  inherent  difficulty  for  the  design  of  monetary  policy  even  if  its 
objectives  are  set  over  the  medium  term.  But  it  becomes  a  nearly  insurmountable  impediment  to 
achieving  targets,  such  as  output  stabilisation,  that  are  defined  over  shorter-term  horizons.  In  fact, 
many countries have seen in the past how an attempt by the central bank to mitigate cyclical output 
decelerations proved ineffective in the short run and destabilising over the medium term.  
Clearly,  then,  any  sensible  cost-benefit  analysis  would  assign  monetary  policy  a  primary  goal  of 
achieving  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  This  of  course  does  not  amount  to  neglecting  the 
relevance  of  business-cycle-related  macroeconomic  variables  in  monetary  policy  design.  Indeed, 
output is, normally, a good leading indicator of price changes. Moreover, all components of aggregate 
demand play a key role in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy impulses to prices. That 
makes careful scrutiny of real economic conditions necessary in order to assess how adequate the 
monetary policy stance is. 
In  the  same vein,  price stability  targets  are normally  defined by  central  banks with  some degree  of 
flexibility  as  they  only  become  binding  in  the  medium  term.  Therefore,  monetary  authorities  do 
sometimes have some limited leeway to define the appropriate policy and, in particular, to regulate the 
speed of the adjustments required to set the controlled variables at the desired levels. It is perfectly 
logical that some sort of evaluation of the effects of different policy strategies on output fluctuations 
might at times be an important consideration when deciding on how to make the best possible use of 
the available room for manoeuvre.  
2 
 BIS Review 50/2003
Evidently, the speed of the adjustments becomes critical when economies face deflationary risks. The 
case  of  Japan  in  the  last  decade  provides  an  insightful  example  on  how  difficult  it  might  be  for  an 
economy to escape from a deflationary situation once this is the case. As soon as nominal interest 
rates  approach  their  zero  lower  bound,  monetary  policy  can  do  little  to  convince  agents  to  spend 
money  if  real  interest  rates  are  still  positive  and  there  is  no  confidence  as  to  the  prospects  of  the 
economy. Even non-orthodox monetary actions such as massive injections of liquidity in the domestic 
markets  or  non-sterilised  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  often  provide  only  temporary 
relief. 
Clearly, then, prevention is far easier than cure. And prevention obviously demands structural reform 
and sound fiscal policies; but it also requires monetary policy to react promptly and decisively. Given 
the difficult reversibility of deflationary spirals and their disproportionately high costs in terms of growth 
and welfare, it is logical that central banks set greater store by that scenario when deciding on interest 
rates.  
Unfortunately, experience suggests that the usual analytical frameworks used by central banks when 
assessing  macroeconomic  conditions  and  prospects  are  not  always  sufficiently  powerful  to  foresee 
low-probability extreme events such as full-blown deflations. With the benefit of hindsight, however, it 
is in most cases true that scenarios of persistently negative output and price growth have often been 
preceded by disorderly developments in asset markets or the financial sector as a whole. This brings 
me to the difficult issue of ascertaining what is the role of possible financial imbalances in monetary 
policymaking. 
I  think  there  is  broad  agreement  that  fragilities  in  the  financial  sector  such  as  asset  price 
misalignments, or balance sheet difficulties of economic agents, particularly financial intermediaries, 
do have a bearing on economic performance. Conversely, the macroeconomic outlook, to the extent it 
affects the risks faced by intermediaries and asset prices, obviously exerts an influence on the stability 
of the financial sector. Therefore, financial stability considerations may and must legitimately form part 
of the set of indicators the central bank uses for decision-making. Moreover, the synergies between 
macro  and  financial  stability  explain  the  involvement  of  most  central  banks  -  albeit  with  different 
specific areas of responsibility - in safeguarding the soundness of the financial system. 
It can however be argued that, in practice, detecting unsustainable financial developments, such 
as asset market bubbles or excessive private-sector indebtedness, is not normally an easy task and 
that, therefore, anticipating a financial crisis is a complex matter. I tend to share the position of those 
arguing that even if central banks were able to identify serious risks of financial distress, there is a lot 
of  uncertainty  as  to  how  financial  imbalances would  react  to  policy  changes,  and  pure  interest  rate 
movements may be of limited effectiveness in correcting such risks. Furthermore, this strategy may 
prove difficult to communicate. 
I would not however subscribe to the ideas of those who conclude from the above arguments that a 
benign-neglect attitude would be the most appropriate or even the only feasible approach by central 
banks.  In  fact,  the  latest  evidence  shows  that  while  crises  are  difficult  to  predict,  a  combination  of 
financial  and  real  developments  -  such  as  excessive  credit,  liquidity  or  investment  growth  or  sharp 
increases  in  asset  prices  -  may  provide  informative  signals  in  that  regard.  In  addition,  it  cannot  be 
denied that while monetary policy can hardly stop a speculative wave once it has gathered sufficient 
momentum, a timely and consistent monetary action might help in countering or, at least, limiting the 
strength of episodes of incipiently excessive debt accumulation or asset price overvaluations.  
This is not, however, as easy as it may sound. First, because empirical evidence on the usefulness of 
asset  prices  in  predicting  future  price  and  output  developments  is  not  conclusive.  And  second, 
because it should be recognised that financial stability considerations can hardly be incorporated into 
standard models and forecasting procedures. Indeed, it would be useless, if not unwise, to attempt to 
design a perfect mapping between a financial stability indicator and the macroeconomic projections on 
which policy decisions are normally based. But central banks could and should monitor asset prices 
and the financial position of all relevant economic agents insofar as such developments may, in very 
specific circumstances, provide useful insight into the risks that surround the macroeconomic outlook 
and, therefore, the prospects for price stability. By doing so, authorities can effectively contribute to 
reducing the risk of the economy facing deep and protracted recessions and, therefore, to increasing 
social welfare. 
 BIS Review 50/2003 
 3
These  reflections  on  the  role  of  output  fluctuations,  deflationary  risks  and  financial  imbalances  in 
monetary policymaking would suggest, in my view, that the evaluation of central bank policy should 
take into account that there might always be several possible - yet not socially equivalent - strategies 
that could deliver stable consumer prices over the medium term. Therefore, although central banks’ 
performance in terms of price stability should always be the overriding criterion when assessing their 
policy approach, the means and procedures employed to achieve the main objective are not irrelevant. 
In particular, the monetary policy strategy of the central bank may help by enhancing both its ability to 
deliver stable prices and the positive welfare effects of its actions. Let me turn now to describing these 
elements. 
First,  the  strategy  should  incorporate  a  clear  specification  of  objectives  and  sufficient  means  to 
achieve  them.  Central  banks  should  not  only  be  given  a  mandate  fully  compatible  with  social 
preferences, but also the required instruments to fulfil that mandate. At the same time, central banks 
should  specify  their  targets  clearly  within  an  internally  consistent  monetary  policy  strategy  and 
establish an effective operational framework permitting them to influence with sufficient precision the 
price formation mechanisms of the economy.  
In  particular,  the  monetary  policy  strategy  should  provide  agents  with  sufficient  information  on  the 
goals that the central bank is seeking to achieve and the way the monetary authority makes use of the 
relevant information available when taking policy decisions. By way of example, a clearly established 
policy objective that is perceived as consistent with a low probability of deflation would indeed reduce 
the likelihood of such an adverse scenario. 
But the need to make use consistently of a clearly defined policy strategy does not mean adopting 
excessively  rigid  targets  and  analytical  frameworks.  Indeed,  just  as  important  as  consistency  is  the 
credibility of the policy set-up and, in particular, the perception of compatibility between the targets, the 
decisions and the strategy of the central bank. If the monetary authority does not succeed in delivering 
such credibility, agents might fail to adapt their expectations about relevant variables - such as future 
consumer  prices  -  in  line  with  the  targets  of  central  banks.  This  would  be  conducive  to  inefficient 
private-sector  decisions  that  would  reduce  the  overall  benefits  of  the  policy  pursued  by  monetary 
authorities.  
Given the unstable nature of most economic relationships and the limited ability of central banks to 
fine-tune movements in prices and output, especially in the short run, credibility normally requires the 
monetary policy strategy to incorporate a reasonable degree of flexibility in the definition of targets and 
also  in  the  weights  attached  to  different  economic  indicators  when  assessing  the  monetary  policy 
stance  in  different  circumstances.  As  I  have  argued  before,  this  is  particularly  relevant  when 
deflationary risks become apparent or there are significant symptoms of financial instability.  
In the day-to-day management of monetary policy it is not often easy to combine the requirements of 
clarity and consistency on one side, and flexibility on the other. There is always a risk that, by avoiding 
an  excessive  codification  of  targets  and  intermediate  references,  agents  might  perceive  an 
exaggerated  degree  of  discretion  in  the  central  bank’s  policy.  The  only  good  way  I  can  think  of  for 
overcoming that risk is to adopt an appropriate communication policy.  
It is certainly in the interest of central banks to ensure that the public at large is fully aware not only of 
policy decisions, but also of the analysis supporting them, within the strategic framework of monetary 
policy. This is probably the most efficient means of ensuring that monetary policy actions are properly 
understood and, therefore, incorporated by agents into their consumption and investment plans, in a 
manner  compatible  with  the  central  bank’s  intentions.  From  that  standpoint,  transparency  is  much 
more than a logical counterpart of the institutional independence of central banks, as it helps to make 
them  accountable  to  the  public  opinion.  This  is  indeed  a  prerequisite  for  the  smooth  and  effective 
functioning of monetary policy.  
After  reviewing  what  I  consider  important  principles  for  the  design  of  an  adequate  monetary  policy 
strategy, we can try to assess the framework followed by the ECB. I think that the euro-area monetary 
policy  complies  fully  with  the  principle  of  clarity  of  objectives  and  appropriateness  of  the  means  to 
pursue them. This is mainly the consequence of the mandate established in Article 105.1 of the Treaty 
of  the  European  Union:  “The  primary objective  of  the  Eurosystem -  the  original  wording,  of  course, 
refers to the ESCB - shall be to maintain price stability”.  
In accordance with that mandate, the Governing Council, feeling that further clarification of the goals of 
monetary  policy  was  required,  decided  to  announce  publicly  its  own  definition  of  price  stability. 
Specifically, this concept was defined in 1998 as an annual increase below 2% of a harmonised index 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2003
of  consumer  prices  for  the  whole  euro  area.  It  also  added,  in  line  with  the  conceptual  arguments  I 
expressed before, that price stability, thus defined, should be seen as an objective to be maintained in 
the medium term. In the review that took place earlier this year the Governing Council confirmed that 
definition and clarified that, in pursuing its primary objective, it will aim to maintain the inflation rate 
close to 2%. This clarification is mainly meant to underlie our determination to keep a sufficient safety 
margin to guard against risks of deflation. 
The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  also  incorporates  a  well-defined  arrangement  for  the 
assessment  of  the  prospects  for  price  stability  using  two  types  of  analysis.  It  contains,  first,  a 
comprehensive monitoring of all economic and financial conditions that are relevant for assessing the 
likely course of the relevant variables over the short and medium term. In addition, monetary analysis 
is conducted to evaluate longer-term trends of inflation. A cross-consistency exercise of both types of 
analysis  is  also  conducted  to  arrive  at  a  unified  judgement.  This  framework  is  consistently  used  in 
policy  deliberations  and  public  statements,  as  well  as  in  the  reviews  of  the  euro  area  economy 
regularly published by the ECB.  
Continuing with this brief - and necessarily incomplete review - of the single monetary policy, I turn 
now to the capacity of the ECB policy framework to permit a flexible adaptation of monetary policy to 
changing economic conditions. In this regard, the first element I think might be worth mentioning is its 
medium-term  forward-looking  orientation.  This  element  allows  the  ECB  to  avoid  reacting  to  shocks 
affecting  price  developments  insofar  as  they  are  perceived  as  transitory  and,  more  importantly,  it 
permits,  as  I  mentioned  before,  the  regulation  of  the  adjustment  process  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
appropriate stance with the degree of gradualism or activism desired. 
But  flexibility  also  affects  the  way  the  ECB  evaluates  the  information  contained  in  the  different 
indicators  used  in  the  regular  monitoring  of  economic  and  financial  conditions.  Although  some 
indicators tend to be more informative than others, in making its monetary policy decisions the ECB 
draws on all available information without committing itself to following a particular tool, model or rigid 
analytical framework at any cost.  
Further, the explicit acknowledgment of the important role of monetary and financial variables and the 
regular monitoring of developments in the financial sector puts the ECB in a favourable position for 
identifying financial vulnerabilities that could affect the macroeconomic outlook at a relevant horizon. If 
that were the case, the current policy framework would naturally allow those elements to be flexibly 
incorporated into the relevant information set on which policy decisions are based. 
The experience accumulated so far has shown the usefulness of this pragmatic approach for coping 
with a range of shocks that have impacted the euro zone since the outset of Monetary Union. The euro 
area  economy  has  seen  a  substantial  deceleration  in  economic  activity  since  the  turn  of  the 
millennium. While GDP growth was 3.5 % in 2000, it will barely be around half a percentage point this 
year. Despite these unfavourable developments in economic activity, inflation held persistently above 
the 2% reference contained in the definition of price stability. These apparently conflicting signals did 
not prevent the Governing Council of the ECB from cutting rates by a total amount of almost 300 basis 
points over the same period.  
Indeed, a detailed analysis of developments shows that prices were subject to a series of successive 
transitory  shocks  -  mainly  on  oil,  agricultural  products  and  indirect  taxes  -  which,  in  a  context  of 
continuing wage moderation, did not entail future inflation developments that might make interest rate 
cuts unwarranted.  
By  making  pragmatic  use  of  the  flexibility  built  into  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  ECB  has 
succeeded in bringing interest rates to a very low level which, as of today, looks fairly appropriate to 
the current weak economic conditions. As I said before, these low interest rates and better financial 
conditions should help the economy to recover soon if the external environment continues improving 
as expected. Both net exports and domestic investment - after its unfavourable trend over the past few 
quarters - should progressively gather momentum. As a consequence, GDP should expand already in 
the second half of this year and gradually approach growth rates close to those of potential output in 
2004. As for prices, at this stage we expect inflation to moderate over the next few months, although 
changes  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  in  some  countries  may  limit  the  speed  of  the 
process.  
As  earlier  stated,  the  complexity  of  monetary  policymaking  and  the  impossibility  of  following  strict 
rules,  since  they  would  be  hardly  valid  in  all  relevant  circumstances,  mean  that  a  significant 
communication effort by the central bank is needed. The ECB has taken this task very seriously, going 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 5
beyond  the  requirements  of  the  EU  Treaty,  which  were  almost  exclusively  inspired  by  the  need  to 
ensure the accountability of the independent monetary authority of the euro zone.  
Indeed, the ECB releases annual, quarterly and even monthly reports explaining its evaluation of the 
current economic situation and the prospects for price stability. Moreover, the President of the ECB 
appears before the European Parliament’s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs each quarter 
and, jointly with the Vice-President, holds a press conference after the first Governing Council meeting 
each month.  
As  a  result  of  these  efforts,  I  think  that  most  commentators  now  tend  to  agree  that  the  ECB  has 
substantially  improved  its  communication  policy.  Indeed,  recent  analysis  shows  that  the  monetary 
policy  of  the  ECB  has  become  increasingly  predictable  to  market  participants,  despite  the  need  to 
adjust policy to a series of different shocks. More importantly, and communication has no doubt helped 
here,  the  ultimate  objective  of  monetary  policy  has  so  far  merited  a  high  degree  of  credibility,  as 
persistently reflected in most indicators of inflation expectations over the medium term. 
 These are indeed very demanding times for economic authorities and central banks around the world. 
In the case of Europe, the recent establishment of a monetary union has added new questions to the 
list of challenges policymakers must face. Let me close this part of the conference with a short review 
of these issues. 
As  you  well  know,  the  European  Monetary  Union  is  a  crucial  step  of  a  process  initiated  by  a  few 
countries some decades ago to establish closer mutual links not only in the economic sphere, but also 
in  the  political  and  social  realm.  In  fact,  in  the  next  few  months  this  process  will  take  a  fresh  and 
considerable  leap  forward  since  European  governments  are  currently  discussing  the  draft  of  a  new 
Constitutional  Treaty,  which  would  govern  important  aspects  of  the  lives  of  up  to  25  European 
countries in the near future. 
That  process  of  closer  relationships  among  EU  countries  has  been  accompanied  by  a  gradual 
convergence  of  their  economic  structures  and  cycles,  which  has  contributed  to  the  success  of  the 
EMU  project.  Nevertheless,  it  is  a  fact  that  some  potentially  relevant  macroeconomic  discrepancies 
among euro area countries still persist. European countries may well belong to the same region, with a 
similar cultural and political background, close economic links and comparable sectoral specialisation. 
But it is not surprising that they present some heterogeneity in their national economic structures in 
terms  of  the  institutional  features  of  their  markets  for  goods  and  productive  factors,  the  patterns  of 
behaviour  of  national  agents  or  their  exposure  to  idiosyncratic  shocks.  Evidently,  it  would  be 
unwarranted to aim to artificially promote a completely homogeneous euro zone. At the same time, 
attention  should  be  paid  to  those  discrepancies  that  reflect  imperfections  in  the  functioning  of  the 
national economies or the EMU as a whole.  
In  that  regard,  inflation  differentials  probably  merit  a  distinguished  place  on  the  list  of  potentially 
relevant  macroeconomic  disparities.  Although  the  dispersion  of  inflation  rates  across  countries  is 
relatively  moderate,  inflation  differentials  seem  to  be  more  persistent  than  in  other  long-established 
monetary unions. This makes the issue relevant, because it means that the effective monetary policy 
stance is not totally homogeneous across the euro zone. This poses a communication challenge for 
the ECB and affects the correct design of its policy objectives. Indeed, these considerations were to 
the fore in the strategy review published last May, as we clarified that the 2% reference for HICP was 
not only supposed to minimise the risks of deflation in the area but also to take into account inflation 
differentials across countries.  
Recent analysis shows that inflation divergences are to a significant extent the result of a number of 
nominal  and  real  rigidities  present  in  individual  countries.  Therefore,  structural  rigidities  not  only 
reduce  the  efficiency  and,  therefore,  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  but  they  also  introduce 
distortions that affect the effectiveness of the single monetary policy. It follows that properly designed 
economic  reforms  in  Member  States  are  in  the  interest  of  the  national  economies  and  the  smooth 
functioning of EMU. 
The Eurosystem is thus qualified to speak out to promote structural reform in the euro area. This is so 
not only because the issue is of considerable importance in the European economy, but also because 
both  the  ECB  and  the  National  Central  Banks  are  key  players  on  the  European  economic  stage, 
enjoying  a  position  of  political  independence  that  makes  their  comments  and  analysis  particularly 
influential. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2003
One issue that has recently taken on great relevance is the stability of the framework for multilateral 
surveillance and binding rules for domestic fiscal policies at the EU level. As you all probably know, 
the  notion  was  already  embedded  in  the  Treaty  of  the  European  Union  approved  in  1992,  which 
establishes for each Member States a budget deficit ceiling of 3% of GDP. These rules were further 
refined in the Stability and Growth Pact, agreed by Member States in 1997, which also introduced the 
idea  that,  in  order  not  to  breach  the  3%  limit,  the  underlying  budgets  should  be  balanced  in  the 
medium term.  
There  is  a  clear  economic  rationale  behind  these  rules.  As  the  economic  literature  shows,  fiscal 
discipline  contributes  forcefully  to  the  success  of  price-stability-oriented  monetary  policy  and  the 
optimality  of  the  prevailing  policy  mix.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  free-riding  behaviour 
among  those  who  might  feel  that,  in  a  monetary  union  with  no  domestic  currency  any  more,  the 
penalties of pursuing imbalanced policies become diluted in the area as a whole. 
Furthermore,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  inspired  by  the  belief,  which  I  fully  share,  that 
discretionary  fiscal  measures  should  be  cautiously  administered.  Given  the  relatively  sizable 
importance of built-in stabilisers in European budgets, the operation of these automatic instruments is, 
on most occasions, the best contribution budgetary policy can make to stabilise output fluctuations. By 
contrast, discretionary measures have proved many times to be destabilising and difficult to reverse. 
Ultimately, the experience in Europe in the last few decades shows that the more the authorities resort 
to discretionary measures, the fewer the possibilities they have to resort to budget stabilisation when 
needed in an economic slowdown.  
Therefore, in my view, European budgetary rules - which are one of the basic underpinnings of the 
monetary  union  -  offer  an  economically  sensible  combination  of  discipline  and  flexibility  which,  if 
properly  implemented,  ensures  an  appropriate  management  of  public  finances  at  all  phases  of  the 
economic cycle.  
Let me conclude this address by pointing out that the biggest challenge we will face, over the medium 
term,  is  that  posed  by  EU  enlargement.  As  you  know,  ten  new  countries  are  to  join  the  European 
Union in May 2004. Since, as we expect, they will at some point meet the conditions to become fully 
fledged members of the single currency area, the Eurosystem and other European institutions should 
be  prepared.  This  involves  a  wide  variety  of  aspects  including,  among  others,  the  composition  and 
functioning of the ECB governing bodies and the development of new analytical tools to assess a new 
economic reality such as an enlarged euro zone. In fact, new rules governing the voting modalities 
within the ECB’s Governing Council were adopted last March, while both the European Commission 
and the Eurosystem are making strong efforts to conduct and pursue analyses of those countries, their 
particular  structures  and  the  impact  on  the  functioning  of  the  Union.  Enlargement  will  surely  make 
some of the issues I have presented today become even more challenging. But I am convinced that it 
will ultimately contribute to bringing about a much stronger economic and political union for the benefit 
of all European citizens. 
I  have  presented  some  reflections  about  the  role  of  monetary  policy  against  a  background  of  low 
inflation and the presence of interactions between financial imbalances and the real economy. Let me 
conclude with a few remarks about the role of financial policy and the New Capital accord.  
Indeed,  the  way  monetary  stability  and  financial  stability  interact  with  each  other  is  a  particularly 
interesting  and  complex  topic,  and  the  impact  of  specific  measures  on  both  fields  is  uncertain.  As 
concerns  financial  policy,  the  regulators’  task  of  ensuring  the  long-term  soundness  of  the  financial 
system  entails  creating  the  right  incentives  for  market  participants.  Creating  the  right  incentives, 
consistent with good market practices and sound risk management, appears to be an important means 
of  promoting  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system  and,  therefore,  a  good  way  of 
sustaining both the stability and growth of the economy.  
I am convinced that when banking systems are adequately capitalised, risks correctly assessed within 
the appropriate time horizon and well-managed, and markets have sufficient meaningful information, 
the financial system becomes more stable, less procyclical, more resilient during periods of distress 
and therefore better able to promote sustainable growth. 
This is why so many central banks, regulatory agencies and commercial banks have devoted our best 
resources to ensuring the success of the New Capital Accord, the so-called Basel II, and this is also 
why  the  new  accord  is  based  on  three  pillars:  risk-sensitive  minimum  capital  requirements, 
co-ordinated  supervisory  review  and  enhanced  market  discipline  through  greater  transparency.  The 
New Accord is therefore much more comprehensive than its 1988 forerunner. 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 7
You all know very well how important access to meaningful information is to take informed investment 
decisions and for the sound functioning of the markets. In this regard, let me emphasise the third pillar 
of  the  New  Accord,  namely  market  discipline.  Bank  regulators  in  recent  years  have  begun  to  view 
markets as an ally to our system of supervision. We have consequently incorporated market discipline 
directly into the supervisory framework.  
Markets  value  well-capitalised  and  well-managed  institutions  as  much  as  supervisors  do,  and  can 
create  rewards  for  banks  that  manage  their  risks  appropriately.  Yet  banks  can  be  very  complex 
institutions and no market discipline is possible without access to timely, accurate and comprehensive 
information on a bank’s risk profile, its risk management processes and its outlook for the future. This 
is the purpose of the third pillar of the Capital Accord that reinforces significantly the other two. 
Let me conclude by briefly mentioning the status of the Accord. We are now working hard to analyse 
all  the  comments  that  we  have  received  during  the  consultative  period.  During  our  last  Committee 
meeting  last  month,  all  members  acknowledged  our  responsibility  to  develop  a  sound,  consistent 
proposal. At the same time, we also recognised the need to resolve outstanding issues and release 
the New Accord as soon as possible to provide certainty so that banks can continue to prepare for the 
new rules. 
In  a  statement  to  the  press  after  our  meeting,  the  members  of  the  Committee  undertook  to  work 
promptly and noted that we expect to take account of the remaining issues and complete the text of 
the New Accord in the coming months and not later than mid-year 2004.  
In addition, we moved forward in a number of difficult areas. I would like to draw your attention to the 
proposals  that  the  Committee  developed  to  revise  the  treatment of  credit  losses.  As  you know,  the 
Third  Consultative  Paper  (CP3)  calibrated  regulatory  capital  on  the  basis  of  both  unexpected  and 
expected  credit  losses.  This  was  intended  as  a  practical  compromise  to  account  for  differences  in 
national  accounting  practices  and  supervisory  authority  regarding  provisioning.  The  Committee  now 
intends  to  align  regulatory  capital  more  closely  to  economic  capital  by  calibrating  it  on  the  basis  of 
unexpected credit losses alone. A supplementary mechanism will help to encourage banks to provide 
sufficiently for expected credit losses. 
I would encourage those interested to read the statement outlining our proposed revision on the BIS 
website. We have also simplified the proposals for securitisation exposures, as we decided to replace 
the “Supervisory Formula” approach to unrated tranches with a simpler rule.  
Also,  as  we  move  closer  to  finalisation,  the  Committee  has  stepped  up  its  efforts  to  provide  for  a 
consistent  implementation  of  the  New  Accord.  Last  August  we  published  a  set  of  principles  for  the 
cross-border application of the New Accord to promote closer co-operation and information exchange 
among supervisors. These implementation issues are very important to promote consistency and to 
reduce the burden of internationally active banks. 
We  are  confident  that  the  development  of  an  incentives-based  capital  framework,  accompanied  by 
more consistent and focused supervisory review and a concurrent enhancement of market discipline, 
will  improve  the  management  of  risk  across  the  industry,  promote  broader  financial  stability  and 
resilience,  and  ensure  that  the  banking  system  is  better  able  to  promote  sustainable  growth  in  the 
economy. 
Thank you very much for your time and your attention.  
8 
 BIS Review 50/2003
