 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building a comprehensive Islamic financial system - new 
financial opportunities  
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Institute of 
Islamic  Banking  and 
Insurance,  London, 
26 September 2003. 
International  Conference  on 
Insurance(cid:146)s 
Islamic 
 (cid:147)Islamic  banking  and  finance  initially  evolved  as  a  form  of  financial  intermediation  for  the  Islamic 
community to conduct financial transactions that conform to Islamic tenets. Today, the Islamic financial 
industry  has  gained  wider  acceptance  and  appreciation  and  has  expanded  beyond  the  traditional 
borders  of  the  Muslim-based  economies  into  the  major  industrial  economies  to  become  an  integral 
component  of  the  global  financial  system.  In  a  global  environment  that  has  become  increasingly 
challenging, an environment that is subject to the powerful forces of change, and that is characterized 
by volatile and unstable market conditions, Islamic finance has emerged as a competitive and resilient 
form  of  intermediation.  Although  Islamic  finance  is  still  at  the  early  stage  of  development,  it  has 
experienced  rapid  expansion  and  is  fast  emerging  as  a  viable  and  robust  form  of  financial 
intermediation with significant potential.(cid:148) 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  for  me  to  be  here  today  before  a  distinguished  gathering  of  scholars, 
researchers and practitioners of the takaful industry. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the 
Institute of Islamic Banking and Insurance for their efforts in organizing this international conference on 
Islamic  insurance  or  takaful.  The  takaful  industry  represents  an  important  component  in  the  overall 
Islamic financial system given its role in the mobilisation of long-term funds, its role in providing risk 
protection, its role in the development of the Islamic capital market and as an important institutional 
investor, as well as its role in supporting the overall economic growth and development. Our challenge 
is  thus  to  evolve  a  dynamic  and  vibrant  takaful  industry  within  the  Islamic  financial  system.  Of 
importance  is  the  development  of  an  Islamic  financial  system  that  is  dynamic,  responsive  and 
sustainable.  
The  development  of  an  Islamic  financial  system  needs  to  include  the  respective  components 
comprising the Islamic banking industry, the takaful industry, the Islamic capital and money markets, 
given the strong linkages, interdependence and synergies among these components in the system. 
The spectrum of participants and the diversity of instruments are among the key attributes in creating 
the enabling environment for a dynamic Islamic financial system. This has been the approach adopted 
by Malaysia at the very onset of our journey in the development of a comprehensive Islamic financial 
system that is progressive and sustainable. 
In the initial stage during the early years of the development of the Islamic financial system, our focus 
of  attention  was  on  the  development  of  the  Islamic  banking  system  and  to  expand  the  number  of 
players  and  volume  of  activity.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  dual  banking  system,  the  pace  of 
expansion increased significantly. In two decades, the total assets of the Islamic banking industry have 
increased from USD97 million at the outset to USD20 billion as at end-June 2003. Similar expansion 
also took place in the takaful industry whereby the assets have increased significantly from less than 
USD30  million  in  1993  to  USD1  billion  in  June  2003.  The  Islamic  capital  market  in  Malaysia  also 
recorded  significant  growth  whereby  the  outstanding  Islamic  private  debt  securities  accounted  for 
USD17.8 billion, or 65% of the total outstanding private debt market while the new issuance of Islamic 
private  debt  securities  in  the  first  eight  months  of  2003  amounted  to  USD1.7  billion.  What  is  more 
encouraging is that more than one third of the new issuance of Islamic debt securities were issued by 
companies owned by non-Muslims, some of which includes multinational companies. 
The  evolution  of  an  appropriate  financial  structure  would  need  to  take  into  account  the  role  of  the 
financial  system  in  the  economy  and  the  objectives  that  need  to  be  achieved.  In  the  context  of  an 
emerging  market  economy,  the  financial  system  is  a  means  to  an  end.  The  appropriate  financial 
structure, particularly in emerging market economies, need to be designed to meet the requirements of 
the economy. The financial system needs to be in a position to support the real sector, changing and 
evolving with the changing needs of the economy. The strategy adopted in Malaysia is to develop a 
comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  that  is  able  to  operate  in  parallel  with  the  conventional 
financial system. 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
 The  key  constituents  within  the  Islamic  financial  system,  which  includes  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions  as  well  as  the  capital  and  money  markets  need  to  be  firmly  reinforced  by  the  legal  and 
regulatory framework that adequately address the unique characteristics of the industry. These intra-
dependent key components ultimately form the enabling environment for the Islamic financial services 
industry to effectively play its role as an efficient conduit for mobilising resources and channelling them 
to productive purposes. The absence of any one of the components could reduce the effectiveness 
and efficiency and could affect the viability and sustainability of the system. 
While  the  Islamic  banking  system  plays  an  important  role  in  mobilizing  deposits  and  providing 
financing, the development of the capital market allows the corporate sector to source their long-term 
financing  needs  based  on  Islamic  principles.  In  addition,  it  would  increase  the  range  of  Islamic 
financial  instruments  available  to  meet  the  demand  of  the  Islamic  investors.  In  the  absence  of  a 
comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  with  financial  services  based  on  Shariah  principles,  the 
development of Islamic banking and finance would be hindered. 
The government would need to assume an important role in the development of the Islamic financial 
system. The role of the government is, amongst others to provide the enabling environment and put in 
place from the outset, the necessary infrastructure through the formulation of a comprehensive set of 
legal and regulatory framework for Islamic banking and finance. In addition, this framework needs to 
be reinforced by a Shariah framework to ensure that all financial transactions are Shariah-compliant. 
Islamic financial operations would thus need to be based not only on best practices, but also satisfy 
the tenets of the Shariah. 
For  Islamic  banking  and  finance  to  be  sustainable,  compliance  with  Shariah  principles  alone  is  not 
sufficient.  Over  the  long  run,  customers  and  businesses  demand  for  quality  in  the  products  and 
services that Islamic finance offers. This is the challenge for Islamic banking and finance, to be able to 
provide a comprehensive range of Islamic financial products and services that are not only innovative 
and competitive but Shariah compliant.  
Let me now turn to the development of the takaful industry. Takaful as a system of Islamic insurance, 
is based on co-operation and mutual help for the good of the society at large. Although takaful has 
been in the market for more than 20 years, it has yet to make significant inroads. It should however, be 
noted that although the conventional insurance market is deeply entrenched in several of the Muslim 
countries,  the  percentage  of  the  Muslim  population  that  are  insured  is  relatively  low.  The  market 
penetration level is very low, notably less than 5 per cent in many Muslim countries. In Malaysia, the 
level of market penetration in terms of takaful certificates in force over the total population is only 3.8 
per cent compared to a market penetration for conventional insurance of 34.7 per cent. It therefore 
represents an enormous potential market that remains yet untapped.  
Takaful  operators  assume  an  important  role  as  economic  or  financial  agents  as  they  essentially 
mobilise  long-term  funds  in  the  form  of  contributions  and  invest  them  in  the  available  Islamic 
investment  avenues.  As  custodians  of  public  funds,  takaful  operators  must  ensure  that  the  takaful 
funds are invested in compliance with Shariah and are soundly managed to instil public confidence. 
For the takaful industry to be developed into a viable alternative to the more entrenched conventional 
insurance industry, the need for it to be supported by the core components of a comprehensive Islamic 
financial  system  cannot  be  over-emphasised.  As  takaful  operators  are  both  mobilizers  of  long-term 
funds and fund managers to the policy holders, their ability to generate returns to fulfil the obligation to 
the policy  holders depends very much on the range  of financial instruments available in the market 
place.  
Without an effective financial system, takaful operators may not be able to perform as effectively and 
as efficiently in terms of delivering their promise on the profit sharing basis and to be able to keep 
pace with their conventional counterparts in the area of fund performance. In the absence of a viable 
Islamic capital market, there would not be an adequate supply of quality financial instruments for which 
the  takaful  funds  can  invest.  It  may  have  to  depend  on  low  yielding  returns  from  bank  deposits.  In 
addition,  it  will  not  be  able  to  offer  innovative  products  like  investment  linked  products,  which  can 
further diversify their investment portfolio as these products are gaining popularity among conventional 
insurance companies. In the absence of an Islamic banking system, takaful operators would not be 
able to synergise and utilise the network of the banking system through bancassurance which can not 
only be an effective distribution channel but also serve to drive down operating costs. 
The development of a comprehensive Islamic financial infrastructure in Malaysia that includes Islamic 
banking,  the  money  and  capital  markets  has  reinforced  the  development  of  the  takaful  business. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
 Today, the takaful industry in Malaysia has emerged as a fast growing industry within the insurance 
sector since its introduction in 1985, 18 years ago. From total assets amounting to only USD0.5 million 
in 1986, it has reached more than USD900 million in 2002, constituting 5.2 per cent of the total assets 
of the insurance sector. In the same period, the takaful operators have offerred a wide range of family 
and general takaful products. 
The  Malaysian  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  represents  the  blueprint  for  the  development  of  the 
financial sector over a 10-year period. The plan, which was launched in 2001, places importance on 
the  development  of  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  sector  as  an  important  component  in  the  financial 
system. To achieve this objective, emphasis is being given to financial infrastructure and institutional 
development,  aimed  at  enhancing  efficiency  of  the  system  and  building  the  internal  resilience  and 
competitive  position  of  the  takaful  operators,  while  meeting  the  needs  of  the  nation.  This  includes 
providing  the  foundations  for  the  development  of  the  financial  markets  and  strengthening  the 
institutional development. As part of this process, the benchmarking exercise is an important tool to 
enhance performance and to guide the takaful operators on improvement of their business strategies. 
To reinforce this, a service quality index has also been initiated to promote the development of world-
class products and services. This is also complemented with a comprehensive consumer education 
programme  so  as  to  promote  product  transparency  and  increase  accountability.  The  introduction  of 
financial advisers is also a further element to facilitate consumer access to a wider range of financial 
products.  
Amongst the most imminent challenges is the creation of the critical mass in the market to allow for 
meaningful cross-border alliances at the regional and global level. The establishment of an adequate 
number of takaful operators in the market is also crucial to provide the groundwork for the setting-up of 
more  retakaful  operators,  in  terms  of  sustaining  business  support  and  providing  the  economies  of 
scale in order for the retakaful industry to develop. 
Currently  there  is  still  a  dearth  in  the  number  of  players  providing  the  retakaful  facility,  resulting  in 
takaful operators ceding to conventional reinsurers. While this has become a common practice, ideally 
more competitive retakaful operators who provide reinsurance in accordance with Shariah principles 
need to be established so that the takaful industry would not be dependent indefinitely on conventional 
reinsurance  as  the  conduit  to  which  they  can  mitigate  risk.  More  importantly,  retakaful  operators 
ultimately  serve  to  strengthen  and  enhance  the  financial  capacity  of  the  takaful  industry,  and  the 
synergistic by-products emanating from the interactive business alliances would contribute towards the 
overall betterment and robustness of the Islamic financial system. Indeed, there is much to be gained 
by the takaful operators in particular, and the Islamic financial industry in general, by having access to 
an adequate and competitive market of the retakaful facility. It is therefore important to increase the 
collaborative efforts and examine plausible ways to address this gap in the takaful industry. 
Our  quest  to  create  a  dynamic  Islamic  financial  system  is  to  achieve  the  ultimate  objectives  of 
developing  an  Islamic  financial  system  that  will  be  able  to  contribute  significantly  to  the  overall 
development of our economy through the intermediation process. Thus, Islamic banking and finance 
industry  needs  to  extend  its  agenda  towards  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  Islamic financial 
system.  The  Islamic  banking  and  finance  should  strive  to  add  value  towards  enhancing  greater 
integration  to  the  economy  and  the  financial  system.  To  harness  the  potential  fully,  genuine 
endeavours to develop and innovate Islamic financial instruments and activities that are able to fulfil 
the  changing  requirements  of  the  economy  and  the  emerging  needs  of  the  contemporary  global 
marketplace  need  to  be  continuously  pursued.  Conferences  such  as  this  can  contribute  invaluable 
ideas  to  foster  new  initiatives  towards  the  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  With  the 
acceleration  of  its  global  integration,  it  will  provide  the  synergies  and  opportunities  for  the  Islamic 
financial industry to evolve into an important component of the international financial system that can 
contribute to enhance prospects for balanced global growth and an enhanced shared prosperity. 
On that note, I wish you a successful Conference. Thank you.  
BIS Review 43/2003 
 3
