Peter Nicholl: Bosnia and Herzegovina - progress and partnership 
Comments  by  Mr  Peter  Nicholl,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  at  the 
second annual business conference, London, 9 December 2003. 
 I would like to welcome all of you to this conference and thank you for attending.  
I will cover four topics in my presentation. The first will be the Central Bank of BH and the roles it plays 
in maintaining financial stability in BH. 
The second will be the significant improvements that have occurred in the banking sector in BH over 
the  last  three  years.  The  third  will  be  the  changes  that  lie  ahead  of  the  BH  financial  sector  in  the 
immediate future, and I will finish with some brief comments on the economic outlook. 
    The central bank (CBBH) 
• 
The  CBBH  commenced  its  operations  on  11  August  1997  so  it  is  still  quite  a  young 
organization. 
It is a state level institution, which means it is the only monetary authority in BH and operates 
over the whole country through five offices. It has 265 staff. 
The CBBH law specifies clearly the functions that the CBBH must carry out and also sets a 
number of limitations on its operations. 
Subject to these legal requirements and restrictions, the CBBH is completely independent of 
political influence. 
Monetary policy 
• 
• 
Monetary policy is the CBBH’s most important function. 
The CBBH operates monetary policy through a strict currency board arrangement, which is 
stipulated in the CBBH law. 
There were three main reasons for the choice of a currency board for BH’s monetary policy:  
It provided a firm nominal anchor in the form of a fixed exchange rate in a situation 
(a) 
where there was significant economic instability; 
It  removed  discretion  in  a  situation  where  there  was  considerable  difficulty  in 
establishing institutions and making political decisions; 
(b) 
(c)  Currency boards had been established in some other eastern European countries and 
were working well. 
The currency board 
• 
The three essential features of the BH currency board are: 
(a)  A fixed exchange rate specified in the law; 
(b) 
(c) 
Full foreign exchange backing for all the KM liabilities of the central bank; 
Full convertibility of the CBBH’s KM liabilities into the anchor currency. 
The fixed exchange rate 
The  initial  exchange  rate  was  set  at  1  KM  =  1  Deutschmark  (the  Bosnian  currency  is  called  the 
Convertible Marka). The choice of the DM as the anchor currency for the BH currency board was an 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 1
easy one. The DM had long been a very stable currency and it was already widely used and trusted in 
BH. 
When the DM was replaced by the euro, the CBBH law was changed to make the euro the anchor 
currency for the BH Currency Board. The new exchange rate was specified in the CBBH law at exactly 
the same rate as the DM had been linked to the euro. i.e., 1KM = 0.51129 euros. This means that the 
exchange  rate  of  the  KM  has  been  unchanged  since  the  CBBH  commenced  its  operations.  The 
transition from the DM to the euro as the anchor currency went very smoothly and the impacts on the 
KM and the currency board were very positive.  
Full foreign exchange backing 
The KM liabilities of the CBBH, which are the KM currency in circulation and the deposits of the BH 
commercial banks at the CBBH, have to be fully backed in convertible foreign assets. As our liabilities 
are tied to the euro, we hold most of our reserves in euros in order to avoid taking any exchange rate 
risk. The table below shows that the CBBH has maintained this full foreign exchange backing for the 
KM since 1998 and we had ‘free reserves’ of KM 148 million at the end of October, 2003. 
Table 1 
CBBH foreign reserves 
End of period in KM millions 
Date 
net foreign reserves 
monetary liabilities 
free reserves  
Dec 1997 
Dec 1998 
Dec 1999 
Dec 2000 
Dec 2001 
Dec 2002 
June 2003 
Oct 2003 
Nov 2003 
144.1 
283.3 
865.7 
1021.2 
2666.6 
2463.2 
2266.1 
2603.1 
2634.1 
160.3 
253.9 
836.7  
973.2 
2591.6 
2345.1 
2123.0 
2455.4 
n.a. 
–16.2 
29.4 
29.0 
48.0 
75.0 
118.1 
143.1 
148.1 
n.a. 
This table also illustrates the way in which the KM gradually substituted for the other currencies that 
were in use in BH thus leading to a steady increase in the CBBH balance sheet from 1997 to 2000. 
This trend accelerated during the euro conversion period in late 2001 and early 2002. In all, the CBBH 
sent DM 4.3 billion of DM banknotes back to Germany from Bosnia during this conversion period and 
the CBBH’s foreign reserves more than doubled over a four month period. 
Our foreign reserves fell during 2002 and the first half of 2003 from the peak they reached at the end 
of 2001. Most of the fall was in the level of commercial bank deposits at the CBBH and came about 
mainly  because  banks  were  expanding  their  domestic  credit  rapidly  and,  as  a  consequence,  they 
reduced the level of deposits they held at the CBBH. 
The fall in the level of foreign reserves has been reversed in the last few months, primarily because of 
changes we made to the reserve requirement system for banks. Our foreign reserve holdings are now 
back over KM 2.6 billion and are close to the peak level achieved during the euro changeover period. 
The CBBH’s net foreign reserves represent around three and a half months of import coverage, which 
is a ‘comfortable’ level. 
Full convertibility 
As the following table shows, the KM has been a convertible currency within BH in practice as well as 
in name. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2003
Table 2 
Net KM issued from 11/8/97 to 25/11/03 
KM billion 
KM issued to BH banks 
KM purchased from BH banks 
net KM issued 
12.097 
9.851w 
2.246 
The success of the currency board arrangements 
The currency board has been a very successful type of monetary policy for BH: 
• 
• 
The KM has been a stable currency against the DM and the euro since it was introduced. 
Inflation in BH is now low and stable. 
Table 3 
Inflation in BH 
Retail price index, annual % growth 
Year ended 
Federation of BH 
Republika Srpska  
BH average  
Dec 2000 
Dec 2001 
Dec 2002 
Sept 2003 
4.0 
0.3 
–0.7 
0.5 
16.1 
2.2 
2.4 
1.9 
8.0 
0.9 
0.3 
0.9 
   KM use has risen steadily in BH and the KM is now the dominant transactions currency in all 
parts of the country (euros are generally accepted too, at least for larger transaction).  
The proportion of bank deposits denominated in KM is also growing, though more than 50% 
are still denominated in foreign currency. 
The KM has remained fully convertible in BH since it was introduced. 
The stability of the KM has been an important element in increasing the level of foreign direct 
investment coming into BH. 
Table 4 
Foreign direct investment into BH  
In KM m. 
period 
Foreign Direct Investment 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2002q1 and 2 
2003q1 and 2  
117.4 
324.5 
310.1 
274.1 
604.3 
261.9 
247.8 
 
We think that these figures actually understate the amount of foreign investment that has come into 
BH in the last few years. The CBBH recently initiated a survey of 800-900 companies in order to try 
and get more up-to-date and accurate data on foreign investment into BH. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 3
The currency board will continue 
The Presidency of BH has announced that the Currency Board Arrangements will continue as one of 
the  major  features  of  macro-economic  policy  in  BH.  This  is  also  the  policy  of  the  state  and  entity 
governments as set out in the Letter of Intent they have agreed with the IMF as part of the Stand-by 
negotiations with the Fund.  
The most important reason for this is that the policy has produced major economic and social benefits. 
Secondly, the citizens of BH have faced many financial traumas in the past. They therefore value a 
stable currency and the currency board consequently has a high level of public support within BH. 
Finally, the long term goal of BH policy is to take the economy closer to and eventually into Europe. 
The KM is already tied to the euro. It is therefore sensible to maintain this link. The exit strategy for BH 
from the currency board will therefore be the eventual adoption of the euro as the currency of BH.  
New board and governor of the CBBH 
The  CBBH  law  said  that  after  the  first  six  years  of  operations  of  the  CBBH,  a  new  Board  of  five 
Bosnian  citizens  would  be  appointed  by  the  Presidency  and  that  one  of  those  five  board  members 
would  be  appointed  Governor.  This  was  an  important  transition  period  for  the  CBBH  and  had  the 
potential  to  introduce  a  degree  of  uncertainty  and  possible  instability.  The  six  year  date  passed  on 
11 August, 2003. The changes have been implemented very smoothly. The Presidency appointed a 
new  Board  in  April.  Three  of  the  five  members  already  had  extensive  CBBH  experience.  With  the 
support of the Presidency, the Board has appointed the new Governor. The new Governor is actually 
the old Governor. I have been reappointed until the end of 2004. In order for this to be possible under 
the  CBBH  Law,  the  Government  of  BH  has  accorded  me  Bosnian  citizenship,  which  I  regard  as  a 
great honor.  
In addition, the Presidency and the CBBH Board have already agreed on and appointed the person 
who  will  become  Governor  from  1  January,  2005.  He  is  Kemal  Kozarić,  one  of  the  current  Vice 
Governors.  
The decisions taken by the presidency on the CBBH are very positive because: 
• 
• 
• 
They were taken early thus avoiding any uncertainty; 
They provide a high degree of continuity in the management of the CBBH; 
They  have  looked  well  ahead,  thus  assisting  a  smooth  transition  to  the  new  Governor  in 
2005.  
Banking sector 
The  second  area  I  want  to  focus  on  in  my  address  is  the  commercial  banking  sector.  BH  has  an 
improving banking sector. The reform in the banking sector has gone further and faster than reform in 
any other sector of the economy. Confidence has come back and depositors are now prepared to put 
their savings in the banks rather than keep them at home in foreign cash under the mattress. Bank 
lending  also  grew  very  rapidly  last  year  and  is  continuing  to  rise  strongly  this  year,  though  at  a 
somewhat slower rate. 
The  strong  growth  in  bank  credit  led  the  CBBH  in  June,  2003  to  take  its  first  ever  monetary  policy 
action. The only monetary policy instrument the CBBH currently has is a reserve requirement that we 
apply to commercial bank deposits. A reserve requirement has been in place since we commenced 
operations  in  1997.  But  we  made  a  number  of  significant  changes  to  the  way  in  which  it  was 
implemented in June: 
• 
The reserve requirement had previously been applied only to KM deposits. It is now applied 
to all deposits, thus more than doubling the base. 
Banks could previously meet their reserve requirement either by holding KM banknotes in 
their vaults of having KM deposits at the CBBH. Now, the reserve requirement can only be 
met by deposits at the CBBH. 
Previously,  banks’  excess  deposits  at  the  CBBH  were  not  remunerated.  Now,  the  CBBH 
pays an overnight interest rate on banks’ total deposits at the CBBH. 
BIS Review 58/2003
  4 
  The ratio level was reduced from 10% to 5%. But because of the other changes, the effect of 
this was an increase in the level of reserve deposits banks had to hold at the CBBH. 
Competition in the banking sector is now very real, helped by the arrival of some good foreign banks. 
Proportionately, foreign investment in the banking sector has been higher than in any other sector in 
BH. 
Table 5 
Commercial bank deposits and lending  
Annual percentage change 
deposits 
lending 
Business 
Households 
Total 
Business 
Households 
Total 
26 
18 
–3 
26 
9 
10 
63 
–9 
29 
177 
12 
11 
21 
10 
8 
69 
13 
12 
13 
2 
3 
1 
4 
8 
105 
8 
43 
77 
114 
30 
20 
–5 
8 
11 
28 
15 
Date 
Dec98 
Dec99 
Dec00 
Dec01 
Dec02 
Sept03  
 
Bank interest rates on lending have fallen substantially under the pressure of increased competition, 
but are still relatively high. Comprehensive data on interest rates was not collected prior to 2002 but 
most bank lending rates prior to 2001 would have been over 20%. They have fallen steadily since that 
time and the average short term lending rate in August 2003 was 10.43% and the average long term 
lending rate was 9.33%. June this year was the first time that this interest data shifted into single digit 
interest  rates  since  we  started  collecting  the  data.  I  expect  this  downward  trend  in  interest  rates  to 
continue. 
I will briefly list the main changes that have brought this improvement in the BH banking sector about: 
Payments system reform 
The  cash  payments  system  has  been  unified  with  the  KM  becoming  the  dominant,  and  almost  the 
sole, currency in use in BH. In the non-cash payments area, the old state-owned centralized system 
that had a monopoly was closed in early 2001. It has been replaced with a modern European-type 
system with two clearing houses, an RTGS one and a giro one, owned and operated by the Central 
Bank. Payments are being conducted by the commercial banks. The suppliers we used had put similar 
systems  into  place  in  nine  other  European  countries.  But  it  was  done  more  quickly  in  BH  than 
anywhere else showing that it is possible to implement large, technical projects in BH successfully. It 
has been operating smoothly and effectively since 5 January 2001. 
Minimum capital requirements 
These  requirements  have  been  substantially  increased  through  a  series  of  steps  from  an  initial 
KM 2.5 million to KM 15 million from the beginning of 2003. This has forced banks to merge or find 
strategic  partners.  This,  plus  increased  competition,  has  led  to  a  sharp  reduction  in  the  number  of 
banks in BH. In 1997, there were 76 registered banks in BH in 1997 but most of them were extremely 
small. At present there are 38 registered banks in BH. But consolidation with the BH banking system 
has already gone further than this number indicates. For example, around 65% of total deposits are 
already in the four largest bank groups and the largest 10 banks have around 85% of total deposits. 
The  number  of  registered  banks  will  therefore  reduce  further  over  the  next  year  as  consolidation 
continues. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 5
Inter-entity banking 
It became possible in 2001 for a bank registered in one entity to operate branches in the other entity. 
Most of the larger banks are already doing so and more will follow. We can say that in the banking 
sector, BH now has a single economic space. 
Deposit insurance 
A  deposit  insurance  scheme  was  started  in  2001.  It  covers  deposits  in  approved  banks  up  to  KM 
5,000. This is also helping return citizens’ confidence to the banks that qualify. Initially, two agencies 
were established, one in each entity. But in 2002, they were merged into a State Deposit Insurance 
Agency. At present, 18 banks have met the standards required to be a member of the DIA. But all 
banks  will  need  to  meet  these  standards  in  the  near  future  or  face  the  risk  of  losing  their  banking 
license. 
Foreign banks 
A  number  of  foreign  banks  have  commenced  operations  in  BH,  particularly  in  the  last  two  years. 
Increased  foreign  competition  has  already  been  very  good  for  the  BH  economy.  It  has  given 
depositors  more  choice  and  it  has  forced  the  local  banks  to  improve  the  range  and  quality  of  the 
services they provide in order to survive.  
Privatization of government owned banks 
Progress in bank privatization was initially very slow but accelerated markedly in 2002. The process of 
privatization  is  now  complete  in  the  RS  but  there  are  still  some  small  state-owned  banks  in  the 
Federation. 
These latter two trends, foreign entry and privatization, have led to a substantial shift in ownership in 
the BH banking sector towards private ownership and, in particular, foreign private ownership. 
Table 6 
Capital structure in BH banking sector (%) 
 31.12.00 
31.12.01 
31.12.02 
31.6.03 
State capital 
Private capital: 
Domestic 
Foreign 
 47 
53 
na 
na1 
19 
81 
25 
56 
10 
90 
23 
67 
10 
90 
23 
67 
1  The data isn’t available but the % of foreign ownership would have been low. 
 
In short, the BH banking system is looking more and more like the banking system you see in other 
European  countries.  The  BH  banking  system  has  still  not  completed  its  transition  to  becoming  a 
modern  European  type  banking  system  but  it  is  well  on  the  way  and  I  think  most  people  will  be 
surprised by how quickly the banking system will continue to change and improve. The main things 
that will slow down the transition are problems in the legal and regulatory frameworks in BH that make 
it difficult for banks to take and use collateral for lending. This is where the reform focus now needs to 
be concentrated. 
Future initiatives in the BH financial sector 
BH now has a sound central bank and a stable currency and a rapidly improving commercial banking 
sector. Now that the BH financial system has a firm base, the challenges for the next two years are to 
maintain  financial  stability  and  to  develop  the  capital  and  securities  markets  so  as  to  broaden  the 
range  of  financial  services  available  to  savers  and  investors  in  BH.  I  will  briefly  list  some  of  the 
initiatives that are underway: 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2003
National capital markets council (NCMC) 
I have recently formed a NCMC in order to develop a broadly based strategy for the next stages of 
financial  market  development  in  BH.  The  Council  includes  representatives  from  state  and  entity 
governments,  regulatory  authorities  and  market  participants.  All  organizations  that  I  invited  to  join 
agreed to do so and are participating enthusiastically. This is a very positive start for the process of 
capital market development. 
Sovereign credit rating 
The  Council  of  Ministers  has  decided  that  BH  should  seek  its  first  sovereign  credit  rating  and  has 
asked the CBBH to administer the project. The credit rating should be available by April, 2004. The 
present international perception of BH is often very negative. We believe having a published rating will 
improve the knowledge about BH and the perceptions many potential investors currently have. 
Securities market 
Work is currently underway to draft a Securities Law and to develop selling, registry and settlement 
processes for a securities market in BH. It has not yet been decided whether the first securities will be 
issued by the State Government, the entity governments or the CBBH - or all of them. But the legal 
and administrative work will be done to allow any or all of those organizations to issue securities in 
2004. 
Stock exchanges 
Two stock exchanges have been established in BH but both are very small. This is the case with most 
of the stock exchanges established in the region. The positive development is that seven of the eight 
stock exchanges in fry have entered into a data sharing program. At its launch they said that this is 
just the first step on the way to shared trading. There is apparently interest in joining this group from 
some stock exchanges outside the fry region. So the exchanges are moving towards some form of 
regional  stock  exchange,  which  in  my  view  is  the  only  feasible  and  sensible  option  for  BH  and  the 
other countries in the region. 
Banking supervision 
Banking supervision in BH is based on the Basle principles. Banking supervision is currently carried 
out by entity agencies, with the CBBH having a coordinating role. There is good cooperation among 
the  three  institutions  and  this  was  recently  formalized  by  the  signing  of  a  memorandum  of 
understanding. The banking system in BH is now essentially a single country-wide system. Because of 
this, banking supervision is likely to move under the umbrella of the CBBH during 2004. 
Harmonization with the EU standards and regulations 
In all areas in financial market developments (as in all other areas), we are trying to ensure that the 
things we introduce are consistent with EU standards and regulations.  
The economic outlook 
There are two things that make it difficult to predict the economic outlook in BH with precision. The first 
is that BH is going through so many transitions simultaneously that the economic numbers can move 
through very large ranges. Second, the economic outlook depends crucially on an acceleration of the 
economic,  regulatory  and  legal  reform  processes  in  BH.  Forecasts  based  on  the  status-quo  as 
compared  to  those  based  on  an  accelerated  reform  path  will  be  very  different.  In  fact,  unless  the 
regulatory, legal and tax systems are changed, and changed quickly and substantially, BH will have a 
very difficult future.  
The environment for private investment has improved but it is still far too complicated. This applies to 
local  as  well  as  foreign  investment.  This  is  where  the  attention  of  BH  politicians  and  international 
consultants and advisors needs to be directed. The macroeconomic situation in BH is a stable one. It 
is the areas of regulatory, tax and legal system reform that will determine the future of BH. 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 7
I am an optimist and believe that we will see a combination of continued macro-economic stability and 
accelerated micro-economic and legal reform. On this basis, I would expect inflation to remain stable 
at around current levels, economic growth rates to be at least 6-7 percent per annum in nominal terms 
(5% real) and the Balance of Payments situation to gradually improve. 
There are still risks attached to investing in BH. But there are also many opportunities. Though BH is a 
small country, it is very strategically located with free market access to a very large European market. 
It has a well educated labor force. Given these two factors and the high degree of macro-economic 
stability in BH, I believe the balance between risk and opportunity now favors opportunity. I take your 
presence at this conference as a very encouraging sign for BH. 
8 
 BIS Review 58/2003
