T T Mboweni: African economic integration 
Keynote address by Mr TT Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 5th Annual 
African Development Finance Conference, Johannesburg, 9 October 2003.  
 Introduction 
1. 
Esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
Africa is the poorest region in the world, with real per capita incomes averaging one-third less than 
those in South Asia, the next poorest region. Sub-Saharan Africa's per-capita GNP is only one tenth 
that of Latin America. Therefore, the promotion of economic development remains the major challenge 
confronting  the  continent  today.  However,  it  is  widely  accepted  that  economic  development  goes 
beyond  the  mere  maximisation  of  economic  growth.  The  distributional  consequences  of  economic 
growth are of paramount importance.  
Given their potential to address both the growth and distributional concerns of economic policy, it is 
imperative  that  appropriate  attention  is  given  to  the  promotion  of  SMEs.  The  presentations  and 
deliberations at this conference cover many important aspects pertinent to the development of SMEs. 
It is widely accepted that macroeconomic stability is a pre-requisite for sustainable economic growth. If 
this is the case, then what has been the African experience to date?  
Recent macroeconomic developments in Africa 
2.  
In  the  past  three  years,  real  GDP  growth  in  sub-Saharan  African  countries  remained  surprisingly 
resilient  in  spite  of  the  slowdown  in  advanced  economies.  GDP  growth  in  the  sub-Saharan  African 
region (excluding South Africa) was 3,1 percent in 2002, compared to 3,8 percent in 2001. Subdued 
economic activity in 2002 was due to the weak global economy, the slower-than-expected rebound in 
world trade, droughts, and political and armed conflicts in some parts of the continent. 
The latest IMF forecast released in September 2003 projects that GDP growth in sub-Saharan Africa 
(excluding  South  Africa)  will  rise  to  3,6  percent  in  2003,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  expected  global 
recovery,  improved  macroeconomic  policies,  rising  commodity  prices  and  the  debt  relief  under  the 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative.  
While the economic growth rate in Africa compares quite favourably with those of developed countries, 
it  is  significantly  less  than  those  in  other  emerging  countries,  most  notably  in  Asia.  A  reasonable 
benchmark for the evaluation of Africa's economic development, is the progress being made towards 
the  achievement  of  the  Millennium  Development  goals.  The  world's  leaders  adopted  the  UN 
Millennium  Declaration  in  September  2002,  committing  their  countries  to  reduce  poverty,  improve 
health  and  promote  peace,  human  rights  and  environmental  sustainability.  Eight  Millennium 
Development  Goals,  with  specific  targets  to  be  achieved  by  2015,  dealing  with  key  development 
challenges emerged from the Declaration.  
According to the 2003 Human Development Report, sub-Saharan Africa will not meet any of the goals 
by 2015 at the current rate of progress – the only region for which this is the case. In order to meet the 
Millennium Development Goal of halving poverty between 1990 and 2015, the IMF has estimated that 
growth in sub-Saharan Africa should be around 7 percent a year. IMF. 2003. World Economic Outlook: 
51 2003: 51. Only six African countries achieved growth rates above 7 percent in 2002.  
There is little doubt that monetary policy has been successful in bringing down inflation in Africa. The 
rate of increase in prices has declined from an average of 14,3 percent in 2000 to 9,3 percent in 2002. 
Contributing  to  the  low  inflation  environment  has  been  the  fiscal  prudence  apparent  in  the 
macroeconomic  policies  of  a  number  of  African  countries  since  the  late  1990s.  The  development 
challenges  that  confront  the  continent  today,  demand  that  both  the  quantity  and  efficiency  of 
government expenditures are kept in check. 
While  global  FDI  inflows  declined  21  percent  between  2001  and  2002,  the  inflow  of  FDI  to  Africa 
declined  dramatically  by  more  than  40  percent,  according  to  the  2003  World  Investment  Report.  In 
addition,  Africa's  share  of  foreign  direct  investment  into  developing  countries  has  dropped  from 
25 percent in the early 1970s to just 5 percent in 2000. To compound matters further, an estimated 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
40 percent  of  Africa's  own  private  savings  are  invested  outside  the  continent.  The  more  effective 
pursuit  of  political  and  macroeconomic  stability,  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms,  greater 
geopolitical stability and a more supportive stance by the international community to addressing the 
concerns of Africa, would go a long way towards making Africa a preferred destination for FDI inflows.  
International trade  
3. 
International trade has been an important engine of growth, and will continue to play a vital role, in 
promoting  economic  development and alleviating  poverty  in  Africa.  According to  the United  Nations 
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA), Africa's share of world exports has fallen from 4,6 percent 
in 1980 to 1,8 percent in 2000. The international community has recognised the importance of closer 
economic  co-operation  as  an  impetus  for  economic  growth  in  the  world  economy.  The  Fourth 
Ministerial  Conference  of  the  World  Trade  Organization  held  at  Doha  in  November  2001,  the 
International Conference on Financing for Development held in Monterrey, Mexico in March 2002, and 
the World Summit on Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg in September 2002, collectively 
defined a new global partnership for development between developed and developing countries. Many 
analysts and policymakers, particularly those in developing countries, had hoped that the commitment 
of the developed countries would be operationalised at the WTO talks in Cancun, Mexico. However, 
as  you  are  aware,  this  did  not  materialise.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  great  disappointment 
followed the failure of the recent World Trade Organisation talks at Cancun to reach agreement on the 
lowering of agricultural subsidies in developed countries.  
While, there is little doubt that increased trade between Africa and the developed world will increase 
Africa's chances of achieving it's economic and social objectives, it is imperative that attention is also 
given to the promotion of intra-Africa trade. Despite four decades of integration efforts, intra-African 
trade  as  a  percentage  of  total  trade  remains  low.  For  example,  the  United  Nations  Economic 
Commission for Africa (UNECA) estimates that intra-African trade has increased only marginally from 
8 percent in 1989 to 12 percent in 2002. It is therefore not surprising that current account deficits in 
many countries remain relatively high. The low level of African exports can be partly explained in terms 
of  issues  related  to  market  access,  inadequate  infrastructure  and  other  structural  impediments  to 
economic diversification in the various economies. In addition, low productivity and high costs of doing 
business have been often cited as the main factors undermining Africa's competitiveness.  
Initiatives promoting African economic development 
4. 
Many initiatives have been undertaken to promote economic development in Africa. Article 44 of the 
Abuja Treaty calls for the harmonisation of economic policies across the African continent. The Treaty 
emphasises two important pillars of economic integration across the African continent: the promotion 
of  intra-Africa  trade  and  the  enhancement  of  monetary  co-operation.  The  African  Monetary 
Co-operation Programme (AMCP) seeks to operationalise the monetary co-operation mandate of the 
Abuja Treaty. In the main, this involves a single monetary area, encompassing a common currency 
and a common central bank by the year 2021.  
The SADC countries have already undertaken many initiatives which are aligned with the objectives of 
the AMCP. For example, the harmonising of payment, clearing and settlement systems has already 
begun. Some SADC central banks are successfully implementing real time gross settlement systems 
(RTGS). And the strengthening of banking supervision has already begun in the region.  
A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Macroeconomic Convergence has also been agreed to 
by SADC member states. This MOU forces members to pursue economic policies that would ensure 
macroeconomic stability. For example, by 2008, SADC member states are required to have single digit 
CPI inflation rates; ensure that the nominal value of public and publicly guaranteed debt, as a ratio of 
GDP, does not exceed 60 percent; ensure that the public budget deficit as a ratio of GDP does not 
exceed 5 percent; and have sustainable current account deficits – meaning 3 percent of GDP or less. 
In addition, Africa has embraced the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) to confront 
the challenges facing the continent. It is a strategic development plan that addresses the economic, 
political  and  dimensions  of  Africa's  future  development.  NEPAD  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  the 
willingness of the continent to take responsibility for its own actions and for its future. It is a new start 
for  Africa  to  meet  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  and  targets.  Crucially,  the  vision  and  way 
forward include, building political consensus and the necessary institutions as well as determining the 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
pace of implementation of the programme. NEPAD aims to reduce poverty by significantly increasing 
economic growth throughout the continent.  
It is within this context that small and medium enterprises can emerge and flourish and support African 
economic development, employment creation and poverty reduction.  
However,  we  must  remember  that  the  global  environment  of  the  21st  century  is  an  important 
determinant  of  industrial  and  economic  success.  Globalisation  demands  improved  competitiveness. 
Increased competition presents new challenges and opportunities for African enterprises. As the world 
economy  is  being  deregulated  and  liberalised,  enterprises  that  are  competitive  in  national  markets 
have to be competitive in world markets as well. A pre-requisite for survival and success requires a 
winning combination of competitive strengths.  
Conclusion 
5. 
There  is  little  doubt,  then,  that  there  have  been  major  changes  in  economic  policy  in  many  African 
countries in the recent past. Many of these changes have been advocated in support of the African 
Renaissance. These changes have entailed a transition towards more open, market-oriented regimes. 
On the political front, there has been a move towards multi-party democracy, and high priority being 
given to issues of governance and transparency in the policymaking process. The foundation is being 
laid. We now have to ensure that the policy intentions are realised. While the road to success may not 
guarantee a smooth ride, it is imperative that we ensure that it is not a long one.  
The increasingly important role of SMEs in this process should not be underestimated. The awards 
that will be presented at this conference are evidence of that. SMEs can play a vital role in job creation 
and  in  strengthening  competition  in  domestic  market.  The  challenge  is  however  to  ensure  that 
individual  success  at  the  level  of  the  firm,  contributes  towards  the  competitiveness  of  the  national 
economy. I congratulate all the award-winners.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
