Jean-Claude Trichet: Europe at the crossroads 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a  dinner  on  the 
occasion of the Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you tonight. This is a special occasion for me. It is the first time that I 
address  -  as  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  -  the  European  banking  community.  As 
European bankers, you are of great importance for our work at the ECB and - if I may say so - the 
ECB is of relevance for your work. It is good to be here tonight with you and it is nice to see many 
familiar faces and good friends. Thank you very much for the invitation. 
I am particularly grateful that this dinner takes place so close to my new home, Frankfurt. Please let 
me, in the presence of the Mayor, Mrs Petra Roth, express my gratitude and admiration to this city. As 
Member of the ECB’s Governing Council and previously of the EMI Council, I have been coming to 
Frankfurt regularly over the last nine years. By and by this city has become dear to me. It is a pleasure 
to see to what extent Frankfurt accommodates its banking community. The city provides us with the 
amenities and attractions of a truly modern and international life. 
“Identify Europe” is the title of the congress that provides the occasion for our dinner tonight. It is a title 
which reminds me of essays that I had to write at school, such as “Characterise the Renaissance” or 
“Explain the Rise of the Roman Empire”. “Identify Europe” comes as an imperative - almost an order. It 
urges  us  to  define  what  Europe  is  about.  There  are,  of  course,  many  ways  of  approaching  this 
question. We can define Europe geographically, culturally, historically or economically. 
Please  allow  me  to  reflect  upon  the  issue  from  an  institutional  perspective.  As  President  of  the 
European Central Bank, I will interpret the term Europe as the European Union. Thus, I will take the 
title of the congress as an encouragement to discuss the EU’s main characteristics. 
I think it is the right time to reflect upon the key features of the EU. Europe stands at the crossroads. It 
needs to take the right decisions now in order to maintain its major qualities in the coming years. What 
are the main tasks facing the EU? First, the Union needs to give itself an institutional foundation - a 
solid  Constitution  -  that  makes  the  EU  fit  for  the  future.  Second,  the  Union  has  to  integrate  an 
unprecedented number of new Member States. 
In my speech, I will concentrate on these two tasks and discuss to what extent - from the perspective 
of a central banker - the EU is on the right track. I will, however, start by identifying what I regard as 
the three key qualities of the European Union. 
Three key qualities of the European Union 
The European Union is a remarkable endeavour which is absolutely unique in human history. Three 
reasons are, most of the time, proposed for explaining this collective will of the Europeans to unite. 
First,  the  lessons  drawn  from  the  wars,  particularly  the  last  two  world  wars,  which  were,  from  a 
European standpoint, abominable civil wars. Second, after World War II the emergence of the Soviet 
Union  empire  creating  a  major  economic,  social  and  strategic  threat  for  Europe.  And  third,  the 
challenge of global economic competition which called upon the setting up of a large single market to 
benefit from economies of scale of the same order of magnitude as those existing in the US single 
market. 
Ensure peace amongst the Europeans, protect Europe against external threats, permit Europe to cope 
efficiently with global competition had undoubtedly played a role in the bold European adventure of the 
last half century. But I am not sure that they are really telling the full story. In a way all these reasons 
are defensive, aiming at protecting Europe against domestic and external dangers. I trust that at the 
heart  of  the  European  ideal  of  today  there  are  also  ideas  that  are  profoundly  enshrined  in  the 
European psyché: the idea of universality which is topical in the “Enlightenment”, in der “Aufklärung”, 
dans  les  “Lumières”.  In  this  perspective,  European  Union  “in  motion”  would  be  also  driven  by  this 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 1
profound and rich European dedication to universality which is at the root of our civilisation and the 
ultimate goal of the Europeans. I am referring to fertile ideas of ancient times. But as Jean Monnet 
said in his “Mémoires”: “There is no such thing as premature ideas, there are only ripe times that one 
should wait for.” 
Whatever the complex set of reasons, almost fifty years ago European nation states took a bold step: 
they  decided  to  work  together.  They  initiated  a  European  project  which  over  time  transformed  this 
continent. I have always seen the European Union as an impressive sailing ship with strong masts and 
many  sails.  This  sailing  ship  and  its  crew  have  three  very  important  qualities:  clear  objectives, 
willingness to co-operate, and openness to “newcomers”. 
1. 
From the beginning, Europe has been set on a clear course and sailed with a clear mission. 
This is to achieve prosperity, peace, and stability for the citizens of Europe. 
Member States work together as a team. They are willing to pool their specific abilities and 
national  sovereignties.  In  a  co-operative  manner  -  unparalleled  to  any  international 
organisation - they overcome differences and manage diversity. They share the conviction 
that they should find European solutions to European problems. The Eurosystem is a perfect 
example for the co-operative approach that characterises the Union. 
Europe  has always  been open  for new  Member  States.  Membership  is neither  limited nor 
exclusive. Clear rules and procedures pave the way for newcomers to join the Union. 
2. 
3. 
Over time, the ship has grown in size and quality. New members joined and new competencies were 
acquired. In the nineties, the ship was given an important additional mast. This new mast is Monetary 
Union.  Its  strong  sails  push  the  ship  further.  They  reinforce  the  strength  of  the  EU  and  generate 
stability. 
In the coming months, this ship will be restructured considerably and will expand its crew significantly. 
It is doing this at sea. The day-to-day work of the EU continues; there is no break or pause that allows 
for  practices  or  trial  runs.  The  key  challenge  is  to  accomplish  these  tasks  while  keeping  the  three 
qualities. These qualities are worth maintaining. They have made the EU to what it is today. 
Let me now concentrate on the first task, the Constitution. 
The Constitution 
The EU has diverted from its traditional path of recurring Treaty reforms. It has decided to give itself a 
Constitution.  Those  of  you  who  come  from  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  will  be  familiar 
with  a  process  of  adopting  a  constitution.  In  your  countries  the  new  constitutions  have  laid  the 
foundation for an open society and democratic institutions. In the case of the EU, the new Constitution 
does not signify the start of a new political era. Why then has the EU embarked on a constitutional 
process? 
Speaking as an outside observer to the process, it seems to me that the Constitution is to serve two 
purposes.  The  first  purpose  is  renovation.  The  EU  has  to  be  made  fit  for  the  future.  It  needs  well-
functioning  decision-making  procedures  and  effective  institutions.  This  is  not  only  in  view  of 
enlargement  but  also  in  order  to  adapt  to  new  international  demands  and  changing  economic 
circumstances. The second purpose is clarification. While concentrating on improving the strength and 
the size of the EU, accessibility and clarity might have been neglected over the years. The Constitution 
shall put this back in order. It seeks to make the EU and its decision-making process more transparent 
and  comprehensible  for  the  citizens.  So,  Europe  is  given  itself  a  new  Constitution  to  consolidate 
existing  achievements;  to  codify  key  objectives  and  common  values;  and  to  provide  a  stable  and 
effective foundation for the future. 
The EU has embarked on a special method for drafting the new Constitution. As you know, over the 
last  one  and  a  half  years  representatives  from  national  and  European  institutions  discussed  in  the 
Convention  what  Europe’s  new  Constitution  should  look  like.  The  ECB  has  followed  these  debates 
with great interest. It welcomes the draft Constitution as presented by the Convention in June. 
However, as central bankers, we had to learn a new lesson. For the first time since the setting up of 
the  ERM  in  1979,  a  major  reform  of  the  EU  takes  place  without  monetary  integration  being  in  the 
limelight.  The  reason  is  simple:  as  far  as  monetary  integration  is  concerned  the  EU  has  reached  a 
“sustainable  endpoint”.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  gave  the  EU  a  modern  “monetary  constitution”  which 
does  not  need  be  changed.  It  is  sound  both  in  terms  of  the  objectives  set  and  the  allocation  of 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2003
responsibilities between different actors and levels of government. The Convention rightly recognised 
this. Its draft Constitution takes over the provisions relating to EMU without changes in substance. The 
single  monetary  policy  is,  by  its  very  nature,  indivisible.  Thus,  it  is  an  exclusive  competence  of  the 
Union. The task of conducting monetary policy, as well as all other central banking tasks, has been 
assigned to an independent European Central Bank, which fulfils the task together with the National 
Central Banks of the euro area and with the clear primary objective of maintaining price stability. The 
draft Constitution explicitly mentions the European System of Central Banks, the ESCB, in the first part 
of  the  Constitution.  Thus,  it  acknowledges  the  federal  nature  of  the  monetary  authority  of  the 
European  Union  and  its  sui  generis  character.  Finally,  the  more  specific  provisions  concerning 
monetary  policy  in  the  current  Treaty  as  well  as  the  Statute  of  the  ECB  and  the  ESCB  will  in  their 
substance remain unchanged and form part of the constitutional texts of the Union. 
I  very  much  welcome  that  the  fundamental  features  of  the  current  set-up  of  EMU  have  been 
preserved. After all, the stability of the institutional architecture is a crucial element of the credibility of 
the single monetary policy and the public’s confidence in our currency. 
Of course, further refinements to the draft Constitution are possible, and the ECB has made several 
suggestions. For example, we strongly believe that price stability should be added to the list of the 
Union’s  objectives  set  out  in  the  first  part  of  the  Constitution.  Because  Price  stability  is  of  great 
importance not only for the ECB but for the Union as a whole. It ensures confidence in the long-term 
value of the euro and translates into low and stable medium and long-term market interest rates. It 
also  avoids  an  abitrary  redistribution  of  wealth,  thus  it  helps  to  protect  the  weakest  members  of 
society. Price stability certainly deserves to be an objective of the European Union. Furthermore, we 
would  like  to  see  a  clarification  of  the  allocation  of  responsibilities  concerning  the  international 
representation of the euro. It would also be useful to recognise the widely used term “Eurosystem”. 
Naturally,  in  all  our  comments  the  ECB  does  respect  the  prerogative  of  national  governments  and 
ultimately the citizens to adopt the institutional framework of the EU. At the same time, the ECB has a 
clear interest for the constitutional process to be a success. In this, I completely concur with what my 
predecessor,  Wim  Duisenberg,  repeatedly  stressed:  for  a  well-functioning  monetary  union  a  strong 
and effective EU is necessary. EMU contributes significantly to the strength of the EU but without a 
political Union and effective institutions the ship will lose balance. 
Therefore,  I  would  like  to  comment  briefly  on  provisions  in  the  draft  Constitution  that  concern  the 
overall  political  institutions  and  procedures  of  the  EU.  I  think,  it  is  to  be  welcomed  that  the  draft 
Constitution increases the visibility and continuity of the key representatives of the EU. A new elected 
President of the European Council and a strong EU Foreign Minister will help to put faces to decisions. 
I  also  support  the  extension  of  qualified  majority  voting.  The  EU  may  not  necessarily  acquire  new 
competencies. However, the EU should have the means to implement effectively those competencies 
that have been given to it. Qualified majority voting ensures that decisions are actually taken. 
It  is  now  for  the  Intergovernmental  Conference  to  use  the  Convention’s  draft  for  finalising  the 
Constitution. In this regard, I look forward to listen to the discussions at the first panel of tomorrow’s 
congress. 
Enlargement 
The upcoming enlargement of the European Union is without any doubt a major achievement and a 
challenge. The ten new members will almost double the number of current Member States and the 
EU population  will  increase  to  more  than  450  million  people.  Looking  beyond  these  numbers,  the 
largest ever expansion of the Union will be a historic landmark. It will underline the end of decades of 
division  and  reunite  the  European  continent.  Enlargement  will  also  bring  benefits  in  a  more  narrow 
economic sense. Both new and current Member States alike will be able to enjoy the benefits deriving 
from the expanded internal market. 
Both the current and new Member States have been preparing intensively for enlargement. Let me 
first  focus  on  the  situation  in  the  acceding  countries  and  then  on  the  European  Union.  I  will  finally 
concentrate on a specific aspect of enlargement, which is of particular relevance for central bankers - 
namely the extension of the euro area. 
Acceding  countries  have  made  remarkable  progress  in  recent  years.  They  significantly  furthered 
macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  structural  reforms.  Moreover,  those  acceding  countries  that  were 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 3
formerly centrally planned economies have been able to establish functioning market economies, thus 
pursuing the process of transition. 
There remain, however, formidable challenges. The task at hand is to advance real convergence while 
safeguarding  and,  where  necessary,  enhancing  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  In  particular, 
locking in inflation at low levels, preserving the soundness of the financial sector and renewing efforts 
towards fiscal consolidation are all of the utmost importance. 
The gap in per capita income between the current and the new Member States remains large. The 
process of catching-up in real incomes has been slower than many expected at the start of transition, 
although the progress achieved differs somewhat across countries. For acceding countries as a whole, 
per capita income today is less than half of the average of the euro area. Given the very low starting 
point  for  most  countries,  increasing  prosperity  and  living  standards  will  remain  their  main  policy 
objective for quite some time. 
Of course, accession to the EU is expected to have a positive effect on the countries’ prospects of 
convergence.  The  full  integration  into  the  internal  market  will  increase  growth  prospects  and  thus 
foster  the  catching-up  process.  New  Member  States  will  have  to  complete  the  adoption  and,  even 
more  importantly,  implement  the  acquis  communautaire  (excluding,  for  the  time  being,  those  areas 
where transition arrangements apply). 
Turning  now  to  the  current  Member  States.  The  EU  has  also  been  preparing  intensively  to  make 
enlargement work. Member States took steps in the Treaty of Nice to streamline their decision-making. 
As I already mentioned, the ongoing process of giving the EU a constitution is also linked, at least in 
part, to enlargement. Within the realm of central banking, the Eurosystem has been engaged since 
1999  in  a  constructive  dialogue  with  the  central  banks  of  accession  countries.  The  institutional 
structures  of  the  ESCB  are  also  being  adapted  and  Governors  of  the  central  banks  of  acceding 
countries already take part as observers in the General Council. Finally, and most visibly perhaps, the 
ECB has submitted a recommendation on the voting modalities of its Governing Council, which has 
been accepted by the EU Council and is now under ratification. This will allow the ECB to maintain the 
efficiency and timeliness of decision-making in an enlarged euro area. 
In fact, enlargement of the EU will lead to the extension of the euro area some time in the future. New 
Member States enter with a commitment to strive towards the adoption of the euro. Let me stress that 
the basic interest of the euro area in this process is to ensure that the monetary integration of the new 
Member  States  proceeds  in  a  smooth  manner  and  in  line  with  Treaty  provisions.  This  has  two 
important implications. 
First,  given  the  heterogeneity  among  acceding  countries  in  their  economic  structure  and  their 
exchange  rate  regimes,  no  single  path  towards  the  euro  can  be  recommended  to  all  acceding 
countries. At the current juncture, the ECB does not discourage any particular strategy, provided it is 
based on sound economic reasoning, conforms to the existing institutional framework and contributes 
to  the  high  level  of  nominal  and  real  -  namely  sustainable  -  convergence,  which  is  of  the  essence 
when joining the euro. 
Secondly,  the  principle  of  equal  treatment  will  continue  to  apply  throughout  the  entire  process  of 
monetary  integration.  Adopting  the  euro  is  an  extremely  serious  affair  and  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance that countries fulfil the convergence criteria in a sustainable manner before adoption of the 
euro,  as  stated  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  There  will  be  no  additional  criteria  but  there  will  be  no 
relaxation of the criteria, either. No more, no less. 
Returning to the theme of identifying Europe, enlargement exemplifies the inclusive nature of the EU. 
The newcomers join the Union on the basis of a rules-based process and as equal members of the 
team.  Moreover,  enlargement  will  advance  the  EU’s  objectives.  It  contributes  to  prosperity,  stability 
and  peace.  Finally,  the  many  preparations  for  enlargement,  both  by  the  EU  and  by  the  acceding 
countries, provide a vivid illustration of the willingness among Member States to implement European 
solutions to European issues. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2003
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The European Union can be proud of its qualities, its clear objectives, its willingness to co-operate and 
its openness to “newcomers”. I am optimistic that despite the profound tasks that lay ahead the EU will 
maintain these qualities. Europe will sail on with a strengthened crew and a modernised ship. 
Yet, we all have to play a constructive role in this. There are investments to be made for rebuilding the 
new  Member  States  and  there  are  financial  services  to  be  integrated  into  one  European  market.  I 
sincerely believe that Monetary Union contributes to accomplishing these tasks. The euro has become 
a strong symbol of Europe. It makes the world “identify Europe” and helps Europeans to identify with 
Europe. I am grateful that as new President of the European Central Bank I have the opportunity to 
ensure that the euro will continue to stand for a successful Europe. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 51/2003 
 5
