R Basant Roi: Introduction of government securities at the stock exchange of 
Mauritius 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the official launching ceremony for 
introduction  of  government  securities  at 
the  stock  exchange  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
12 December 2003. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good afternoon  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  address  you  this  afternoon  on  the  occasion  of  the  Official  Launching 
Ceremony  for  the  introduction  of  Government  securities  at  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Mauritius.  It  is  a 
greater  pleasure  still  to  see  that  Government  securities  have  finally  found  their  way  to  the  Stock 
Exchange after several timid attempts made in the past.  
Indeed the Bank of Mauritius has been striving for more than a decade to develop a secondary market 
for  Government  papers.  In  November  1992  when  the  Bank  started  with  the  weekly  auctioning  of 
Treasury bills a strategy for the development of a secondary market was devised. It remained a paper-
strategy  and  did  not  find  its  way  through.  In  February  1994,  the  Bank  made  a  second  attempt.  A 
Secondary Market Cell was set up in-house with a view to kicking-off, with some determination, the 
development of a secondary market for Government papers. This in-house Cell was initially expected 
to play a market-making role. Commercial banks did not respond positively to the initiative. The market 
did  not  take  off.  Brokers  were  eventually  invited  as  participants  to  play  a  decisive  role  in  the 
endeavour. The then strategy of the Bank was not well received. It was not appealing to brokers. As a 
result of miscarriages, the in-house Secondary Market Cell laboured in routine operations.  
In December 1998, the Bank of Mauritius started with the sale of Treasury bills over-the-counter to 
individuals and non-financial corporations. One of the important objectives of this initiative was to let 
individuals from all strata of the population familiarize themselves with Treasury bills as an investment 
instrument. This initiative triggered competition for deposit resources in the banking industry. Individual 
investors derived some experience with Treasury bills as an investment instrument. The sale of bills 
over-the-counter  by  the  Bank  was  a  success.  Investment  in  the  bills  reached  a  peak  of  over  Rs4 
billion. Some 11,000 individuals and financial corporations invested in the bills.  
Pursuing  its  objective  to  eventually  take  Government  papers  for  trading  on  the  Stock  Exchange  of 
Mauritius, the Bank of Mauritius established, effective 1 February 2002, a Primary Dealer System. At 
the weekly auctions for Treasury bills four banks, the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd., State Bank of 
Mauritius Ltd, HSBC, and Barclays Bank Plc., were appointed primary dealers. The Bank of Mauritius 
had decided that traditional bidders for bills at the weekly auctions would be gradually cropped out. 
Between February 2002 and November 2003 transactions by Primary Dealers with banks amounted to 
Rs1.9 billion. Their transactions with Corporate bodies amounted Rs10.8 billion. With individuals their 
transactions amounted to Rs1.6 billion. These give a total amount of over Rs14 billion worth of bills 
transacted by Primary Dealers. This value of transactions in bills reflects the potential that exists for 
the trading of Government papers on the Stock Exchange.  
So far the number of eligible bidders at the weekly auctions held at the Bank of Mauritius that are not 
primary dealers has been reduced from around 250 to 11. Over time only the Primary dealers will be 
eligible  to  bid  at  the  weekly  auctions.  Institutional  investors  like  the  National  Pension  Fund,  the 
National Savings Fund and all the remaining banks and other financial institutions will be required to 
purchase Government papers on the secondary market. This would definitely require major changes in 
the investment decision-making process within these organizations. They would stand to gain in the 
medium-term.  
Sometime in May last I initiated discussions with Mr. Sunil Benimadhu, Mr. Vipin Mahabeersingh and 
Mr. Chota Moollan at the Bank of Mauritius on our intention to sell Treasury bills through brokers on 
the Stock Exchange. Several meetings were since held with myself, the Managing Director and the 
staff of the Financial Markets Department of the Bank of Mauritius. Discussions were held with stock 
brokers also. A set of rules and procedures has been defined and was submitted for approval by the 
Financial Services Commission.  
BIS Review 57/2003 
 1
Some  six  weeks  back  I  had  a  stimulative  exchange  of  views  with  the  Honourable  Minister  Sushil 
Khusiram on this project. The swiftness with which the Honourable Minister made Regulations to that 
effect  reflects  his  personal  commitment  and  determination  for  the  development  of  the  market  for 
Government papers. I am thankful to him for having supported this initiative.  
With  hindsight  the  decision  to  sell  Treasury  bills  over-the-counter  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  was  a 
decision taken in the right direction. I am happy to see that finally the trading of bills will soon take-off 
on solid foundation. The Stock Exchange of Mauritius, the Central Depository & Settlement Co. and 
the  brokers  have  put  in  lots  of  efforts  in  the  project  and  I  am  confident  that  it  will  not  suffer  the 
miscarriages of the past. Should the Stock Exchange and the brokers require any further assistance 
from the Bank of Mauritius we will be glad to do so. May I wish all the stakeholders the very best of 
success.  
2 
 BIS Review 57/2003
