 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Outlook and prospects for Asia 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Asia Pacific 
Bankers Club Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 15 September 2003. 
 Y.Bhg. Datuk Amirsham A. Aziz 
President of Asia Pacific Bankers Club 2002/2003  
Members of the Asia Pacific Bankers Club  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Introduction  
Powerful forces of change reinforced by  global political, economic and financial developments have 
had pronounced implications on the economic and financial environment we operate in. It has not only 
dramatically changed our economic and financial landscape but has brought with it new uncertainties, 
risks and challenges. Despite these developments, the Asian region has demonstrated resilience and 
continues to emerge as the fastest growing region in the world. The issue before us is - to what extent 
can Asia continue to prosper in this increasingly more difficult and changed global environment? To 
what extent can Asia(cid:146)s previous successes be sustained in these more challenging circumstances?  
It is my pleasure to be here today on this occasion of the Asian Pacific Bankers Club Conference on 
(cid:147)Financial  Stability  and  Challenges(cid:148).  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  also  welcome  the  delegates  to 
Kuala  Lumpur.  Indeed,  high  priority  has  been  accorded  by  the  economies  in  this  region  towards 
achieving  financial  stability.  Varying  degrees  of  financial  restructuring  and  reform  have  been 
undertaken  to  strengthen  domestic  financial  systems.  Five  years  since  the  countries  in  this  region 
emerged from the financial crisis we have seen financial stability restored and the financial systems 
significantly strengthened. Despite the more challenging environment in the more recent period, the 
financial  systems  in  this  region  have  demonstrated  resilience. While  this  is  a  positive  development, 
challenges remain. In view of the increasingly more difficult environment these efforts to strengthen 
the financial systems need to continue.  
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  the  background  against  which  these  efforts  are  being 
undertaken. In particular, I will focus on the emerging changes that are taking place in our region that 
are  likely  to  be  important  in  sustaining  the  growth  prospects  for  this  region.  In  the  context  of  these 
changes, I will touch on the important role that the banking sector has in contributing to the growth and 
development process.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  region  is  highly  integrated  with  the  world  economy  in  terms  of  the  high  volume  of  trade  and 
investment flows between the region and the rest of the world. While this has contributed significantly 
to the strong growth in the region, it has also brought with it increased vulnerabilities arising from shifts 
in  demand  and  reversals  in  investment  flows.  Indeed,  developments  in  the  advanced  economies 
arising from the bursting of the technology bubble, the unprecedented declines in the stock markets, 
uncertainties arising from international geopolitical tensions all had implications on this region.  
In the current environment, clear signs are now beginning to emerge that the recovery in the advanced 
economies is strengthening and that this is already positive for the region. While the pace of growth in 
the  major  industrial  countries  is  still  below  their  potential,  it  has  been  revised  upwards  to  reflect 
improved consumption and business investment activity. Most encouraging has been the indicators of 
business  investment,  particularly  IT  investment,  which  has  been  stronger-than-expected.  This  has 
been supported by improved corporate cashflows and the low interest rates environment. In Japan, 
signs of recovery have emerged  while in the euro area, indicators of business sentiment suggest a 
stabilisation from the current weakness. These developments augur well for growth in the region in the 
second  half  of  this  year  and  in  2004.  Indeed,  the  positive  performance  of  the  global  stock markets 
reflected an anticipation of stronger future growth.  
While  these  are  encouraging  trends  for  the  region,  we  need  to  look  beyond  the  prospects  of  the 
current cyclical recovery. Several significant imbalances however, still remain in the global economy. 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
 An important issue that needs to be addressed is how the unbalanced growth that has taken place in 
the world economy can be resolved with orderly adjustments of both the economies concerned as well 
as of the respective financial markets. The adjustments need to take place while maintaining robust 
overall  global  growth.  Global  growth  still  remains  dependent  on  the  US  as  an  important  trading 
partner. This is reflected in the large and persistent current account and budget deficit in the US as it 
continues to be the net purchaser of world output. Asia and the Euro area, on the other hand, continue 
to record large surpluses. This is also reflected in the significant build-up of dollar assets in Asia as US 
deficits are partially financed by capital inflows from Asian economies. Meanwhile, the adjustments to 
the  previous  excesses  in  investment  still  continue  to  restrain  new  investment,  leaving  growth  to  be 
dependant  on  the  sustainability  of  consumption.  These  global  imbalances  are  unsustainable  in  the 
medium-term.  Moreover,  any  large  and  disorderly  adjustments  in  exchange  rates  would  have 
disruptive implications on growth in the region and for the overall global growth. Despite the severity of 
the  Asian  crisis,  geopolitical  uncertainties  in  the  past  few  years,  and  most  recently,  the  SARS 
outbreak, Asia still remains the fastest growing region in the world. Growth for the region as a whole 
for this year is forecast to be about one and a half times faster than the global average.  
The issue before us is, to what extent can Asia ensure sustainability of the growth prospects over the 
long-term in this more difficult global economic environment? To what extent will the global imbalances 
place  the  burden  of  adjustment  on  the  region?  How  can  the  region  contribute  towards  a  more 
balanced global growth? In dealing with these risks and pressures, the region is supported by several 
strong underlying factors that provide the foundations for securing our future growth.  
Factors underlying Asia(cid:146)s Growth Prospects  
First, domestic demand led growth  
Domestic demand in the regional economies is becoming an increasingly important driver of growth 
that  has  considerable  potential  to  contribute  further  in  sustaining  growth  prospects  for  the  Asian 
region. The stronger domestic demand has also been reflected in the rising intra-regional demand for 
goods  and  services,  thus  providing  a  positive  mutually-reinforcing  effect  for  the  region.  While 
externally driven growth will continue to be important, the increased focus on strengthening domestic 
demand will reduce vulnerability to external developments.  
Second, the role of private consumption  
Given  the  focus  on  domestic  demand  to  harness  a  more  self-sustained  and  balanced  economic 
growth, an important catalyst is the role played by private consumption. Private consumption is well 
positioned  to  further  build  the  capacity  of  domestic  demand  in  the  region.  The  contribution  of 
consumption  to  economic growth  in  regional  economies  has  increased  over  time,  supported  by  the 
expansion in per capita income in the region, which has increased by 4% per annum during the period 
2000-2002. Consumption has also been supported by the fiscal and monetary stimulus that has been 
implemented  in  the  region.  This  has  enhanced  incomes  and  strong  credit  expansion  for  household 
spending including for the purchase of housing. The tradition of high savings ranging to between 20% 
to 45% of GNP allows scope for encouraging a  higher rate  of consumption  without  undermining  its 
sustainability.  Household  debt  levels  are  also  generally  low.  In  addition,  the  household  sector 
generally has a good track record in servicing their debt. Previous prudent fiscal policies have allowed 
an expansionary stance to support the growth while low inflation and excess capacity has allowed for 
the monetary stimulus.  
Third, favourable demographic factors  
The  Asian  region  accounts  for more  than  half  of  the world(cid:146)s  population  and  continues  to  grow  at  a 
relatively high and stable rate. Of importance is that the region has a relatively young demographic 
structure with rising education, which augurs well for securing a large and dynamic labour force going 
into  the  future.  These  favourable  demographic  prospects  of  the  region  increase  the  potential  for 
creating  a  consumer  group  with  high  purchasing  power,  thus  providing  an  increased  potential  for 
growth in domestic demand.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
 Four, rising middle-income consumers  
Rising income and urban  migration in Asia has produced a  large and vibrant  middle-income group, 
creating  a  pivotal  change  in  the  pattern  of  consumption  to  deliver  the  positive  benefits  in  domestic 
demand  growth.  The  cumulative  effects  of  policies  that  have  been  implemented  previously  have 
resulted in increasing income and living standards and established the foundations to accentuate the 
transformation of domestic demand in the region. China(cid:146)s domestic market with a population of more 
than 1.2 billion, is already the world(cid:146)s largest market for mobile phones and is poised to be the world(cid:146)s 
largest market for personal computers. By 2005, it is estimated that 15% of China(cid:146)s population would 
consist of about 200 million middle-income consumers equipped with a high propensity to consume. 
By  2010,  middle-income  consumers  in  China  are  expected  to  increase  to  400  -  500  million  thus 
making the China market comparable to that of the US.  
Five, rising intra-regional trade  
Rising economic integration has enabled the region to be more resilient in an increasingly volatile and 
uncertain external environment. The East Asian region has already developed a significant degree of 
economic  integration  as  manifested  in  its  fairly  high  level  of  intra-regional  trade.  The  rise  in 
intra-regional exports, which accounts for 34% of the East Asian region(cid:146)s exports in 2002, stemmed in 
part from the higher contribution of domestic demand, which leveraged on the robust economic growth 
achieved by regional countries. Estimates indicate that about 30-70% of intra-regional trade is for final 
demand in the region. Of significance is the positive economic performance of China and India, which 
has generated increased sources of final consumer demand. Since 1993, China(cid:146)s role in the region 
has reversed from a net exporter to a net importer in regional trade. Intra regional trade within ASEAN 
has also increased significantly to account for 24% of the region(cid:146)s trade, exceeding the trade by the 
region with the United States.  
Six, supportive policies for endogenous sources of growth  
The  region(cid:146)s  commitment  to  harness  domestic  driven  growth  has  been  reinforced  with  pro-active 
economic  policies  to  provide  an  enabling  environment  to  enhance  the  development  of  domestic 
businesses, in particular, small and medium scale enterprises. Policy makers in the region recognise 
the challenges that emanate from a more competitive environment and have continued to re-examine 
and  redefine  strategies  geared  towards  building  the  capacity  of  domestic  enterprises  and  thereby 
enhancing their contribution to growth of the domestic economy. In addition, efforts have also been 
made  to  develop  new  areas  of  growth  to  ensure  a  more  diversified  economy.  Countries  have 
increasingly  shifted  to  areas  of  their  natural  comparative  advantages,  whether  in  agriculture,  ICT, 
construction  and  infrastructure  or  services-related  sectors  in  order  to  benefit  from  their  inherent 
strengths.  
Seven, a new wave of FDI in the region  
Apart from intra-regional trade, intra-regional foreign direct investment (FDI) flows have increasingly 
operated as a strong force for growth in the East Asian region. Regional FDI has largely been trade-
related. Early FDI in East Asia was mainly derived from Western multinationals, particularly the US. 
The second wave of FDI after the late 1970s was predominantly Japanese capital which flowed into 
East Asia, in search of lower costs of production. Today, the cumulative stock of Japanese FDI has 
surpassed that of American investments. Since the late 1980s, as Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore 
transformed  into  capital  surplus  economies  that  moved  up  the  value  chain,  investments  by  these 
newly industrialised economies gained significance in Asia. This has represented the (cid:147)third wave(cid:148) of 
FDI in the region. The East Asian region is thus witnessing a steady inflow of FDIs from the NIEs to 
ASEAN and China. In the more recent period, this trend has been reinforced with increased overseas 
investments by Korea and Malaysia.  
Eight, engaging the emergence of large new markets in the region.  
Overall, as a high level of integration exists at the regional level in terms of trade and FDI, shifts in 
trading and investment patterns both from external sources into the region and within the region itself 
have been a dynamic process. Hence, given the emergence of large new markets in the region, the 
opportunities present in these markets show complementarities in the region. Countries in the region 
need  to  therefore  focus  on  these  complementarities  in  new  potential  areas  of  growth.  In  an 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 3
 increasingly competitive environment, economic progress in the region is benefiting from the strategic 
specialisations which are supported by the leverage on comparative advantages.  
Nine, regional cooperation gathers momentum  
Given  the  existing  mutual  interest  amongst  countries  in  the  region,  regional  cooperation  efforts  are 
gathering momentum in East Asia, notably in the context of ASEAN+3 and EMEAP. To-date, the focus 
of  such  cooperation  by  Governments  has  been  on  regional  surveillance,  developing  institutional 
arrangements and according high priority to co-operation in trade and investment. The drive toward 
regional cooperation will continue to  increasingly focus on enhancing regional trade and investment 
linkages to maximise the comparative advantage of each member country. Toward this end, studies 
have  already  been  commissioned  to  explore  the  feasibility  and  identify  the  preconditions  for  the 
creation of an Asian common market, a logical long-term objective of regional cooperation.  
Ten, strong underlying economic and financial fundamentals  
The underlying fundamentals in the region are expected to continue to remain positive. Sustainable 
current  account  surpluses  and  strong  international  reserves  positions  all  continue  to  support  the 
growth prospects. The high savings rate, of between 20-45%, which allows for financing of pro-growth 
policy measures from domestic sources will continue to support the growth prospects. Unemployment 
in the region as a whole is also relatively low. Financial stability has generally been restored and there 
has been a resumption in credit growth.  
The Financial Sector as an Enabler of Growth in Asia: The Vital Role of the Banking System in 
Facilitating the Economic Growth Process 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The banking sector in particular and the financial sector in general have an important role in facilitating 
the  growth  process.  The  financial  system  in  emerging  market  economies  represents  an  important 
means  to  an  end.  For  emerging  market  economies,  the  financial  sector  is  an  important  enabler  of 
growth. It is therefore important to embrace the long-term agenda of the economy.  
Despite the trend of the increasing significance of alternative means of financing, the banking sector in 
emerging market economies will for some time to come remain the most important source of financing 
in  the  economy.  The  banking  system  therefore  needs  to  effectively  and  efficiently  perform  its 
intermediation function. Of importance, is the need to recognise the on-going economic transformation 
that  is  taking  place  in  the  region  and  to  facilitate  a  more  balanced  growth  between  domestic  and 
external  sources  of  growth,  between  public  and  private  sector-led  growth,  between  the  balance  of 
consumption  and  investment,  and  between  the  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  regions  and 
communities  within  the  country.  Facilitating  a  more  balanced  growth  will  contribute  toward 
sustainability of the growth process. 
With  new  areas  of  growth  emerging,  and  new  business  models  being  adopted,  new  and  more 
differentiated customer requirements need to be met. The level of innovation will need to be accorded 
increasingly  important  attention.  While  for  the  most  part,  pricing  for  products  and  services  need  to 
reflect the costs and risks, the industry needs to recognise that in emerging market economies, the 
basis to do so should take into account the social agenda that is an integral part of the sustainable 
performance  of  the  country.  The  ability  to  achieve  socio-economic  stability  will  produce  a  more 
balanced growth. Ultimately, the objective of increasing competition and therefore enhancing efficiency 
in pricing needs to be balanced against providing basic financial services to the less advantaged retail 
customers at very minimal costs. Such trade-offs need to be made and managed.  
This also includes enhancing access to financing to the various sectors in the economy, to both the 
large and small borrowers. In emerging market economies, providing other ancilliary financial services 
especially  to  small  businesses  will  enhance  the  potential  quality  of  such  assets.  This  therefore,  not 
only includes providing greater access to financing but the complete financial services solution to the 
small- and medium-sized enterprises. In addition, monitoring loan performance during the lifetime of 
the loan rather than only during the approval process will allow for early remedial action to be taken 
well before difficulties emerge.  
4 
 BIS Review 43/2003
 A  further  important  contribution  in  emerging  market  economies  is  to  enhance  consumer  literacy 
through  consumer  and  investor  education  to  increase  the  potential  for  well-informed  financial 
decisions. Another area that is important is the investment in human capital to create a workforce that 
is skilled and competent,  as this  will bring substantial long-term benefits. Finally, foreign institutions 
that have a presence in the region need to recognise the meaningful role that can be realised in the 
region  not  only  in  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  domestic  environment  but  also  to  promote 
investment and business opportunities from their established networks in other parts of the world.  
The  Asian  Financial  Crisis  not  only  presented  the  opportunity  to  improve  the  region(cid:146)s  resilience  to 
external shocks, but also underscored the importance of breadth in the financial sector, in particular, 
the development of alternative avenues of financing. Historically, bank loans, as well as funds raised 
through equity markets have assumed significant roles in Asia as the main sources of financing. By 
providing another avenue for financing with the development of the corporate bond market, firms are 
able to improve their ability to balance debt and equity to better manage the degree of leverage while 
reducing the impact of shocks arising from over-dependence on any single form or source of financing.  
The development of corporate bond markets in the region has also enhanced the efficiency of capital 
allocation by providing an avenue for investing one of Asia(cid:146)s hallmarks - its large reserve of savings 
arising from trade surpluses. By  developing the regional bond markets, it would enable firms to tap 
alternative sources of financing at competitive cost thereby contributing to increased efficiency, higher 
investment and consequently to overall growth.  
The  launch  of  the  Asian  Bond  Fund  (ABF)  in  June  2003  marks  the  first  significant  step  in  regional 
financial co-operation and integration, and augurs well for the future development of the Asian regional 
bond market. The Asian Bond Market will not only serve to facilitate the re-investment of a portion of 
Asia(cid:146)s  reserves  back  into  the  region  but  what  is  equally  important  is  that  it  allows  for  the  efficient 
allocation  of  savings  for  productive  investments  and  at  the  same  time  broadens  and  deepens  the 
regional  bond  markets.  In  the  process,  the  level  of  corporate  governance  in  the  region  would  be 
enhanced as well.  
Indeed, developing such an alternative source of financing would serve as a more resilient source of 
long-term  financing  with  improved  matching  of  the  currency  and  maturity  profiles  of  assets  and 
liabilities. Finally, institutional investors with longer-term liabilities would benefit from reduced currency 
risk  by  purchasing  longer-term  bonds  denominated  in  their  home  currency.  This  would  contribute 
towards  diversifying  risks  arising  from  borrowing  in  foreign  currencies,  reducing  the  potential  for 
systemic risk in the financial system.  
At this juncture, there is still much potential for improvement in the regional corporate bond markets. 
Certain  countries  have  taken  measures  to  develop  their  bond  markets  with  varying  degrees  of 
progress with efforts focused on strengthening the market infrastructure, establishing benchmark yield 
curves, augmenting the number of issuances and new instruments, and further liberalizing markets to 
enhance foreign participation.  
This  has  resulted  in  the  evolution  in  the  roles  played  by  commercial  banks.  In  the  process  of 
developing  corporate  bond  markets,  commercial  banks  are  becoming  increasingly  active  as 
investment  bankers,  with  roles  as  corporate  advisors,  major  issuers,  deal  originators,  underwriters, 
dealers, brokers and providers of a broad range of risk management and hedging instruments. Such 
an evolution follows the sequence in developing deeper, more active and increasingly integrated and 
competitive financial markets.  
In the pursuit to develop regional bond markets and options for raising capital, new mindsets of looking 
at regional and global capital markets and a broader range of tools in managing risk and hedging need 
to  be  adopted.  In  this  environment  regulators  have  directed  efforts  at  increasing  transparency, 
competition and strengthening the market and legal infrastructures. These efforts, coupled with Asia(cid:146)s 
history of enterprise and value creation augurs well for Asia as a region.  
Conclusion  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
In conclusion, prospects for Asia continue to remain positive. Asia can expect to continue to remain 
the fastest growing region in the world. The economic and financial sectors in the region have now 
strengthened significantly and are better positioned to mobilize the region(cid:146)s surplus capital to provide 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 5
 broader,  deeper  and  more  liquid  sources  of  financing  to  facilitate  the  region(cid:146)s  growth.  The  new 
emerging trends in the region point to increased economic and financial integration. This is reinforced 
by  greater  regional  co-operation.  All  this  would  result  in  an  Asia  that  is  a  more mutually-reinforcing 
region of growth. In the process, the Asian region would emerge as a stronger engine of growth which 
in turn can facilitate more balanced growth in the world economy.  
6 
 BIS Review 43/2003
