Zhou Xiaochuan: Opening to the outside world - past experience and prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  World  Economic 
Development  Declaration  Conference 
the  China  Business  Summit,  Zuhai, 
10 November 2003. 
(WEDDC)  and 
 I feel honored to be able to address such a distinguished audience. Let me first congratulate on the 
launch  of  the  World  Economic  Development  Declaration  and  wish  the  conference  a  great  success. 
One  of  the  key  subjects  under  discussion  in  this  conference  is  reflected  in  the  first  part  of  the 
Declaration. That is under market economic conditions, all countries and economies need to liberalize 
trade in goods and services and investments for each other so as to cement inter-dependence and 
promote common development. Today, I would like to share with you my views on economic opening 
up, in particular the opening of the service industry. 
History  of  economic  development  and  opening  over  the  recent  decades  showed  we  are  prone  to 
underestimate advantages brought by opening up to the outside world while overestimating the shocks 
and risks that may result in such a process. Such a perception is more likely to prevail in the early 
periods of economic opening in the developing countries when they are dwarfed in terms of economic 
strength compared with the developed countries. And China’s experience over the past two decades is 
a good example in this regard. 
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, China started to import home electronic appliances, mainly color TV 
sets and cassette recorders. At that time, we heard loud voices expressing concerns over the damage 
the opening might cause to the viability of the Chinese electronic industry, for we were far behind the 
foreign countries in terms of industrial competitiveness. The final result, however, is we have not only 
made remarkable progress in developing the electronic industry, but also become the largest producer 
and exporter of the electronic audio and video products in the world. In the late 1980s, China forcefully 
cut import quotas and licensing control, and such an action raised concerns about widespread shocks 
a step forward in opening the Chinese economy big as this one could possibly inflict on the domestic 
market.  Contrary  to  these  worries,  China’s  trade  sector  witnessed  steady  development  with  the 
competitiveness  of  domestic  industries  remarkably  improved  in  the  process  of  international 
competition. 
In 1994, we unified the dual exchange rates and adopted the managed floating exchange rate regime. 
When  this  reform  was  put  on  table  for  debate  and  discussions,  some  people  expressed  profound 
worries  about  the  timing  to  introduce  it,  citing  unsound  domestic  economic  fundamentals  and  the 
inherent big risks. In their view, three preconditions must be satisfied before we could proceed to unify 
the  dual  exchange  rates,  namely  a  robust  strengthening  of  export  capability,  a  large  stockpile  of 
foreign  reserves  and  skilled  macroeconomic  management.  In  the  absence  of  any  of  these  three 
preconditions, the authorities found it very difficult to make the decision to unify the exchange rates. At 
the end of 1993, China however decided to go ahead with reform of the exchange rate regime and 
subsequently further achieved current account convertibility in 1996. With the benefit of hindsight, now 
we can see the foreign exchange reform was a great success. At the end of 2001, China joined the 
World Trade Organization (WTO). As to whether China should join the WTO, people at the beginning 
were actually holding different views. Some worried about the impact it might bring on the domestic 
industries. We made careful preparation. Experience over the past two years indicated that China’s 
WTO accession has brought itself benefits far more than the shocks and risks. In my view, the above 
four cases may help to improve our perceptions about opening up to the outside world in the future. 
The global experience was not much different. After World War II, the developing countries initially did 
not fully recognize their comparative advantages in international competition and worried about shocks 
associated  with  external  liberalization.  They  generally  thought  that  the  world  economic  order  was 
discriminatory in nature against the developing countries, so they demanded for a change of the terms 
of  trade  with  the  developed  world  and  a  strengthening  of  protection  for  their  national  industries. 
However, with the great success of the export-oriented development strategy adopted first by the four 
“Asian  Dragons”  and  then  by  the  five  “Asian  Tigers”,  such  a  development  strategy  has  started  to 
gradually take firm root in the developing countries, including China. Despite the breakout of the Asian 
financial crisis in late 1990s, many developing countries have come to realize that the benefits brought 
by economic opening up actually outweigh the inherent shocks and risks, and these countries have 
become an important force in advancing the liberalization of trade and investment. Of course, there is 
no denying that some countries have not even attempted to open up to the outside world, and it is 
more disappointing to see the resurgence of protectionism in some developed countries and the failure 
of the Cancun negotiations. 
Looking forward on the basis of historic experience, I hope to talk a bit more about the future of service 
trade.  Similar  to  the  liberalization  of  trade  of  goods,  opening  of  the  service  sector  will  also  bring 
competition. Competition further brings not only pressure, but also vigor and prosperity. In this regard, 
opening  and  competition  will  promote  technology  exchange  and  more  effective  allocation  of  the 
resources. In China, financial opening constitutes an important component of the overall opening of 
the service sector. As China’s banking system is still heavily burdened with various deficiencies and 
the  capital  market  and  insurance  sector  remain  young,  we  need  to  make  unremitting  efforts  to 
strengthen our own competitiveness. Despite the above-mentioned obvious advantages, the shocks 
and risks are still likely to be overstated when it comes to the opening of the service industry. 
It  is  my  belief  that  steady  opening  of  China’s  service  industry  in  accordance  with  the  Chinese 
government’s  WTO  commitments  and  the  timetable  of  the  WTO  will  bring  more  benefits  to  the 
Chinese economy and the whole world. The People’s Bank of China looks forward to making valuable 
contribution,  through  its  financial  policies,  to  the  opening  of  the  service  sector,  to  the  realization  of 
principles contained in the Declaration and to the success of this conference. 
Thank you! 
