   Toshihiko Fukui: The Japanese economy 
Summary of remarks by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the National Securities 
Industry Convention, Tokyo, 18 September 2003. 
 As you are aware, economic activity in Japan continues to be virtually flat. Recently, however, some 
signs of apparent recovery are being observed.  
Business fixed investment is recovering gradually against the background of an upturn in corporate 
performance--a trend evident particularly among large manufacturers. As for the export environment, 
the likelihood is gradually increasing that the growth rate of the U.S. economy will accelerate and that 
the  East  Asian  economies  as  a  whole  will  resume  a  growth  trend.  Furthermore,  business  and 
household sentiment is getting a boost from the substantial rise in stock prices from their low levels 
during the early spring.  
Thus,  it  is  likely  that  exports  and  production  will  gradually  resume  an  upward  trend,  triggering  a 
virtuous circle leading to a moderate self-sustained recovery in domestic demand.  
The extent and strength of recovery based on this scenario of export and production growth need to 
be monitored closely, as they could be affected adversely by ongoing structural adjustments, such as 
firms’ reduction of excess debts and labor costs.  
With regard to financial markets, long-term interest rates are increasing along  with the rise in stock 
prices. Long-term rates normally move in response to market participants’ prospects for the economy. 
In the short term, however, they may move erratically in response to various other factors. The Bank of 
Japan, for its part, will monitor closely the overall trend of financial markets, watching, for example, 
any developments in long-term rates that are not in line with economic activity.  
Next  I  will  touch  on  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  has  provided  liquidity  in  a  flexible  and 
proactive  manner  in  response  to  various  cases  of  rising  uncertainty  under  the  framework  of 
quantitative monetary  easing.  As a result, I believe  the  Bank has  been  able to prevent  various risk 
factors from exerting a negative impact on the economy through heightened liquidity concerns.  
Needless to say, the  Bank  will  do  its utmost to support the Japanese economy. It  will maintain the 
policy  of  quantitative  monetary  easing  to  ensure  the  progress  of  economic  recovery,  supplying 
sufficient liquidity and strengthening the working of the transmission mechanism of monetary easing.  
The Bank remains firmly committed to maintaining the current quantitative easing policy until the year-
on-year increase in the consumer price index (CPI) becomes stably zero or above. This is a clear and 
specific pledge aimed at actual CPI data made public each month, and not the prospect of it. I would 
like  to  emphasize  this  point,  although  I  am  aware  that  it  has  been  stated  explicitly  on  several 
occasions in the past.  
As I have explained, the  Bank’s commitment to easy monetary  policy  is unequivocal. However, the 
role of financial markets in delivering its commitment effect through the entire economy is equally great 
and not to be discounted. A key factor behind their role, I believe, is the "price discovery function." In 
other words, the determination of market prices and interest rates at levels that reflect the degree of 
relevant risks is the most important premise for the efficient distribution of funds required by firms and 
households.  Further  refinement  of  the  price  discovery  function  through  development  of  innovative 
transactional techniques in an environment of enhanced market liquidity should lead to more efficient 
funds allocation and, hopefully, more active investment by the private sector.  
In  this  connection,  markets  for  new  securitization  products  such  as  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs) 
have  grown  in  recent  years.  I  strongly  hope  that  securities  firms,  the main  players  in  the  securities 
market,  and  other  relevant  institutions  will  continue  to  utilize  their  ingenuity  in  developing  new  and 
innovative financial instruments that will further invigorate financial markets.  
The  Bank,  for  its  part,  has  recently  started  purchasing  ABSs  to  help  support  this  market.  It  is 
unprecedented for a central bank to directly accept the credit risk pertaining to private-sector debt, and 
this is, therefore, a move that we hope will act as a "catalyst" for the autonomous development of the 
ABS market.  
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 Next, I would like to turn to Japan’s financial system, which, though still under serious strain, appears 
to be gradually improving its soundness.  
Nonperforming loans (NPLs) held by financial institutions as a whole remain the most crucial issue. 
The  economic  value  of  loans  is  being  appropriately  evaluated.  And  based  on  this  evaluation, 
appropriate  provisioning  and  write-offs  are  being  promoted.  Currently,  efforts  are  being  made  to 
enhance concerted action by both the financial and industrial communities.  
It  is  notable  that  parties  concerned  are  becoming  increasingly  aware  of  the  necessity  to  utilize 
corporate  managerial  resources  in  achieving  structural  reforms,  rather  than  wastefully  abandoning 
them.  While  the  work  of  the  Industrial  Revitalization  Corporation,  a  public  entity,  is  getting  into  full 
swing,  unassisted  and  voluntary  actions  on  the  part  of  the  private  sector  are  also  growing  more 
widespread.  
Moreover, from the viewpoint of reforming Japan’s economy and industrial structure, which forms the 
basis of the economy, it is essential that new and innovative value-added products and services be 
created. It is important, therefore, for large numbers of entrepreneurs, the creators of new businesses, 
to  emerge.  The  price  discovery  function  of  the  market,  pointed  out  earlier,  comes  into  play  in  this 
connection. As a part of facilitating the environment, it is essential that risk capital be provided through 
the  channel  of  the  price  discovery  function  to  such  entrepreneurs.  The  mediation  of  risk  capital 
between investors and industries is one of the fundamental roles performed by the securities industry. 
Needless to say, herein also lie major business opportunities. I would like to add here my expectation 
that the securities industry takes a further step forward in this regard now that there is felt to be an 
ever-increasing need for industrial restructuring.  
At  the  same  time,  there  exists  an  undiminished  expectation  that  the  securities  industry,  as  a  major 
player in the financial markets, will continue in its efforts to further invigorate the markets. One of the 
means to achieve this objective would be the improvement in transparency and smooth functioning of 
the market by enhancing clarity in presenting risk-return relationships to customers of the securities 
firms.  I  believe  that  increased  competition  between  securities  companies  and  other  financial 
institutions in providing varied and dependable credit intermediation services strengthens the financial 
system as a whole and thereby helps improve the structure of the economy.  
It is evident that securities companies themselves must improve their managerial capabilities if they 
are  successfully  to  perform  such  an  important  role.  At  present,  the  stock  market  is  showing  some 
buoyancy  in  terms  of  both  price  and  volume.  I  trust,  however,  that  the  securities  industry  will  not 
loosen its resolve and that it will continue to target creativity and higher efficiency. 
The Japanese economy as well as the financial system is still burdened with a number of difficulties. 
Nevertheless,  lights  of  hope,  though  dim  at  present,  are  on  the  horizon.  The  Bank,  for  its  part,  will 
continue to do its utmost to ensure that these lights do not fade.  
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
