Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, before the 
Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of 
the  European  Parliament,  Brussels, 
1 December 2003. 
 It is my pleasure to appear before your Committee for the first time in my capacity as President of the 
ECB. I would like to tell you that I was very impressed by our last encounter here and I thank your 
Committee and Parliament for the confidence expressed by giving your approval to my appointment. I 
look forward to continuing our regular dialogue in the same fruitful and constructive spirit that was dear 
to  my  predecessor  Wim  Duisenberg,  to  whose  achievements  I  wish  to  again  pay  tribute  on  this 
occasion. 
I  shall  begin  my  first  report  to  you  with  our  assessment  of  economic  and  monetary  developments, 
before turning to another issue of topical importance, namely the draft EU Constitution. I should like to 
conclude my statement by briefly addressing the international role of the euro. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
At the time of Mr Duisenberg’s last testimony in September, we noted that economic activity had been 
very weak in the first half of 2003. At the same time, early signs of a recovery were emerging. Since 
then,  data  have  confirmed  our  main  scenario,  which  is  one  of  a  gradual  improvement  in  economic 
activity starting in the second half of this year. Eurostat has provisionally estimated that quarterly real 
GDP growth was 0.4% in the third quarter of the year. 
There are, increasingly, reasons to expect the gradual economic recovery in the euro area to broaden 
and strengthen in the course of 2004. Recent data show that the recovery of the world economy is 
clearly  making  progress.  The  expansion  of  global  trade  and  economic  activity  should  support  euro 
area  exports.  On  the  domestic  side,  recent  survey  data  continue  to  point  towards  a  further 
improvement  in  confidence.  The  conditions  for  investment  are  also  improving  as  a  result  of  firms’ 
continued  adjustment  efforts  to  enhance  productivity  and  profitability.  Financing  conditions  are 
generally  favourable,  not  least  due  to  the  low  level  of  interest  rates.  Finally,  terms-of-trade  effects 
stemming from the past appreciation of the euro should also positively affect real disposable income 
and  thus  facilitate  a  pick-up  in  consumption  growth.  Developments  in  financial  markets  are  broadly 
consistent with the overall picture of a gradual resumption of economic growth. 
As compared with a few months ago, downside risks to the main scenario of a gradual recovery have 
clearly receded. Overall, the risks to this scenario in the coming quarters now appear to be balanced. 
Over longer horizons, some risks to the sustainability of economic growth at the global level remain. 
This is due, primarily, to unresolved structural problems, the sustainability of public finances and to 
external imbalances in some parts of the world economy. 
As  regards  prices,  the  annual  rate  of  HICP  inflation  declined  to  2.0%  in  October,  from  2.2%  in 
September. Looking ahead, inflation rates may not fall as quickly and strongly as was expected at the 
time of the last testimony of the President of the ECB. We have seen rather strong increases in some 
categories of food prices owing to the effects of this summer’s heatwave. In addition, oil prices have 
remained  higher  than  expected,  owing  mainly  to  ongoing  political  uncertainties  in  the  Middle  East. 
Furthermore,  in  the  coming  months,  planned  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  in 
some euro area countries are likely to have an upward impact on annual inflation rates. 
However, there are also factors which should continue to dampen inflationary pressures. First, in the 
context of a gradual economic recovery, wage developments should remain moderate. In addition, the 
past appreciation of the euro, which is reflected in current subdued price pressures at the producer 
level, will continue to lower import prices and be passed on to consumer prices over time. At the same 
time, developments in inflation expectations need to be monitored closely. 
Cross-checking  this  assessment  with  our  monetary  analysis,  we  see  that  liquidity  in  the  euro  area 
remains ample following the period of strong monetary growth over the past two years, reflecting past 
portfolio shifts, precautionary savings and the low level of interest rates. The latter factor also provided 
a counterweight to the negative impact of weak economic growth on loans to the private sector. In the 
view of the Governing Council, the accumulation of excess liquidity should not, at the current juncture, 
be of concern for price stability, given that, for the time being, the economic recovery is only gradual. 
However, should high excess liquidity continue to prevail once there is a significant strengthening of 
economic  activity,  this  could  lead  to  inflationary  pressures  in  the  medium  term.  Monetary 
developments therefore need to be monitored carefully. 
Overall,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  at  its  meeting  in  November,  continued  to  assess  the 
outlook for price developments as in line with our definition of price stability and considered the current 
stance of monetary policy to be appropriate. At the same time, the Governing Council made clear that 
it will carefully monitor all developments that might affect its assessment of risks to price stability. 
Turning  to  recent  fiscal  policy  developments,  you  are  very  well  aware  of  our  serious  concerns.  In 
recent months we have seen a gradual move away from the commitments made under the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact.  The  Governing  Council  had  already  made  clear  on  6  November  that  the 
recommendations  of  the  European  Commission  regarding  the  steps  to  be  taken  in  the  excessive 
deficit procedure had pushed the room for interpretation of the rules and procedures to the limit. 
As  you  already  know  from  the  Governing  Council’s  statement  to  the  public  last  Tuesday  afternoon 
following  the  decision  of  the  ECOFIN  Council,  the  Governing  Council  deeply  regrets  the  ECOFIN 
Council’s  decision  not  to  act  on  the  basis  of  the  Commission’s  recommendations  regarding  France 
and  Germany.  It  fully  shares  the  views  made  public  by  the  Commission  on  the  ECOFIN  Council’s 
conclusions. 
The  conclusions  adopted  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  carry  serious  dangers.  The  failure  to  respect  the 
rules and procedures foreseen in the Stability and Growth Pact risks undermining the credibility of the 
institutional framework and confidence in the sustainability of public finances across the euro area. 
The  Governing  Council  takes  note  of  the  commitments  by  France  and  Germany  to  correct  their 
excessive  deficits  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  by  2005  at  the  latest,  and  strongly  urges  the 
governments concerned to live up to their responsibilities. It is now absolutely imperative that effective 
action  be  taken  to  limit  negative  effects  on  confidence.  Moreover,  we  also  note  that  the  ECOFIN 
Council stands ready to act on the basis of the Commission’s earlier recommendations to give notice 
to the two countries, should they fail to comply with the Council’s conclusions. 
The public can rest assured that the Governing Council remains staunchly committed to maintaining 
price stability. 
We  firmly  believe  that  the  need  to  correct  the  excessive  deficits  in  some  countries  and  to  pursue 
sound fiscal policies in general have to be framed within a comprehensive and credible medium-term 
reform strategy. It is necessary for executive branches, parliaments and social partners to push ahead 
with structural reforms aiming at enhancing the competitiveness of the euro area, notably in labour and 
product markets, as well as in social security systems, in order to foster a more flexible allocation and 
utilisation of capital and human resources. The Governing Council very strongly supports recent and 
ongoing efforts by a number of governments in this direction. It also encourages social partners to fully 
commit themselves to the objective of making the euro area a more dynamic and innovative economy, 
as intended by the “Lisbon agenda”. 
Once there is a convincing commitment to implementing comprehensive structural reforms to foster 
the growth perspective of the euro area, confidence will increase among all economic actors, including 
consumers. The upswing that we currently foresee is a sign that confidence is returning, but for the 
economic  recovery  to  be  sustained  it  is  essential  that  excessive  deficits  are  corrected  and  that  the 
reforms currently being discussed are carried out. 
The draft EU Constitution 
2.  
For the last two years, the EU has been engaged in intense debates on a future Constitution for the 
Union. These debates resulted in the draft Constitution presented by the Convention in June and are 
now  culminating  in  the  Intergovernmental  Conference,  which  is  seeking  to  finalise  the  Constitution 
before the end of this year. The ECB has followed the constitution-building process with great interest 
and welcomes all efforts to further the construction of a united Europe. 
When the European Union re-writes its rulebook by giving itself a Constitution, does this mean that 
there will be profound changes to the provisions relating to the ECB and to monetary union in general? 
Throughout  the  process  of  drafting  the  Constitution,  the  ECB  has  consistently  advocated  that  the 
monetary constitution of the EU - the basic set of rules and provisions for EMU, as laid down in the 
Maastricht Treaty - is sound both in terms of the objectives set and the allocation of responsibilities 
between different actors and levels of government. 
I am grateful that the Convention has followed a similar line of reasoning. Its draft Constitution takes 
over the provisions relating to EMU without changes in substance. The single monetary policy is, by its 
very nature, indivisible. Thus, it is an exclusive competence of the Union. The conduct of monetary 
policy has been assigned to an independent European Central Bank, which fulfils this task together 
with the national central banks of the euro area and with the clear primary objective of maintaining 
price stability. The European System of Central Banks is explicitly mentioned in the first part of the 
draft Constitution. 
However, further refinements to the draft Constitution are possible, and the ECB has made several 
suggestions. For example, we strongly believe that price stability should be added to the list of the 
Union’s objectives set out in the first part of the Constitution, as price stability is of great importance 
not only for the ECB but for the Union as a whole. It ensures confidence in the long-term value of the 
euro and translates into low and stable medium and long-term market interest rates. It also avoids an 
arbitrary  redistribution  of  wealth,  thereby  helping  to  protect  the  weakest  members  of  society.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  price  stability  deserves  to  be  one  of  the  European  Union’s  objectives. 
Furthermore, we would like to see a clarification of the allocation of responsibilities with regard to the 
international representation of the euro. It would also be useful to formally recognise the widely used 
term “Eurosystem”. 
It  is  now  for  the  Intergovernmental  Conference  to  use  the  Convention’s  draft  to  finalise  the 
Constitution.  I  sincerely  hope  that  Foreign  Ministers  and  Heads  of  State  or  Government  will  take 
decisions in full awareness of the historic nature of their task. From the ECB’s point of view, the recent 
proposal  to  introduce  into  the  Constitution  an  extended  enabling  clause  which  would  allow  the 
European Council to amend, by unanimity, important parts of the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB 
is certainly not welcome. In a letter which I sent to the current President of the Council, Mr Frattini, last 
week, I stressed that the ECB is seriously concerned about this proposal. Such an expansion of the 
simplified amendment procedure would imply a far-reaching change to the current constitution of the 
ESCB, which the ECB could not support. 
The international role of the euro 
3. 
Let me conclude my statement with some observations on the international role of the euro, an issue 
which I know the European Parliament follows with great interest. The ECB monitors developments in 
this  area  carefully  and,  as  in  previous  years,  we  will  shortly  publish  its  annual  review  of  the 
international role of the euro. The findings of this report suggest that the use of the euro by non-euro 
area residents continues to increase gradually and is most prominent in regions neighbouring the euro 
area. In addition, the use of the euro is, to some extent, driven by the euro area itself, as euro area 
investors account for a significant part of demand for international euro-denominated bonds. 
While these features have not changed over the past few years, a number of new developments have 
emerged in 2003. First, there is some evidence of rising interest in euro-denominated bonds on the 
part of Asian investors. Second, according to the latest data published by the IMF, which were recently 
revised, the share of the euro in global foreign exchange reserves also increased between 2001 and 
2002, from 16.4% to 18.7%. Third, euro area countries are increasingly using the euro as a settlement 
or  invoicing  currency  in  trading  with  non-euro  area  residents,  especially  following  the  cash 
changeover. This suggests that the cash changeover may have encouraged exporters and importers 
to review their settlement and invoicing practices. As you know, these developments are the outcome 
of  decisions  essentially  taken  by  market  participants.  They  underscore  the  confidence  of  non-euro 
area residents in the euro. 
I am now open to questions. 
