Villy Bergström: Can we be best again? The importance of capital formation for 
long-term growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Villy  Bergström,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting  in  Kiruna, 
8 December 2003. 
 I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak before the local group 
of the Center for Business and Policy Studies.  
I intend to speak today about the factors that affect a country’s long-term growth capacity. To this end, 
I will focus on the role played in this regard by capital formation, but will also discuss other important 
factors  such  as  changes  in  both  the  labour  supply  and  the  age  structure  of  the  population  in  the 
coming years. Like many other countries, Sweden is facing the problem of an ageing population. This 
is going to place a greater burden on the public finances and will entail increased demands on the 
working population to forgo consumption in favour of supporting the elderly. Meanwhile, labour force 
growth in Sweden will be slower in the years ahead. Moreover, the rate of net investment in Sweden is 
low in comparison to previous periods. This affects Sweden’s long-term growth capacity and thereby 
also the prosperity of people in general. It is these topics that I shall be concentrating on in my speech 
today. But allow me first to begin with a few words about the Riksbank’s role in this context. 
The Riksbank has little opportunity to influence Sweden’s long-term growth capacity 
As everyone knows, one of the Riksbank’s statutory remits is to promote price stability. A large part of 
the  Riksbank’s  operations  revolve  around  this  remit.  In  order  to  be  successful  in  this  regard,  it  is 
important  that  the  process  of  wage  formation  works  well  and  that  both  the  central  and  local 
governments manage their finances in a responsible manner. Relatively stable inflation in recent years 
and expectations of future inflation around the Riksbank’s target of 2 per cent indicate that the Bank 
has been successful in its conduct of monetary policy in recent years. This success has been largely 
attributable  to  increased  stability  in  economic  policy  in  general;  in  particular,  fiscal  policy  has  been 
governed by a ceiling for central government expenditure and a surplus target for the public finances. 
Furthermore,  partly  as  a  result  of  greater  credibility  for  the  Riksbank’s  inflation  target,  the  social 
partners have managed to halve the rate of wage increases from the levels that were common in the 
1970s  and  1980s.  These  circumstances  have  formed  the  environment  in  which  the  Riksbank  has 
acted in recent years.  
The very point of giving the Riksbank’s objective of price stability high priority in economic policy is that 
a stable economic environment fosters economic growth and high employment. The experiences from 
the beginning of the 1970s and 20 years thereafter indicate that high inflation, devaluations that fuelled 
economic  growth  followed  by  austerity  measures  to  prevent  overheating,  entailed  weak  productivity 
growth and a drop in the standard of living compared with other industrialised nations. 
The Riksbank can help to create a favourable environment for rapid economic growth but the growth 
itself  must  come  from  other  sources  than  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  the  Riksbank  has  every 
reason  to  take  an  interest  in  these  sources  of  economic  growth  since  fast  growth  facilitates  the 
Riksbank’s task. This task involves tightening or easing monetary policy to regulate demand, so that it 
keeps  even  pace  with  our  country’s  growth  capacity.  In  that  way  inflation  is  stabilised.  A  higher 
potential rate of growth allows scope for higher aggregate demand without giving rise to inflationary 
pressures. 
Long-term growth and demand 
The  Riksbank  distinguishes  between  two  concepts  of  growth:  potential  growth  and  demand-driven 
growth. Potential growth is the rate of growth that is sustainable in the long term, taking account of 
resource growth in the economy and how effectively these resources are employed. Thus, you could 
say that potential growth is determined by a combination of labour force growth, investment activity 
and scientific and technological progress. The latter determines how efficiently the labour force and 
capital can be utilised. None of these fundamental factors can be influenced by the Riksbank other 
than  temporarily.  The  Riksbank’s  work  is,  however,  affected  by  potential  growth.  The  higher  the 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 1
long-term  sustainable  rate  of  growth,  the  easier  it  is  for  us  to  balance  aggregate  demand  in  the 
economy so that it coincides with what is available for household consumption, business investment 
and the needs of the public sector. So monetary policy cannot raise the potential growth rate but, in a 
worst  case  scenario,  as  we  witnessed  during  the  1970s  and  1980s,  it  can  worsen  our  chances  of 
attaining a high potential growth rate by affecting demand in the economy in the wrong way. 
Consequently, on an abstract level, the “formula” for economic growth is very simple. It is the weighted 
sum of labour force growth and capital growth as well as technological progress.   
However, when we compare growth between different countries, it is not that interesting to note that a 
country has high growth because its labour force is growing fast. It is the standard of living that is of 
interest and this does not have to improve just because the population and labour force are growing. 
The important issue instead is how quickly a country’s production grows per capita and this leads us 
into concepts such as productivity in a broad sense. For productivity is just that - production per capita. 
It  can  be  measured  per  inhabitant,  per  employee  or  per  hour  worked.  The  concepts  are  closely 
related. One interesting observation is that the United States’ rapid growth in recent years has been 
attributable  mainly  to  high  labour  force  growth.  Productivity  in  the  United  States,  however,  has  not 
been faster than in Sweden. 
During the first half of the 1990s, Swedish productivity growth was among the most vigorous in the 
world,  which  resulted  in  increased  prosperity  for  Swedish  citizens.  During  the  1950s  and  1960s, 
productivity growth in Sweden increased further. This was partly due to considerable reconstruction 
needs  following  the  Second  World  War  and  the  robust  demand  that  resulted  from  this.  In  addition, 
trade  was  liberalised  during  this  period  which  led  to  stiffer  competition,  and  -  most  of  all  -  capital 
formation  was  rapid.  The  favourable  productivity  growth  during  these  years  furthered  Sweden’s 
prosperity.  In  1970,  Sweden  was  in  fourth  place  in  the  OECD  league  in  terms  of  GDP  per  capita, 
which means that it was one of the four richest countries in the world. 
During the period that followed, however, productivity growth was appreciably slower and it is widely 
known that the 1970s and 1980s were bad periods for Sweden. Today, Sweden finds itself in 17th 
place  in  the  OECD  league  and  is  below  the  average  for  industrialised  countries.  What  caused  this 
decline  then?  It  may  be  relevant  to  look  at  the  reasons  behind  Sweden’s  weak  growth  during  the 
20 years up to the mid 1990s. These are mistakes that we need to avoid in the future.  
When I discuss this unsuccessful period in Sweden I will mainly focus on productivity since it is the 
measure that determines our standard of living. We then have to somewhat modify the growth formula 
that I mentioned earlier. The basic growth mechanism for our standard of living, i.e. labour productivity, 
now  becomes  the  weighted  sum  of  capital  growth  per  capita  and  technological  progress.  Given  a 
constant age structure of the population, and an evenly balanced age pyramid, the basic formula for 
growth  in  the  standard  of  living  can  also  be  expressed  as  the  weighted  sum  of  capital  growth  per 
employee and technological progress (a complication that I will return to later is that the age structure 
is not constant). 
Capital formation contributed to lower productivity growth in Sweden 
Why did it go badly for Sweden during the 1970s and 1980s? First, it should be noted that the majority 
of industrialised nations suffered a drop in productivity growth from the beginning of the 1970s. This 
was due to the supply shock associated with the first oil crisis, when the price of oil tripled, followed by 
a second oil crisis at the end of the 1970s when the price once again increased threefold but this time 
from a higher level. As we know, the price of oil affects many parts of the economy. Oil is used as 
energy for transport and heating purposes and its price therefore has a direct impact on the costs of 
these. Moreover, firms’ costs are affected since oil products are often used as intermediate inputs in, 
for  example,  different  plastic  products.  So  all  countries  encountered  problems  due  to  the  oil  supply 
shock, but productivity growth declined more in Sweden than in other countries.  
Many  explanations  have  been  put  forward  for  this.  Social  benefits  were  improved  during  this  time. 
Compensation for sick leave was raised and the qualifying day was abolished. Furthermore, legislation 
was introduced for job security and co-determination in the workplace. Many believe that firms’ costs 
rose and that production was disrupted by sick leave and other kinds of leaves of absence that had 
also been introduced. These factors are difficult to assess but it is likely that they contributed. At the 
same time as the oil price shock, the Swedish economy was also hit by a domestic cost crisis which 
resulted in a decline in production. In spite of this, firms retained employees to a greater extent than in 
other countries, which led to lower growth in labour productivity.  
2 
 BIS Review 56/2003
Moreover,  in  the  mid  1970s,  there  were  dramatic  changes  in  capital  formation,  which  undoubtedly 
explain some of the slowdown in productivity growth. Of course, this capital growth is in turn the result 
of  a  variety  of  economic  conditions  for  enterprise  and  the  public  sector,  including  those  mentioned 
earlier. 
For the most part we speak about investment activity in our country in gross terms. This concept also 
includes such investment that is needed to replace the depreciation that occurs during all production. 
When we exclude the part of gross investment that is made to compensate for this depreciation, we 
are left with net investment. Net investment is the new additions to the capital that is already employed 
in production in the form of plant, machinery and buildings. 
So, as regards net investment, in other words the contribution to capital formation, this was more than 
halved as a percentage of GDP in the mid 1970s. This meant two things.  
First,  capital  growth  per  employee,  or  per  hour  worked,  fell.  For  a  number  of  years,  investment 
dropped so much that capital per employee in the business sector actually declined. In other words, 
each employee worked with less capital. In order to illustrate what capital per employee means, we 
can take an extreme example, namely what a lone worker can accomplish when digging with a spade 
and iron bar compared with a hydraulic excavator. The latter represents considerably more capital per 
employee than just digging with a spade, as well as substantially less physical effort for the worker. 
Therefore, we should expect productivity growth to fall when capital per employee declines.   
But  there  is  also  another  indirect  effect.  With  new  capital,  new  technology  is  introduced  into  the 
production process. Investment is the means for putting new technology and research into practical 
production.  Through  investment,  new  methods  and  new  technology  are  ushered  into  production 
processes. For this reason, we should expect less technological progress in production when capital 
formation falls. An excavator is so much more than a large number of spades; it represents entirely 
new technology that affects the whole production process.   
Figure 1 shows that capital formation, net investment as a percentage of GDP, fell in the mid 1970s - 
from around 15 per cent of GDP to about 5 per cent. So growth in capital per employee was slower 
from  the  mid  1970s,  and  new  technology  was  not  employed  to  the  same  extent  as  before.  Such a 
dramatic change has to have consequences. This is evident in the bottom curve showing the current 
account, which was almost always in deficit during the 20 years after 1975 because Sweden’s saving 
declined even more than investment. It was only during the first half of the 1990s that a surplus was 
restored, as a result of a weaker krona, higher capital formation and even higher saving. 
Figure 1. Saving, investment(net) and the current
account, as percentage of disposible income
20
15
10
5
0
-5
1950 52 54 56 58 1960 62 64 66 68 1970 72 74 76 78 1980 82 84 86 88 1990 92 94 96 98 2000 02
Source: Associate Professor Lennart Berg, Uppsala University
Saving
Investment (net)
Current account
BIS Review 56/2003 
  3
In order to illustrate the importance of the lower capital formation, I have compiled productivity data 
from  the  period when  the marked  change  took place  (see  Table  1).  In  the 1980s,  the  lower  capital 
growth had been established. Capital per employee - capital intensity - had been more than halved 
both in industry and in the business sector as a whole. Productivity growth followed this trend and was 
more  than  halved  from  the  high growth  levels of  the  1960s.  This  means  that  the  value  of  the  work 
performed decreased, as did the scope for higher real wages. 
 
Table 1. Capital intensity and productivity growth 
 5.3% 
3.2% 
2.0% 
7.6% 
3.4% 
3.2% 
 
Productivity 
 
Productivity 
Business sector 
Capital/ 
employee 
6.5% 
6.2% 
3.0% 
Industry  
Capital/ 
employee 
8.3% 
1963-70  
6.3% 
1970-80  
2.8% 
1980-86  
Source: Own calculations 
 
The previous diagram also shows that the level of capital formation in relation to our total resources 
that we had during the 1960s has not returned but that the fluctuations have been larger after the mid 
1970s.  On  average  we  have  remained  at  approximately  one-third  of  the  level  of  resources  that  we 
previously  had  allocated  to  new  capital.  One  difference  is  that  saving  has  increased,  but  not 
investment. This means that we are exporting capital. 
Despite a continuation of relatively low capital formation, the weak trend seen in total Swedish labour 
productivity  in  recent  years  was  broken  during  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  when  productivity  growth 
increased. But it was other factors than capital formation that contributed to this. Among other things, 
the economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s led to substantial rationalisation measures and the 
winding up of low-productivity operations, which resulted in increased productivity growth but also high 
unemployment. During the same period, there was also a shift in Swedish economic policy in order to 
create conditions for more sustainable long-term economic growth. This shift in fiscal and monetary 
policy  led  to  increased  stability  and  predictability,  which  most  likely  enhanced  the  efficiency  of  the 
economy. Moreover, the tax and social security systems were reformed. Sweden’s entry into the EU’s 
single  market  together  with  the  deregulation  of  several  important  markets  also  entailed  stiffer 
competition. Furthermore, the faster growth in the private sector compared to the public sector, as well 
as the evolution of the ICT sector during the second half of the 1990s, most likely contributed to higher 
productivity growth. 
Against  the  background  of  the  lower  capital  formation  since  the  1970s,  however,  it  is  worth  asking 
what the prospects for Swedish growth are in the years ahead. Will we be able to regain any of our 
previously prominent position as a comparatively rich industrialised nation? What does the low level of 
capital  formation  imply  for  Sweden’s  chances  of  recapturing  the  leading  position  it  had  among 
industrialised nations at the beginning of the 1970s? 
It is important here to note that the structure of the business sector has changed. The industrial sector 
as a whole, including the basic industries, such as mining, ironworks and steelworks, and paper and 
pulp,  have  decreased  as a  proportion of  GDP  in  favour of  the expanding services  industries.  Basic 
industries’  share  has  fallen  from  6.5  per  cent  of  GDP  in  1970  to  just  over  4  per  cent  today,  while 
service production in the business sector has increased from approximately 30 per cent of GDP to just 
over  40  per  cent  during  the  same  period.  We  have  therefore  moved  further  and  further  away  from 
capital-intensive production to production that is more dependent on human capital than heavy plant 
and machinery. Another factor to take into account is the decline in housing construction, which has 
also contributed to the drop in the figures for capital formation. However, housing construction does 
not  have  the  same  importance  for  productivity  growth  as  industrial  investment,  for  example.  This 
means  that  the  dramatic  decline  in  capital  formation  does  not  have  to  imply  an  equivalent  fall  in 
productivity growth. 
Nevertheless, I still have the impression that we are focusing less on capital formation than before. 
This is indicated by the fact that structural change is currently relatively limited. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2003
The labour supply 
Permit me now to discuss the other component that determines a country’s long-term growth capacity 
besides productivity, namely the labour supply. This is determined by the number of people in work 
and the number of hours they work. 
The number of hours worked rose during the years after the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. This 
was partly due to greater demand for labour, to a rise in the working age population (20-64 years) and 
relatively low numbers on sick leave. The trend in the number of hours worked has been broken in 
recent years, however. This is because the total number of people on sick leave has risen in Sweden 
since  1997-1998.  According  to  the  most  common  measurement  methods,  Sweden  has  the  highest 
incidence of sick leave in the EU. There has also been an increase in work absence due to holiday 
and  other  leaves  of  absence  as  well  as  a  decrease  in  overtime  and  additional  working  hours. 
Meanwhile, the labour market has not made satisfactory use of the immigrant population in Sweden. 
The employment rate among this group has been markedly lower than among native Swedes. 
In  addition,  according  to  Statistics  Sweden,  population  growth  in  the  years  ahead  will  be  less 
favourable  from  a  labour  force  perspective  than  it  has  been  up  to  now.  The  number  of  people  of 
working age will indeed continue to rise but by an increasingly smaller amount. This is because the 
number of people entering retirement in the years ahead will rise sharply. In particular, large numbers 
of  the  1940s  generation  will  start  to  retire  in  a  few  years.  This  could  have  a  negative  impact  on 
potential growth.   
Over the coming 10-year period, the number of people over 65 years of age is estimated to rise by 
270 000 - some 1.6 per cent per year on average. Between 2012 and 2030, this group will increase by 
around 1.3 per cent per year. The number of people of working age is forecast to rise by 170 000 over 
the coming 10-year period, i.e. by only approximately 0.3 per cent per year. Between 2012 and 2030, 
the increase in the working age population is estimated to average 0.05 per cent per year, which in 
effect amounts to stagnation. 
In all, this means that measures will need to be taken to boost the supply of labour in the years ahead. 
These could be achieved by reducing the numbers on sick leave and if fewer people were to take early 
retirement. The trend also implies greater demands on people to enter working life at an earlier age 
and  on  increased  labour  force  participation  among  the  elderly.  Moreover,  we  currently  have  an 
unutilised labour force reserve in the form of our immigrant population. The employment rate among 
this  group  averages  about  30  per  cent  lower  than  that  of  native  Swedes.  Measures  to  improve 
integration  of  immigrants  into  the  labour  market  could  make  a  positive  contribution  to  the  labour 
supply. 
For example, growth in the number of hours worked could be 0.4 percentage points higher per year up 
to 2008 if the Government’s target of halving sick leave were to be attained. Furthermore, if the labour 
reserve  represented  by  our  immigrant  population  were  to  be  utilised,  the  number  of  hours  worked 
could rise further. If this reserve were to be utilised to the same extent as native Swedes, the number 
of hours worked could rise an additional 0.1 percentage points. This would have a positive impact on 
potential growth. 
Heavier burden on the public finances 
As  I  mentioned  initially,  it  is  important  that  monetary  policy  and  the  wage  formation  process  are 
efficient and that the central and local governments manage their finances in a satisfactory way. The 
change in the population’s age structure in the years ahead is not only a challenge to future potential 
growth. It also has other implications.  
For instance, the population trend means that the proportion of people that are 65 years or older will 
increase from 17 per cent today to 23 per cent in 2030. At the same time, the working age population 
will  decrease  from  59  to  54  per  cent  during  the  same  period.  This  implies  that  the  working  age 
population  in  Sweden  will  have  to  support  an  increasingly  large  proportion  of  both  the  young  and 
elderly. At present, each person of working age supports 0.70 people that do not work - in other words, 
the  young  and  old.  By  2030,  it  is  forecast  that  each  person  of  working  age  will  have  to  support 
0.84 people, which represents a rise in the dependency burden of 20 per cent. The whole increase in 
the dependency burden is due to the retirement of large numbers from specific generations, the 1940s 
generation in the years 2005-2015 and the 1960s generation in the years around 2030, at the same 
time as average life expectancy is expected to increase. So if we only take the elderly into account, 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 5
each person of working age today supports 0.29 people that are 65 years or older. By 2030, this is 
forecast to have risen to 0.42. 
So the problems we are seeing today with the public sector’s financing are a trifle compared with what 
awaits  us  if  nothing  is  done.  The  population’s  age  structure  will  entail  great  demands  on  welfare 
services and thereby a heavier burden on the public finances. In addition, a smaller supply of labour 
and a resultant lower level of production will mean a drop in receipts for the Government.  
However, the problems would increase even in the event of even population growth. The structural 
shift implied by an ever larger production of services is also a problem in this context. Workers in the 
services sector demand the same wage as other parts of the population despite considerably slower 
productivity growth compared with the industrial sector, which is exposed to competition. The latter is 
undergoing constant  rationalisation  through  an  increasing ratio of  capital  per  employee - something 
that  is  not  quite  as  feasible  in  the  services  sector.  This  means  that  the  relative  price  of  services  is 
increasing over time, which is a particularly large problem when services, like in Sweden, are largely 
provided by the public sector and financed via taxes. The wage rises that are being driven forward by 
the high-productivity industrial sector are spreading to services and could entail consequent increases 
in prices and taxes.  
Allow me finally to touch upon an overlooked industrial sector in Swedish business - basic industries.  
Basic industries - a good example. 
In the public debate during the 1990s on the New Economy, it was often claimed that the old industrial 
society had had its day and that traditional industry would suffer the same fate as agriculture. Basic 
industries,  which  are  roughly  composed  of  the  iron  and  steel  industry,  paper  and  wood  product 
industry  and  mining,  have  indeed  declined  in  significance  in  recent  decades,  especially  for 
employment, but are still important for net exports. While the rise and fall of the ICT sector during a 
number of years has taken centre stage in the debate, an evolution has long been under way within 
other industry. For it is in non-ICT industries that much of the gains afforded by the new technology 
have been achieved and will be able to be achieved.  
Basic industries have undergone marked structural change. For example, average production capacity 
per mill in the forestry sector has increased eight times for paper manufacture and six times for the 
manufacture of pulp in the past 40 years. The small mills have been closed down and there is now a 
substantial  concentration  of  companies.  The  exploitation  of  economies  of  scale  as  well  as  stricter 
environmental  standards  have  forced  companies  to  invest  on  a  large  scale.  Sweden  currently 
accounts for about 3 per cent of paper manufacture in the world and 9 per cent of exports. Almost 85 
per cent of the production of paper and pulp is exported. It is true that the mining industry is not as big 
as  it  once was.  Its  value added  today accounts  for just  over 1  per  cent  of  the  total  value added  in 
industry. But after a period of stagnation at the beginning of the 1990s, net exports of ore increased at 
the end of the same decade to account for approximately 2 per cent of total net exports of industrial 
products.  LKAB  accounts  for  approximately  4  per  cent  of  world  trade  in  iron  ore,  and  Swedish 
companies hold a dominant position in Europe in terms of production of iron, silver and lead.1  
In spite of competition from countries with considerably faster-growing forests and cheaper ore, as well 
as the fact that technology in some areas has become easier to transfer between countries, the basic 
industries have survived several crises over the years. The reason for this and for the fact that basic 
industries are still relatively important today is probably that the owners of industry and its executive 
management have been quick to assimilate new technology and have constantly sought to refine and 
create  a  niche  for  their  businesses.  They  have  substituted  labour  for  capital  at  a  fast  rate  (see 
Figure 2) . Sweden’s biggest paper and pulp mill, Husum outside Örnsköldsvik, is run by 113 people 
per shift, while Boliden’s opencast mine, Maurliden, employs around 12 people when the mine is in 
operation. 
                                                      
1   Svensk Basindustri , Ds 2001:63 (Basic industries in Sweden, Ds 2001:63) 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2003
Figure 2. Capital stock per employee
M anufacturing
Paper and pulp
M etal w orks and m etal product industry
M ining
n
o
i
l
l
i
 m
K
E
S
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
3
6
9
1
5
6
9
1
7
6
9
1
9
6
9
1
1
7
9
1
3
7
9
1
5
7
9
1
7
7
9
1
9
7
9
1
1
8
9
1
3
8
9
1
5
8
9
1
7
8
9
1
9
8
9
1
1
9
9
1
3
9
9
1
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 So basic industries in Sweden have undergone the necessary adjustment to a modern structure and 
have subsequently performed very well in relation to international competitors. The contrast is striking 
compared with the rusting steel-industry and the problem-ridden forestry industry in the United States 
where attempts have been made to circumvent the necessary adjustment by way of import tariffs.  
While Swedish industry as a whole lost just under 20 per cent of its world market shares in relation to 
other  OECD  countries  between  1970  and  1990,  basic  industries  recovered  towards  the  end  of  the 
1980s.  Basic  industries  also  outperformed  other  industry  in  terms  of  productivity,  with  vigorous 
productivity growth in particular during the second half of the 1980s. In the iron and steel industry, for 
example,  productivity  rose  sharply  between  1977  and  1984,  reflecting  extensive  rationalisation 
measures especially as regards the manufacture of merchant steel. 
As  I  said  earlier,  Swedish  capital  formation  as  a percentage of  GDP  was  halved  in  the  mid  1970s. 
Thus,  factors  other  than  a  good  supply  of  cheap  real  capital  have  been  behind  the  favourable 
development  of  basic  industries.  Our  country  has  specialised  in  capital-intensive  process  industry 
based  on  inexpensive  energy  and  a  good  supply  of  raw  materials,  notably  wood.  Thus,  the  driving 
force has mainly been the supply of energy and raw materials rather than cheap real capital. 
Another important factor is growth in total factor productivity. This is a result of technological progress 
and  essentially  measures  how  much  production  can  rise  during  a  given  period  without  needing  to 
increase  labour  and  capital.  Total  factor  productivity  depends  in  turn  on  how  many  resources  the 
country and industry invest in R&D. In 12 of 19 industrial sectors, R&D intensity is higher in Sweden 
than in the other OECD countries. Relative R&D intensity is particularly high - that is R&D compared 
with corresponding sectors in other countries - in basic industries, i.e. in the steel and paper industry. 
Besides a cheap supply of energy and raw materials, the success of basic industries is also due to the 
relatively sharp focus on R&D compared with other countries. 
Figure  3  shows  that  productivity  in  the  paper  and  pulp  industry  is  a  result  of  internally  generated 
technological progress as opposed to closures of weak units, which is predominant in other sectors.  
BIS Review 56/2003 
 7
Figure 3. Breakdown of total factor
productivity, 1990-1998
Paper and pulp (SNI 21-22), average productivity growth: 5.2
Telecom products (SNI 32), average productivity growth: 9.2
Manufacturing, average productivity growth: 4.2
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of productivity growth that is due
to internal improvements in productivity
Percentage of productivity growth that is due
to the closure of low-productivity operations
and the start of high-productivity operations
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
Note. The Figure does not show a complete breakdown of productivity and therefore does not sum up to 100. A full breakdown 
would also include covariance terms. See, for example, Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (1998), Bureau of Census, USA. 
  Overall, the standard of living in Sweden has dropped in comparison with other countries because the 
country’s total factor productivity has lagged behind. We have fallen from a leading position in terms of 
standard  of  living  to  being  a  relatively  poor  industrialised  nation  with  a  below  average  income  per 
capita among OECD countries. Our fall behind in total factor productivity is evident in industries such 
as engineering and chemicals while our basic industries have performed well. 
It could be said that since relative R&D expenses have been especially high in our basic industries, it 
has helped to ‘conserve’ the traditional industrial structure. It has even been claimed that our standard 
of  living  lags  behind  that  of  other  countries  because  we  have  locked  the  factors  of  production  into 
traditional  basic  industries.  This  is  wrong  of  course.  The  alternative  conclusion  is  that  if  Swedish 
business as a whole had been as alert to developments as the basic industries, and invested as much 
in R&D compared with other countries, Sweden would not have declined into relative poverty. 
Conclusions - well, can we be best again? 
Growth  is  now  in  the  focus  of  the  public  debate  in  Sweden.  It  is  important  that  we  re-establish  a 
relatively high standard of living and cope with the unfavourable consequences of our population trend 
-  not  least  for  the  sake  of  our  public  finances.  Moreover,  if  we  succeed  in  our  work  to  create  high 
potential growth, the Riksbank would be able to refrain from tightening monetary policy in times of low 
growth. 
It is vital that we lay the foundations to enable an increase in the labour supply in the years ahead. 
First,  it  is  important  to  create  conditions  that  enable  our  immigrant  population  to  work.  It  is  also 
important that economic policy is focused on finding ways to reduce the distortional effects of the tax 
and  benefit  system,  not  least  as  regards  people’s  willingness  to  work  and  the  motivation  of 
entrepreneurs to start up new businesses within all Swedish industries.  
It  is  mainly  an  increase  in  productivity  that  lays  the  foundations  for  long-term  growth.  Thus,  a 
fundamental precondition for success is to re-establish a high rate of capital formation and thereby the 
introduction  of  new  technology.  But  we  do  not  primarily  need  to  increase  saving,  since  we  have  a 
substantial current account surplus. Investment in Sweden could replace capital exports. The evolution 
of basic industries also demonstrates that investment in R&D has the potential to yield considerable 
productivity gains and that old industrial sectors do not have to be written off. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  that  we  do  not  lose  our  traditionally  successful  basic  industries  and  only 
focus on ICT and biotechnology, not to mention the so-called creative industries. Our basic industries 
8 
 BIS Review 56/2003
have demonstrated their staying power; they have coped with major structural change and are growing 
steadily. They are also the industries in Swedish business that, compared with their counterparts in 
other  countries,  have  come  furthest  in  terms  of  technological  level,  productivity  and  innovation.  So 
there is also scope for an expansion of the capital-intensive basic industries.   
Allow me to conclude by saying that we certainly have the potential to be among the best again. But it 
will require diligence, enterprise, increased investment and a healthier population. It took 20 years to 
go  from  being  one  of  the  richest  countries  to  being  a  comparatively  poor  industrialised  nation. 
Productivity will have to improve a few tenths of one per cent more than in other countries year in and 
year out for a couple of decades. So it will take an equivalent period of persistent effort to regain a 
leading position.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 9
