   Toshihiko Fukui: The Japanese economy and Asia 
Speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Asian Affairs Research Council, 
Tokyo, 26 September 2003. 
 It is a great pleasure to have this opportunity to address the Asian Affairs Research Council. Today, 
after touching briefly on the current state of the Japanese economy, I would like to share with you my 
thinking on the following topics: the deepening interdependence between Japan and the rest of East 
Asia under globalization; the implications of this deepening interdependence; and the improvement of 
financial and capital markets in the region as a key factor for East Asia’s economic growth.  
Before  I  start,  let  me  note  that  in  today’s  remarks  I  focus  on  East  Asia,  primarily  the  newly 
industrializing economies (NIEs),1 ASEAN,2 and China, not Asia in general, which would include India 
and other South Asian countries.  
Current State of the Japanese Economy 
I. 
In the Bank of Japan’s semiannual economic outlook published in April 2003, the standard scenario 
was  that  as  exports  and  production  increased  with  the  recovery  of  overseas  economies,  a  self-
sustaining recovery would gradually gain momentum in the second half of fiscal 2003. There were a 
number of uncertainties in this standard scenario. In fact, since spring 2003, the uncertainty about the 
economic outlook was amplified against the background of the war in Iraq, severe acute respiratory 
syndrome  (SARS),  volatile  movements  in  the  stock  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  and  persistent 
concern about financial system stability. As a result, an excessively pessimistic view on the economic 
outlook seemed to have spread toward the summer.  
Such  an  excessively  pessimistic  view,  however,  has  been  receding  since  the  summer.  Domestic 
demand has begun to show some signs of improvement. Corporate profits continue to increase, and 
the  ratio  of  current  profits  to  sales  for  this  fiscal  year  is  likely  to  reach  the  highest  level  since  the 
collapse of the bubble economy. Judging from various survey results and in light of recent machinery 
orders,  a  leading  indicator,  the  trend  of  recovery  in  business  spending,  by  large  manufacturing 
companies  in  particular,  is  anticipated  to  become  more  evident.  Despite  continuing  weakness  in 
private consumption as shown in sales statistics, we have also begun to observe some favorable signs 
of change on the employment and income front. Wages and employment figures, including those for 
part-time workers, have stopped falling.  
Overseas economies appear to be showing signs of gradual improvement. The U.S. economy is likely 
to  pick  up  as  private  consumption  remains  firm  partly  due  to  the  large  tax  cuts,  and  orders  and 
shipments of IT-related goods are increasing. East Asian economies are also returning to a recovery 
path after a temporary decline in private consumption caused by the spread of SARS in the spring. A 
rebound  in  global  IT  demand,  especially  in  the  United  States,  seems  to  have  given  an  additional 
impetus to the East Asian economies, which are heavily dependent on IT-related industries. Against 
this favorable background to overseas economies, Japan’s exports are likely to return to a moderate 
recovery path in the second half of this fiscal year.  
The  Nikkei  225  Stock  Average  has  regained  the  10,000  yen  level  since  the  middle  of  August, 
reflecting improved corporate profits and better economic prospects.  
In  view  of  these  developments,  there  is  an  increasing  probability  that  the  Bank’s  standard  scenario 
released in April, a virtuous cycle of recovery in which an increase in exports leads to an increase in 
production and profits, will materialize. Yet, considering structural adjustment pressure stemming from 
excess debt and labor, uncertainty still exists with respect to the strength and breadth of the expected 
recovery.  
                                                      
1   Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan. 
2   Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 1
 By maintaining quantitative easing, the Bank has strived to ensure that economic recovery continues, 
thereby  overcoming  deflation  and  putting  the  economy  back  on  a  sustainable  growth  path.  In  this 
regard,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  Bank  has  made  a  strong  commitment  to  continuing 
quantitative easing until the year-on-year increase in the consumer price index (CPI) becomes stably 
zero or above.  
So  far,  I  have  discussed  the  cyclical  problem  of  the  Japanese  economy,  where  economic  activity 
remains below its potential due to lack of demand. But, the Japanese economy also suffers from a 
longer-term problem of the potential growth rate being on a downward trend amid such changes as the 
IT  revolution,  economic  globalization,  and  an  aging  society.  Although  it  is  not  yet  clear  how  the 
potential  growth  rate  can  be  raised,  I  believe  that  the  keys  to  higher  growth  can  be  found  in  such 
traditional  concepts  as  competition,  the  division  of  labor,  free  trade,  education,  and  the  capital 
markets.  The  deepening  of  interdependence  between  the  Japanese  and  other  Asian  economies 
should be examined in this context.  
More than 200 years ago, Adam Smith emphasized the advantage of the division of labor, saying that 
"the  division  of  labor  is  limited  by  the  extent  of  the  market."3  The  expansion  of  an  economy  or  its 
market size, for example, from a village to a city, or from a city to a nation, promotes the division of 
labor  and  increases  production  capacity.  At  the  same  time,  market  expansion  and  the  associated 
increase  in  purchasing  power  induce  new  entry  into  the  market,  which  leads  to  more  intensified 
competition  and  higher  efficiency.  This  mechanism  applies  equally  to  economic  globalization.  The 
division  of  labor  through  international  trade  and  the  efficient  use  of  managerial  resources  through 
direct investment are indispensable for economic development.  
Interdependence between Japan and the Rest of East Asia 
II. 
East Asian economies are the high-growth center of the world, with an average annual growth rate of 
more than 7 percent during the past ten years, which is significantly higher than that of industrialized 
countries. The NIEs first achieved high growth in the second half of the 1970s, closely following Japan. 
Then, from the mid-1980s, East Asia as a whole exhibited remarkable economic growth as the ASEAN 
and Chinese economies joined the advance.  
The mid-1980s were the period when Japanese companies took major steps toward globalization. At 
that time, many of them struggled to find new opportunities in their overseas business strategies such 
as  building  factories  abroad  and  undertaking  foreign  direct  investment  to  cope  with  the  rapid 
appreciation of the yen and intensifying trade friction with the United States. In expanding into NIEs, 
Japanese companies aimed at substantially reducing production costs, and maintaining or enhancing 
their competitiveness by taking advantage of the inexpensive and abundant local labor force in their 
processing and assembly bases. These activities of Japanese companies contributed significantly to 
the creation of employment opportunities in East Asia as well as the region’s economic growth.  
In the 1990s, companies from all over the world, including Europe and the United States, boosted their 
direct  investment  in  East  Asia.  They  first  invested  in  the  ASEAN  countries,  and  then  expanded  to 
China. In terms of industries, IT-related companies made significant inroads into the region as the IT 
revolution progressed. Although direct investment was temporarily halted by the Asian currency crisis 
in 1997-98, it resumed as regional growth regained momentum.  
Recently, Japanese companies, not only manufacturing but also nonmanufacturing companies such 
as retailers, distributors, trading houses, and financial institutions, are actively engaged in businesses 
in East Asia, particularly those related to China. These businesses include not only the relocation of 
labor-intensive  production  but  also  the  expansion  of  new  business  aiming  at  technology  transfer, 
marketing,  and  sales  enhancement.  Such  business  expansion  promotes  the  further  globalization  of 
Japanese companies.  
These developments are reflected in trade. For example, the total amount of trade by the NIEs, the 
four major countries of ASEAN,4 and China increased 2.3 times from 1991 to 2002. And, East Asia’s 
share in the world trade increased from 14 percent to 17 percent over the same time span, exceeding 
                                                      
3   Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Book 1, Chapter 3, 1776. 
4 
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   that of the United States. The salient feature of East Asia’s trade expansion is the rise in the trade of 
IT-related goods. In fact, IT-related goods account for about 30 percent of the exports of East Asian 
economies, which is higher than the figure for traditional export items such as clothing. In terms of the 
share  in  the  world  trade  of  IT-related  goods,  Asia,  excluding  Japan,  accounts  for  more  than  30 
percent,  which  is  higher  than  that  for  Japan,  the  United  States,  and  Europe.  East  Asia  plays  an 
important role as the global supplier of IT-related goods.  
Trade  between  Japan  and  the  rest  of  East  Asia  is  also  on  an  upward  trend.  From  1991  to  2002, 
exports from Japan to the rest of East Asia increased 1.6 times, and imports from the rest of East Asia 
to Japan 1.9 times. In particular, trade with China posted a significant increase. Both exports to and 
imports  from  China  rose  more  than  fourfold  from  1991  to  2002.  In  terms  of  Japan’s  exports  and 
imports classified by region, the rest of East  Asia now  accounts for more than 40 percent, up from 
about  30  percent  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s,  which  is  significantly  higher  than  that  for  the  United 
States and the European Union.  
With  the  increasing  trade  volume,  the  trade  items  between  Japan  and  the  rest  of  East  Asia  have 
changed. A significant part of exports from Japan consists of capital goods and intermediate goods 
shipped to  production and processing bases in  East Asia.  Among such exports, those of IT-related 
electronic parts to China have recently displayed a marked increase. A large part of imports from the 
rest  of  East  Asia  to  Japan  used  to  consist  of  labor-intensive  goods,  including  clothing  and  light 
manufactured products. But, lately, imports of these labor-intensive goods have been leveling off, and 
instead  those  of  high  value-added  goods  such  as  IT-related  and  capital  goods  have  been  on  an 
increasing trend. The rise in IT-related goods in both exports and imports indicates that Japan and the 
rest  of  East  Asia  are  in  the  process  of  establishing  a  vertical  international  division  of  labor  under 
ongoing economic globalization.  
Implications of a Deeper Interdependent Relationship 
III. 
As  I  mentioned,  Japanese  companies  need  to  open  themselves  further  to  global  competition  and 
transform themselves to  enhance their vitality  under  globalization. Given  that Japan  and the rest of 
East  Asia  have  already  established  significant  economic  interdependence,  I  would  like  to  consider 
further  the  implications  of  deeper  regional  interdependence  in  the  context  of  the  transformation  of 
Japanese companies.  
Under globalization, countries and regions naturally deepen their economic linkages with each other. 
With the advance in transportation and IT, it is a global economic trend that people, goods, money, 
and  information  move  freely  across  borders,  and  that  countries  and  regions  deepen  their  mutual 
dependence by promoting the international division of labor based on their comparative advantages. 
In  light  of  this  trend,  it  is  very  important  for  Japan  and  the  rest  of  East  Asia  to  further  deepen  the 
already established interdependence, for the following reasons.  
The first is geographical proximity. Simply  put, Japan adjoins the rest of East Asia, and vice versa. 
Despite the significant advances in transportation, geographical proximity and a small time difference 
still  offer  substantial  advantages  in  terms  of  the  movement  of  people  and  goods.  The  IT  revolution 
enables inventory control without actually having to carry a large amount of inventories. In addition, the 
prompt  and  timely  delivery  of  goods  from  suppliers  to  customers  becomes  important  in  responding 
swiftly to changes in demand. The merits of such geographical proximity have been shown clearly in 
Europe as well as North and South Americas, where mutual dependence with neighboring countries is 
first strengthened.  
The  second  is  the  large  economic  size  of  East  Asia,  excluding  Japan.  In  fact,  in  terms  of  nominal 
GDP, it is about 70 percent of Japan’s economy as measured in current foreign exchange rates. The 
economic size of Latin America is a little less than 20 percent of the United States, and that of Eastern 
Europe  is  less  than  10  percent  of  the  Euro  area.  Such  a  comparison  clearly  shows  the  huge 
advantage for Japan to have an enormous and fast-growing market such as East Asia as a neighbor. 
A further expansion of the markets in East Asia is expected, especially China. Currently in China, a 
rise in income is enlarging consumer demand. Moreover, we now observe an increase in investment 
demand  for  enhancing  production  and  product  development  capacity  as  well  as  construction 
investment demand related to the Beijing Olympic Games and the Shanghai Exposition.  
The third is the complementary nature of the relationship between Japan and the rest of East Asia. 
East Asia is endowed with an abundant labor force that is diligent and relatively inexpensive. It is thus 
quite an effective strategy for Japanese companies shouldering high labor costs to make use of such a 
BIS Review 42/2003 
 3
 labor force to strengthen their competitiveness. Accordingly, many Japanese manufacturing firms have 
moved  their  production  and  processing  bases  to  East  Asia  which  has  been  welcomed  by  the  host 
countries as these moves create employment and increase income. Furthermore, they look forward to 
the  transfer  from  Japan  of  production  and  product  development  techniques  as  well  as  managerial 
expertise that will help them move to a more sophisticated industrial structure.  
It is clear that all these reasons lead naturally to the formation of interdependent relationships between 
Japan and the rest of East Asia. In fact, I see it as an encouraging trend that momentum is growing 
among Japanese companies to seize a variety of new and challenging business opportunities in East 
Asia, in China in particular.  
Having said this, there is concern in Japan that the expansion of Japanese companies to East Asia 
engenders  a  hollowing-out  of  Japanese  industry,  which  adversely  affects  domestic  production  and 
employment. There exists a deeply embedded view that rapid growth in East Asia, especially in China, 
may constitute a threat to the Japanese economy.  
However, faced with intensifying global competition, due partly to the increased consolidation of East 
Asia in the global economy, Japanese companies must strive to increase their ability to create high 
value-added goods and services, while raising productivity and correcting their high cost structure. Not 
only  companies  expanding  their  overseas  operations,  but  also  those  remaining  in  Japan,  need  to 
enhance  their  competitiveness  through  innovation  and  the  reallocation  of  resources.  In  addition  to 
people, such intangible assets as information, knowledge, and expertise move freely across borders. 
By  effectively  utilizing  these  assets  and  human  resources,  Japanese  companies  should  be  able  to 
generate a self-sustained virtuous cycle of creating high value-added goods and services in Japan.  
As economic globalization progresses, deeper interdependence between Japan and the rest of East 
Asia is of great significance. One of the driving forces behind this interdependence is the prevalence 
of free trade agreements (FTAs) in East Asia. FTAs expand trade and direct investment by eliminating 
trade  barriers among the  parties  to such  agreements. Although recognizing such merits, we should 
bear in mind the exclusiveness of FTAs to parties outside the agreements. Thus, in the "Basic Policies 
for Economic and Fiscal Policy Management and Structural Reform 2003" announced in June 2003, 
the  Japanese  government  emphasizes  the  need  to  promote  the  current  round  of  World  Trade 
Organization (WTO) negotiations as well as FTAs.  
Improvement of Financial and Capital Markets in East Asia 
IV. 
With  the  deeper  interdependence  between  Japan  and  the  rest  of  East  Asia  through  business  and 
trade, there is a growing need to improve the financial infrastructure to underpin these activities. Under 
globalization,  money  travels  across  borders  much  faster  than  people  and  goods  do.  To  take 
advantage  of  the  market  mechanisms  and  enhance  competitiveness,  developing  convenient  and 
efficient financial and capital markets is indispensable.  
The importance of a healthy financial infrastructure is one of the  valuable  lessons learned from the 
Asian currency crisis of 1997-98. During the crisis, companies in East Asia suddenly faced difficulties 
in  their  funding  as  they  relied  heavily  on  U.S.  dollar-denominated  short-term  debt.  Concerns  about 
financial stability developed into a serious economic crisis. As a result, many economies in the region 
suffered  negative  economic  growth.  With  this  experience  in  mind,  after  the  crisis  East  Asian 
governments reformed the banking sector, and companies in the region switched their funding to long-
term debt and direct investment as well as to domestic currency-denominated debt.  
Although  these  efforts  have  been  gradually  bearing  fruit,  it  is  vital  to  further  develop  financial  and 
capital markets to respond to growing credit demand and achieve the efficient allocation of resources.  
To this end, it is useful to strengthen the functioning of bond markets in East Asia. Deep and liquid 
bond markets can satisfy various funding and investment needs in the region. Furthermore, the fair 
assessment  of  credit  risk  in  bond  markets  contributes  greatly  to  strengthening  the  financial 
intermediation  function  of  the  banking  system.  Japan  has  made  a  variety  of  contributions  to  the 
development of Asian bond markets. I will return to this subject later when I discuss the role of the 
Bank of Japan.  
Strengthening the functioning of Japan’s financial system also helps to stimulate and diversify capital 
flows in East Asia. Recently, however, loans by Japanese banks to the region have been declining, 
and companies in East Asia do not issue a large number of bonds in the samurai bond market. To 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2003
   improve  the  situation,  it  is  necessary  to  revitalize  the  Japanese  securities  market,  and  at  the  same 
time, to strengthen the intermediation function of the Japanese financial institutions. 
Let me touch briefly upon the foreign exchange rate system in East Asia. For companies vigorously 
engaged in business in East Asia, the stability of East Asian currencies is a prerequisite for expansion. 
As I have often stated elsewhere, foreign exchange rates should be determined in a stable manner 
reflecting  economic  fundamentals.  In  an  open  economy,  we  cannot  simultaneously  achieve  a  fixed 
foreign  exchange  rate,  free  capital  flows,  and  independent  monetary  policy.  For  example,  many 
industrialized countries, including Japan, enjoy free capital flows and independent monetary policy at 
the  expense  of  having  floating  foreign  exchange  rates.  On  the  other  hand,  China  seeks  a  de  facto 
fixed  foreign  exchange  rate  and  independent  monetary  policy  at  the  expense  of  regulated  capital 
flows. Although China is gradually easing regulations on capital outflows, the deregulation of capital 
flows  may  cause  instability  if  unaccompanied  by  reform  of  the  domestic  banking  system,  as  the 
experience  of  the  Asian  currency  crisis  shows  clearly.  One  orthodox  way  to  achieve  sustainable 
economic growth is to gradually remove capital controls and make the foreign exchange rate system 
more flexible in tandem with reform of the domestic banking system and strengthening of the financial 
system.  
Role of the Bank of Japan 
V. 
Finally,  let  me  discuss  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  the  context  of  deeper  interdependence 
between  Japan  and  the  rest  of  East  Asia.  In  brief,  what  the  Bank  can  do  is  to  provide  Japanese 
companies  with  a  stable  financial  and  economic  environment  to  support  their  innovative  business 
activities under globalization. Let me elaborate.  
First, needless to say, the sound development of the Japanese economy is one of the most important 
prerequisites for stable economic growth in East Asia. To this end, the Bank is working to overcome 
deflation  and  put  the  economy  back  onto  a  sustainable  growth  path  by  maintaining  the  current 
quantitative easing policy. 
Second, the Bank is strengthening regional financial cooperation with central banks in the rest of East 
Asia. Such a direction has gained further momentum since the Asian currency crisis of 1997-98. In the 
wider  context  of  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system,  the  importance  of 
establishing  a  collective  and  regional  financial  support  system  has  been  widely  recognized  among 
East Asian economies. In this regard, Japan has already entered into currency swap agreements, in 
the form of liquidity support, with Korea, Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia, China, and Indonesia.  
Discussion on developing bond markets in East Asia is underway in various international forums. The 
Bank has taken an initiative in such discussions in close cooperation with the Japanese government. 
Recent examples include the Bank’s decision to participate in the Asian Bond Fund, which is a fund for 
investment  in  U.S.  dollar-denominated  East  Asian  sovereign  bonds.  This  is  part  of  central  bank 
cooperation to further develop Asian bond markets, which was discussed at the Executives’ Meeting of 
East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP). The initial size of the Asian Bond Fund is only about U.S.$1 
billion. We hope that with an increase in trading volume and liquidity as well as an expansion in the 
number of investors not only from the region but also from all over the world, the Asian Bond Fund will 
generate momentum for the further expansion of Asian bond markets. This would certainly contribute 
to  facilitating  funding  by  Japanese  companies  in  East  Asia.  We  also  strongly  hope  that  such 
cooperation among central banks in East Asia will strengthen financial systems in the region.  
Third, the Bank is further improving the quality of information and analysis relating to economic and 
financial developments in East Asia. Particularly noteworthy are the rapid development of the Chinese 
economy and the expansion of Japanese companies into China-related businesses. In light of such 
developments, the Bank is preparing to establish a representative office in Beijing by the end of the 
year.  Through  this  office,  the  Bank  aims  to  gather  more  detailed  information  about  the  East  Asian 
economy.  
Bearing in mind the relationship between Japan and the rest of East Asia that I have described, we will 
make our utmost efforts to meet the challenges facing the Japanese economy in the broader context 
of ongoing globalization.  
BIS Review 42/2003 
 5
