Kristina Persson: The impact of the euro 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Women’s Economic 
Round Table, New York, 29 October 2003. 
 Allow me first to extend special thanks for this invitation. It is particularly important for me personally 
as  well  as  for  the  Riksbank  to  be  given  this  opportunity  to  meet  women  economists  and  discuss 
current  economic  issues.  I  am  privileged  to  be  one  of  three  women  on  the  Riksbank’s  Executive 
Board, which has a total of six members. At the Riksbank we strive to attain an even distribution of 
men  and  women  at  all  levels.  This  is  a  deliberate  policy  but  also  reflects  the  sharp  rise  in  the 
proportion  of  women  among  qualified  economists  entering  the  Swedish  business  sector  in  recent 
decades. If this trend is to continue, and more women are to take the chance of achieving success in 
this traditionally male profession, we will need more role models like you here today. 
The subject of my speech is “The impact of the euro”, a topic that was decided before 14 September 
2003, when Sweden held a referendum on introducing the single currency. Personally I am convinced 
for many reasons that Sweden should introduce the euro, and made no secret of that. However, as 
many of you know, the result was a clear ‘no’ to the euro.  
The question of the economic advantages and disadvantages of the euro often resembles a tug-of-war 
between  the  short-  and  long-term  perspectives.  The  risks,  when  highlighted,  often  temporarily 
overshadow the long-term gains, which arise in small incremental doses over a long period. 
Unfortunately, short-term conditions came sharply into focus just when the Swedish people were about 
to  vote,  as  attention  was  turned  to  the  global  economic  slowdown  and  its  effect  on  the  euro  area, 
particularly in the major countries. GDP growth in Germany and France is forecast to decline from 0.2 
per cent and 1.3 per cent respectively in 2002 to 0.0 and 0.3 per cent in 2003 (Riksbank forecast). 
This is the poorest rate of growth in these countries in over a decade. In the debate on the euro, this 
contraction in growth was largely attributed to the limitations imposed on these countries’ economic 
policies,  as  they  did  not  have  a  national  monetary  policy,  and  to  the  fiscal  policy  constraints  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. As we know, the budget deficits of both Germany and France have in both 
2002 and 2003 exceeded the reference value of 3 per cent of GDP, which was established in the EU’s 
Stability and Growth Pact. At the same time, attention in the debate was drawn to the temporary and 
one-off rise in prices of certain goods that occurred when prices were rounded after the introduction of 
the euro.  
In light of this, it is understandable that many voters got the impression that there were no economic 
benefits  of  participation  in  the  euro.  Furthermore,  those  that  voted  against  the  single  currency  may 
have  been  strengthened  in  their  belief  by  the  fact  that  the  ‘no’  vote  was  not  followed  by  any 
speculation  against  the  krona,  which  instead  has  appreciated  against  both  the  euro  and  the  dollar 
since the referendum. 
What  didn’t  feature  in  the  same  way  in  the  debate  was  the  longer-term  perspective  -  and  it  is  this 
perspective that I believe speaks in favour of the euro. It proved difficult to explain that the underlying 
causes of the crisis in Germany and France were mainly domestic structural problems, partly in the 
labour  market.  Those  problems  had  existed  long  before  EMU  and  could  not  be  remedied  by  a 
separate currency and monetary policy. At the same time, the economic slowdown overshadowed the 
long-term transaction gains of a single currency for trade and the financial markets. 
In  earlier  economic  research,  the  gains  associated  with  a  single  currency  were  often  viewed  as 
uncertain and very small at best. As there were very few contemporary examples of currency unions, 
comparisons were made instead between fixed and floating exchange rates, in which fixed exchange 
rates did not appear to result in any definite welfare gains. More recent research has concentrated on 
the  smaller  currency  unions  that  have  nevertheless  existed,  and  has  excluded  other  factors  in  so-
called gravitation models. This research has pointed to quite substantial gains from currency unions (a 
shift in the magnitude of 50 per cent or even more according to researchers such as Andrew K Rose, 
at Berkeley). Even conservative estimates indicate a considerable rise in trade within currency areas, 
and  attendant  welfare  gains.  Other  studies,  which  are  directly  based  on  trade  dynamics  in  the  last 
decade, suggest that trade between the euro area countries may have increased by 5-10 per cent as 
a result of the euro. 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
Another  long-term  gain  is  in  price  competition.  The  limited  and  temporary  rise  in  prices  of  certain 
goods and services in conjunction with the introduction of the euro notes and coins should be weighed 
against  the  long-term  gains  from  price  transparency,  the  effect  of  easier  price  comparisons  when 
prices in the entire euro area are expressed in the same currency. Previously, this particular gain was 
also perceived as minimal as cross-border trade is relatively small and companies themselves are said 
to be capable of converting prices regularly between currencies without suffering any major efficiency 
losses.  However,  at  the  same  time,  there  were  price  differences  in  the  EU  of  20-30  per  cent  on  a 
number of goods (cars, for example) that should be relatively easy to both transport over the border 
and  compare  in  terms  of  price.  These  differences  appear  to  have  diminished  quicker  since  euro 
banknotes  and  coins  were  introduced  in  2001.  New  research  also  suggests  that  the  effects  of  a 
common  currency  on  prices  may  have  been  underestimated.  For  instance,  Charles  Engel  from  the 
University of Wisconsin compared price differences for the same goods in cities on both sides of the 
Canadian and US border with price differences between different cities in the US. Although US and 
Canadian  cities  have  largely  the  same  language  and  culture,  as  well  as  free  trade,  the  different 
currencies cause prices to vary as much on each side of the border as between cities at opposite ends 
of the US. 
Finally,  of  course,  there  is  the  increasingly  important  role  of  the  euro  as  a  dominant  international 
currency.  
The most immediate gain from this is an increase in seignorage income to the extent that the euro is 
more widely held outside the euro area than the sum of the currencies that preceded it. Taken as a 
whole,  the  euro  area  is  the  world’s  largest  exporter  and  importer,  accounting  for  about  one-fifth  of 
international  trade.  Despite  this  the  US  dollar  is  still  the  most  common  counterparty  in  foreign 
exchange trading and the widespread use of the dollar as a ‘vehicle currency’ in itself reinforces its 
status. Given that the euro is still a young currency it is likely to grow in importance and may in time 
have the potential to catch up with the dollar’s share in the foreign exchange markets. Furthermore, by 
replacing  12  currencies,  in  particular  the  German  mark  and  the  French  franc,  the  euro  was  used 
immediately  as  a  reserve  currency  by  central  banks  and  became  part  of  a  currency  basket  (for 
example in Morocco) or a solitary anchor for the exchange rate policy of some countries (like Estonia, 
Bosnia and Bulgaria). Nevertheless, two-thirds of world reserves are still held in US dollars compared 
with less than 15 per cent in euros, although since the euro’s introduction there appears to have been 
a gradual shift in the composition of the reserves of large economies such as Russia, and even China, 
towards an increased share for the euro. All this points to larger income to the euro area from external 
holders of the euro, a small but not insignificant gain given that estimates of US seignorage income 
from external holders of the dollar is estimated at almost 1 per cent of GDP. 
The euro is also bound to increase the efficiency of euro area financial markets. The use of the euro in 
the international debt market has increased compared with the joint share of its preceding currencies. 
The share of  international  bonds denominated  in  euros  and  issued  by non-euro area residents  has 
increased to about 30 per cent, compared with 20 per cent for the currencies that preceded the euro. 
Important factors behind this development are the larger home-currency investor base and the better 
issuing conditions for international borrowers provided by the unified European money market, which 
is now more liquid and efficient than the markets in the individual countries before the introduction of 
the euro.  
Needless to say, European equity markets have also been affected by the disappearance of currency 
risk within the euro area. There appears to be a gradual shift from the domestic focus in the euro area 
countries to a euro area-wide, sector-related, view. Integration is likely to attract a broader range of 
potential investors and benefit the development of private equity and financing opportunities for new 
firms. 
In addition to these economic advantages, we must naturally also include what I consider to be the 
decisive  political  arguments  in  favour  of  Sweden  participating  fully  in  the  political  and  economic 
cooperation with a view to attaining a position of influence in a strong and prosperous Europe. 
The  fact  that  the  Swedish  krona  has  not  been  more  negatively  affected  by  the  result  of  the 
referendum,  despite  the  foregone  advantages,  could  in  turn  be  due  to  long-term  factors  that  are 
independent  of  EMU.  The  political  uncertainty  ahead  of  the  referendum  should  indeed  have 
contributed  to  the  somewhat  weaker  krona  during  the  summer.  However,  the  krona  has  been 
considered undervalued for a long time. So, one reason for the krona’s current recovery is that the 
markets  are  once  again  focusing  on  Sweden’s  long-term,  stable  macroeconomic  policy,  which  has 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
remained  in  place  regardless  of  EMU.  This  policy  includes  the  Riksbank’s  inflation  target  and  a 
budgetary framework that has the support of all parliamentary parties. 
Thus, Sweden will remain outside the euro for the time being, together with its fellow EU countries 
Denmark and the UK. But as early as May next year the EU will have ten new Member States and 
around 100 million new inhabitants, the vast majority from Central and Eastern Europe. Of these ten, 
nine  have  expressed  their  desire  to  join  monetary  union  as  soon  as  they  meet  the  convergence 
criteria.  Contrary  to  many  people’s  expectations,  several  of  these  countries  appear  fully  capable  of 
meeting the criteria in the next few years. After a decade of reforms leading from planned economy to 
market economy, inflation and budget deficits have been cut and debt levels have been kept in check 
in a number of the smaller countries, while for the bigger countries, such as Poland, Hungary and the 
Czech  Republic,  budget  consolidation  is  their  last  remaining  obstacle.  So  it  is  not  unrealistic  that  a 
handful of new countries could introduce the euro as early as 2006-2007, or in any case 2-3 years 
later. It may be that Sweden, Denmark and the UK will have to discuss their future relationship to the 
euro at the same time as the euro area expands to include half a dozen new countries. 
The Central and Eastern European countries will also have to weigh the long-term gains of adopting 
the euro against the risks of asymmetric shocks. The advantages for these countries are perhaps even 
clearer than for Sweden. Particularly substantial gains may arise from increased financial integration 
through the euro. Thanks to the fact that banks from EU countries have acquired large sections of the 
banking system in eastern Europe, the financial sector there has been able to evolve relatively quickly. 
But the new Member States’ financial systems are still rather undeveloped, with credits in relation to 
GDP  of  between  one-eighth  and  one-quarter  of  that  in  the  euro  area.  Sweden’s  Baltic  neighbour 
Estonia  is  one  example  of  how  currency  integration  can  help  the  financial  system  to  evolve.  The 
Estonians have pegged their currency to the euro for over a decade and are keen to quickly take the 
step  into  monetary  union.  Their  banking  system  is  owned  by  Swedish-Nordic  banks  and  credit 
volumes  are  growing  by  20-30  per  cent  a  year  -  most  of  which  is  denominated  in  euro.  In  some 
countries, the euro can also help to cement the macroeconomic discipline that is still a relatively new 
phenomenon there. 
Meanwhile, the risks that stem from the countries possibly diverging from the euro area average are 
perhaps also clearer than for Sweden (which is a country that is unusually well-integrated with euro 
area countries and has a similar economic structure). But some factors suggest that the new Member 
States  in  central  Europe  do  not need  a  different  monetary  policy  than  that  of the  euro area.  These 
countries  also  have  close  ties  with  the  rest  of  the  EU,  which  is  their  biggest  trading  partner  by  far, 
accounting for some 50-70 per cent of imports and exports. Having said that, the countries are still 
undergoing  a  period  of  quick  change;  it  is  conceivable  that  any  potential  shocks  during  such  a 
transitional period would be managed better through a national monetary policy. Their growth is and 
should be considerably higher than the EU average as long as they continue to reduce the differences 
in their standard of living compared with the rest of the EU. This always entails risks of overheating 
similar to that experienced by the fast-growing Irish economy.  
The  assessment  of  the  risks  related  to  the  process  of  change  and  of  the  long-term  gains  varies 
between the different candidate countries depending on how open and flexible their economies are. 
Nevertheless, it seems that the advantages of integration will outweigh the disadvantages when the 
new countries have assessed the euro, even if it is likely that some of the new Member States will 
have to wait longer than others before introducing the euro. 
If there are such gains to be made from a common currency in a reunified Europe, would it not be 
possible  that  such  gains  may  also  be  attained  on  a  global  level?  Should  we  continue  on  a  path 
towards more global monetary cooperation? There are many arguments both for and against such an 
arrangement. In recent years we have seen substantial exchange rate fluctuations between some of 
the world’s large economic blocs. These have largely been related to developments in the US dollar. 
The dollar’s weakening against the euro has recently gained impetus once again; in two years, the 
euro/dollar exchange rate has gone from a low of 84 cents to 1.18 dollars in recent weeks - a rise of 
just  over  40  per  cent.  Discussions  of  the  implications  of  an  overvalued  dollar  for  the  US  current 
account deficit have quickly turned into concern over the effects of the rapid fall in the dollar on euro 
area growth. Should there be a quicker correction in the US current account deficit due to diminishing 
interest  among  international  investors  in  US  assets,  the  dollar  could  weaken  further.  A  fast  and 
dramatic depreciation of the dollar could derail Europe’s fragile recovery.  
But  in  addition  to  this  concern  over  excessively  sharp  movements  in  exchange  rates,  an  equally 
heated  discussion  has  flared  up  in  recent  months,  both  in  the  US  and  Europe,  as  to  whether  the 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 3
perhaps most important fixed peg that exists today between two major international currencies, that 
between  the  US  dollar  and  the  Chinese  renminbi,  should  be  abandoned.  For  the  past  decade,  the 
Chinese currency has been pegged by the People’s Bank of China at a rate of around 8.28 renminbi 
per  dollar.  Critics  of  this  policy,  mainly  leading  US  politicians  and  some  industrialists,  believe  that 
Chinese exports have been given an unfair advantage when the renminbi has tracked the dollar’s fall 
against the euro. 
The most drastic answer to these exchange rate issues would be to propose a new global monetary 
system of the kind that existed after the Second World War and up to the early 1970s in the shape of 
the  Bretton Woods  Agreement  and  the  link  via  the  dollar  to  gold.  This  kind of  solution  has  actually 
been recommended by Robert Mundell, a currency area theorist and winner of the 1999 Nobel Prize in 
Economic  Sciences.  Even  Keynes  considered  the  establishment  of  a  global  currency,  the  bancor. 
Mundell points to transaction gains for trade and the financial markets, but also other arguments. One 
of these is that the signalling of international relative prices is distorted by exchange rate fluctuations 
caused  by  capital  flows.  Another  is  that  the  global  economy  has  led  to  increasingly  weak  money 
illusion,  the  illusion  that  prevents  wage-earners  from  immediately  perceiving  a  deterioration  in  their 
purchasing power following a depreciation, and from demanding compensation that would render the 
depreciation ineffectual. Despite the intellectual appeal of such arguments, it is not difficult to see that 
during  the  past  decade,  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan  have  had  very  different  growth  rates  and  their 
business cycles have been highly unsynchronised. Given that monetary policy would be dictated by 
the monetary system, a tremendous burden would be placed on fiscal policy to stabilise the economy 
when the differences across the common monetary area are too great. The large real adjustments that 
would be required in wages and relative prices in the US and Europe - instead of an adjustment in the 
exchange rate - would probably cost more than the gains derived from having fixed global exchange 
rates.  
Therefore, the requirements necessary to make such a system work, which in reality are the factors 
that  determine  what  constitutes  an  optimal  currency  area,  indicate  that  such  a  solution  is  a  distant 
prospect,  if  it  should  become  reality  at  all.  In  addition,  there  are  the  practical  and  administrative 
problems  of  organising  such  a  global  monetary  system,  indeed  even  a  global  central  bank  with 
representation from all countries. 
A middle ground between a single currency or single monetary standard such as Bretton Woods, and 
fully floating exchange rates, would be intervention bands and controlled exchange rates between, for 
instance, the euro and the dollar. However, this would partly suffer from the same problems as a fully 
fixed regime. Furthermore, we would encounter the same dilemma that characterised all semi-fixed, or 
fixed but adjustable exchange rate arrangements, which failed so miserably over the past ten years. 
The list is long, from Sweden’s and the ERM countries’ crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, to the 
crises in Mexico, Asia, Russia and Brazil during the subsequent decade. All displayed some similar 
characteristics, which a controlled exchange rate between the dollar and euro would also be unable to 
escape. At some point in time, the market becomes aware that the political gains of avoiding painful 
real adjustments are probably less than the costs and loss of prestige associated with an exchange 
rate  adjustment.  Once  the  market  realises  this,  speculation  follows  and  the  costs  of  defending  the 
exchange rate mount, at the same as the potential loss of prestige from adjustment diminishes. In the 
end,  an  exchange  rate  adjustment  becomes  economically  unavoidable  and  politically  acceptable  - 
regardless  of  whether  politicians  wanted  it.  Of  course,  such  a  spiral  is  not  possible  with  a  single 
currency  where  adjustments  must  occur  without  devaluation  and  where  speculation  of  this  kind  is 
impossible. 
Do  not  these  arguments  lead  us  to  conclude  that  China  too  should  let  its  currency  float?  After  all, 
China is one of the world’s largest economies that in spite of its increasing openness follows a course 
of  its  own.  Critics  of  the  dollar  peg  believe  that  if  the  renminbi  were  allowed  to  float,  it  would 
appreciate,  thus  reducing  China’s  current  account  surplus  and  shrinking  the  US  deficit.  In  the  long 
term, I believe that it is right to allow the renminbi to float. In the short term, however, it is difficult to 
see this as the appropriate solution. The main reason for not floating the renminbi yet is the Chinese 
financial  system.  The  Chinese  banking  system  is  still  a  long  way  from  being  adapted  to  market 
conditions, and a large proportion of its lending is still made to state-owned companies that are often 
unable to honour their payment obligations. If we take into account all the hidden and disclosed non-
performing loans in the banking system, these are estimated to be equal to as much as half of China’s 
GDP,  and  they  are continuing  to  grow.  Were  the currency allowed  to  float  before  addressing  these 
problems, it is just as likely to depreciate as appreciate since the Chinese public could take advantage 
of  the  opportunity  to  transfer  its  assets  abroad  instead  of  saving  at  low  interest  rates  in  the  weak 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2003
domestic banking system, a system that would then be rocked to its foundations. The experiences of 
many  countries,  including  Sweden  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  show  that  the  foreign  exchange 
market should not be deregulated until the banking system has been reformed. 
Could  China  not  revalue  then  and  adapt  the  exchange  rate  to  its  trade  surplus  without  floating  its 
currency? In my opinion, this would not be such a wise decision either. It is wrong to attribute China’s 
trade surplus with the US to the currency issue. The surplus is probably best explained by the cost 
advantages enjoyed by Chinese producers in labour-intensive goods compared with the US. China’s 
trade surplus can be seen as a natural consequence of the division of labour within the Pacific region 
where China’s position as supplier and sub-supplier of low value-added goods is highly favourable for 
US productivity. This is a segment in which the Chinese compete with very few US producers, which is 
why an exchange rate adjustment would have only a marginal impact. In actual fact, an excessively 
large one-off adjustment would be required to have any effect at all on the US-Chinese trade balance. 
Such a large correction would in turn give rise to problems for Chinese trade elsewhere. It is with the 
US that China enjoys a large surplus, while the trade balance is close to zero or is negative with many 
other areas, including the euro area. This picture is confirmed by many fundamental analyses of an 
equilibrium exchange rate for China, which come relatively close to China’s fixed exchange rate today. 
Furthermore,  China  currently  has  either  very  low  inflation  or  deflation,  which  normally  points  to 
devaluation  pressure  rather  than  revaluation  pressure  (a  need  for  real  depreciation).  Finally,  China 
and other the Asian economies that are trying to prop up the value of their currencies are the main 
purchasers  of  US  Treasury  bonds.  So,  in  a  situation  where  the  US  government  finances  are 
deteriorating,  the  Chinese  exchange  rate  regime  is  actually  helping  to  depress  US  long  yields  and 
indirectly bolstering the US recovery. 
My conclusion is that China in the short term should retain its fixed exchange rate until such time as its 
financial system has undergone more substantial reform, which is something that nevertheless must 
be done in the coming years. In the long term, however, a floating exchange rate appears unavoidable 
for a country that is on the way to becoming one of the world’s leading economies. It is only in the 
much longer term, when China is highly integrated with the world economy, that fixed exchange-rate 
cooperation can become a possibility once again.  
This conclusion brings me back to the main line of my argument: Europe can gradually be enlarged to 
become  a  relatively  big  currency  area  that  includes  all  the  countries,  from  Ireland  in  the  west  to 
Estonia in the east, where the long-term microeconomic gains outweigh the recurring but temporary 
macroeconomic costs. As the representative of a central bank, I must add that it is interesting to at 
least toy with the idea of how a global currency and global monetary policy would look. But for the time 
being  this  will  probably  remain  no  more  than  an  intellectually  stimulating  vision.  At  global  level, 
integration needs to go much further, and the economies become more synchronised, if the long-term 
gains of fixed exchange-rate cooperation are to outweigh the risks.  
In the long term, it is not inconceivable that a trend will arise towards large regional currency blocs with 
single currencies, but with flexibility between them. Within these blocs, it will be possible to reap the 
advantages of integration fully, while the risks will be limited by increasingly similar conditions in the 
countries taking part in the common currency. Competition between these areas regarding which has 
the dominant reserve currency may increase gradually. The dollar’s unique position will weaken, just 
as we are seeing today with a number of Asian central banks planning to increase their assets in euro 
and reduce those in dollars. Let us hope that there will also be cooperation between the regions, so as 
to give the world greater stability, development and continued integration. 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 5
