Elena Kohutikova: Slovakia - perspective place for investments 
Speech by Ms Elena Kohutikova, Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Slovakia, at the 
Conference “Middle and East Europe – region of the future”, Salzburg, 15 October 2003. 
 Slovakia has been disregarded as a reasonable country to place an investment in, for a long time. This 
trend has been showing on the results of total foreign direct investments made in Slovakia until 1999 
compared to the other countries acceding to the European Union in May 2004. After the changes of 
general  economic  policy  (economic  reforms, 
institutions  more 
transparent…) with the new government seizing power in 1998, this FDI per capita gap shrinked to 
minimum.  At  present,  overall  environment  is  very  much  competitive  for  new  investments  within  the 
area;  it  still  ranks  fourth  behind  Czech  rep.,  Hungary  and  Poland,  however  capacity  to  invest, 
experience  of  the  foreign  companies  that  invested  already  and  overall  conditions  created  by 
government motivation to attract new investments makes Slovakia a very interesting market. 
This contribution aims to view some of the attributes of Slovak environment and features of the country 
that have a vast importance in the course of decision-making process on placement of an investment. 
legislative  changes,  making 
Location and infrastructure 
1. 
Slovakia  is  a  small  open  economy  (with  exports  plus  imports  ratio  to  GDP  amounting  to  155  %). 
Therefore, development of external relations is of high importance for the country. 
Thanks  to  location,  Slovakia,  near  European  markets  as  well  as  near  eastern  European  emerging 
markets may represent a bridge between East and West. European market of 350 million people is 
accessible within one-day truck drive (more than U.S. and Canada combined). 
Despite  relatively  hilly  surface,  major  roads  infrastructure  is  fairly  well  developed.  Moreover, 
government  highway  construction  program  aims  to  conclude  main  corridors  connecting  North  and 
South, and East and West in the medium resp. long run perspective. 
External stability 
2. 
Slovakia  became  a  member  of  OECD  in  2000.  This  membership  invitation  declared  stable 
environment,  transparency  and  clear  path  in  economic  development  based  on  the  premises  of  the 
World  Trade  Organization.  OECD  membership  itself  helped  to  certain  extent  to  ensure  exponential 
growth of investments in 2000-2002. Slovakia will enter European Union in May 2004 and soon will 
become  a  member  of  NATO  as  well  (ratification  process  in  member  countries  is  running  in  the 
moment).  Economy  has  been  stabilized  and  Maastricht  criteria should  be  reached  and  fulfilled  until 
2006. According to the strategy, Slovakia plans to adopt euro as soon as possible, on the horizon of 
years 2008-2010. 
Internal stability  A) Reforms 
3. 
All necessary economic reforms were/are to be introduced before fulfilling Maastricht criteria that the 
least  possible  disturbing  factors  may  appear  once  given  up  own  monetary  tools.  Pension  reform  is 
under the process of final discussion in the Parliament, new Labor Act has been introduced recently, 
major tax reform is to be introduced soon and health care reform and public administration reform is 
underway as well. 
Another  major  reform,  tax  reform,  aims  to  make  the  tax  system  more  transparent  and  simple.  This 
unique and radical reform based on fiscal neutrality introduces unified flat tax rate of 19% for VAT and 
rise of other indirect taxes on the one hand and introduces the same, decreased, direct tax rate of 
19% for individual income tax as well as corporate tax on the other hand. This reform will change the 
situation  of  both  companies  and  households  dramatically.  It  also  counts  with  gradual  delegation  of 
minor taxes and fees to the lower level, to communities, which will collect these to relocate resources 
for projects developing local infrastructure and solution of the ecology related problems. 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
Pension reform introduces three-pillar system. The first pay-as-you-go pillar fulfils the role of full merit 
and the second capitalization pillar fulfills the role of pension savings; both of which will be obligatory. 
The third supplementary pillar fulfills the role of additional pension insurance choice. The objective of 
this reform is to adjust the system to demographic changes and to changing features of the society. 
This reform is assumed to bring more effective management of the social system in future. 
Healthcare reform aims to solve two main issues. These are introduction of deductibles for health care 
services. Two functions of this measure shall prevent misuse of free healthcare services and collect 
resources  in  order  to  support  financial  stability  of  the  system.  Moreover,  the  reform  includes  other 
stabilization measures, which aim to slow down or even stop the sector indebtedness. 
Public  finances  reform  aims  to  make  public  finances  more  transparent  as  well,  introduces  strategic 
planned  budgeting  and  more  effective  allocation  of  resources.  This  reform  includes  introduction  of 
forecasting systems for stable medium-term framework of public finances. 
All these and other introduced and planned reforms are structured in detail, timed and co-organized 
with all other important economic interventions as well as with ability to comply with Maastricht criteria, 
especially budget deficit. 
Internal Stability  B) Fiscal and monetary consolidation 
3. 
In  2002,  the  general  government  deficit  amounted  to  7.2%  of  GDP,  which  was  well  above  the 
reference value set for EMU admission. Slovakia had also failed to meet this particular criterion in the 
previous years. The largest deficit had been recorded in 2000, surging largely on the back of costs 
incurred  in  restructuring  the  banking  sector,  with  after-effects  of  the  restructuring  campaign  still 
affecting the deficit through interest expenses. 
Based on the draft assumptions of the state budget of following years, the Slovak government is bent 
on slashing the deficit down to 5.0% of GDP in 2003 and 3.9% of GDP in 2004, In 2005, the deficit is 
supposed to reach 3.4 percent. In 2006, the criterion regarding the general government deficit should 
be met with a small margin to spare (0.1%). 
The  fiscal  criterion  on  public  debt  is  currently  met.  Slovakia  had  not  exceeded  the  reference  value 
(60%  of  GDP)  in  the  previous  years  either.  After  a  gradual  increase  in  public  debt  in  the  period  of 
1999-2001, in 2002 the government moved to reduce it, in particular by using privatisation revenues. 
The  inflation  was  above  the  reference  value  throughout  the  entire  period  reviewed,  but  shows  a 
downtrend  in  the  last  years.  At  the  end  of  2002,  Slovakia's  HICP  exceeded  the  reference  value  of 
2.9% by a mere 0.4%. 
However,  massive  price  deregulations  implemented  in  2003  leaded  to  a  substantial  increase  in 
inflation, which currently exceeds 8%. Deregulation effects will be present also in 2004, but their share 
should slowly decrease and in 2006 total inflation will not exceed 3%. This will lead to fulfillment of 
inflation criterion for our eurozone entry. 
Considering  the  fact  that  there  is  only  a  limited  amount  of  bond  issues  in  Slovakia  with  long  term 
maturity, it is useful to look at the development on the yield till maturity on the traded long term bonds. 
These have been falling in the recent years, with the yield till maturity below 5 per cent to meet the 
Maastricht criteria. 
The SKK/EUR exchange rate was relatively stable during the period reviewed, namely from early 2001 
until now. It spent most of the time in a ±3% corridor off the mean value of SKK/EUR 42.63 (average 
for the period from 1 January 2001 until now). It recorded a period low in July 2002 amid pre-election 
doubts, and is currently (September 2003) attacking its highs as the Slovak currency is considered the 
most stable and attractive in the Central European region. 
Dynamics of the growth 
4. 
Based on a comparison of real GDP growth in Slovakia and in the EU, we can find a more distinct 
convergence of economic levels in the last two years. In 2002, real GDP growth in Slovakia outpaced 
real GDP growth in the EU by more than 3 percentage points. 
In GDP growth, Slovakia is one of the most dynamic economies and this should persist also in the 
following years. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
In 2002, Slovakia has absorbed the highest inflow of foreign direct investments in its entire history; the 
total  inflow  amounted  to  185.8  billion  SKK,  i.e.  almost  4.5  billion  EUR.  In  other  words  the  inflow  of 
foreign direct investments was two times higher than in 2000 and more than 20 times higher than in 
1997.  
Following  results  of  a  recent  survey  done  by  Forbes  magazine,  91%  of  current  foreign  investors  in 
Slovakia intend to increase their stakes. The group of present and satisfied investors is getting bigger, 
the  group  covers  names  like:  Alcatel,  Coca-Cola,  Fujitsu,  Heineken,  IBM,  Johnson  Controls,  Kraft, 
MOL, Samsung, Siemens, Sony, Tesco, US Steel, VW, etc.. 
Taking  into  account  current  and  future  VW  investments  and  lately  confirmed  PSA  Peugeot-Citroen 
investment plans, Slovakia is on its way to become one of the leading automobile producers. Industrial 
production  absorbed  more  than  36  %  of  total  foreign  direct  investments  and  another  significant 
amount (24.5%) came into financial intermediation. 
Labour force 
5. 
A steadily growing economy, solid growth in labor productivity and the expansion of investor activity in 
Slovakia are positive signals both for the economic development as well as for investment climate for 
new players to arrive. Besides, Slovakia possesses relatively high quality of education system and the 
skills of its labor force. Businesses operating in Slovakia have discovered that the work force has in 
general strong work ethic, is skilled and educated. Slovakia’s school system ensures that almost 90% 
of the population has secondary or university education. 
With wages lower than Hungary, Poland or the Czech Republic, employee costs even lower that in 
European Union; Slovakia becomes even more attractive for investments. 
As candidate countries try to catch up with the EU, it is critical that GDP growths to be supported by 
rising productivity of labour, while factors of costs are kept under control. During last 10 years Slovakia 
achieved 4% growth in the real productivity of labour and 2% growth in the real wage. 
Past  development  in  the  real  unit  labour  costs  is  even  more  favourable  for  foreign  investments. 
Slovakia offers the lowest labour and production costs among V4 countries. 
This low labor and production costs have roots mainly in the character of labor market and features of 
unemployment, which is still, in spite of down-sloping trend, one of the highest in the region. However, 
availability  of  this  workforce,  which  is  relatively  skilled,  represents  another  advantage.  Industrial 
restructuring and transformation have led to a high level of redundancy of skilled labor force. State-
owned heavy industry and weaponry, running before 1990, were liquidated or went bankrupt. After the 
period of low foreign investments until 1999, job creation dropped into red numbers. This trend has 
been reverted after 2000; however still large numbers of industry oriented skilled workers mainly in 
central and eastern parts of the country are searching for job opportunities. 
Legislative investment incentives 
6. 
The trend of introducing legislation that favors foreign direct investments has been gradually approved 
since 1999. The Parliament had approved several major acts; the main goal of is to stimulate foreign 
direct investments to Slovak economy. The main acts, as follows, create the baseline to the motivation 
of foreign direct investments be placed in Slovakia. 
The Investment Incentive Act no. 565/2001 deals with state support in forms of: 
• 
• 
• 
initial investments to tangible and intangible assets  
subsidies for newly created job opportunities (up to USD 4.000)  
subsidies for re-qualification of employees hired to newly created job opportunities (up to 230 
USD)  
Industrial  Park  Development  Support  Act  no.  193/2001  is  another  important  basic  investment 
incentive, which deals with community subsidies for: 
• 
• 
technical facilities and infrastructure up to 70% of total costs  
land purchase costs up to 70% of total costs  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 3
land rental costs up to 70% within next 10 years  
• 
to the community ownership or community disposal to the use of the developer. 
All customs and import duties on new machinery employed in production have been canceled, well 
before the adoption of free movement of good, when this issue will become automatic. All these and 
other  allowances  even  more  support  all  the  points  that  make  an  investment  in  Slovakia  even  more 
attractive. 
Rating improvement 
7. 
All the features discussed and measures taken in the scope of Slovak economic development mirror in 
the continuous improvement of rating by all major rating agencies. 
Standard & Poor’s 
Moody’s 
FITCH 
Assignment 
date 
Rating 
(FCY/LCY)  Outlook 
Assignment
date 
Rating 
(FCY/LCY) Outlook
Assignment
date 
Rating 
(FCY/LCY)  Outlook
Current rating  
Current rating   
Current rating 
(October 03)  BBB/A- 
positive  (October 03) A3/A3 
stable 
(October 03) BBB/A- 
stable 
December 02  BBB/A- 
positive  November 02 A3/A3 
stable  March 03 
BBB/A- 
stable 
October 01 
BBB/A- 
positive  October 02  Baa3/A3 
positive  November 02 BBB-/BBB+  positive 
November 00  BB+/BBB+  positive  November 01 Baa3/A3 
stable 
February 01  BB+/BBB+  positive 
November 99  BB+/BBB+  stable  November 00 Ba1/Baa2  positive  September 00 BB+/BBB+  stable 
September 98  BB+/BBB+  negative  October 99  Ba1/Baa2  stable  December 98 BB+/BBB+ 
 June 97 
BBB-/A 
stable  March 98 
Ba1/Baa2  negative October 98 
BBB-/A- 
negative
April 95 
BB+/ 
stable  November 97 Baa3 
negative August 96 
BBB-/A- 
February 94  BB-/ 
stable  May 95 
Baa3 
stable 
     Conclusion 
8. 
Slovakia  has  taken  many  steps  in  order  to  become  more  attractive  place  to  make  an  investment, 
mainly in the recent years. Moreover, it is obvious that economy is on the path to stabilization, both 
external and internal. All major reforms are timed in the way to be introduced before 2005 and more 
importantly before joining ERM2. Legislation favoring foreign investments has been applied to a large 
extent. Labor and production costs are one of the lowest in the region. Vast majority of investors are 
satisfied and confident about future. Besides, Slovakia experiences one of the highest dynamics in the 
region. All these features make Slovakia a more perspective country to invest day by day. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2003
