Philipp Hildebrand: The Swiss National Bank’s view of international financial 
markets against the background of trends in the United States 
Introductory  remarks  by  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 12 December 2003. 
 The  past  year  was  a  turbulent  one  for  the  international  financial  markets,  which  were  essentially 
influenced by trends in the US. During the first half of 2003, market developments were shaped by 
economic and deflation fears as well as by the war in Iraq. In this environment, equity markets reached 
an annual low in March. In June, bond market yields fell to their lowest level. The second half of the 
year saw an economic recovery in the US, which is now spreading to other economic regions as well. 
Capital markets 
Long-term  yields  on  Swiss  paper  rose  by  approximately  60  basis  points  from  their  low  in  June  to 
roughly 2.7%, approximately tracking yields in the  euro area. In both cases, yields followed the US 
market  very  closely,  albeit  with  modest  fluctuations  (see  graph  1).  Under  the  present  economic 
conditions, the interest rate environment in Switzerland is still viewed as attractive by consumers. The 
high  level  of  new  fixed-rate  mortgages  is  an  indication  of  this  sentiment.  The  higher  Swiss  yields 
reflect  the  improved  economic  outlook  and  not  inflation  expectations,  which  are  modest  given  that 
there  is  still  pronounced  underutilisation  of  capacities.  In  contrast  to  capital  market  yields,  money 
market yields were decidedly stable. The three-month Libor remained almost constant at 0.25%. 
 The global trend in capital market yields was chiefly determined by long-term yields in the US, which 
themselves were shaped by the recovery of the US economy. In the early summer, deflation fears had 
dragged the yield on ten-year US government bonds down to 3.1% - a level last reached at the end of 
the 1950s. In July and August, however, positive economic data pushed the yield right up to 4.6%. 
Convexity  hedging  was  one  of  the  factors  contributing  to  the  unusual  scale  of  the  turnaround.  As 
interest rates fell in the early summer, the refinancing of existing mortgages - which is possible in the 
US  at  any  time  -  had  triggered  extensive  buying  of  government  bonds.  US  investors  holding 
substantial mortgage portfolios had to make these purchases in order to keep the residual maturities 
of their portfolios constant. When interest rates rose, therefore, the correction was similarly swift. In 
September, increasing doubts were voiced as to the sustainability of the economic upswing in the US: 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 1
compared with earlier cycles, the essential element of an improving labour market was missing. This 
led to a consolidation on the capital markets even though the economic indicators remained largely 
positive. With the first signs of the US labour market recovering at the end of September, coupled with 
rapid growth in gross domestic product in the third quarter (8.2%), the strength of the economic revival 
in the US economy was confirmed. Just how sustained this pick-up proves to be will become evident 
in the coming months when the extraordinary fiscal and monetary stimuli weaken. 
Foreign exchange markets 
Fluctuations in the US dollar dominated the foreign exchange markets. After having lost considerable 
ground  during  the  first  half  of  the  year,  the  greenback rebounded  slightly  by  October  amid  growing 
signs  of  an  acceleration  of  growth.  Recently,  the  focus  of  market  participants  returned  to  the 
sustainability  of  the  US  recovery  and  the  continued  rise  in  America’s  current  account  deficit.  As  a 
result, the dollar weakened again (see graph 2). 
Since  the  middle  of  the  year,  the  Swiss  franc  has  moved  sideways  against  the  euro.  Heavier 
fluctuations were recorded vis-à-vis the dollar. With positive economic data emanating in the US from 
June  onwards,  the  franc  initially  weakened  before  firming  again  as  part  of  the  general  dollar 
consolidation  witnessed  since  September.  On  the  whole,  the  Swiss  franc  hardly  registered  any 
independent movements. It depreciated strongly during the first half of the year after our interest rate 
decision and has remained stable since the summer. In relation both to Switzerland’s 24 major trading 
partners and to the euro zone, the real exchange rate index of the Swiss franc is now slightly below its 
level at the beginning of 1999, i.e. at the time of the euro launch. 
Gold market 
Owing to the more favourable economic situation,  raw material prices continued the rise which had 
started in 2001. At over 400 USD/ounce, the gold price was at a seven-year high at the beginning of 
December. Because of the weak dollar, the gold price increase in francs was more modest. However, 
its peak of approximately 17,000 CHF/kg was still the highest for several years. The main reason for 
this rise was persistently modest hedging activity by gold producers. 
 2 
 BIS Review 58/2003
Equity markets 
International equity markets exhibited a positive course overall, steadily making up lost ground after 
their mid-March low (see graph 3). As the equity environment began to present a perceptibly brighter 
picture, turnover also picked up. This, together with the more confident investor sentiment, reduced 
volatility. The ambitious profit expectations now reflected in share prices suggest that market players 
are optimistic about the economic situation and the corporate environment. 
To sum up, the financial markets are currently influenced by a complex interplay of factors: a globally 
synchronised  economic  recovery  is  taking  place  against  a  backdrop  of  external  imbalances.  An 
autonomous  economic  recovery  outside  of  the  US  -  underpinned,  not  least  of  all,  by  supply-side 
reforms - would help substantially to redress these imbalances. 
 Key features of the SNB’s future investment and risk control process 
The SNB’s investment activity is subordinated to monetary policy and is determined by the criteria of 
liquidity, risk and returns. The new National Bank Law will extend the SNB’s investment opportunities. 
The current National Bank Law (NBL) limits eligible investments to gold and fixed-interest securities, 
and  eligible  borrowers  to  states,  international  organisations  and  banks.  Article  9  of  the  new  NBL 
defines a wider scope of possible transactions. This allows the National Bank to further optimise the 
structure of its investments with a view to specific central bank needs. As part of this process, we are 
also evaluating the possibility of enlarging the investment universe. However, such an extension would 
raise a number of fundamental questions that will first need to be examined. Before the new law enters 
into  force,  we  will  establish  and  publish  investment  policy  directives  setting  out  how  the  Governing 
Board plans to make use of the extended investment policy scope. 
While our assets have already been managed largely in conformity with the principles of modern asset 
management,  improvements  were  nevertheless  called  for.  It  was  essential  to  bring  our  internal 
investment  and  risk  control  processes  into  line  with  the  new  legal  framework.  The  opportunities  for 
diversification  brought  about  by  additional  investment  instruments  would,  in  principle,  reduce  the 
market  risk  of  the  investments.  At  the  same  time,  though,  the  SNB  would  incur  new  risks,  e.g. 
additional  credit  risks.  In  addition,  corporate  governance  is  to  be  enhanced.  The  primary  goal  is  to 
segregate powers as far as possible: firstly between monetary policy and investment policy operations, 
secondly between investment strategy and its implementation through asset management, and thirdly 
between  risk  taking  and  risk  controlling.  There  are  limits  to  the  principle  of  segregation  of  powers 
insofar as the Governing Board is responsible both for monetary policy and investment policy. 
Let me briefly outline our concept regarding the new investment process: 
BIS Review 58/2003 
 3
    The  Bank  Council  approves  the  principles  laid  down  for  risk  policy  and  the  investment 
process.  
The  Governing  Board  decides  each  year  on  the  investment  strategy  based  on  the 
aforementioned criteria of liquidity, risk and returns.  
The organisational unit Asset Management, which is part of Department III, is responsible for 
the  market-oriented  implementation  of  this  investment  strategy.  An  investment  committee 
chaired  by  the  head  of  Asset  Management  makes  the  strategic  investment  decisions  and 
sets the targets for each portfolio manager.  
A  well-tested  risk  control  process  ensures  that  risk  taking  at  the  different  levels  is  duly 
supervised.  
Responsibilities  and  competencies  are  clearly  assigned  at  all  levels  of  the  investment  process. 
Performance  at  the  different  levels  is  assessed  through  the  consistent  use  of  benchmarks  and  the 
corresponding measurement techniques. 
The process described above is applied to the management not only of the international reserves but 
also of the proceeds from the sale of gold no longer needed for monetary policy purposes. How the 
gold reserves deemed “free” at the time are finally used will be a political decision. Managing these 
assets  is  not  part  of  the  SNB’s  statutory  mandate.  Thanks  to  the  new  NBL  and  the  SNB’s  internal 
know-how, however, the Bank is well qualified to perform this task. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2003
