Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy and business cycles 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at 
Kunnskapsparken Bodł, 25 September 2003. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at 
Norges  Bank(cid:146)s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board(cid:146)s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  17 September  and  on 
previous speeches. The Charts in pdf can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per 
cent over time.  
The inflation target provides economic agents with  an anchor for their decisions concerning saving, 
investment, budgets and wages. The inflation target also provides a framework for monetary policy(cid:146)s 
contribution to stabilising output and employment. This intention is also expressed in the Regulation 
on  Monetary  Policy.  High  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  labour  shortages  normally  point  to 
higher  inflation. When  interest  rates  are  increased,  demand  falls  and  inflation  is kept  at  bay. When 
demand is low and unemployment rises, inflation will tend to slow. Interest rates will then be reduced.  
Norges Bank sets the interest rate so that future inflation will be equal to the inflation target of 2‰ per 
cent. The interest rate has been reduced since December last year in response to the change in the 
inflation  outlook.  This  was  the  result  of  weaker  cyclical  developments  in  the  world  economy  and  a 
sharp  drop  in  interest  rates  internationally.  In  addition,  the  Norwegian  business  sector  has  felt  the 
effects of the high Norwegian cost level and the strong krone exchange rate.  Public agencies have 
also had to adapt activities as a result of last year(cid:146)s wage settlement. The weak prospects abroad and 
at home have in turn had an impact on the Norwegian labour market and the outlook for wage growth 
and inflation in the years ahead.  
The mandate implies that the interest rate must be adapted to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. 
If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2‰ per cent with an unchanged interest rate, the interest 
rate  will  be increased.  If it appears that  inflation  will  be lower than 2‰ per cent with an unchanged 
interest rate, the interest rate  will be reduced. Normally, this orientation  of monetary  policy  will also 
contribute to stabilising output and employment.  
The impact of monetary policy occurs with a lag. The current inflation rate does not provide sufficient 
information to determine the level at which interest rates should be set now. Our analyses indicate that 
a  substantial  share  of  the  effects  of  an  interest  rate  change  will  occur  within  two  years.  Thus,  two 
years is normally a reasonable time horizon for reaching the inflation target.  
The interest rate influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its 
effect on the exchange rate. When the interest rate falls, it is less profitable for households to save, 
and they will therefore make purchases now rather than wait until later. Borrowing also becomes less 
costly, and investment also rises. Higher demand in turn leads to a higher rise in prices and wages. 
Lower  interest  rates  make  it  less  attractive  to  invest  in  the  Norwegian  krone  and  for  Norwegian 
enterprises  and  households  to  raise  loans  in  foreign  currency.  Therefore,  lower  interest  rates  will 
normally lead to reduced capital inflows and a depreciation of the krone. This makes imported goods 
more expensive. In addition, a weaker krone increases activity, profitability and the capacity to pay in 
the internationally exposed sector.  
Activity  in  the  economy  moves  in  waves.  For  the  Norwegian  economy,  the  1980s  was  a  period  of 
relatively wide fluctuations in activity, with periods of high inflation. The mid-1990s represents a period 
of stable and solid growth. In contrast to the situation in the previous decade, inflation was low and 
stable.  
At the beginning of the 1990s, the Norwegian economy was in a deep recession. Production was far 
below capacity. When growth in the economy picked up, capacity utilisation increased. The output gap 
shows the difference between actual GDP and the level indicated by trend growth - estimated at close 
to 2‰ per cent in Norway. Around 1996, there was full capacity utilisation, and the output gap, as we 
normally measure it, closed.  
Subsequently,  growth  in  labour  costs  picked  up,  and  the  rise  in  prices  for  goods  and  services 
produced  for  the  Norwegian  market  accelerated.  The  upturn  peaked  in  1997,  with  mainland  GDP 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 1
growth  approaching  5  per  cent.  In  1997  and  1998,  the  economy  shifted  from  an  upturn  with  high 
growth  rates  to  an  expansion  with  lower  growth  but  low  unemployment,  labour  shortages  in  many 
sectors and strong growth in labour costs.  
Capacity utilisation in the mainland economy has subsequently fallen again and is now on a par with 
the level in the years 1995-1997, before cost inflation accelerated. The output gap has again closed. 
At the same time, wage growth has dropped to a more sustainable level.  
Labour  costs  rose  more  rapidly  in  Norway  than  among  its  trading  partners  due  to  the  high  pay 
increases  negotiated  by  the  social  partners  during  the  period  of  strong  economic  expansion  after 
1997. Until 2000, this was counteracted by the depreciation of the krone. Companies with income in 
foreign currency could cover the higher labour costs with the increased revenues which were a result 
of the weaker krone.  
When  the  krone  began  to  appreciate,  however,  it  did  not  take  long  before  relative  labour  costs 
measured  in  a  common  currency  rose  sharply.  Despite  this  development,  the  strong  wage  growth 
continued.  
This  contributed  to  a  deterioration  in  the  exposed  sector(cid:146)s  competitiveness.  Despite  a  pronounced 
downturn among many of our trading partners last year, annual wage growth in Norway increased to 
5(cid:190) per cent. Wage drift remained surprisingly high through the autumn of 2002, especially in some 
manufacturing sectors, partly as a result of local settlements.  
Due  to  the  depreciation  of  the  krone  this  year,  it  now  appears  that  competitiveness  is  improving 
somewhat  compared  with  last  year.  Wage  growth  has  also  slowed  to  a  more  sustainable  level. 
However, cost competitiveness is still weaker than the average for the past 30 years.  
The  global  downturn  started  in  2000  and  through  2001,  the  interest  rate  in  the  US  was  sharply 
reduced to stimulate growth. For a long period, a relatively rapid recovery was expected. During the 
autumn of last year, it became clear, however, that growth would remain subdued for a longer period.  
Changes  in  the  economic  outlook  are  clearly  expressed  in  implied  forward  rates.  In  the  US,  these 
expectations have been adjusted downwards considerably since summer 2002. Last summer, market 
participants expected the key rate in the US to be increased to about 4 per cent towards the end of 
2003. The interest rate is now believed to have reached its lowest level and is expected to remain at 1 
per cent until the end of 2003, with only a gradual rise after that.  
The  lower  projections  for  growth  reflect  the  effect  on  the  world  economy  of  a  number  of  negative 
shocks,  such  as  the  war  in  Iraq  and  the  SARS  virus.  It  took  longer  than  first  expected  to  correct 
imbalances created by an overoptimistic outlook in sectors such as the IT industry. High oil prices may 
also have contributed to curbing the growth rate.  
GDP  growth  in  important  European  countries  has  been  low  or  negative  for  some  time.  In  the 
Netherlands, GDP has fallen for three consecutive quarters, and Germany has recorded a contraction 
over  the  last  two  quarters.  France(cid:146)s  GDP  showed  growth  in  the  first  quarter  and  a  decline  in  the 
second quarter of this year. For the euro area as a whole, preliminary figures show that GDP fell by 
0.1 per cent in the second quarter. Some consumer and business confidence indicators have recently 
shown signs of improvement, and the EU Commission(cid:146)s estimates point to a slight increase in growth 
in the next few quarters. There are, however, no clear signs of an imminent and rapid recovery.  
The key rate in the euro area has been reduced to 2 per cent. Interest rates are expected to remain at 
2 per cent to the end of 2003, before rising slightly next year.  
International  business  cycles  affect  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  Norway  through  a  number  of 
channels, including the interest rate differential and the krone exchange rate.  
Subdued economic growth internationally and high growth in Norway resulted in a wide interest rate 
differential  between  Norway  and  its  trading  partners.  This  made  it  very  profitable  to  invest  in  the 
Norwegian krone, and the krone exchange rate appreciated. The appreciation of the krone and high 
wage growth led to a considerable deterioration in the competitiveness of Norwegian enterprises.  
Through 2003, the interest rate differential has narrowed as a result of monetary policy easing. This 
has also contributed to a substantial depreciation of the krone.  
In Norway, internationally oriented business sectors, such as the ICT sector and the travel industry, 
have  been  particularly  affected  by  weak  global  developments.  Expectations  concerning  future 
earnings have been revised downwards substantially in these sectors. This has led to cost cuts and 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2003
redundancies. Combined with a deterioration in competitiveness and lower activity in manufacturing, 
this  has  resulted  in  rising  unemployment  in  the  last  year.  Public  agencies  have  had  limited 
opportunities to increase service production because wages have risen. Some municipalities and other 
government agencies have reduced the number of employees.  
While real economic activity has declined and unemployment has increased, inflation in Norway is now 
low.  The  rise  in  consumer  prices  adjusted  for  taxes  and  excluding  energy  products  (CPI-ATE)  has 
slowed,  primarily  due  to  developments  in  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods.  Low  inflation  is  a 
consequence of the appreciation of the krone throughout last year and low inflation abroad. The rise in 
prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  has  also  slowed.  This  particularly  applies  to 
prices for domestically produced goods influenced by world market prices.  
In August, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE was 0.9 per cent, after having been down to 0.7 per 
cent  one  month  earlier.  This  was  slightly  lower  than  projected  in  the  last  Inflation  Report  and 
considerably lower than the inflation target of 2.5 per cent. In mid-September, Norges Bank submitted 
a  report  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  This  report  carefully  examines  the  reasons  for  the  low  level  of 
inflation and the measures that have been implemented to bring inflation back up to target.  
There are still prospects of low inflation for some time ahead. Developments in other countries indicate 
that prices for imported goods and services, measured in the producer countries(cid:146) currencies, will not 
rise appreciably. It also takes time for the effects of last year(cid:146)s appreciation of the krone to dissipate. 
However, this year(cid:146)s krone depreciation will gradually have an affect on inflation and thus contribute to 
higher inflation.  
The analysis in the June Inflation Report showed that a reduction in the sight deposit rate towards 3 
per cent, combined with some depreciation of the krone, could bring inflation up towards the target at 
the two-year horizon11. The prospect of more moderate wage growth ahead could provide a basis for 
an even lower interest rate and a weaker krone without the projections for inflation exceeding 2.5 per 
cent in the period.  
With reduced pressures in the economy and an inflation outlook that is below target at the two-year 
horizon, Norges Bank has reduced the key rate a number of times in the last year. This summer the 
interest rate has been reduced in larger steps than has been customary. Interest rate reductions have 
been an important element in preventing inflation expectations from taking hold at too low a level. The 
reductions in the interest rate will also contribute to pushing up growth in the economy.  
There  was  a  decline  in  mainland  GDP  this  past  winter.  Subsequently,  it  appears  that  growth  has 
picked  up  somewhat,  but  investment  activity  in  mainland  Norway  is  still  low.  Investment  in  the 
petroleum sector is rising, but a large portion of the increase in demand is being met by imports. Public 
consumption rose sharply in 2002, but the public sector is providing little stimulus to the economy this 
year. In spite of relatively high growth in nominal budget ceilings, high wage growth gives little room for 
increased  activity.  It  is  primarily  private  consumption  that  is  making  a  positive  contribution.  More 
balanced  growth  might  be  desirable,  but  households  have  strengthened  their  financial  position  in 
recent  years  at the  expense of private and  public enterprises. Therefore,  these sectors(cid:146) capacity  to 
push  up  growth  will  be  somewhat  reduced  in  the  period  ahead.  We  expect  that  growth  in  private 
consumption  will  gradually  contribute  to  higher  employment  and  increased  investment  in  mainland 
enterprises. The interest rate reductions will underpin these developments.  
Growth  in  the  global  economy  is  also  expected  to  accelerate  and  stimulate  growth  in  Norway.  The 
recovery  of  the  US  and  Japanese  economies  appears  to  be  somewhat  more  swift  and  more 
pronounced  than  expected.  The  recovery  in  the  US  has  not,  however,  led  to  higher  employment, 
adding to the uncertainty about the strength and duration of the recovery. In Europe, the economy is 
still marked by stagnation, and projections for growth in 2003 have been revised downwards a number 
of times. A moderate upturn is expected in 2004, but activity will remain at a low level.  
Even though Norges Bank is forward-looking in its conduct of monetary policy, thorough knowledge of 
the  current  state  of  the  economy  is  extremely  important.  An  up-to-date  and  correct  picture  of  the 
current situation is necessary to make accurate projections for the period ahead.  
In autumn 2002, Norges Bank established a regional network as a tool to gauge the level of activity in 
the Norwegian economy.  
                                                      
1  Based on an assumption concerning forward rates and a gradual depreciation of the exchange rate. 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 3
Official  statistics  and  evaluations  of  developments  in  financial  markets  will  continue  to  be  the  main 
basis  for  our  assessments,  but  due  to  the  time  lag  and  revisions  of  such  statistics,  supplementary 
information is useful.  
The regional network provides up-to-date information on the state of the Norwegian economy. Regular 
communication  with  local  contacts  in  Norway(cid:146)s  business  and  community  life  provides  us  with 
information  that  supplements  available  official  statistics.  It  also  provides  us  with  supplementary 
information  on  areas  not  covered  by  official  statistical  sources,  and  we  learn  which  issues  are  of 
particular concern to enterprises.  
The network consists of companies, organisations and municipalities throughout Norway. We will be 
having  six  rounds  of  talks  each  year  with  business  and  community  leaders  concerning  financial 
developments in their enterprises and industries, with about 200 visits in each round. The selection of 
contacts represents the production side of the economy, both industry-wise and geographically.  
In the course of 2003, the number of contacts in the network will rise to about 1000 persons. These 
individuals will be contacted once or twice a year.  
Kunnskapsparken in Bodł conducts the contact meetings in Region North.  
In  general,  our  contacts  in  Region  North  reported  at  the  end  of  August  and  the  beginning  of 
September that developments continue to be sluggish.  
The fishing industry is still experiencing difficult times, even though some enterprises have reported a 
slight increase in demand for certain species and products.  
Companies supplying goods and services to the fisheries and aquaculture sector are experiencing a 
decline in demand and output and a number of companies only have a few service orders.  
The household service sector is reporting a small increase in demand, whereas companies(cid:146) demand 
for services is generally stagnant or falling slightly.  
The public sector is reducing the number of employees, while retail trade and the construction sector 
are planning a slight increase in the number of employees.  
The rise in costs in the last few years has not fed through to prices due to intense competition, both 
from abroad and from other market participants in Norway. Instead, enterprises has reduced activity 
and implemented extensive efficiency- enhancing measures.  
The  public  sector  employs  more  than  one-third  of  the  labour  force  in  Norway.  In  Northern  Norway, 
public sector employees account for close to 45 per cent of the labour force.  
The primary industries are important for the counties in Northern Norway, especially the utilisation of 
the abundant fish resources in the coastal areas. A large part of the fishing industry is export-oriented 
and  is increasingly competing  with low-cost countries. These industries  will be  vulnerable  when the 
rise in domestic costs is high.  
There  are  wide  regional  variations  in  unemployment.  At  the  end  of  July,  the  number  of  registered 
unemployed in Northern Norway came to 4.4 per cent of the labour force, which is slightly higher than 
the national average of 4.1 per cent.  
Even  though  the  region  has  somewhat  higher  unemployment  than  the  national  average,  the  rise  in 
unemployment in Northern Norway has been relatively low in the last year. Unemployment has only 
risen half as much in Northern Norway as in the rest of the country. The number of unemployed has 
risen least in the county of Finnmark in the last year. This is probably related to the industry structure 
which is characterised by a relatively high share of employees in the public service sector.  
As I have mentioned, a look at the current situation in this part of the country and similar reports from 
the other regions represent important information in the work on setting interest rates.  
The short-term nominal interest rate in Norway has now reached a historically very low level. The real 
interest rate is also low, but not nearly so low as in the beginning of the 1980s when inflation was high.  
Without a considerable easing of monetary policy, inflation might have been too low for an extensive 
period. This may in turn lead to expectations of continued very low inflation. In such a situation, it may 
be more demanding to increase economic activity. It was therefore appropriate to reduce the interest 
rate considerably.  
4 
 BIS Review 43/2003
Since December last year, monetary policy has been eased to a greater extent and more rapidly than 
has been customary. Following this phase of substantial easing, uncertainty with regard to economic 
developments in the period ahead may be somewhat greater than normal.  
If  households  assume  that  interest  rates  will  remain  low,  private  consumption  may  increase 
substantially, and the rise in house prices and household borrowing may again accelerate. The risk of 
stronger  growth  in  household  demand  must  be  weighed  against  the  sluggish  developments  in  the 
business sector. Despite the depreciation of the krone, enterprises(cid:146) competitiveness is still rather weak 
after many years of high wage growth.Vacancy rates for commercial premises are high and rents have 
fallen.  
Another risk is that wage growth may accelerate again, as it did following the interest rate reductions in 
1999. This risk is also being reduced by a slacker labour market. Unemployment in 2004 will probably 
be on a par with the level in 1996 and 1997. Annual wage growth in these years was a little less than 
4‰ per cent.  
The low pay increases in this year(cid:146)s wage settlement may indicate that the social partners are now 
placing more weight on the negative effects of large pay increases on future developments in interest 
rates, the krone exchange rate and employment in contrast to what appeared to be the case in the 
past few years. In the light of experience from 2002, it must be assumed that public agencies will be 
more  cautious  in  future  wage  settlements.  The  labour  market  outlook  underpins  expectations  of 
moderate wage growth.  
Developments in the krone exchange rate represent another source of uncertainty. The relationship 
between  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  the  interest  rate  differential  against  other  countries  is  not 
necessarily  stable  over  time.  Themes  in  international  financial  markets  change.  However,  the 
depreciation of the krone this year is contributing to stabilising inflation and activity in the economy. 
We may not yet have seen the full effects of the interest rate reductions on the krone exchange rate. 
At the same time, the krone may be influenced by fiscal policy and the outlook for wage growth.  
Norges  Bank  has  no  set  target  for  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate.  Developments  in  the  krone  are 
nevertheless  of  considerable  importance  in  interest  rate  setting.  The  response  to  a  change  in  the 
exchange  rate  will  depend  on  its  expected  impact  on  inflation.  This  requires  an  evaluation  of  the 
reasons for the duration of the change. Short-term fluctuations in the krone tend to have very limited 
effects on economic developments, while long-lasting changes may have an impact.  
Norges  Bank  has  mainly  based  projections  in  the  baseline  scenario  in  its  inflation  reports  on  a 
constant exchange rate equal to the average for the previous three months, and in some cases the 
average  for  the  previous  month.  Using  these  averages,  very  short-term  variations  in  the  krone 
exchange rate will have less effect on the exchange rate assumption. A more long-lasting change in 
the krone exchange rate will, on the other hand, be taken into account over time and will gradually 
have an effect on the inflation projection and on interest rate setting.  
Norges Bank(cid:146)s Executive Board sets the interest rate with a view to achieving the inflation target of 2‰ 
per cent. The inflation target also provides a framework for stabilising output and employment. When 
setting  the  interest  rate,  the  Executive  Board  seeks  to  strike  a  balance.  On  the  one  hand  is  the 
consideration of bringing inflation up to target and stimulating growth in the Norwegian economy. On 
the other hand, we must consider the risk of new pressures in the Norwegian economy when looking 
further ahead. Since December 2002, we have found it appropriate to reduce the interest rate to a low 
level. At the last monetary policy meeting on 17 September, it was decided to reduce the interest rate 
to  2.5  per  cent.  According  to  Norges  Bank(cid:146)s  assessment,  with  an  interest  rate  of  2.5  per  cent,  the 
probability that inflation two years ahead will be higher than 2‰ per cent is the same as the probability 
that it will be lower.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 43/2003 
 5
