Jean-Claude Trichet: Paris seminar on the EU accession process (concluding 
remarks) 
Concluding remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Paris 
seminar on the EU accession process, Paris, 5 March 2004. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
To conclude this seminar, let me say what a great pleasure it has been for me to be here with you 
yesterday  and  today.  This  seminar  has  brought  together  governors,  vice-governors  and  high-level 
representatives of the 12 accession country central banks, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the 
15  national  central  banks  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB),  as  well  as 
representatives of the Irish Presidency and the European Commission. 
Today’s discussions have, in my view, clearly shown how much progress we have already made in 
exploring many of the key issues that will shape successful monetary cooperation and integration in an 
enlarged European Union (EU). They also illustrate how much common ground we share on central 
banking  matters  here  in  Europe.  Obviously,  this  is  the  result  of  our  regular  and  increasingly  close 
contact  over half  a decade.  And  I believe  that  this permanent  dialogue  is  a  very  valuable asset  for 
future interaction, particularly in an enlarged ESCB. 
 Listening  to  today’s  presentations  and  statements,  it  struck  me  how  many  interlinkages  there  are 
between, on the one hand, the policy issues, and on the other, the practical and operational aspects. It 
is  important,  and  it  will  always  be  important,  to  understand  the  implementation  issues,  and  to 
anticipate questions that may arise in day-to-day practice. 
Our  discussion  in  the  first  session,  entitled  “Monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  and  the  practical 
functioning  of  ERM II”,  illustrated  that  this  is  particularly  important  in  the  case  of  ERM II,  as  our 
practical and  operational experience  with  ERM II  is  still  somewhat  limited  and our  initial  experience 
from  “ERM I”,  although  useful,  is  not  always  wholly  relevant.  Our  discussions  highlighted  both  that 
ERM II is a useful framework to help Member States participating in the mechanism in their efforts to 
adopt  the  euro  and,  also,  that  participation  in  ERM II  is  only  one  element  of  the  overall  policy 
framework.  Participation  in  ERM  II  must  be  complemented  by  other  elements  of  this  overall  policy 
framework. 
As  we  stated  in  the  Policy  position  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  on  exchange  rate  issues 
relating to the acceding countries (published on 18 December 2003), to ensure a smooth participation 
in  ERM  II  it  would  be  necessary  that  major  policy  adjustments  -  for  example  with  regard  to  price 
liberalisation  and  fiscal  policy  -  are  undertaken  prior  to  participation  in  the  mechanism,  and  that  a 
credible fiscal consolidation path is being followed. 
Drawing lessons from one’s own experience and from that of others was clearly another leitmotiv of 
today’s seminar.  Obviously,  this  is  easier  said  than done.  But  if  a  task  is difficult,  it  means  that  we 
should simply work harder at it. 
Respecting  rules  is  particularly  important  in  the  EU  institutional  framework.  Fiscal  rules  in  the 
European  Union  are  a  clear  case  in  point,  as  the  discussion  in  our  second  session  today  entitled 
“Budgetary discipline in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact” has clearly shown. 
Fiscal performance has been rather weak recently in some of the acceding countries. In this context, 
the  multilateral  surveillance  procedures  within  the  EU  framework,  and  in  particular  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact, will play a key role in enhancing budgetary discipline. In this area, let me reiterate that 
the Governing Council of the ECB shares the concerns of the European Commission regarding the 
conclusions of  the  ECOFIN Council  in November  last  year.  The Commission  is  the  guardian  of  the 
Treaty and the ECB respects the Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity. Furthermore, we do not 
see a need to change the Treaty and, in our view, the Stability and Growth Pact in its current form is 
appropriate. We are in agreement with the Commission that the implementation of the Stability and 
Growth Pact could be further improved, in particular in terms of the analysis of structural imbalances 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
and the strengthening of incentives for sound fiscal policies during good economic times. Clarity and 
enforceability of the fiscal framework should be enhanced. 
What  holds  true  for  rules  in  general  can  also  be  applied  to  standards  and  regulations  (which  are 
specific  forms  of  rules).  Our  discussion  in  the  last  session,  entitled  “Issues  related  to  financial 
standards, accounting regulations and corporate governance”, has made this crystal clear with regard 
to standards and regulations in the financial and corporate sector. Given the extent of globalisation in 
today’s  world,  the  need  for  a  sound  framework  for  the  conduct  of  business  and  for  appropriate 
supervision, also in cross-border terms, has never been more pressing. 
If  I  can  draw  just  one  general  conclusion  from  all  of  our  discussions  today,  it  is  the  importance  of 
being prepared. Although the forthcoming accession is undoubtedly a major historic achievement, we 
must continue to thoroughly prepare for integration in the future in  order to get the timing of policy 
actions right. 
So  where  do  we  go  from  here?  Looking  ahead  over  the  remainder  of  2004  and  beyond,  there  are 
clearly  challenges  for  which  we  need  to  continue  to  prepare.  Challenges  and  opportunities  for  all 
countries represented here today. 
• 
Bulgaria and Romania will of course face the challenge of making further progress towards 
creating the conditions for EU membership and of completing accession negotiations. 
For  the  10  new  Member  States,  the  main  agenda  item  will  still  be  full  integration  into  the 
EU framework.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  integration  into  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union, since all acceding countries will join the EU as Member States with a derogation. That 
means  that,  while  not  yet  adopting  the  euro,  they  are  committed  to  striving  towards  the 
eventual adoption of the euro upon the fulfilment of the convergence criteria laid down in the 
Treaty. Full integration will also require considerable efforts in other key areas such as the 
single market. 
As regards the 25 Member States, speeding up the pace of structural reforms would help to 
improve  the  longer-term  growth  potential  of  the  wider  EU.  Moreover,  there  is  also  the 
important task of moving ahead with the project of a Constitution for Europe. The months 
and years ahead will be very formative for all of us. And I think decisions will be taken that 
may well shape Europe for a long time to come. 
   Let me conclude by warmly thanking Governor Noyer and the staff of the Banque de France for their 
excellent preparation of this seminar. I am sure I speak for all participants when I say that we have 
appreciated your very warm hospitality and splendid organisation both yesterday evening and today. 
In the name of all fellow members of the Governing Council of the ECB, I would also like to thank all 
participants,  and  in  particular  our  colleagues  from  the  accession  countries,  for  coming  to  Paris  to 
discuss a broad set of issues that are vital to both the future of monetary integration in Europe and the 
financial stability of our continent. 
As I said yesterday evening, this seminar in Paris is the last one in the current configuration. However, 
there  will  be  other  seminars  and  opportunities  for  close  dialogue  with  central  banks  from  those 
countries  still  negotiating  EU  membership,  and  with  central  banks  from  countries  that  may  become 
accession countries in the future. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
