Y V Reddy: Current concerns and some perspectives on inflation 
Concluding  remarks  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Institute  for 
Development Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, 27 August 2004. 
 Dear Shri Bajpaiji, Shri C. S. Rao garu, Shri Kamesam, Dr. Gulati and friends, 
At the outset, I am thankful to the Institute for inviting me to this function and giving the pleasure of 
being  with  you  all.  The  programme  clearly  says  that  I  have  to  give  some  concluding  remarks.  This 
makes  it  clear  that  my  presence  is  essentially  ceremonial  -  hand  over  the  certificates  to  the  bright 
young people and just give a few remarks, basically perhaps because the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
funds this Institute. I think it is a very wise thing for the Institute for Development Research in Banking 
Technology  (IDRBT)  to  express  thanks  to  those  who  fund  and  cultivate  those  who  matter.  I  will, 
however, take the opportunity to make some comments on current concerns on inflation.  
Financial regulation 
To  begin  with,  there  will  be  a  few  comments  on  the  addresses  delivered  today  and  then  some 
reference to the IDRBT. Shri C. S. Rao, Chairman, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDA)  emphasised  the  synergy  that  is  developing  between  banking  and  insurance.  There  are  two 
elements here - one from the macro-side and the other from the operational or the micro-side. India’s 
contractual  savings  and  long-term  savings  are  rather  low,  which  is  why  we  are  not  able  to  invest 
heavily in infrastructure, and that is the macro part where insurance has a critical role. The second part 
is that much of business in our country is not really covered by insurance. The growth of economic 
activity requires risk-mitigation and the classic case is agriculture in India. So if we don’t have the risk 
mitigation  measures,  the  capacity  for  increasing  the  economic  activity  gets  constrained.  We  pride 
ourselves that financial sector reforms in India started early in the reform cycle, but within the financial 
sector,  the  insurance reforms came  in  rather  late  in the  cycle.  Hence,  there  is enormous scope  for 
expansion  in  that  area.  Shri  Rao’s  focus  on  the  linking  of  banks  and  insurance  sector,  taking 
advantage of the penetration that banks already have in the rural areas, is a remarkable approach and 
admittedly, it is extremely useful to use the technology in this process. We should work further on this 
and  I  am  sure  the  banks,  especially  public  sector  banks,  have  great  business  potential  too  in 
bankassurance. 
Shri  Bajpai,  Chairman,  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  has  covered  in  his  address 
both historical perspective and cross-country perspective. As compared to most other countries, the 
extent of progress that has been made by our securities regulator in terms of technology penetration 
and safety measures is impressive and currently, absolutely world class. SEBI should be proud of that. 
As  we  go  along,  there  is  a  need  to  be  abreast  of  the  global  developments  and  at  the  same  time 
integrate it into our own unique socio-economic circumstances. 
There  are  two  issues  -  one  is  at  the  operational  level  and  the  other  is  the  overall  stability  issue  in 
regard to the role of the financial regulators - and on both these counts, by and large, we have every 
reason to be proud of our achievements. We withstood the external and domestic challenges as well 
as economic and political ones in the last ten years. India emerges from the 1990s, as an island of 
financial stability in a sea of turbulence among the emerging markets and the credit goes to all who 
have been participants in this venture of improving the financial system.  
On IDRBT 
As regards the activities of IDRBT, we are heralding a customer-centric national switch for ATMs. This, 
I  believe,  facilitates  access  to  a  large  number  of  ATMs  of  different  banks.  IDRBT  has  taken  major 
steps to herald an IT revolution in the financial sector in a brief span of about eight years. Another 
excellent initiative is the University-Industry collaboration and both the M.Tech. Programme and the 
PGPBTM  Programme  are  significant  contributions.  Undoubtedly,  the  IDRBT  will  have  a  proper 
balance  between  research,  training  and  IT  infrastructure  provisioning  for  the  benefit  of  the  financial 
sector as a whole. India boasts of excellence in the development of computer software, and the entire 
world’s financial sector sources its software from Bangalore, Hyderabad, Pune, etc. Perhaps, there is 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
some merit in our trying to get advantage of this expertise being provided by various centres. IDRBT 
can play a role by creating a forum in which the software industry and the hardware industry that are 
setting global standards are able to serve the financial sector domestically also. And whatever we try 
to  do,  we  have  to  be  very  careful  about  the  quality  of  services  and  it  is  hoped  that  IDRBT  will 
introduce,  if  it  has  not  already  introduced,  and  also  upgrade  the  mechanisms  by  which  there  is  an 
assessment of the quality of services IDRBT is providing.  
RBI and technology 
Some mention of the RBI’s work with regard to technology will be in order in this forum. An important 
contribution of the RBI to the development of technology is indeed the establishment of this Institute. 
The major achievement in the last one-year is the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS). Between the 
timetable and making sure that it works right, we gave preference to making sure that it works right 
which resulted in some delay but by and large we are on track. Within three months of the introduction 
of the RTGS, the system has been able to settle almost 90% of the inter-bank funds transfer, which 
were being earlier routed through the net-settlement based inter-bank clearing at Mumbai. The year 
also witnessed the introduction of what is called the Special Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT), which 
provides  for  transfer  of  funds  in  the  electronic  mode  on  the  same  day  basis  with  multiple  daily 
settlements. The RTGS and SEFT are together able to cover about 2500 branches of banks in around 
200 cities. No doubt, there is still lot of scope for further improvement.  
It is appropriate to mention the items on the RBI’s agenda on technology matters. One of course is the 
expansion  of  the  reach  of  the  RTGS  and  what  is  most  important  is  to  make  sure  that  it  not  only 
increases  its  reach  but  also  works  well.  Secondly,  the  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  needs  to 
connect almost all branches in the country using the SFMS and the INFINET. The third is enhancing 
the level of security in the Payment and Settlement System. We should accord the highest priority to 
security in all IT-related matters, particularly in the financial sector, because they are all inter-related 
and if security is breached in one place, it is quite possible that this spreads into the other areas. The 
fourth  relates  to  the  conduct  of  clearing  and  settlement  at  the  national  level  through  a  national 
settlement system. Introduction of cheque truncation system on a pilot basis in the National Capital 
Region is an important task. There are also some proposals related to the risk mitigation schemes for 
deferred  net  settlements  system.  In  this  regard,  we  are  also  pursuing  the  idea  of  having  a 
semi-autonomous  Board  for  Payments  and  Settlements.  Ultimately,  there  should  be  a  separate 
legislation governing the Payments and Settlements System.  
To provide a roadmap to attain these goals, the RBI has decided to start the preparation of a new 
vision  document  on  technology.  The  new  vision  document  will  encompass  the  consolidation  of 
progress made and also show the way forward. As soon as the preliminary draft is prepared, we will 
be  able  to  submit  it  to  a  group  of  multi-disciplinary  professionals,  both  from  the  user-side  and  the 
technology-side  and  it  will  invite  your  advice  and  guidance.  This  vision  document  will  be  put  in  the 
public domain in the draft stage itself.  
On the current macroeconomic situation 
In  view  of  the  widespread  interest  in  the  current  inflationary  environment,  I  will  make  a  brief 
presentation on the current macro-economic situation with particular reference to inflation.  
If you recall, a few weeks ago I had made a brief statement on the concerns relating to inflation. At that 
stage, it was submitted that there were both global and domestic factors working, predominantly global 
but some domestic factors - which are driving the current inflation. I had also mentioned about both the 
supply and demand factors and that the rise in headline inflation was predominantly a result of supply-
shock.  In  terms  of  policy  response  it  was  indicated  that  (a)  we  are  monitoring  the  developments 
carefully; and (b) we respond to the development on an ongoing basis with a view to ensuring price 
stability. 
This is as good a statement today as it was a few weeks ago. But there are certain developments 
since then, and it is my duty to place them before you. 
First, a number of fiscal actions have been taken in particular relating to oil. The impact, you may not 
find the impact of these actions today or tomorrow, but it is very clear that there is a determined fiscal 
response which has been initiated and which will be continued as necessary. This should help contain 
inflationary expectations. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
Second,  there  is  a  new  development  in  Indian  situation.  It  is  that  the  corporate  houses  have  taken 
upon  themselves  the  importance  of  maintaining  certain  amount  of  price  stability.  The  industry  and 
trade have taken initiatives in terms of looking at what may be called the broader interest. In terms of 
pricing power, there are occasions when the corporate sector may not use the full pricing power in the 
short-run to gain immediate advantage keeping in view a longer term perspective. This realisation is 
evident among our corporates and I am sure it is happening among the larger trading community also. 
These attitudes and actions do contribute to moderating inflationary outcomes and, more importantly, 
expectations. 
Third, we had a series of discussions in the recent past with the financial industry associations and the 
leading bankers. We had extremely fruitful discussions and the major advice that came forward from 
the banking community and the financial sector is to try and reduce volatility. All of them agreed that it 
is in the interest of everybody that we minimise volatility in the financial markets and in public policy 
minimise knee-jerk reactions, while focussing on price stability and the underlying inflation. 
Fourth, in the domestic circumstance, there is a truckers’ strike and there are fears of strike adding to 
inflation. It must be recognised that there may be some increase in the numbers relating to headline 
inflation for those few weeks. I would, however, describe the truckers’ strike to be in the nature of a 
“temporary  supply  disruption  in  certain  localities”  rather  than  something  that  should  influence  the 
inflationary expectations or the approach to price stability. It is this distinction that is required when we 
are analysing the type of policy responses.  
Fifth, as far as the financial markets are concerned, the money markets have been reasonably stable 
and  the  forex  markets  have  also  been  stable.  In  the  government  securities  market,  however,  there 
have been certain concerns. The RBI is aware of the situation and the market participants have made 
several  suggestions  to  minimise  volatility  or  adverse  impact,  and  these  are  being  examined  at  the 
operational level. We in RBI are trying to see that there are no avoidable uncertainties in policy, while 
mitigating undue pressures on the functioning of markets without undermining market efficiency. 
Positives getting more positive 
But in all this, while it is true that we should be concerned about the current rise in headline inflation, 
we should not forget the positive side, and in my view, the positive side seems to be getting a bit more 
positive in the last two-to-three weeks. How is that so? 
First  and  foremost,  there  is  virtually  a  national  consensus  that  high  inflation  is  not  good  and  that  it 
should be brought down. Whether it is political leadership, whether it is economic agents, whether it is 
bankers, whether it is regulators - among everybody there is a national consensus that it is not good to 
have persistent highs in prices and that everybody should consider the common long-term interests in 
maintaining price stability. So, there is a national consensus on the issue and several actions have 
followed from all sections wherever it was warranted and there have been no knee-jerk reactions. 
Second, there is good news, in the sense that generally in India democratic pressures ensure that the 
inflation doesn’t go above the two-digit mark. But now, we find that inflation tolerance has come down. 
The society, the economic agents and the market participants are now reacting to a lower headline 
inflation, which is a good thing because if we want a sustained strong growth, it is necessary to rein in 
inflationary expectations. It is necessary to ensure price stability and what is the best way to ensure 
price stability? Everybody should work towards the same goal including the RBI and that is possible 
when there is a consensus in this regard. There is a virtual national consensus today that tolerance to 
inflation has come down and that definitely people are unhappy if it is higher and so it must be brought 
below that level as soon as possible. This indeed is good news because the economic agents are now 
factoring in this consensus as a possible factor governing future policies and expectations relating to 
price stability.  
Third, the changing scenario on interest rates is also good news. For long, we had planned systems 
and we had administered interest rates with some amount of comfort for everyone. In the last five to 
six years, we had reduction in the interest rates. As the interest rates went down and down over the 
recent  years,  we  were  not  fully  sensitive  to  the  fact  that  there  is  something  known  as  interest  rate 
cycles.  So,  for  the  first  time,  the  market  participants  have  got  a  feel  of  this  interest  rate  cycle.  No 
doubt, the RBI has been mentioning this in its analysis, but for many it looked like the usual central 
bank analysis and caution - like a grandfather always cautioning to be careful while crossing the road.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 3
But  the  reality  of  the  reform  process  is  that  there will  be  interest rate  cycles  even  within an  overall 
stable  situation  and  consistent  with  overall  macro-stability.  That  cycle  is  being  experienced  by  the 
market participants for the first time, with the result that the market participants are now able to input 
these uncertainties more consciously and factor the type of risk they have to face in their conduct of 
business.  So  from  the  central  bank’s  point  of  view,  it  is  our  endeavour  to  facilitate  -  it  is  not  our 
endeavour  to  say  we  told  you  so  -  the  new  environment  by  working  together  to  see  that  the 
appropriate  systems  to  withstand  interest  rate  cycles  are  more  consciously  built.  In  a  meeting  with 
bankers a couple of days ago, we have more or less come round to the view that the system should 
be made to get accustomed to the interest rate cycles. 
Fourth, the prospects for real sector are looking better. In the current fiscal, in terms of the numbers, 
the investment activity is picking up whether one talks of capital goods imports, or one talks of capital 
goods production. The off-take in the non-food credit in this fiscal has been very impressive. These 
developments mean that the output should in the normal course grow. So, the output is likely to grow 
in the next few months and that is in many ways the time-frame which we have to look at in regard to 
the price levels. One should recognise that ultimately inflation is the result of interplay between the 
supply side such as productivity, quantum of output and investment activities, and the demand side. 
So, I would consider the supply side domestically being more positive. 
Fifth,  as  a  positive,  our  exports  are  growing  impressively.  We  are  usually  worried  that  the oil  bill  is 
going up but the exports are also going up and so, at least the impact on balance of payments is not 
as much as we would have apprehended. Hence, we are less uncomfortable in facing the oil price 
hikes.  
Analytics for policy response 
In this background, it will be useful to look at the analytics that should govern the policy response.  
As between the international and domestic factors that influence the current tendency for a rise in the 
headline inflation in our country, the international factors continue to be dominant. The international 
factors  relate  primarily  to  oil  but  also,  to  some  extent,  other  commodities  and  financial  markets, 
including interest rates and exchange rates. At the same time, there have been positive developments 
on the domestic front. These relate to improved outlook on monsoon and pick up in the investment 
activity.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  dominance  of  international  factors  in  the  current  price  rise  and  the 
importance  of  stability  governing  domestic  economy  continue  to  warrant  a  measured  response  to 
ensure price stability and contain inflationary expectations.  
As  between  supply  and  demand  factors,  the  evidence  clearly  continues  to  be  that  the  increase  in 
inflation is largely on account of supply shock. As regards demand factors, the growth in broad money 
as well as the reserve money has moderated. There is evidence of gradual unwinding of overhang of 
liquidity. There may be some transient impact of the truckers’ strike on inflation but this need not be 
treated as a lasting supply  shock.  In  any  case,  there  is  no  clear  evidence  that  there has been any 
aggravation  on  the  demand  side.  On  balance,  therefore,  while  the  situation  has  to  be  watched 
carefully in terms of the balance between supply and demand factors, the current situation seems to 
be not much different than what it was diagnosed to be some time ago, viz., significantly a supply side 
shock.  
As regards inflationary expectations, there is a new dimension to the understanding of inflation itself. 
There is recently a sophisticated debate on the issue of appropriate index of inflation. Analysts have 
pointed out that the wholesale price index (WPI) of India is similar to producers’ price index in other 
countries and that in other countries, the headline inflation is usually the consumer price index (CPI). 
More  important,  internationally,  empirical  evidence  shows  that  wholesale  price  or  producers’  index 
tends to be more volatile. It may be necessary to capture these nuances and their relationship with 
policy response in the context of inflationary expectations.  
It will be interesting to recall the experience of rise in headline inflation and divergence between WPI 
and CPI in our country. Over the last five years average WPI inflation, on a weekly basis, was 4.6 per 
cent  and  CPI  inflation  was  lower  at  3.9  per  cent,  on  a  monthly  basis.  In  the  recent  years,  the 
year-on-year  WPI  inflation  rate  was  higher  in  the  range  of  6.0-9.0  per  cent  during  most  parts  of 
2000-01. Again, inflation remained high in the range of 6.0-7.0 per cent for sometime during 2003-04. 
As  these  inflationary  episodes  were  considered  to  be  largely  caused  by  supply  side  factors,  the 
inflation  rate  reversed  itself  quickly  once  the  supply  situation  stabilised.  While  the  headline  inflation 
responds  to  both  supply  shocks  and  demand  pressures,  the  nature  of  response  could  be  quite 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2004
different. The response of inflation to supply shocks is quick but transient. The response to demand 
shocks  on  the  other  hand,  is  more  subtle  but  persistent.  As  indicated  in  the  annual  monetary  and 
credit  policy  Statement  for  the  year  2001-02,  a  factor  which  complicates  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy  during  certain  periods  is  the  difficulty  in  correct  assessment  of  the  potential  inflationary 
pressures  based  on  the  available  data  for  the  current  period.  While  there  are  uncertainties,  it  is 
perhaps useful to look at the recent inflation history for an assessment of inflationary expectations.  
The monetary policy stance in other countries is also trying to respond to the oil price shock. In many 
countries there has been a shift in monetary policy stance from easy to a more neutral one. In most 
countries, there is very little evidence of cognisable monetary policy response to the oil price hike per 
se.  In  view  of  the  linkages  between  domestic  and  international  economy,  the  monetary  policy 
responses of other countries, particularly the developed ones, have also to be carefully watched.  
Most important, there is a reassurance that in the context of current rise in inflation all are on the same 
side, viz., on the side of price stability. The fiscal authorities, monetary policy, the financial markets 
and  corporates  are  committed  to  the  objective  of  price  stability  and  minimising  volatility.  In  this 
background, therefore, RBI will continue its dialogue with market participants to fine tune its response 
to  minimise  volatility  while  emphasising  the  importance  of  Reserve  Bank’s  credibility  in  maintaining 
price stability consistent with the compulsions of the growth dynamics in our country at this juncture.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 5
