Lee Hsien Loong: ASEAN  -  the way ahead 
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore, at the opening ceremony of the ASEAN Finance Ministers meeting (AFMM), 
Singapore, 7 April 2004. 
 Finance Ministers of ASEAN member states 
The ASEAN Secretary-General 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let me first welcome all of you to Singapore for the 8th ASEAN Finance Ministers Meeting. 
Introduction 
In 1997, ASEAN was hit by its worst-ever economic crisis. The Asian Financial Crisis dealt a severe 
blow  to  all  of  us.  One  after  another,  our  countries  succumbed  to  the  flight  of  capital  and  investors. 
Several economies were on the verge of collapse. Before we could fully recover from the Crisis, we 
were confronted again with yet another shock, this time a global economic downturn. The September 
11 attacks in America followed shortly. More recently, ASEAN was hit by SARS and the avian flu.  
ASEAN  has  taken  quite  a  few  hard  punches  in  the  last  few  years.  Although  we  might  have  been 
bruised,  we  are  far  from  being  knocked  out.  ASEAN  countries  strived  to  repair  the  damage,  to 
recapitalise banking systems, to restructure companies in difficulties, and most importantly to restore 
confidence. Despite the setbacks, ASEAN countries continued to embrace globalization. We continued 
to look outwards, do our best to attract FDI, liberalise trade, and broaden our linkages with the outside 
world.  
Now most ASEAN economies are on the mend. Economic growth has been strong in many countries. 
Exports  are  growing,  and  stock  markets  are  up.  As  a  regional  grouping,  we  have  continued  to 
integrate our economies while individually pursuing restructuring. ASEAN is now back on its feet, up 
and running again.  
The necessity of deeper integration 
The need to broaden and deepen economic co-operation is a necessity recognised by ASEAN more 
than  ten  years  ago.  In  1992,  ASEAN  started  the  ASEAN  Free  Trade  Area  (AFTA)  to  boost 
intra-ASEAN trade and establish the region as a common area for manufacturing operations.  
At  that  time,  the  catalyst  for  greater  integration  was  globalisation.  Competition  was getting tougher. 
Europe was consolidating and integrating itself to form the Single European Market. In North America, 
the  US,  Canada  and  Mexico  were preparing  to  form  the  North America  Free  Trade  Area (NAFTA). 
NAFTA provided US manufacturers an attractive, low cost manufacturing base in Mexico. Mexico too 
expected to benefit from new investments from the US, which would create jobs and bring growth and 
prosperity  to  the  country.  Both  the  Single  European  Market  and  NAFTA  strengthened  the 
competitiveness of the continents, and threatened to divert investments away from Asia. 
Determined not to lose out, ASEAN responded with AFTA. In retrospect, AFTA is perhaps the most 
important decision on economic cooperation that ASEAN members have taken together.  
Today, the world is even more globalised than compared to 1992. Competition is once again at our 
door step. This time however, the competition comes not from Europe or Mexico, but from much closer 
to home. China and India are growing very rapidly. China is the factory of the world, while India is the 
back office of the world. The rise of these economies is in fact putting pressure on Europe and Mexico, 
which we worried about as competitors ten years ago.  
ASEAN must once again band together to maximise our strengths. Our fundamentals are strong, and 
can  be  further  exploited.  First,  ASEAN  has  a  large  market,  with  a  population  of  560  million  and  a 
combined GDP of US$330 billion, which is comparable to China?s coastal region. Second, we have 
an abundant supply of skilled labour ? young, eager to learn, and with a good attitude towards work. 
Third, ASEAN has a good track record in welcoming trade and foreign investments. We have always 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 1
been outward-looking, and our belief in free and open trade is reflected in the multitude of FTAs that 
we  are  currently  pursuing.  The  new  ASEAN  members  have  not  progressed  as  far  as  the  original 
ASEAN members in economic development and liberalisation, but they too are moving, and their rich 
human and natural resources and lower costs are key advantages that will fuel their economies.  
We must also remember that although the competition seems formidable, international competition is 
not  a  zero-sum  game.  ASEAN  can  benefit  tremendously  from  the  rise  of  our  large  neighbours  by 
trading with them, investing in them, and attracting investments and tourists from them. But it means 
working smart, co-operating with China and India, and complementing their activities. It also means 
further integrating our economies.  
Forging ahead 
Bilaterally,  individual  ASEAN  countries  are  already  increasing  their  economic  links  with  China  and 
India. But we should complement these individual efforts with combined ones, either several ASEAN 
countries which are ready proceeding first, or the whole of ASEAN working together as a group. 
We are negotiating an FTA with China, and targeting to conclude the goods chapter by middle of this 
year. By 2010, we should have an FTA between China and the original six ASEAN countries. By 2015, 
all ten ASEAN members will be included. India is also negotiating to establish an FTA with ASEAN by 
2011.  Japan,  which  has  been  a  key  investor  in  ASEAN,  has  also  proposed  a  Japan-ASEAN 
Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership,  which  both  sides  are  now  working  on.  The  US,  too,  has 
announced  the  Enterprise  ASEAN  Initiative,  under  which  it  will  pursue  various  agreements  with 
ASEAN countries, taking into account their respective progress in economic liberalization. So we are 
strengthening our linkages with all our key trading partners.  
Last  October,  the  Leaders  committed  to  an  ASEAN  Economic  Community  by  2020.  This  is  an 
ambitious vision which will see the creation a single market for goods, services, capital and talent in 
ASEAN.  But  2020  is  a  long  time  from now, and  we  must  make progress  long  before  this  deadline. 
Beyond trade in goods, ASEAN needs to step up its integration in other areas. For example, much 
work remains to be done in forging common investment rules, and in liberalising and integrating the 
services sectors.  
Financial cooperation 
Financial cooperation is a critical component of this effort. Financial services is a significant part of our 
(6-7%) regional economy, and is a growing sector. But it is not just the size of the market that makes 
financial  services  important.  The  Asian  Crisis  has  demonstrated  that  with  globalisation  and  greater 
ease in transferring funds around the world, it is more critical than ever that our financial sectors be 
sound, and our economies not be weakened by excesses.  
In recognition of the importance of the financial sector, the ASEAN Finance Ministers started to meet 
in  February  1997.  We  have  introduced  important  co-operation  initiatives,  such  as  the  ASEAN 
Surveillance Process to keep track of economic and financial trends and to provide early warning of 
economic  vulnerabilities,  and  the  ASEAN  Finance  Work  Program  to  improve  financial  procedures, 
standards and corporate governance within member countries. These are important mechanisms to 
guard against a repeat of the Asian Crisis.  
To further liberalise and integrate our markets, the Finance Ministers last year endorsed a roadmap for 
regional  financial  integration.  This  will  guide  us  towards  greater  liberalisation  and  integration  of  our 
markets.  To  keep  ASEAN  on  the  radar  screens  of  international  investors,  Finance  Ministers  are 
planning to organise joint road-shows to Europe and the US to promote the investment opportunities 
in ASEAN. 
One  possible  area  for  collaboration  is  in  the  capital  markets.  While  regional  capital  markets  have 
generally  experienced  strong  growth  since  the  financial  crisis,  our  potential  is  limited  because  by 
international  standards  the  regional  equity  and  bond  markets  are  small  and  fragmented.  We  made 
some  headway  four  years  ago  with  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  (CMI),  which  saw  the  expansion  of 
existing multilateral currency swap arrangements to include all 10 ASEAN members, as well as the 
conclusion of 16 bilateral swap arrangements, totalling US$36.5b in combined facility. When the CMI 
was launched in May 2001, it was agreed that Finance Ministers should review the Initiative 3 years 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2004
after implementation. So it would be timely this year, for ASEAN Finance Ministers together with our 
“Plus-3” counterparts to consider what and how the review of the CMI could be done.  
We  should  also  explore  further  avenues  of  cooperation.  For  example,  we  may  develop  greater 
linkages between stock exchanges in the region, or harmonise standards and conventions so as to 
make it easier for investors to operate across the capital markets in the region. In such initiatives, we 
do  not  have  to  wait  for  all  ASEAN  members  to  be  ready.  Once  two  or  more  ASEAN  members  are 
ready to make the move, they can work together as pathfinders for the whole region.  
Conclusion 
Globalisation has presented many challenges to ASEAN, but it has also created many opportunities. 
Integrating  our  economies  requires  hard  work,  political  will  and  often,  tough  decisions.  ASEAN  is 
determined to overcome the challenges, and embrace globalisation to benefit the lives of our people. 
Governments will need to lead the way, by implementing sound policies that foster development and 
growth. Foreign investors too will play a key role, by supporting good policies and exploiting the full 
potential of our markets. Once the people of ASEAN are aware of the larger challenges that the region 
is facing, I believe they will support the agenda for economic cooperation which will improve their lives.  
On  this  note,  let  me  now  declare  the  8th  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  Meeting  open.  I  wish  you 
meaningful and fruitful discussions.  
BIS Review 20/2004 
 3
