Niklaus Blattner: System stability and security of the systems 
Summary of a speech by Prof Dr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Luzerner  Tage  für  Informationssicherung  (LUTIS,  conference  on  information 
security), Lucerne, 25 May 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
 The stability of the banking system and the security of the financial market infrastructure - including the 
stock  exchanges  and  especially  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems  -  have  become  an 
important  concern  of  central  banks  all  over  the  world  in  recent  years.  This  has  notably  happened 
against  the  background  of  the  numerous  financial  crises  witnessed  during  the  past  decades. 
Moreover, events such as 9/11 have heightened awareness for the security of the financial markets 
and other infrastructures. 
In Switzerland, the growing importance of system stability has also been reflected in the new National 
Bank Act, which entered into force on 1 May 2004. Within the framework of its principal mandate of 
pursuing a monetary policy in the interests of the country as a whole while at the same time ensuring 
price  stability,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  is  legally  obliged  to  make  a  contribution  to  system 
stability and to facilitate and secure the operation of cashless payment systems. In implementing its 
mandate, the SNB takes preventive measures as well as measures aimed at overcoming crises. For 
instance, in a crisis the National Bank plays an important role in providing liquidity. With the new Act, 
the  SNB  specifically  bears  the  responsibility  of  overseeing  the  systemically  important  payment  and 
securities  settlement  systems.  The  operators  of  such  systems  will  in  future  have  to  meet  certain 
minimum  requirements,  which  will  also  include  requirements  with  regard  to  information  security. 
Secure and reliable information and communications structures are an essential precondition for the 
smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  In  the  context  of  its  mandate,  the  SNB  limits  itself  to 
systems-relevant aspects in these areas. Systems-irrelevant problems concerning individual banks or 
payment systems, by contrast, are explicitly not a part of its mandate. This is based on the conviction 
that the problems in the financial system must be solved by the market itself whenever possible. 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 1
