Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro - five years on 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual Dinner of 
the Guild of International Bankers, London, 2 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
For  five  years  now,  we  have  had  a  single  currency  and  a  monetary  policy  conducted  by  the 
Eurosystem, consisting of the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the euro area. 
The  introduction  of  the  single  European  currency  has  been  a  historical  landmark.  The  process  of 
preparing for the adoption of the single currency had led to a degree of convergence in the 1990s that 
many had not thought possible.  
Sceptics were unconvinced as to whether it was possible to establish the euro as a stable currency 
and  to  successfully  formulate  a  monetary  policy  for  a  diverse  currency  area.  In  particular,  some 
observers considered the continuing existence of autonomous national fiscal policies as incompatible 
with a supranational monetary policy. The “one-size-fits-all” approach implied by the single monetary 
policy was, on account of the diverse nature of the currency area, criticised to give rise to permanently 
asynchronous  economic  developments.  Critical  observers 
that  a 
stability-oriented monetary policy was doomed to failure. 
Where do we stand five years later? The euro has been firmly and credibly established as a stable 
currency. The euro area has witnessed a period of low rates of inflation and low levels of long term 
interest rates. Most countries have had their lowest market interest rates for decades. The introduction 
of  the  euro,  first,  in  book-entry  form,  and,  second,  in  the  form  of  banknotes  and  coins  went  very 
smoothly. The euro has become part of people’s daily lives. 
the  view 
therefore 
took 
The successful introduction of the euro 
The birth of the euro and the cash changeover  
In  January  1999  the transition  to  the  euro was  virtually  free  of  technical  problems,  although  many 
people  had  predicted  that  such  a  big  project  would  inevitably  be  delayed  or  affected  by  bugs.  We 
established, almost overnight, a unified money market, which functioned smoothly from the very start.  
Three years later, the exchange of the old national banknotes and coins of the 12 countries of the euro 
area for the new euro notes and coins was a huge organisational, logistical and technical undertaking. 
The euro cash changeover progressed well and rapidly, without any major hitches, to the benefit of 
more than 300 million European citizens.  
The mandate of the ECB 
Equally important, the ECB’s monetary policy has been successful in keeping inflation and inflation 
expectations under control over the last five years, even in the face of substantial adverse shocks. To 
a large extent, policy had to be conducted in a context of exceptional economic, financial and 
geopolitical uncertainty. But we kept a steady hand and never overreacted, with a view to anchoring 
long term inflation expectations.  
It  is  important  to  recall  which  factors  have  enabled us  to  make  the  euro  a stable currency.  I  would 
name here, most importantly, the institutional framework of European Economic and Monetary Union. 
The  Maastricht  Treaty  assigned  to  the  Eurosystem  the  unambiguous  responsibility  for  the 
maintenance of price stability. This clear focus of our mandate and the independence granted to the 
ECB have been indispensable in ensuring a high degree of credibility for our policy from the outset.  
There  is  a  broad  consensus  today  that  the  overriding  goal  of  monetary  policy  should  be  the 
maintenance of price stability. If credibly pursued, this will create confidence, thus diminishing inflation 
risk  premia  incorporated  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  enhancing,  ultimately,  growth  and 
employment. Price stability also prevents the large distortions in relative prices which are encountered 
with  inflation  or  deflation,  and  which  lead  to  a  misallocation  of  resources.  It  also  avoids  an  ad  hoc 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
redistribution  of  wealth  as  a  result  of  unexpected  price  developments,  thereby  also  contributing  to 
social cohesion. Thus, an environment of stable prices fosters the functioning of the price mechanism, 
favours allocation efficiency, anchors inflation expectations and reduces market uncertainty and risk 
premia. Maintaining price stability is therefore a  necessary condition for sustainable growth and job 
creation and this is recognised very widely. It is in particular a strong belief that the Eurozone shares 
with the United Kingdom. 
The institutional framework for monetary policy in the euro area has helped the ECB to keep inflation 
low and stable. The credibility of the ECB is reflected in low long-term inflation expectations. And this 
credibility was already high at the start of European Economic and Monetary Union. I well remember 
that at that time some observers argued that the quality of the euro as a new currency would converge 
only towards a sort of an arithmetic average of the legacy currencies, rather than to the benchmark set 
by  the  stronger  ones.  In  fact,  what  happened  is  that  long-term  interest  rates  in  all  participating 
countries  converged  towards  those  of  the  most  credible  currencies.  This  is  one  of  the  euro’s  main 
achievements.  
Independence and transparency 
The independence of the ECB and the need for transparency go hand in hand. For us to successfully 
maintain  price  stability,  we  constantly  have  to  make  all  the  reasons  underlying  our  decisions 
transparent  to  the  public.  The  announcement  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  in  October  1998,  well 
before the introduction of the euro, was a key element in this. It clearly stated the ECB’s understanding 
of its objective and the framework used to guide policy decisions. In addition, the regular publication of 
the Governing Council’s assessment of the current economic situation and the risks to price stability 
are  an  important  part  of  our  striving  for  transparency.  Monetary  policy  decisions  are  regularly 
explained in the press conference that we give after the first meeting of the ECB Governing Council 
every month. Further details are given in the Monthly Bulletin of the ECB, in the speeches given by 
members  of  the  Governing  Council  and  in  the  testimonies  of  the  President  to  the  European 
Parliament.  With  its  monthly  press  conference  the  ECB  was  the  first  central  bank  to  provide  such 
extensive and open real-time diagnosis - and other central banks are now doing likewise. 
The historic enlargement of Europe 
EU enlargement 
The introduction of the euro as a stable common European currency was not the last challenge to be 
faced by the ECB and the European Union in general. The forthcoming enlargement of the EU will be 
the largest ever expansion of the European Union. The number of Member States will go up from 15 to 
25 and the EU population will increase to more than 450 million people.  
Many  acceding  countries  have  made  remarkable  progress  in  recent  years,  especially  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic  stabilisation  and  structural  reforms.  Moreover,  those  eight  acceding  countries  that 
were formerly centrally planned economies have been able to establish functioning market economies, 
thus driving forward the process of transition.  
There remain, however, important challenges. The task at hand is to advance real convergence while 
safeguarding  and,  where  necessary,  enhancing  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  In  particular, 
locking  in  inflation  at  low  levels,  preserving  the  soundness  of  the  financial  sector  and  making 
determined efforts towards fiscal consolidation are all of the utmost importance.  
At present the gap in per capita income between the current and most new Member States is large. 
For acceding countries as a whole, per capita income today is less than half of the average of the euro 
area. In general, the process of catching-up in respect of real incomes has been slower than many 
expected at the start of transition, while the progress achieved has differed from country to country. 
Given the low starting point for most countries, increasing prosperity and living standards will remain 
their main policy objective for quite some time.  
Of  course,  accession  to  the  EU  has  a  positive  effect  on  the  countries’  growth  prospects.  Full 
integration  in  the  internal  market  and  inclusion  into  EU  regional  policies  will  foster  the  catching-up 
process.  
2 
 BIS Review 7/2004
Moving towards the euro 
The Eurosystem has been engaged since 1999 in a constructive dialogue with the central banks of the 
acceding countries. The governors of these central banks already attend the meetings of the General 
Council of the ECB as observers and will as from 1 May 2004 be full members of that Council.  
Enlargement of the EU will also lead to an expansion of the euro area at some time in the future. 
The main aim of the Eurosystem in this process is to ensure that the monetary integration of the new 
Member States proceeds in a smooth manner and in line with the Treaty provisions. The principle of 
equal treatment will continue to apply throughout the entire process of monetary integration. Adopting 
the  euro  is  an  irrevocable  decision  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  countries  fulfil  the 
convergence criteria in a sustainable manner, as required by the Maastricht Treaty. There will be no 
additional criteria but neither will there be a relaxation of the criteria. 
The Governing Council of the ECB published a policy position paper on exchange rate issues relating 
to  the  acceding  countries  on  18  December  2003.  This  document  consolidates  into  a  single 
comprehensive policy text the previous positions of the Eurosystem on the matter. It lays out the key 
principles for financial markets and for the public at large in a European Union of 25 Member States. 
As the acceding countries differ greatly in terms of economic structure, exchange rate and monetary 
regimes, and in the degree of nominal and real convergence already achieved, they will need to be 
assessed on a case-by-case basis throughout the process leading to their adoption of the euro. In 
this  respect,  no  single  path  towards  ERM II  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro  can  be  identified  or 
recommended.  Many  strategies  may  be  feasible,  provided  they  are  based  on  sound  economic 
reasoning,  conform  to  the  existing  institutional  framework  and  contribute  to  the  high  level  of 
sustainable convergence which is essential when joining the euro. 
The need for structural reforms 
While Economic and Monetary Union has been highly successful in furthering macroeconomic stability 
in Europe, policymakers still have to undertake important efforts to fully realise the advantages of a 
stable  common  currency.  Structural  economic  impediments  in  participating  countries  reduce 
employment opportunities and real income, and they undermine the sustainability of the social security 
system.  It  is  therefore  widely  recognised  that  structural  reforms  in  capital,  labour  and  product 
markets are needed to improve the prospects of the euro area. In this respect, the ECB very much 
welcomes and supports the impetus given by the Lisbon European Council to the economic reform 
process. Structural reforms that are designed to increase the flexibility of markets permit a higher level 
of  sustainable  long-run  growth  and  employment.  They  furthermore  enhance  the  capacity  of  the 
participating countries to cushion macroeconomic shocks. The more rigid labour, product and financial 
markets are, the higher will be employment and income losses experienced in response to changing 
domestic and global economic conditions. This is due to the fact that prices and wages cannot adjust 
suitably and in a timely manner. Conversely, the speedier adjustments of wages and prices can take 
place  in  response  to  adverse  changes  in  macroeconomic  conditions,  the  lower  will  be  the  costs  in 
terms of employment and output losses. 
As the central bank responsible for the euro area, we place great value on seeing a major necessary 
condition  for  growth,  job  creation  and  prosperity  for  current  and  future  generations  being  fulfilled: 
ensuring  price  stability,  confidence  in  the  euro  and  its  purchasing  power  is  our  own  decisive 
contribution to sustainable growth. And this contribution is less difficult to deliver in an environment 
where  governments  and  social  partners  -  based  on  sound  policies  -  contribute  to  confidence  and 
potential output growth. 
There  is  no  denying  the  fact  that  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  requires  courage  and 
leadership. Especially, as they may temporarily have negative repercussions for some groups, namely 
those that profited from protective regulations or subsidies. For example, while regulatory reforms will 
ultimately  result  in  broader  choices  and  lower  prices  for  consumers,  they  may  imply  some  adverse 
short-run effects for formerly protected firms. This may, amongst other factors, be due to the inefficient 
use of resources in incumbent firms before the sector was opened up to competition. However, after 
some  time,  employment  in  the  liberalised  sector  can  be  expected  to  increase,  as  new  services  are 
being  introduced.  Most  importantly,  all  other  sectors  which  before  had  to  finance  the  subsidies  will 
immediately enjoy the benefits from the reform. These gains are often overlooked in the public debate. 
In  fact,  there  is  a  formidable  challenge  to  gain  the  support  of  parliaments  and  the  public  for 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 3
implementing  structural  reforms.  It  is  therefore  imperative  to  make  it  clear  to  the  public  that,  if 
governments and social partners deliver those reforms, the net benefits will be significant.  
The impetus from determined structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets would 
set in train a virtuous circle of increasing confidence: the more credible the reforms are, the more 
confidence  they  will  create,  and  the  more  confidence  is  created,  the  sooner  positive  results  will  be 
visible.  
Among  the  necessary  measures,  structural  reforms  in  capital  markets  should  aim  to  allow  a  more 
effective  allocation  of  savings  toward  the  most  rewarding  investment  opportunities.  Since  the 
introduction of the euro, the pace of reform has been impressive. Through a cohesive and effective 
interplay of free competition, co-ordinated action by all market participants and policy enforcement by 
public authorities, micro-economic reform in capital markets has been proceeding. However, the need 
for continuation and completion remains. First, the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) initiated by 
the  European  Commission  in  1999  should  be  implemented  and  enforced,  giving  rise  to  a  genuine 
common  financial  legislation  and  regulation.  And  second,  a  further  consolidation  and  integration  of 
market infrastructure and harmonisation of the standards and conventions routinely used by market 
participants, is required, extending also to accounting standards.  
Also regarding the integration and level of competition in goods markets much progress has been 
achieved. But substantial barriers to trade and free competition continue to exist, particularly limiting 
the  integration  of  services  markets.  The  Internal  Market  Directives  have  not  yet  been  fully 
implemented, and a number of infringement cases, too, indicate that delays and inefficiencies remain. 
A strengthening of competition, through further deregulation, should be accompanied by a sustained 
reduction of state aid - particularly to the extent that it constitutes economically questionable ad-hoc 
and sector-specific measures. This will help to smooth the restructuring process in goods markets, by 
promoting the entry of new players. It will enhance innovation and an efficient allocation of resources. 
It will have a downward effect on prices. And cuts in industry- or sector-specific subsidies will reduce 
the tax burden. All this will contribute to boost welfare across the euro area. 
Progress  with  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  labour  markets  has  been  uneven  in  the 
euro area. Output growth has become somewhat more job intensive at the end of the 1990s, and we 
also have some tentative evidence that the structural level of unemployment has tended to decline. 
However,  it  is  urgent  to  reduce  non-wage  labour  costs  and  labour  mismatch  and  to  improve  the 
flexibility  of  labour  contracts  and  wage-setting  to  enhance  employment  growth  in  a  lasting  manner. 
This will help to increase the employment opportunities for those who face particular difficulties in the 
labour market, such as women, the youngest, the oldest age and the lowest educated groups. These 
measures have to go hand in hand with a reform of the pension and health care system. They are 
indispensable  to  contain  expenditures  on  pensions  and  health  care  and  thus  to  reduce  non-wage 
labour costs.  
 In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me make three remarks. 
First, as regards the Euro, I would only mention here that the Eurozone today represents already four 
fifth of the number of countries members of the present European Union, four fifth of the population 
and four fifth of the GDP of the fifteen. Let me add that UK entry is very warmly welcomed by all of us. 
That of course depends on the decision of the authorities and people of the United Kingdom. 
Second,  as regards  enlargement,  I would  like  to  stress  again  the  major historic  achievement  that  it 
represents. It is not only an impressive illustration of the success of the concept of European Union. It 
is  also  a  formidable  chance  and  opportunity  for  Europe,  not  the  least  in  the  economic  field.  Let  us 
seize this chance and this opportunity in a highly responsible and professional manner in the Western 
part of Europe as well as in the Central and Eastern part of it. We have all reasons to be optimistic as 
regards the impact of this historic endeavour on overall European growth. 
Third, the ECB is conscious of its particular responsibilities in a time of meditation and hesitation as 
regards the institutional framework of present and future Europe. We do all what we can to preserve 
and enhance confidence as a fully unified executive institution in our domain of responsibility. Let me 
also tell you that I remain personally very confident that Europe will overcome its present difficulties. I 
draw this personal intimate conviction in particular from the reading of Jean Monnet’s memoirs written 
in 1976 : “When one sees the persistence of European sentiment within this permanently changing 
environment, one cannot doubt that there is at stake a very powerful trend of historic nature (...) ‘Il faut 
compter avec le temps’, One has to take account of time”. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2004
“Those who decide not to start any enterprise because they are not assured that things will move in 
strict conformity with their plans are condemning themselves to absolute immobility. Nobody can say 
today  what  will  be  the  shape  of  tomorrow’s  Europe,  because  future  changes  that  will  be  born  from 
present  changes  are  unpredictable”.  This  was  written  in  1976  by  the  founder  of  the  European 
Community concept. It is truer than ever today. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 5
