Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
16 February 2004. 
 In my testimony today I will first comment on recent economic and monetary developments. I will then 
make a few remarks about the benefits that have been brought to us by the euro in its first five years 
of existence. 
Economic and monetary developments 
When we last met in December, economic indicators and financial market developments were already 
supporting our view that a gradual economic recovery had started in the euro area in the second half 
of 2003. The evidence that has since become available has made us more confident that the recovery 
did indeed begin in the second half of 2003 and has strengthened our expectation of an upswing in 
economic activity. 
An  upturn  in  economic  activity  is  well  under  way  at  the  global  level.  This  view  was  shared  by  all 
participants at the recent G7 meeting in Florida. The robust real GDP growth in the economies of the 
euro  area’s  major  trading  partners  over  the  past  few  months  can  be  expected  to  support  foreign 
demand for euro area goods and services. Looking ahead, the external environment of the euro area 
should continue to develop favourably, and the broadly-based global economic recovery should gain 
further  momentum.  External  developments  should  thus  support  the  continued  recovery  in  the  euro 
area. 
We expect this economic recovery in the euro area to proceed gradually. After real GDP growth picked 
up  in  the  third  quarter  of  2003,  survey  evidence  on  business  confidence  and  the  Eurostat  flash 
estimate for real GDP growth in the fourth quarter point to a continuation of the recovery around the 
turn  of  the  year.  While  domestic  demand  remained  subdued  in  2003,  the  conditions  for  some 
improvement  are  now  in  place.  Investment  activity  should  profit  not  only  from  strengthening  global 
demand,  but  also  from  companies’  earlier  efforts  to  enhance  productivity  and  profitability,  from  the 
historically low levels of interest rates and from the favourable financing conditions prevailing in the 
euro  area.  Growth  in  euro  area  private  consumption  is  also  expected  to  progressively  recover, 
benefiting from price stability and supported by the growth of real household disposable income. The 
scenario of a gradual economic recovery in the euro area is reflected in all available forecasts from 
official and private sources and seems to be in line with developments in financial markets. 
Over the shorter term, risks to the main scenario of a gradual euro area recovery remain balanced. 
Nevertheless, over longer horizons, some uncertainty related to the sustainability of economic growth 
remains, given the persistent imbalances in some regions of the world. Against this background, there 
is  a  broad  international  consensus,  expressed  in  particular  in  the  last  G7  statement,  that  these 
imbalances are a challenge that calls for the implementation of structural reforms that raise the growth 
potential of our economies, elevate labour productivity growth and increase employment, and of sound 
fiscal  policies  over  the  medium  term.  Let  me  also  mention  that  we  all  agreed  to  state  in  the 
G7 communiqué that exchange rates should reflect economic fundamentals and that excess volatility 
and disorderly movements in exchange rates are undesirable for economic growth. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  euro  area  HICP  inflation  was  2.0%  in  December  and  is 
estimated by Eurostat to have remained at this level in January. Rises in food and oil prices and, in 
particular, significant increases in indirect taxes and administered prices have prevented a decline in 
the inflation rate to lower levels. Looking forward, inflation should fall below 2% in the course of this 
year and remain in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability thereafter, namely below 2% and 
close  to  2%.  In  view  of  the  expected  gradual  nature  of  the  recovery,  wage  developments  should 
remain moderate. Nonetheless, given the conditional nature of any forward-looking evaluation, it is of 
course  important  to  bear  in  mind  all  elements  of  risk  to  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  Furthermore, 
inflation expectations need to be monitored closely. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 1
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  annual  M3  growth  has  continued  to  moderate  only  slowly  over 
recent months. The shift of portfolios away from monetary assets towards longer-term financial assets 
outside M3 that started during the summer of 2003 has been rather gradual. The low level of interest 
rates  is  contributing  to  the  continued  strong  growth  of  very  liquid  assets  and  may  explain  the  slow 
pace  of  portfolio  adjustment.  At  the  same  time,  the  increased  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector 
reflects the effects of both low interest rates and an improvement in the economic environment. 
The strong monetary growth observed over the past few years, means that there is significantly more 
liquidity  available  in  the  euro  area  than  needed  to  finance  non-inflationary  growth.  Whether  the 
accumulated excess liquidity will translate into inflationary pressures over the medium term depends 
on the extent to which past portfolio shifts are reversed and on the future strength of economic growth. 
Should excess liquidity persist, it could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium and long term. 
In summary, the economic analysis continues to indicate that the outlook for price developments over 
the medium term is in line with price stability. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis does not alter 
this picture. Against this background, the Governing Council judged at its last meeting on 5 February 
that the current stance of monetary policy in the euro area remained appropriate. Of course, we will 
continue  to  monitor  carefully  all  developments  that  could  affect  the  assessment  of  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term. 
With regard to fiscal policies, there are several important issues that warrant close attention. First, the 
implementation of fiscal policies should be in line with the commitments made by governments last 
year.  In  this  connection,  a  thorough  assessment  of  the  new  stability  programmes  of  the  Member 
States is currently under way. Sound public finances are needed to support a stable macroeconomic 
framework, which in turn enhances confidence and promotes investment, growth and employment in 
the euro area. 
Second,  as  regards  the  institutional  framework  for  fiscal  policy,  the  Governing  Council  shares  the 
concerns of the European Commission regarding the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council in November 
last  year.  The  Commission  is  the  guardian  of  the  Treaty  and  the  ECB  respects  the  Commission’s 
decision to seek legal clarity on the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. The ECB does 
not see a need to change the Treaty and it considers the Stability and Growth Pact appropriate in its 
current form. The Governing Council is in agreement with the Commission that the implementation of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  could  be  further  improved,  in  particular  in  terms  of  the  analysis  of 
structural  imbalances  and  the  strengthening  of  incentives  for  sound  fiscal  policies  during  good 
economic times. The clarity and enforceability of the fiscal framework should be enhanced. 
A  sound  monetary  policy,  a  healthy  fiscal  policy  and  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  are 
necessary to pave the way for sustainable growth in the euro area. But this alone is not sufficient. The 
euro  area  needs  to  boost  employment,  foster  labour  productivity  and  make  the  best  use  of 
technological and scientific progress. These challenges require structural reforms in the fiscal domain, 
in the management of social welfare and pensions as well as in financial, product and labour markets. 
The required measures have been identified and the Lisbon agenda has set the appropriate direction 
for the euro area. Important progress has already been made in many euro area countries. It is of the 
utmost importance that the implementation of structural reforms be speeded up, notably in labour and 
product markets, where the responsibility lies with governments, parliaments and social partners. This 
would, over longer horizons, significantly improve the euro area’s growth potential and increase the 
economic  welfare  of  all  its  citizens.  It  would  also  enhance  the  confidence  of  economic  agents  over 
shorter horizons. All parties involved must strive to convince the public at large that everybody would 
benefit from such reforms - in terms of growth, more and better jobs, and higher incomes. 
The euro after five years 
It is now five years since the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union and two years 
since the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, and I would like to make a few remarks on the 
benefits the single currency has had for our economies and our citizens. 
First of all, I am proud to say that, in accordance with the mandate set out in the Maastricht Treaty, 
the  ECB  has,  despite  substantial  adverse  price  shocks,  successfully  kept  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations at low levels by historical standards. The single monetary policy and its clear focus on 
the maintenance of price stability have helped to anchor inflation expectations in the euro area over 
the medium and long term. This has facilitated a reduction of inflation uncertainty and the associated 
risk  premia.  As  a  result,  market  interest  rates  have  remained  historically  low  and  our  citizens,  our 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2004
companies and the euro area as a whole now enjoy financing conditions which are very favourable by 
historical standards. This is a key factor for growth and job creation. 
We should not forget that prior to the euro, there were significant differences in long-term interest rate 
levels  across  countries.  It  was  a  remarkable  achievement  that  the  creation  of  a  credible  Monetary 
Union allowed market interest rates to converge towards the levels of the legacy currencies inspiring 
the maximum level of confidence and therefore having the lowest market interest rates, and not just to 
the average level. This very significantly improved the financing conditions in a large part of the euro 
area which previously had much higher market interest rates, and this is a success of the euro which 
is often underestimated. 
Second, let me remind you that by adopting the single currency, euro area countries also eliminated 
their exposure to intra-euro area exchange rate volatility and risks. Prior to the introduction of the euro, 
intra-euro area exchange rate developments were very significant sources of uncertainty for trade and 
investment. This uncertainty was in turn priced into high-risk premia on interest rate markets. These 
phenomena hampered investment, job creation and growth all over what is now the euro area. 
Moreover,  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  exchange  rate  developments  vis-à-vis  non-European 
currencies are now much less significant than they were prior to the introduction of the euro. This is a 
very significant structural change, which has improved the conditions for investment and trade in the 
euro area. 
All things being equal, this much more stable environment facilitates decisions by producers, investors 
and consumers. It increases the confidence of economic agents and is therefore favourable to growth 
and  job  creation.  Had  the  single  currency  not  existed,  the  various  crises  that  have  occurred  at  the 
global level over recent years would have translated into major turbulence for our economies. 
My third comment relates to the very powerful impact the euro has had on the creation of the Single 
Market. The euro has led companies to see the euro area as a whole as the relevant domestic market 
for  their  business,  rather  than  their  own  national  markets  as  in  the  past.  In  this  respect,  the  single 
currency has undoubtedly been a catalyst for the progressive reshaping of the European productive 
sector, which are in turn creating a more efficient and vibrant economy. 
Low medium and long-term market interest rates, better protection against external risks and shocks, 
and the strengthening of the European productive sector are all important benefits for the citizens of 
the euro area. It is always difficult to compare what you have with what you would have, had the euro 
had not been established five years ago. The present benefits are extremely substantial, a fact which 
is unfortunately not very often stressed. 
Let me summarise the advantages for the citizens of the euro area, which would not exist without the 
euro: 
• 
the credible medium and long-term protection of their purchasing power throughout the euro 
area; 
the credible medium and long-term preservation of their savings throughout the euro area; 
favourable  financing  of  their  medium  and  long-term  investment,  in  particular  in  housing, 
throughout the euro area; 
a  total  elimination  of  adverse  effects  on  households  from  intra-European  crises  such  as 
those observed in 1992 and 1993; and finally 
a  more  efficient  and  resilient  productive  sector,  which  is  particularly  important  in  a  global 
environment  of  renewed  healthy  competition,  both  within  the  industrialised  world  and 
between industrialised countries and emerging economies and economies in transition. 
   Let me add one final remark. I know that some of our fellow citizens have the feeling that euro area 
inflation  has  been,  and  perhaps  continues  to  be,  above  the  levels  of  CPI  inflation  computed  by 
national  institutions  and  by  Eurostat.  I  want  to  tell  them  that  the  figures  published  are  not 
underestimating inflation. But I also want to tell them that the Governing Council of the ECB is fully 
aware of their fears. I want to assure them of our determination to preserve price stability in the euro 
area not only this year and next year, but on a medium and long-term basis. I also want to tell them 
that  we  are  doing  all  we  can  to  encourage  competition,  which  is  the  law  of  market  economies  and 
fosters  best  value  for  money  for  all  consumers.  We  are  vigilant  and  we  are  confident.  I  know  the 
European  households  are  vigilant,  which  is  good.  I  encourage  them  also  to  be  confident:  their 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 3
purchasing power will be protected in the years to come, thanks in particular to the vigilance of the 
Governing Council of the ECB. From that standpoint, perhaps it is time to be more confident, and for 
households to consume and to invest more, which in turn would be good for growth and job creation. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2004
