Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy, house prices and household indebtedness 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Sparbanken  Finn’s 
customer meeting, Lund, 20 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak  at  Sparbanken  Finn’s 
customer meeting. Tonight I intend to talk about something that has been much debated in the media 
recently;  namely  the  increase  in  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  and  its  significance  for 
monetary policy. House price trends, combined with increased indebtedness, could for instance cause 
significant problems in the future if households have not taken into account in their calculations the 
fact  that  interest  rates  will  rise  from  their  present  low  levels.  Is  this  something  we  should  take  into 
account when making monetary policy decisions? 
To answer this question, I shall begin with a few words on how we conduct our monetary policy and 
the aims of our policy. I shall then go on to describe developments in household borrowing and house 
prices and the most important driving forces behind them. I shall also mention how household wealth 
is included in our forecasts and whether there is reason to pay particular attention to developments in 
debts and house prices in the monetary policy stance. In conclusion, I shall also briefly comment on 
the present economic situation and the inflation outlook. 
The aims of monetary policy 
The Riksbank has been assigned two tasks by the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament). The first entails 
maintaining price stability and the second involves promoting a safe and efficient payment system, i.e. 
contributing to financial stability. In addition, if it is possible to do so without creating a conflict with the 
other aims, we shall also take into account other aims of economic policy, such as economic growth 
and employment. 
Maintaining price stability means in more concrete terms that the Riksbank has set an inflation target 
for its monetary policy. The rate of price increase in terms of the consumer price index, CPI, shall be 
limited to 2 per cent a year with a tolerated deviation interval of +/- 1 percentage point. The fact that 
deviations  from  the  target  are  tolerated,  within  a  set  interval,  is  because  monetary  policy  is  not 
sufficiently  precise  to  be  able  to  bring  inflation  to  exactly  2  per  cent  all  of  the  time.  However,  the 
deviations must not be too large, nor of long duration. 
The Riksbank mainly endeavours to influence inflation by raising and lowering its key rate - the repo 
rate.  The  aim  is  to  subdue  or stimulate  demand  in  order  to  affect  the  balance  between  supply  and 
demand in the economy, and thereby resource utilisation and inflationary pressure. An adjustment in 
interest  rates  affects  the  cost  of  borrowing  and  thereby  also  demand  for  housing  and  households’ 
demand  for  primarily  durable  goods.  The  speed  and  strength  of  the  impact  of  these  interest  rate 
adjustments  to  some  extent  depend  on  household  indebtedness  and  asset  holdings,  for  instance, 
housing. 
As monetary policy has an impact after a certain time lag, it is difficult to steer inflation in the short 
term. Monetary policy decisions are therefore based on an inflation forecast, usually looking one to two 
years ahead. This is the approximate time required for the effects of an adjustment in interest rates to 
pass through various channels of the economy and attain full impact on the rate of price increase. At 
the same time, we try to conduct our monetary policy in a way that will avoid excessive fluctuations in 
production  and  employment.  This  may  give  us  reason  to  extend  the  forecast  perspective  a  little 
beyond the two-year horizon. One could say that the Riksbank conducts a flexible inflation-targeting 
policy, a concept to which I will return later. 
Developments in household indebtedness and house prices 
Before I go into more detail on the significance of debts and wealth in monetary policy, I would first like 
to comment on developments in indebtedness and house prices in Sweden and compare them with 
developments in some other countries. 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 1
In recent years, household borrowing and property prices have increased rapidly in Sweden, as they 
have in many other countries. Debts have increased more than disposable incomes, and in Sweden 
the debt ratio, i.e. debts in relation to disposable incomes, is approaching the level seen during the 
crisis period in the early 1990s. House prices, when regarded across the country as a whole, have 
risen since the end of 1996. The rate of increase has varied this year between 7 and 10 percentage 
points a year according to Statistics Sweden’s real estate price index. As I see it, there are several 
factors of a partly structural nature behind this development. One is the decline in interest rates, which 
is  largely  a  result  of  the  economic  policy  conducted.  The  fact  that  credit  markets  have  been 
deregulated in recent decades and become more efficient has also created more beneficial conditions 
for  household  borrowing.  These  driving  forces  have  been  similar  in  many  countries,  although  they 
have occurred at slightly different points in time. 
The fact that households have increased their indebtedness can to some extent also be due to the 
changeover in economic policy that took place in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s, with a focus 
on price stability. Public finances were consolidated and an inflation target was introduced. Confidence 
in the low-inflation policy was established gradually and has brought greater stability to the economy, 
with  lower  inflation  and  interest  rates.  A  more  stable  economy  makes  it  easier  to  predict  future 
developments  in  interest  rates  and  inflation.  This  can  in  turn  mean  that  the  risks  connected  with 
slightly higher indebtedness are perceived as smaller. 
In recent years, household loans have largely been used to buy housing. The fact that the increase in 
lending to households has gone hand in hand with rising property prices is therefore no surprise. The 
rapid  increase  in  house  prices  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  is  partly  due  to  the  decline  in 
interest rates. However, there are also other explanatory factors. Naturally, income growth has also 
played  an  important  role.  Other  driving  forces  behind  house  price  trends  include  demography  and 
relocation flows that have contributed to a large demand for housing in certain areas of the country, 
particularly the metropolitan regions. There are also other factors that have had an impact, such as 
reduced  housing  subsidies  and  rising  construction  costs.  There  has  also  been  relatively  little  new 
building since the crisis years, despite substantial demand for housing. Nevertheless, it now appears 
that the trend regarding construction has turned. 
The increase in house prices has in turn contributed to a rise in the value of household wealth, as well 
as  in  the collateral  for  most  of  their  loans. Household  debts as  a  percentage of  total  assets,  which 
among other  things  include  housing,  equity  and  saving  in  insurance  policies,  have  therefore shown 
relatively little increase, despite the fact that the loans have risen in relation to disposable incomes. 
The fall in interest rates has also meant that the percentage of households’ disposable income used to 
pay interest expenditure after tax is currently low, despite the increase in indebtedness. 
Is there reason to be concerned that households have acquired such large debts and house prices 
have risen so much that it could cause problems in future? To determine this, it is necessary to have 
some perception of the long-term sustainable levels. One point worth noting to begin with, is that the 
Swedish nation as a whole has not increased its indebtedness in recent years. On the contrary, the 
large  surplus  on  the  current  account  indicates  that  external  debt  has  declined.  This  should  have 
contributed to making the economy as a whole less vulnerable to a rise in interest rates. In this respect 
we  differ  from  a  number  of  other  countries,  where  household  indebtedness  has  increased  rapidly, 
while they have had a deficit in their current accounts for several years. This applies, for instance, in 
the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia.  
Developments  in  household  indebtedness  in  Sweden  are  not  remarkable  when  seen  in  relation  to 
other  OECD  countries.  It  is  clearly  difficult  to  compare  the  level  of  debt  ratios  between  different 
countries. Differences in taxation systems, credit terms and the percentage of the population that are 
home-owners  are  just  some  of  the  factors  that  complicate  this  analysis.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
comparison of how much the debt ratio has increased in different countries in recent years can provide 
some  perspective  for  developments  in  Sweden.  It  appears  that  developments  in,  for  instance,  the 
United Kingdom and Australia have been much more dramatic than in Sweden. Property prices have 
also risen more rapidly in these countries. However, in the United States, which deregulated its credit 
market at an earlier stage than the other countries, indebtedness has increased at a slightly slower 
rate, although it did not show any decline in the mid-1990s, as there was in Sweden. 
The structure of the credit market and the wording of the loan contract also affect property prices, and 
lead to differences in trends between countries. One example is that in some countries, such as the 
United States and Denmark, there is an opportunity to renegotiate fixed-rate loans - at a very low cost 
- when interest rates fall. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2004
One  phenomenon  that  is  probably  significant  for  indebtedness  and  property  prices  in  some  other 
countries, but which does not appear to be particularly common in Sweden, is that private households 
invest  in  property  to  rent out.  This  occurs,  for  instance,  in  the United  Kingdom  and,  probably  to  an 
even  greater  extent,  in  Australia,  where  loans  for  making  investments  comprise  approximately 
one-third of the banks’ lending to households.1 The fact that households borrow money to buy property 
in addition to their own housing to rent out probably increases the risk of speculative elements in the 
price-setting. At the same time, it makes households more vulnerable to changes in interest rates and 
income. They also become more sensitive to changes in the balance of the rented property market. 
This  means  that  the  risk  of  substantial  fluctuations  in  house  prices  is  probably  greater  in  countries 
where it is common to buy housing to rent out. 
There has thus been an increase in indebtedness internationally, parallel to a rise in property prices. 
As has been the case in Sweden, questions have arisen regarding the sustainability of this trend and 
what happens when interest rates rise. Developments in house prices and household indebtedness 
are regularly analysed in the Riksbank's Financial Stability Reports. Of course, any assessments of 
the valuation of the house market are connected with a large measure of uncertainty. However, the 
calculations we have made so far do not indicate that the pricing of houses in Sweden as a whole is 
significantly  out  of  balance.  Price  trends  can  be  explained  fairly  well  by  the  increase  in  household 
incomes, the decline in interest rates and a low construction rate, despite strong demand. However, 
one  should  be  aware  that  the  rate  of  price  increase  varies  substantially  between  different  regions. 
House  prices  have  increased  at  a  much  faster  rate  in  metropolitan  areas  than  in  the  rest  of  the 
country. The possibility that price increases may have been exaggerated in certain individual regions 
or markets cannot be ruled out, although developments in Sweden as a whole appear to be balanced. 
Indebtedness, house prices and inflation forecasts 
What  significance  do  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  have  for  the  Riksbank's  inflation 
forecasts?  The  inflation  forecasts  are  based  on  an  analysis  of  the  various  driving  forces  behind 
domestic inflation and the international rate of price increase, imported inflation. Domestic inflation is 
largely governed by cost trends and by how total demand develops in relation to production capacity, 
that is to say, resource utilisation. Household consumption comprises a significant part of total demand 
and this is where indebtedness and house price trends mainly come into the forecast work. Household 
wealth plays an important role in the Riksbank’s assessment of how private consumption will develop. 
Wealth  affects  households’  consumption  in  several  ways.  To  simplify,  one  can  say  there  are  two 
reasons why an increase in wealth, for instance in the form of an increase in the value of one’s own 
home, can be expected to lead to increased consumption. Firstly, the larger the wealth an individual 
has,  the  more  he  or  she  can  consume  during  his  or  her  lifetime.  This  is  a  traditional  wealth  effect. 
Secondly, the size of the wealth can affect the possibilities to obtain loans. This is usually called the 
balance  sheet  effect.  The  larger  the  collateral  a  household  can  offer  for  its  loans,  the  greater  the 
possibilities  to  borrow  and  thereby  to  consume.  When  the  value  of  the  property  owned  by  the 
household  increases,  this  also  provides  a  possibility  to  take  out  further  loans  on  the  property,  for 
instance, to extend or renovate and further increase the value of the property, or to consume other 
goods. Another effect is that a higher valuation provides the possibility to renew last mortgage loans 
as  first  mortgage  loans  and  thereby  reduce  the  interest costs  for  the  loans.  There  is also empirical 
support for a positive correlation between wealth and consumption. 
Wealth  also  has  significance  for  how  strongly  households  are  affected  by  interest  changes.  An 
adjustment  in  interest  rates  affects  the  price  of  households’  assets,  such  as  housing  and  thereby 
wealth, and through this channel has an indirect effect on households’ consumption in the way I just 
have  described.  However,  an  adjustment  in  interest  rates  also  has  a  direct  effect  on  households’ 
purchasing power and willingness to incur debt via interest costs for borrowing. 
The  speed  and  strength  of  the  impact  of  an  interest  rate  adjustment  on  households’  interest 
expenditure depends to a large extent, as I mentioned earlier, on the size of the debts, the percentage 
of the loans that are variable-rate loans and the average fixed-rate term for the loans at a fixed interest 
rate. The percentage of variable-rate loans increased during the 1990s and is currently around 35 per 
cent of the total debts. The larger the percentage of variable-rate loans a household has, the faster an 
                                                      
1   See pp 15-17, Financial Stability Report 2004:1 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 3
interest rate adjustment will affect interest expenditure. The fact that indebtedness and house prices 
have increased should thereby have contributed to a more rapid and possibly also a stronger impact 
by monetary policy on household consumption demand than previously. 
Do the inflation forecasts contain all of the relevant information on house prices and 
indebtedness? 
As I mentioned earlier, the Riksbank’s monetary policy is normally based on forecasts of inflation one 
to two years ahead. Two important issues in this context are whether this is a sufficiently long time 
perspective and whether there are problems with the forecasting methods that lead to the effects of 
households’ increased indebtedness being underestimated. 
The reason why the Riksbank has chosen to focus on the inflation forecasts one to two years ahead is 
that this is the perspective in which monetary policy is assumed to attain a full impact. However, it is 
not possible to disregard expectations of how inflation and the real economy will develop beyond the 
two-year horizon. Sometimes shocks may occur that affect the economy for a much longer period than 
two  years.  This  indicates  that  monetary  policy  should,  in  principle,  also  take  into  account  whether 
events now, such as developments in household indebtedness and house prices, can be expected to 
have  serious  repercussions  on  the  real  economy  and  inflation in  a  longer  perspective.  However,  at 
present  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  developments  in  the  housing  market  or  household 
indebtedness  entail  a  risk  of  creating  shocks  that  would  require  special  consideration  in  monetary 
policy. 
So what are the potential problems with regard to assessing how indebtedness and property prices 
affect  inflation?  Our  forecasts  are  based  on  both  calculations  using  economic  models  and  more 
qualitative assessments of the factors expected to affect inflation. The theoretical models are usually 
based on households behaving in a rational manner. This involves households making plans for the 
future  and  building  up  expectations  of  future  economic  developments,  and  also  there  being  no 
systematic errors in these expectations. It is not unlikely that households’ rationalism is in some cases 
overestimated in the formal models. If  this is the case, the conclusions regarding the effects of, for 
instance, repo rate rises that are calculated using these models may be incorrect. One such example 
would  be  if  households  did  not  include  in  their  calculations  the  fact  that  interest  rates  rise  when 
economic activity strengthens and that indebtedness and house prices therefore were being pushed 
beyond sustainable levels. 
Something  that  can  give  rise  to  special  problems  in  the  forecast  context  is  that  changes  in 
indebtedness and property prices have a tendency to reinforce one another over the economic cycle. 
Low interest rates make it cheaper to finance house purchases, which means that house prices rise. 
As  the  value  of  the  collateral  for  households’  loans  mainly  consists  of  houses  or  tenant-owned 
apartments,  the  price  increase  in  itself  contributes  to  making  it  possible  to  borrow  more  money. 
Sooner  or  later,  interest rates will  rise and  the question  is what happens  then.  If  indebtedness  and 
house  price  trends  during  the  upturn  phase  have  been  based  on  over-optimism  and  unrealistic 
expectations  among  lenders  and  borrowers,  house  prices  may  fall  sharply  and  households  may 
experience  difficulty  in  meeting  their  interest  payments.  Demand  in  the  economy  can  then  fall 
substantially.  It  is  difficult  to  completely  capture  a  sequence  of  events  where  changes  in  different 
variables  tend  to  reinforce  one another  in  economic  calculations.  If  the  households  have  also  been 
overly  optimistic  -  irrational  -  in  their  expectations,  it  becomes  particularly  difficult  to  capture  these 
effects.  It  is  therefore  important  for  forecasters  to  make  more  “qualitative”  assessments  in  addition. 
Another reason for not trusting solely to formal models based on historical data is that the effects of 
structural changes that have taken place fairly recently can easily be underestimated. 
Let  me  give  an  example  that  to  some  extent  captures  these  problems.  During  the  years  from  the 
mid-1980s to the beginning of the 1990s, substantial changes were made in the economic structure 
and there was a clear correlation between the change in house prices and the change in household 
borrowing. The decline in house prices during the financial crisis at the beginning of the 1990s was 
largely due to an unfavourable combination of changes of both a structural and a cyclical nature. In 
connection with the deregulation of the credit markets during the second half of the 1980s, household 
borrowing increased substantially and the loans were largely used to buy houses. The fairly high and 
fluctuating  inflation  rate  contributed  to  real  interest  costs  after  tax  often  being  low,  sometimes  even 
negative,  which  in  practice  meant  that  one  could  at  times  make  a  profit  from  borrowing.  At  the 
beginning of the 1990s, the tax system was reformed, and this entailed a substantial reduction in the 
opportunities for deducting interest expenditure. Interest rates rose substantially at the same time, and 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2004
the Swedish economy was affected by an international economic slowdown. This had very negative 
effects on both household borrowing and house prices. Could a similar situation arise today? Although 
we have seen a rapid increase in both indebtedness and house prices in recent years, the present 
situation is quite different, with a low-inflation policy and thereby more stable economic environment. 
Nor  have  there  been  any  extensive  structural  changes  of  a  nature  that  would  completely  alter  the 
conditions for households’ decisions on indebtedness and property purchases. 
Monetary policy takes account of other factors than inflation 
In principle, household indebtedness and developments in house prices could create problems for the 
payment system. This is something regularly analysed in the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Reports. 
The conclusion that can be drawn from the most recent report in June is that the risk of the household 
sector alone being able to create such large losses for the banks as to threaten the payment system is 
very slight. As I mentioned earlier, the assessment is that house prices over the country as a whole 
are  reasonable.  A  special  study  of  households  in  debt  was  included  in  the  June  report,  and  this 
showed that, on average, these households were assessed to have good margins for managing rising 
interest expenditure or increased unemployment. It is also worth mentioning that during the property 
crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, it was not the households that caused problems for the banks. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Riksbank,  like  many  other  central  banks,  conducts  a  flexible 
inflation-targeting policy. In addition to taking account of price stability, monetary policy may in certain 
cases wish to take into account developments in the real economy as a whole. This can mean, for 
instance, conducting a less aggressive interest rate policy and thereby allowing inflation to return to 
the target gradually after a disturbance to avoid excessive fluctuations in production and employment. 
In  connection  with  the  build-up  of  household  debt  and  price  trends  in  housing,  there  could  be  a 
situation where households may have based their decisions on incorrect expectations and the trend 
may have proved unsustainable, or that we see a tangible risk of this situation arising. This could lead 
to an adjustment process, where house prices fell heavily and there was a decline in the real economy 
as a whole. We explained in a clarification of monetary policy published in 1999 that, if we choose to 
take  these  considerations  into  account,  we  will  clearly  motivate  our  decision.  If  flexible  inflation 
targeting  functions  well,  it  leads  to  smaller  fluctuations  in  production,  without  this  causing  average 
inflation to rise. The scope for conducting such a policy is determined by households’ and companies’ 
confidence  in  monetary  policy.  If  they  have  considerable  confidence,  there  is  little  risk  that  inflation 
expectations will be affected if inflation should deviate temporarily from the target level. 
At  present,  I  cannot  see  that  real  economy  considerations  could  lead  to  the  Riksbank  wishing  to 
deviate  from  the  normal  rule  of  thumb  for  monetary  policy,  given  the  current  level  of  household 
indebtedness.  My  own  assessment  is  that  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  conflict  between  price 
stability and stability in the financial and real economy. 
The current situation 
Before I summarise what I have said tonight, I would like to briefly comment on my current perceptions 
of future inflation. 
Our assessment in the spring was that economic activity both in Sweden and abroad would continue 
to  strengthen  this  year  and  over  the  coming  two  years.  Inflation  in  Sweden  was  expected  to  be 
relatively stable over the coming year and then to increase gradually as resource utilisation rose in 
Sweden and abroad. The conclusion was that inflation would be in line with the target level two years 
ahead, and we therefore chose to leave the repo rate unchanged. 
At our meeting in August, there appeared to be reason to expect slightly more rapid growth in Sweden 
and abroad, which then gave reason to assume a higher figure for resource utilisation and inflation. 
However, we still anticipated that inflation would be in line with the target two years ahead. 
The conclusion drawn by the Riksbank in August with regard to future inflation still largely stands, in 
my opinion. However, there may be reason for some upward revision to the inflation forecast made in 
May, and perhaps even to the one made in August. One factor which could indicate a higher inflation 
rate, at least in the short term, is the high oil prices. Resource utilisation may also be slightly higher 
than  anticipated  in  the  coming  years.  One  reason  is  the  strong  figures  for  Swedish  growth  that  we 
have  seen  over  the  summer.  Another  is  that  fiscal  policy  will  probably  become  more  expansionary 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 5
now. Inflation can nevertheless be expected to be in line with the Riksbank's target two years from 
now. 
This is also the picture painted in a speech by Riksbank Governor Lars Heikensten in London today. 
Conclusion 
Let me summarise what I have said this evening. 
Despite  stock  market  fluctuations  and  a  periodically  weak  economic  climate,  both  household 
indebtedness  and  house  prices  have  increased  substantially,  on  a  national  level,  in  recent  years. 
There  have  been  similar  developments  in  many  countries,  and  households’  debts  and  interest 
payments  as  a  percentage  of  disposable  income  are  not  remarkably  high  in  Sweden.  Although  the 
debt ratio is approaching the high level prior to the financial crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, the 
low interest rates have meant at the same time that households' interest expenditure as a percentage 
of  income  has  largely  been  halved  since  then.  Our  calculations  also  indicate  that  households  with 
debts on average have a relatively good safety margin for interest rate rises and reductions in income. 
We therefore do not at present envisage any major problems for the household sector as a whole, 
even if interest rates rise significantly. However, this does not mean that problems will not arise for 
individual households in the case of higher interest rates. It is important that borrowers include rising 
interest rate expenditure in their calculations and carefully consider what level of indebtedness they 
can manage when interest rates sooner or later begin to rise. For this reason, we have emphasised in 
connection  with  our  monetary  policy  decisions  over  the  past  six  months  that  interest  rates  are  at 
present low in a historical perspective and will need to be raised in the long run. 
With  regard  to  house  prices,  the  calculations  we  have  made  so  far  do  not  indicate  that  prices  for 
housing in the country as a whole are substantially unbalanced. The developments can be explained 
fairly well by factors such as disposable income, living costs, construction costs and the fact that there 
is  relatively  little  new  building,  despite  strong  demand.  Supply  is  expected  to  increase  at  a  slightly 
slower  rate  than  demand  over  the  coming  years.  My  assessment  is  that  at  present  no  imbalances 
have been built up that could risk leading to a sharp fall in prices further ahead. However, the rapid 
increase in house prices and indebtedness occurring now is something we shall monitor closely. 
I would at the same time like to emphasise that monetary policy often involves difficult considerations. 
If I and my colleagues were to come to the conclusion that serious imbalances were building up in the 
economy in a way that threatened the stability of the payment system, or in a way that we felt would 
have serious consequences for the real economy in the future, we may want to take this into account 
when  conducting  monetary  policy.  However,  so  far,  considerations  concerning  the  effects  of  house 
prices and household indebtedness on other elements than inflation have only played a marginal role 
in monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2004
