Lucas Papademos: Some reflections on the Stability and Growth Pact 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the ECB, at the annual dinner of the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants in Ireland, Dublin, 5 April 2004. 
 Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, 
I understand that in addressing you this evening I am following in the footsteps of very distinguished 
speakers, including both the current and the previous Presidents of the Irish Republic. This is both an 
honour and a daunting task for a central banker such as myself. Unlike many heads of state, central 
bankers are not, in general, renowned for their great oratory. But I will do my best not to disappoint. 
And I feel reassured by the audience tonight. Central bankers and accountants have certain things in 
common. We both spend a considerable part of our time looking at, counting and assessing numbers.  
Central bankers like counting numbers. But we don’t like to have to count too far. For example, with 
regard to inflation, at the ECB we like to count only up to two, that is “two percent”. Actually, “below but 
close to two percent” is our stated preference. If we are measuring the size of euro area countries’ 
budget deficits, we really don’t like to have to count much at all. And, in fact, my colleagues and I can 
get quite irritable if we have to count above three percent. This is because the Maastricht Treaty and 
the Stability and Growth Pact say that we should not have to do so, or at least not very often. And if an 
occasion should arise when we do have to count above three percent, then a procedure is foreseen to 
ensure that this state of affairs does not last for too long.  
Unfortunately, we have been doing a lot of counting above three percent recently. And last November, 
the ministers of economy and finance in the ECOFIN Council decided that the procedure designed to 
correct this state of affairs could be put on hold for the time being.  
My  colleagues  and  I  in  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  have  made  clear  our  concern  about  the 
ECOFIN Council’s decision last November. And our concern has increased in the light of information 
that has recently become available indicating that public finances in a number of EU Member States 
have deteriorated since then. Mr President, in your letter inviting me here this evening, you mentioned 
that the banking and wider business community is also concerned and that you would welcome my 
observations  on  these  developments.  Let  me  make  these  observations  by  answering  the  following 
questions. First, why should we be concerned about these developments? Second, how concerned 
should we be? And third, what should be done about it? 
Why should we be concerned? 
Let me start with why we should be concerned. This is, in my view, a question that we should take 
care to answer, and to answer properly. We should not assume that everyone knows the reasons for 
our  concern.  It  should  be  clear  that  the  Governing  Council  does  not  simply  support  the  rules  and 
procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact for the sake of the rules and procedures themselves. If we 
defend the Pact, it is because we believe that it makes good economic sense. It can contribute to the 
attainment of our societies’ fundamental economic objectives. 
By respecting the rules of the Pact, a Member State pursues a sound fiscal policy. And this is in its 
own interest. A government that maintains a budgetary position that is close to balance or in surplus 
over  the  medium  term  and  reduces  its  debt  to  a  low  and  sustainable  level  has  room  to  pursue  its 
desired tax and spending policies. It also creates scope and increases flexibility to cushion the effects 
of the economic cycle. By contrast, a government that pursues an inappropriate fiscal policy, resulting 
in  persistent  deficits  and  higher  levels  of  debt,  increasingly  limits  its  room  for  policy  action.  Money 
spent paying interest on higher levels of debt cannot be used to provide public services or to lower 
taxes.  And  experience  has  shown  that  while  such  a  trend  of  high  deficits,  higher  debt  and  higher 
interest payments, and thus still higher deficits and so on, can easily be established, it is much harder 
to reverse. 
There is no fundamental choice between stability and growth. Sometimes there seems to be such a 
choice. But it is either temporary or illusory. In the longer term and in reality, stability is a precondition 
for growth. They are two sides of the same coin. And sound public finances create conditions which 
are conducive to stability and sustainable growth. Nowhere is there a better example of this than here 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
in  Ireland.  In  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s,  Ireland’s  debt  increased  dramatically  and  economic 
growth  slowed.  Then,  in  the  mid-1980s,  Ireland  changed  course.  It  began  to  put  its  fiscal  house  in 
order. We all know what has happened since then.  Over the last 15 years, Ireland’s debt ratio has 
been reduced from over 100% to around 30%, now one of the lowest in the EU. And over the same 
period Ireland has had an average growth rate of around 7%, by far the highest in Europe.  
A government that pursues a sound fiscal policy will ultimately be rewarded. A government that does 
not do so will ultimately be punished. In the past, this punishment used to be imposed fairly promptly 
by markets: primarily the foreign exchange market, but also money and financial markets. This is no 
longer true for a euro area country. Member States are now largely shielded from this discipline. But 
this does not mean that they are shielded from the effects of inappropriate fiscal policies. Instead, the 
effects will now appear in terms of lost competitiveness, reduced confidence and, as a consequence, 
slower growth and higher unemployment.  
The  problem  is  that  these  mechanisms  operate  slowly.  So  the  symptoms  of  an  inappropriate  fiscal 
policy may only show up when the disease has already spread far and wide. And then the required 
medicine is likely to be more drastic and painful. In a monetary union there is no automatic wake-up 
call to alert a Member State to its deteriorating state of fiscal health. There is no early warning system; 
unless, that is, we create one in the form of a fiscal rule.  
A sound fiscal policy, and a good fiscal rule, is in a country’s own interest. In a monetary union such as 
the euro area it is also a truly common interest. An inappropriate fiscal policy in one country directly 
affects the other countries as the impact on interest rates will no longer be confined to one country but 
will spread across the euro area. The countries of the euro area now live in the same monetary house. 
When you live in the same house, you need to have some rules to ensure that the house is kept in 
order. And once you have agreed on the rules, you have to apply them consistently and in the same 
way to all. Otherwise the members of the household will feel that they are not treated equally. Each 
member will have his own reason for not obeying the rules. And in the end, you may not have viable 
rules at all.  
So my colleagues in the Governing Council and I are concerned, because we believe that fiscal rules 
such as those of the Stability and Growth Pact are necessary in a monetary union; and recent fiscal 
developments raise doubts about Member States’ commitment to these rules. 
How concerned should we be? 
How concerned should we be? How concerned should I be as a member of the Governing Council 
charged  with  the  task  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area?  Obviously  I  think  there  are 
grounds for concern, for the reasons I just mentioned. But I also don’t want to exaggerate. We should 
not be alarmist. We should maintain a reasonable perspective.  
Following the ECOFIN decision of last November, many observers promptly proclaimed the Pact to be 
dead. I do not agree with this fatalistic view. The ECOFIN Council did not kill the Pact or even suspend 
its basic rules last November. What it did do was to give France and Germany an extra year to adjust 
their  fiscal  policies  in  view  of  the  commitments  made  by  these  countries.  And  in  order  to  do  so  it 
decided to put one step of the excessive deficit procedures for these countries on hold pending the 
fulfilment of their commitments. If the Pact is dead, then why have so many people been talking about 
it so much in recent weeks and months?  
To paraphrase one of Ireland’s famous literary geniuses, Oscar Wilde, I would say that “reports of the 
death  of  the  Pact  are  wildly  exaggerated”.  The  Pact  is  not  dead.  It  is  growing  up.  It  is  making  the 
transition from being a set of rules on paper to a set of rules applied in the real world. As is often the 
case when growing up, there are growing pains from time to time.  
Moreover, while the Pact may be experiencing a few growing pains, it still represents an improvement 
on the past. At present the euro area fiscal deficit stands at just under 3% of GDP. Ten years ago, at a 
similar point in the economic cycle, it was around 6%. The Pact may not be working as well as we 
would like, but this does not mean that it has been a failure. By being there, it has had some impact. 
We should give the rules and procedures of the Maastricht Treaty and the Pact due credit for this.  
We should also be reassured by the fact that the euro area has a strong monetary constitution. It has 
an independent central bank with a clear objective to maintain price stability. Monetary financing of 
budget deficits and the bailing-out of insolvent governments are prohibited. In short, monetary policy in 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
the euro area is protected more than any other against the possible negative implications of unsound 
fiscal policies.  
I say this because I want to make one point clear. If the Governing Council of the ECB expresses its 
concern about fiscal developments and the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact, it is not 
primarily because we fear the implications for price stability. We have the tools at our disposal to fulfil 
our objective. European citizens and business can rest assured that the ECB will continue to maintain 
price stability over the medium term. This is not what we are worried about. Our concern is that if the 
Stability and Growth Pact is not implemented properly, and if excessive deficits persist and public debt 
levels remain high or, even worse, increase, there will eventually and inevitably be a cost in terms of 
lower growth and employment. 
What should be done? 
If the Stability and Growth Pact is not working as well as we would like, what can be done about it? 
What should be done in view of the ECOFIN Council decision of last November?  
Well, first of all, having made the commitments they did last November, France and Germany must 
keep their word. And if they cannot do so, the ECOFIN Council should keep its word and apply the 
next  steps  of  the  excessive  deficit  procedure.  Abiding  by  the  commitments  made  last  November 
would, in my view, go a long way to restoring confidence. We at the ECB think that the decision taken 
last November was not the appropriate one. France and Germany and the ECOFIN Council can prove 
us wrong. And in this case I for one will be happy if I am proved wrong.  
Beyond this, the question that seems to be on everyone’s mind at the moment is whether the recent 
problems in implementing the rules and procedures of the Pact call for the Pact itself to be changed. 
My  colleagues  in  the  Governing  Council  and  I  are  not  convinced  that  this  is  either  necessary  or 
desirable. The current rules of the Pact have been agreed upon by all 15 EU Member States, because 
they make good economic sense. Just because you encounter problems here and there when you first 
try to apply the rules does not mean that you should re-write the rulebook.  
Let me illustrate my views by drawing a comparison with the Highway Code. We all know that driving 
at excessive speed is dangerous. So for good reason, governments have introduced speed limits. We 
also know that speed limits have not eliminated speeding completely. Some drivers continue to speed. 
But this does not mean that you should abolish or revise the speed limits. It means that you still have a 
job to do in educating drivers about the dangers of speeding and in better enforcing the speed limits. 
As in the case of fiscal rules, identifying the optimal speed limit under all circumstances is a highly 
complex task. Just as economic conditions can differ, so can driving conditions. But you cannot have 
speed limits that are constantly changing to suit all conditions. And you cannot have different speed 
limits for different drivers. The technology simply does not exist or is too expensive to put in place. And 
the driver as well as the traffic authorities would, in any case, become confused. Speed limits need to 
be clear and enforceable. And you have to rely on the authorities to implement them in a way that 
makes good sense.  
In my view, the same is broadly true of fiscal rules in a monetary union. You need fiscal rules that are 
clear and enforceable, rules that are the same for everybody and understood by all. Fiscal rules such 
as those contained in the Pact cannot be optimal at all times. But this does not mean they are bad 
rules.  It  means  that  those  responsible  for  law  enforcement,  in  this  case  the  Commission  and  the 
ECOFIN Council, have to implement them appropriately in the light of experience gained.  
Recent  experience  has  taught  us  that  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  the  implementation  of  the 
rules. We know, for example, that the current problems are partly due to the fact that governments 
failed  to  strengthen  their  public  finances  during  periods  of  robust  growth.  So  it  would  help  to 
strengthen incentives for fiscal consolidation in good times. We also know that fiscal surveillance has 
been complicated by the difficulty of identifying underlying budgetary trends as well as by the quality of 
budgetary  data  and  the  -  sometimes  rather  “flexible”  -  application  of  accounting  rules.  It  would 
therefore help if we could improve our analysis of structural budget balances, the credibility of fiscal 
figures,  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  monitoring  and  auditing  process.  All  such  improvements, 
however, can be made within the current framework. They do not call for the EU fiscal framework itself 
to be abolished or re-written. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 3
I  have  perhaps  spoken  for  too  long.  But  you  did  invite  me  to  speak  on  a  subject  that  is  of  crucial 
importance and that central bankers are passionate about. Some say that there is nothing a central 
banker  likes  more  than  to  talk  about  fiscal  policy.  I  think  I  have  lent  weight  to  that  statement  this 
evening. 
Fortunately  for  me,  members  of  the  accounting  profession  are  known  for  their  long  concentration 
spans and for their patience. You have certainly been an attentive and patient audience. I will not test 
your patience any further. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2004
