Lars Heikensten: Introduction on monetary policy  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 1 April 2004. 
 Let  me  begin  as  usual  by  thanking  you  for  the  opportunity  to  come  to  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance and give an account of monetary policy. The committee’s public hearing of the governor is an 
important part of the transparency the Riksbank wishes to uphold. These meetings illustrate the clear 
link between the bank and the democratically-elected body in Sweden. Now these meetings are a part 
of our legislation. 
As is usual on these occasions, I intend to begin by commenting on our current assessment of inflation 
and our view of monetary policy. Then I shall briefly discuss events in the Swedish economy last year 
and the results of the monetary policy we conducted.  
The current assessment 
World economy recovering 
As Sweden is a small country, very dependent on events in the outside world, it is natural to begin a 
discussion of the current economic situation with a description of developments in the world economy. 
Global  economic  growth  has  largely  followed  the  path  anticipated  by  the  Riksbank  and  most  other 
analysts during the autumn and winter. Compared with the picture we envisaged in December, we are 
now assuming that international growth will be slightly stronger. This is mainly due to a slightly more 
positive  assessment  of  developments  in  the  United  States  and  Asia,  but  also  to  more  favourable 
developments in Latin America, and central and eastern Europe. On the other hand, developments in 
the  euro  area,  particularly  in  the  larger  countries  -  Germany,  France  and  Italy  -  have  been  more 
subdued  than  expected  and  a  slightly  weaker  development  is  foreseen  in  the near  future  than  was 
previously assessed. 
Although international demand has developed largely as we expected, the same cannot be said for 
prices. The subdued international price trend in recent years has probably been linked to the earlier 
economic  slowdown.  However,  there  are  also  other  explanatory  factors.  One  possible  cause  of  the 
weak price pressure is the globalisation of trade and production patterns that has followed in the wake 
of deregulation and the spread of information technology. Many new markets are being integrated into 
the global economy, including countries in central and eastern Europe and Asia.  
We are now seeing weak international price trends for manufactured goods, while there is a sharp rise 
in  commodity  prices.  This  could  also  be  at  least  partly  due  to  changed  international  patterns  in 
production and trade. The best example of this is China, with its huge size and rapid industrialisation. 
The country is now one of the world’s largest commodity importers, particularly crude oil, copper and 
certain agricultural products. China’s rapid industrial expansion, with an average annual growth rate of 
8 per cent, has contributed to a sharp rise in, for instance, steel and cement prices. Meanwhile, China 
is  literally  churning  out  cheap  manufactured  goods,  produced  mainly  by  labour  with  a  low  level  of 
education and very low wages.  
To summarise, we assume in the Inflation report that international growth will remain good. Growth in 
the  OECD  area  is  expected  to  amount  to  around  3  per  cent  a  year  over  the  coming  two  years. 
International price pressure on manufactured goods is expected to rise in future as economic activity 
strengthens,  although  not  as  rapidly  as  historical  patterns  indicate.  On  the  other  hand,  oil  price 
forecasts have been revised upwards for the entire forecast period, mainly as a result of increased 
demand. Nevertheless, international price pressure is expected to be slightly lower during the entire 
forecast period than assumed in earlier assessments. 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 1
Swedish economic picture remains the same 
Economic  activity  in  Sweden  during  the  autumn  and  winter  has  largely  followed  the  path  we 
anticipated. The downturn that we now appear to have left behind us has been relatively mild, with an 
average  growth  rate  during  the  past  three  years  of  1.5  per  cent.  Important  reasons  why  economic 
activity  did  not  weaken  more  than  this  are  the  expansionary  fiscal  policy  pursued  and  low  interest 
rates, which contributed to upholding household consumption. At the same time, the relatively weak 
krona has contributed to favourable developments in exports.  
We can now see that the economic upswing is continuing to strengthen gradually. Industrial activity 
has made some progress; export demand is accelerating and firms are relatively optimistic about the 
future. Capacity utilisation is also continuing to increase. Households’ expectations regarding their own 
finances and the Swedish economy are once again more optimistic, after a decline at the end of last 
year. Retail trade sales indicate a good level of consumption. A slightly stronger development in real 
disposable incomes, partly due to lower inflation, continuing low interest rates and rising asset prices, 
is expected to benefit consumption in the near future.  
Given this background, we have found no reason to make more than a few marginal changes to the 
overall  picture  of  growth we  have been  outlining since  last  autumn.  We  now  believe  that  economic 
growth will amount to just over 2½ per cent on average over the coming two years, which is a tenth of 
a  percentage  point  more  than  our  previous  estimates.  However,  the  annual  outcomes  differ  slightly 
more because of the fact that the figures for the current and coming years are affected by changes 
between  the  years  in  the  number  of  working  days.  This  has  no  major  significance  for  our  view  of 
resource utilisation, as both production and demand are affected. The conclusion of our assessment of 
economic activity is that the economy will approach full resource utilisation at the end of the forecast 
period. 
Weaker price and cost pressure 
Although  we  have  not  changed  our  views  of  developments  in  economic  activity,  during  the  autumn 
and at the beginning of this year we have gradually changed our view of inflationary pressure in the 
Swedish economy. This is connected with the labour market showing a weaker development than was 
forecast in December. Another factor is that productivity has increased more rapidly than expected, 
resulting in lower domestic cost pressure. A further factor is that the recent decline in inflation appears 
to have had some effect on inflation expectations, which have fallen slightly. Some of these are factors 
we  pointed  to  already  in  December.  At  our  meeting  in  early  February  we  were  able  to  base  our 
decision  on  statistics  from  a  further  couple  of  months  which  reinforced  the  picture.  Inflation  was 
expected to be below target level and we therefore cut the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points. Let 
me go into these factors more closely and comment on them in the light of events since February. This 
is because it is essentially these factors that lie behind the decision we made yesterday.  
During the latter part of 2003 unemployment rose relatively sharply. A number of factors contributed to 
this. Demand for labour declined both in the business sector and in the public sector, and there were 
cutbacks in labour market policy measures. As yet, there are few signs of a turnaround in the labour 
market and business tendency surveys indicate that the upturn in the private sector will be relatively 
weak this year. However, some improvement may be on the way, although it is difficult to determine 
exactly when the trend will turn. Recently, the number of new job vacancies registered has increased 
somewhat and the number of redundancy notices has declined. At the same time, the strained local 
government finances indicate a weak upturn in employment in this sector in the near future. 
The situation in the labour market has caused us to revise down our assessments of future wage cost 
increases. This was also included in the picture in February. The central wage agreements signed in 
the  manufacturing  and  retail  trade  sectors  have  confirmed  this  development.  Our  new  forecasts 
indicate wage cost increases of 3.5 per cent over the coming two years, which is slightly lower than in 
December.  
Last year there were increasing signs of more rapid productivity growth. While employment, measured 
as the number of hours worked in the business sector, developed weaker than anticipated, growth was 
largely  as  expected.  This  is  reflected  in  more  rapid  productivity  growth.  We  drew  attention  to  this 
picture  already  in  December.  Since  then,  these  developments  have  become  clearer  and  been 
reinforced.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2004
The stronger productivity growth is probably connected with economic activity; at the beginning of a 
recovery  the  available  production  resources  are  used  to  a  greater  degree  and  it  is  only  when  the 
recovery  is  secure  that  investment  and  new  recruitment  accelerate  in  earnest.  However,  there  are 
numerous  indications  that  productivity  has  risen  more  than  is  usual  for  the  economic  situation,  a 
pattern that has been even more evident in the United States. It is conceivable that this development 
is  linked  to  the  factors  I  mentioned  earlier;  globalisation,  deregulation  and  increased  competition. 
However, more lasting changes in productivity may also be linked to the large investments in IT and 
telecommunications at the end of the 1990s. It is possible that the full impact from the investments 
made and technological advances is first achieved in connection with cost-cutting and rationalisation. 
We have a special boxed article on this subject in the report, which I can recommend reading. It is not 
possible to determine with any certainty what has caused the improvement in productivity. However, 
given  this  more  favourable  picture,  we  have  nevertheless  anticipated  a  rather  higher  level  of 
productivity growth in the near future. 
The new inflation figures received also indicate a slightly more subdued inflationary pressure than we 
had estimated. The outcome shows not only that electricity prices have fallen back as expected, but 
also that prices have increased at a slower rate in general. It is thus not only import prices, but also 
domestic  price  pressure  that  has  increased  more  slowly.  This  could  be  connected  with  the  higher 
productivity I mentioned. In this case, it would mean that the economy could grow at a slightly faster 
rate without inflation accelerating. Particularly as inflation expectations have also declined slightly.  
Inflation picture and monetary policy 
When we look ahead somewhat, we can conclude that the temporary fluctuations in energy prices, 
which have had a strong effect on inflation since the end of 2002 and pushed it down significantly in 
recent  months,  are  expected  to  have  abated  by  mid-2005.  As  Swedish  and  international  economic 
activity improve, price pressure is also expected to increase. However, in the main scenario inflation is 
expected to be below the Riksbank’s target both one and two years ahead, mainly due to lower wage 
cost increases and improved productivity growth. During 2004 UND1X inflation is expected to amount 
to an average of 0.6 per cent, which is 0.5 percentage points lower than the December forecast. The 
corresponding figure for 2005 is 1.2 per cent, which entails a revision of 0.4 percentage points for the 
year.  At  the  end  of  the  two-year  period  that  comprises  the  main  focus  of  the  forecasts,  inflation 
according to UND1X is expected to be 1.6 per cent, on the assumption of an unchanged repo rate. 
So  what  are  the  risks  that  might  upset  the  picture  I  have  just  presented?  We  make  it  clear  in  the 
Inflation  Report  that  we  consider  the  risks  of  a  poorer  development  in  Swedish  and  international 
economic activity to have declined as the recovery has progressed. Experience also shows that it is 
easy to underestimate the force of an upturn once it has found a foothold. Developments in the labour 
market in both Sweden and the United States are one factor pointing in the other direction. In addition, 
developments  in  the  euro  area  remain  sluggish  and  in  the  United  States  there  are  problems  with 
imbalances in foreign trade in particular. Our opinion is nevertheless that, compared with the picture 
we present in the main scenario, there is an upside risk for inflation from economic activity in Sweden 
and abroad, with links to price trends.  
There  are  arguments  that  we  could  have  either  overestimated  or  underestimated  cost  pressure. 
Compared  with  the  December  assessment,  we  have  revised  up  our  basic  view  of  productivity, 
although  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  in  this  area,  given  the  surprising  developments  over  the 
past six months. On the other hand, the uncertainty regarding wages has diminished somewhat, as 
central wage agreements have now been concluded for a large part of the labour market. All in all, our 
assessment is that the risks in this field are balanced.  
The conclusion of the discussion on risks in the Inflation Report, and which I have only briefly touched 
on here, is that we saw reason to make an upward adjustment in the main scenario inflation forecast 
of around a tenth of a percentage point. This does not alter the conclusion that inflation in terms of 
both CPI and UND1X will be below the target level during the coming two years. During the first year 
we believe that inflation will be significantly below two per cent. We have also assessed that inflation 
will be marginally below the target at the end of the two-year period. This is the background to the 
decision we made yesterday to cut the repo rate by 0.5 percentage points. 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 3
Inflation in line with target in 2003 
That covers the discussion in the Inflation Report and our interest rate decision. Let me now move on 
to  discuss  monetary  policy  from  a  retrospective  view.  We  have  as  usual  in  connection  with  the 
publication  of  the  first  Inflation  Report  of  the  year  produced  a  background  report  to  facilitate  the 
assessment of monetary policy over the past three years. This report is included in a special box in the 
report. 
Measured as an annual average, the inflation rate was very close to the 2 per cent target in 2003. The 
CPI increased by exactly 2 per cent, while UND1X inflation, which is adjusted for the direct effects of 
indirect  taxes  and  interest  rates,  amounted  to  2.3 percent.  However,  these averages hide relatively 
strong fluctuations over the course of the year.  
At the beginning of 2003 inflation rose rapidly and during a couple of months it actually exceeded the 
upper tolerance limit of 3 per cent. However, it had fallen back by May and was once again in line with 
the 2 per cent target. The downturn continued throughout the remainder of the year, particularly for 
CPI inflation. The fact that CPI inflation fell more than UND1X inflation was due to the interest rate cuts 
made earlier in the year. In December, CPI inflation was 1.4 per cent, while UND1X was 1.7 per cent. 
The upturn at the beginning of the year was mainly due to rising electricity prices caused by supply 
problems  in  the  hydroelectric  power  companies’  reservoirs  and  by  unusually  high  demand  resulting 
from a cold winter. Oil prices also rose and contributed to the higher inflation rate. The high energy 
prices had an impact on several sub-components of the CPI. For instance, housing costs and various 
prices linked to transportation activities rose unusually quickly during the spring. When adjusted for 
energy prices, the path of inflation in 2003 was much more stable and remained within the interval of 
1.2-1.9 per cent.  
Small deviations from target 
Despite the fact that inflation fluctuated substantially over the year, we can conclude that the average 
CPI  deviation  from  target  level  was  relatively  small  in  an  historical  perspective;  around  half  a 
percentage point, compared with approximately one percentage point during the period 1995-2002. In 
a comparison with a number of other inflation-targeting countries, it is evident that Swedish inflation 
was closest to the target level last year, measured as an annual average, and that it was fairly average 
with regard to deviations from the target level.  
As monetary policy’s effect on inflation has a time lag, the outcome of inflation in 2003 is largely a 
result  of  the  monetary  policy  conducted  in  2001  and  2002.  Let  me  therefore  report  some  of  our 
considerations in the light of the developments and forecasts made then. At the beginning of 2001 the 
repo rate was 4 per cent. During the spring there was a severe depreciation of the krona. Despite the 
fact  that  economic  activity  in  Sweden  and  abroad  was  in  a  weakening  phase,  domestic  resource 
utilisation  was  at  a  high  level,  while  inflation  had  increased  significantly  during  the  spring  and 
exceeded the upper tolerance limit. Inflation expectations had also begun to rise. Given this, we raised 
the  repo  rate  in  summer  2001.  Economic  developments  and  monetary  policy  considerations  in 
Sweden differed from those in many other countries, where monetary policy in many cases had begun 
to  be  more  expansionary.  The  decision  to  raise  the  interest  rate  in  July  2001  was  not  self-evident. 
Three  Executive  Board  members  entered  reservations  against  the  decision,  with  reference  to  the 
weakening economic activity.  
The  terrorist  actions  in  September  2001  caused  us  to  cut  the  rate  by  half  a  percentage  point.  Our 
assessment was that confidence among both households and firms would deteriorate. There was also 
a  risk  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  The  economic  slowdown  that  had  begun  could  thus 
become more profound and prolonged than was previously anticipated. The easing of economic policy 
after the terrorist acts contributed to some recovery in international and domestic economic activity. In 
spring 2002 we made the assessment that inflation one to two years ahead would exceed the target 
level.  A  gradual  upturn  in  the  underlying  inflation  rate,  combined  with  unexpectedly  high  wage 
increases in the services sectors in particular, indicated that resource utilisation could be higher than 
we had assumed. The repo rate was raised in two stages.  
Steering interest rates in several other small countries were also raised at this time. However, during 
the summer and autumn we saw more and more signs that the recovery had come to a halt. Industrial 
activity weakened and geopolitical unease increased, as did the concern that the heavy stock market 
fall that began in 2000 would affect households and firms more than expected. The Riksbank, like the 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2004
ECB and the Federal Reserve, began to reappraise the prospects for economic activity and inflation. 
Towards the end of the year, we made a downward adjustment in the inflation forecasts and the repo 
rate was cut by as much as it had been raised during the spring.  
With hindsight, it could perhaps be claimed that raising the interest rate in spring 2001 and 2002 was 
unnecessary. However, this would not lead to a fruitful discussion. It is always easy to know how one 
should  have  acted  afterwards,  when  the  result  is  a  fact.  The  interesting  part  of  an  assessment  is 
whether our decisions are understandable in the light of the picture available at the time the decision 
was made. When we analyse this question, we can conclude that we have acted consistently on the 
basis of the inflation forecasts we made, much as we usually do. 
A further question is how good we are at making forecasts. The accuracy of the forecasts for price 
trends as a whole in 2003, which were made during the two preceding years, appears relatively good. 
However, the general assessment hides a number of large forecast errors for individual components. 
For instance, domestic inflation was underestimated, while international prices and imported inflation 
were overestimated. We thus have some work left to do to achieve better precision in the individual 
components that are important to the total assessment. Despite this, I can observe that our inflation 
forecasts for 2003 were slightly better than the average of other forecasters.  
Some concluding reflections 
Let me now, in conclusion, emphasise a couple of issues connected with the present decision-making 
situation.  
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  economic  activity  has  essentially  followed  the  paths  we  have  been 
anticipating  since  early  last  autumn.  On  the  other  hand,  new  information  has  been  received,  which 
indicates lower price and cost pressure. This information concerns international prices, productivity in 
Sweden, the labour market situation and wage costs as well as inflation outcomes and expectations. It 
is not always easy to interpret all this information. All in all, it has led to a significant change in our 
forecasts since October. This has in turn made us cut the interest rate by a total of 0.75 percentage 
points. Similarly, we made a couple of cuts in a row last spring, when it became obvious that prospects 
for  economic  activity  weakened  more  than  expected  and  our  inflation  forecasts  were  therefore 
adjusted  downwards.  This  is  the  way  we  work.  New  information  affects  our  assessments  and 
sometimes leads to a reappraisal of our inflation forecasts. If this happens, it also has an impact on the 
policy we conduct.  
The difference between the present situation and the situation last spring is that the uncertainty then 
also encompassed developments in the real economy. At that time there appeared to be a substantial 
risk that economic activity would continue to weaken. To this extent, the present situation, despite the 
sometimes  rather  heated  debate,  is  not  more  troubled,  but  actually  less  troubled.  Growth  has 
increased over the past six months to one year and most indications are that it will continue to do so. 
This makes the need for interest rate cuts appear less acute. At the same time, inflationary pressure is 
lower. It is important to take the inflation target equally seriously whether it requires cutting or raising 
the repo rate. There is usually no reason to have a higher interest rate than the situation requires, this 
is part of the credibility of the policy conducted. The result of our endeavour to act consistently and 
symmetrically has been fairly good; inflation has remained in line with the target level during the years 
of inflation-targeting policy.  
Nevertheless, I would like to point out that we do not follow our rules of action mechanically. Our focus 
is on the inflation rate one to two years ahead, and in this perspective we are clearly below the target 
level and today’s decision is therefore well-motivated. In addition, inflation will probably be well below 
target level for the greater part of the coming year, while it is difficult to envisage any strong reasons 
why it should accelerate rapidly beyond the forecast horizon. This is connected with the fact that there 
is  presently  a  high  level  of  unutilised  resources  in  the  economy  and  that  resource  utilisation  is 
expected to increase slowly. Given this background, there should be plenty of time to take action and 
raise the rate in future; when and if there is reason to believe that inflationary pressure is growing.  
We also try to take into account in our actions risks to financial stability. This is primarily done on the 
basis  of  information  on  how  lending  and  so  on  affects  the  banks,  and  through  them,  the  payment 
system.  However,  there  is  also  a  more  difficult  problem  concerned  with  how  credit  expansion  and 
asset prices affect the conditions for the stability of the payment system, as well as for developments 
in  the  real  economy  in  a  slightly  longer-term  perspective.  These  are  questions  that  have  been 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 5
discussed more at the Riksbank than many other central banks, given the background of the crisis at 
the beginning of the 1990s. 
However, in today’s concrete decision-making situation we have not considered the build-up of credit 
and increased indebtedness in recent years to be sufficiently serious to motivate a departure from our 
usual means of conducting monetary policy, namely on the basis of expected inflation trends a couple 
of years ahead. At present, we see no actual problems for the banks and the stability of the financial 
system.  Nor  do  we  see  any  major  problems  for  the  household  sector  as  a  whole  to  meet  its 
obligations, which does not prevent problems for individual households from arising when the interest 
rate sooner or later begins to rise. All in all, there is good reason to closely monitor loan developments 
and the build-up of debt in society. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2004
