Sir K Dwight Venner: A broadbrush picture of the Eastern Caribbean Central 
Bank 
Presentation  by  Sir  K  Dwight  Venner,  Governor  of  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank,  on  the 
2003/04 Annual Report, Basseterre, 21 June 2004. 
 The presentation of this report on the operations of the Bank during the fiscal year 2003/2004 is in 
accordance with Article 48 (1) (b) which requires the institution to transmit such a report to each of the 
Participating  Governments  and  to  publish  it.  The  Monetary  Council  has  also  agreed  to  this  formal 
presentation to ensure that the public would be properly informed and educated on critical aspects of 
the Bank’s operations and its impact on the economies of the Currency Union. 
The  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank  has  its  origins  in  the  Treaty  of  Basseterre,  June  18  1981, 
establishing  the  Organisation  of  Eastern  Caribbean  States.  Article  3  outlining  the  Purposes  and 
Functions of the Organisation states in Section 2 (1) -  
“to  this  end  the  Member  States  will  endeavour  to  coordinate,  harmonise  and  pursue  joint  policies 
particularly in the field of Currency and Central Banking.” 
PREAMBLE (ECCB Agreement 1983) 
The Treaty of Basseterre 1981 was followed by the Agreement establishing the ECCB in 1983. The 
Preamble states: 
“An Agreement made on the 5th day of July 1983 between the Governments of Antigua and Barbuda, 
The Commonwealth of Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia and 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (hereinafter referred to as the Participating Governments”) 
Whereas  it  is  desired  to  maintain  a  common  currency  to  establish  a  Common  Central  Bank  with 
powers to issue and manage that currency, to safeguard its international value, to promote monetary 
stability and a sound financial structure, and to further the economic development of the territories of 
the Participating Governments.” 
Anguilla became a full member of the ECCB in April 1987. 
The ECCB has distilled its goal and mission statements from the preamble and has defined its ultimate 
goal as being to contribute to the balanced growth and economic development of its member states, 
while its mission statement is “to maintain the stability of the EC dollar and the integrity of the banking 
system in order to facilitate the balanced growth and economic development of its member states.”  
The ECCB after deep reflection at every level of the institution - Monetary Council, Board of Directors, 
Management and Staff - has outlined its aspirations as an institution as follows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The Governance structure and arrangements of the Bank comprises three elements: 
(a) 
to be one of the leading institutions for policy research and advice; 
to be a model for the practice of modern management methods; 
to be an advocate for ECCU and OECS regionalisation initiatives. 
The  Monetary  Council  which  is  composed  of  the  Ministers  of  Finance  of  the  member 
countries. This is the highest decision taking body of the Bank and Article 7 (2) states that - 
“The  Council  shall  meet  not  less  than  twice  each  year  to  receive  from  the  Governor  the 
Bank’s report on monetary and credit conditions and to provide directives and guidelines on 
matters  of  monetary  and  credit  policy  to  the  Bank  and  for  such  other  purposes  as  are 
prescribed under this Agreement.” 
The  Board  of  Directors  which  subject  to  Article  7  shall  be  responsible  for  the  policy  and 
general administration of the Bank. 
According to Article 9 (4 and 5) the Governor shall preside as Chairman at the meetings of 
the Board; serve as Chief Executive Officer of the Bank to be in charge of and responsible to 
the Board for the implementation of the policy and the day to day management of the Bank.  
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
The Bank has established three formal Consultative arrangements with the following: 
(a) 
the  Ministries  of  Finance  in  keeping  with  Part  IX  of  the  Agreement  -  Relations  with 
Participating Governments; 
the Commercial Banks in keeping with Part VIII of the Agreement - Relations with Financial 
Institutions; 
the Private Sector through a Private Sector Consultative Group as approved by the Monetary 
Council. 
(b) 
(c) 
The  Bank  has  made  networking  arrangements  with  institutions  and  agencies  within  the  public  and 
private sectors in the Currency Union. 
The Bank is also committed with the full support of the Council and the Board to a full programme of 
public education and information on economic and financial matters. 
The principal role of the ECCB is to be the central monetary authority of the ECCU. Its responsibilities 
are  therefore  to  ensure  the  achievement  of  the  purposes  of  the  Bank  as  set  out  in  Article  4  of  the 
Agreement as follows: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
to regulate the availability of money and credit; 
to promote and maintain monetary stability; 
to promote credit and exchange conditions and a sound financial structure conducive to the 
balanced growth and development of the ECCU economies; 
to  actively  promote  through  means  consistent  with  its  other  objectives  the  economic 
development of ECCU countries. 
(4) 
Clear specification of the processes for formulating and reporting monetary policy decisions; 
Public availability of information on monetary policies; 
Accountability and assurances of integrity by the central bank. 
The setting of objectives for both the short term and long term are critical for all institutions, including 
central banks. 
The manual of “Good Transparency Practices for Monetary Policy by Central Banks” sets out three (3) 
transparency practices which are critical to the setting of policy objectives. They are - 
1. 
2. 
3. 
This formal presentation of the Bank’s annual operations and the publication of its audited accounts is 
in keeping with these requirements. 
The  Bank  also  proposes  to  set  out  a  list  of  objectives  at  the  beginning  of  each  financial  year  as 
contained in its Annual Report which will guide its operations for the ensuing year. These objectives 
will be derived from the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Arising from these reviews the five (5) major operational objectives of the Bank have been identified as 
follows: 
1. 
The scope of the ECCB Agreement; 
The past decisions and directives of the Council; 
An analysis of the economic policies of Member Governments; 
The perceived sentiments of the public; 
The independent research and analysis of the Bank. 
Monetary stability as represented by the maintenance of the external and domestic value of 
the currency; 
Financial stability as represented by the safety and soundness of the banking and financial 
system; 
The  development  of  money  and  capital  markets  as  represented  by  the  creation  of  new 
currency union wide financial markets, products, and institutions; 
2. 
3. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
4. 
The regulation of money and credit to provide short, medium and long term finance at the 
appropriate prices, volumes and maturities; 
The active promotion of economic development through policy research and advocacy. 
5. 
A review of the year 2003/2004 shows that the total assets of the Bank grew from EC$1,617 billion in 
March 2003 to EC$1,740 billion in March 2004 with Foreign Reserve Assets moving from EC$1,455 
billion to EC$1,576 over the same period. 
The currency backing was at 97.65% as at 31 March 2004, which represented 8.6 months of imports 
of goods and services. 
Currency  in  Circulation  increased  from  EC$478  million  in  March  2003  to  EC$532  million  in  March 
2004.  
The currency maintained its value at 2.7 to the US dollar. 
The rate of inflation in the Currency Union averaged 1.8% during the year. 
The commercial banking system remained stable with total assets of EC$13,889.6 million as at the 
end of April 2004, total deposits of EC$11,049.1 million, and total loans of EC$7,679.9 million.  
During  the  course  of  the  year  the  ECCB  was  the  focal  point  of  a  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme conducted by a joint team from the IMF and the World Bank, which reviewed areas of risk 
to the financial system including weaknesses in the regulatory and supervisory framework for financial 
institutions. 
Arising out of this exercise several recommendations have been made for strengthening the regulatory 
arrangements, some of which have been incorporated in the new Uniform Banking Act. 
Work continues to be carried out on improving the Payments System which is critical to commercial 
and economic activity in the Currency Union. 
The ECCB is banker to the commercial banks and effects the exchange of payments mainly through 
the  exchange  of  cheques.  The  volume  of  these  activities  is  extremely  high  averaging  120,000 
cheques, at a value of EC$311 million per week. 
A more efficient payments systems at the level of the ECCB and the commercial bank through a Real 
Time Gross Settlement System, and the retail level of debit and credit cards and cheques will lower 
transactions costs and provide increased benefits to the economy. 
The  money  and  capital  markets  initiatives  of  the  ECCB  are  beginning  to  bear  fruit  with  two  more 
governments, Grenada and St Lucia coming on to the Regional Government Securities Market, and 
four more companies listing on the Stock Exchange. 
The  Eastern  Caribbean  Stock  Exchange  (ECSE)  is  by  far  the  most  technologically  advanced 
exchange in the region and the hemisphere, and considerable interest is being shown in accessing it 
by market players in Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago and beyond the region. 
During the course of the year the ECCB maintained the levels of the two rates of interest over which it 
has control, namely, the discount rate which was kept at 6.5 per cent and the minimum savings rate 
which remained at 3 per cent. 
The Bank continued to support the member countries in the areas of National Accounts and Balance 
of  Payments  Statistics  as  well  as  consolidating  its  own  work  in  the  area  of  monetary  and  financial 
statistics. 
Given the importance of accurate, regular and timely statistics to the making of good policies, the Bank 
has committed itself to working with the national statistical offices and external agencies to improve 
the identification, collection, analysis and management of statistics in the Currency Union. 
In the area of fiscal and debt management and economic adjustment, the Bank in collaboration with 
the Ministries of Finance and Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre (CARTAC) initiated the 
Structural Adjustment Technical Assistance Programme (SATAP) to address the serious concerns in 
these  areas.  The  initiative  is  aimed  at  creating  Policy  Units  in  each  Ministry,  training  staff  in  the 
technical  work,  and  producing  the  country’s  own  adjustment  programme  to  be  approved  and 
monitored by the Cabinet. 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
(iii) 
The  Bank  also  supplied  technical  and  administrative  support  to  the  Tax  Commission  which  was 
established  by  the  Monetary  Council  to  review  and  make  recommendations  on  Tax  Policy  and 
Administration. 
The Bank also gave specific support to the Commonwealth of Dominica, in its adjustment programme 
with both financial and technical assistance. The Bank made two loans available to the country from 
the  Fiscal  Tranche  and  provided  technical  assistance  for  prolonged  periods  in  the  fiscal  and  debt 
areas. 
The year 2003/2004 was a very challenging, but productive year. 
In  the  year  2004/2005,  the  Bank,  taking  into  consideration  the  external  environment  and  domestic 
circumstances  of  member  countries  has  set  out  a  programme  of  activities  to  respond  to  these 
circumstances. 
The external environment would take into consideration the following: 
(i) 
(ii) 
The economic performance of our main trading partners; 
Movements in the relative parities of our trading partners currencies, in this case the dollar, 
the euro, sterling and the canadian dollar; 
Trade arrangements, for example, preferential access to markets as in the case of sugar and 
bananas; 
Bilateral investment treaties and direct foreign investment; 
Multilateral and bilateral aid arrangements and concessional flow; 
Remittances. 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
The domestic circumstances which are of significance would be - 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The Bank in its programme for the fiscal year 2004/2005 will carefully monitor these factors and pay 
particular attention in its research programme to the following - 
(a) 
The efficient allocation and utilisation of the factors of production; 
Appropriate development and structural policies; 
Fiscal and debt management policies and strategies; 
Appropriate interest rate and exchange rate policies. 
The external environment and its impact on our reserve position, the competitiveness of the 
E C dollar and the balance of payments; 
The role of the tourist industry; 
The impact of oil prices; 
Money and credit conditions in the Currency Union. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
The Bank will be making a major effort to put in place the recommendations arising out of the FSAP to 
strengthen the entire financial system in the Currency Union. This will require the fullest cooperation of 
the national authorities through the establishment of the proposed Integrated Regulatory Units. 
The work on the development of money and capital markets will be accelerated with the objective of 
having a wider range of government securities and shares of private firms on the market. 
The efforts at fiscal sustainability and debt management will be stepped up considerably in conjunction 
and collaboration with the Ministries of Finance. 
The  current  financial  year  2004/2005  will  be  one  of  great  challenges  for  the  Bank  and  its  member 
countries.  However,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  groundwork  is  being  laid  for  the  improved  conception, 
articulation and implementation of policies in the monetary and financial arenas to provide the stability, 
which can lead on to sustainable and widely distributed development. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2004
