Joseph Yam: Two IFC 
Talk by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Federation of 
Hong Kong Industries Annual Dinner 2004, Hong Kong, 2 March 2004. 
 I am delighted to be joining you at your annual dinner this evening. Since its foundation in 1960, the 
Federation of Hong Kong Industries has seen enormous changes in the business landscape of Hong 
Kong. In 1960 Hong Kong was reaching the end of its first decade as a major centre of manufacturing. 
Today Hong Kong  is  the centre  of  a much  larger regional  manufacturing  base,  with some  5  million 
manufacturing workers employed by Hong Kong companies in Guangdong Province alone. The size 
and diversity of this manufacturing base makes the work of your organisation even more important and 
challenging. The Federation has risen to the challenges with a growing focus on the Pearl River Delta 
and beyond and a stress on communication and co-operation with counterparts beyond Hong Kong, in 
Mainland China, in Asia and across the world. As industrialists, you are in command of considerable 
resources,  and  as  producers  of  wealth  and  as  investors  you  are  some  of  the  main  users  of  Hong 
Kong’s financial infrastructure. My aim in this speech is to tell you something about recent and future 
developments in that infrastructure. 
But first I should point out that “Two IFC” - the title of this speech - does not stand for the magnificent 
new  building  in  which  the  HKMA  offices  are  now  housed.  It  stands  for  a  Mach  Two  International 
Financial Centre. It stands for a new vision of what an international financial centre is like. It raises 
questions on how the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government (HKSARG) should go 
about  discharging  its  responsibility  under  Article  109  of  the  Basic  Law  in  “the  maintenance  of  the 
status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre”. 
You may wonder why I refer to Mach Two in the description of an international financial centre. Mach 
is defined in the New Oxford Dictionary of English as “the ratio of the speed of a body to the speed of 
sound in the surrounding medium”. Mach Two is generally used to mean twice the speed of sound. It 
is also used as an image for a higher dimension. I think it is a suitable description of the phenomenal, 
dimensional jump that we have been seeing in global finance - and in the environment in which an 
international financial centre has to function. 
Financial  liberalisation,  and  consequently  the  globalisation  of  financial  markets,  has  placed  new 
demands  on an  international  financial centre.  The  information  technology revolution  means  that  the 
speed at which international capital travels the globe, and its volume, have increased tremendously, to 
the  extent  that  the  traditional  topography  or  the  key  attributes  constituting  an  international  financial 
centre are no longer adequate. The migration of financial sector activity into cyber space has begun, 
whether we like it or not. When was the last time you went into a bank? You can now conduct most 
banking transactions through the Internet, while enjoying your vacation in Phuket or having a family 
reunion  in  Whistler.  Soon  it  will  be  the  financial  intermediaries,  or  may  be  even  the  markets 
themselves, that will start to migrate into cyber space. Indeed, the boundaries arising from geography 
and time zones are breaking down for many activities, particularly those of financial markets, under the 
influence of globalisation and the revolution of information technology. 
What  then  are  the  attributes  of  a  Mach  Two  International  Financial  Centre?  And  how  does  the 
HKSARG  discharge  its  responsibility  specified  clearly  in  Article  109  of  the  Basic  Law?  These  are 
challenging questions and the legal responsibility is an onerous one. But before I attempt to answer 
these questions, I think I should, in view of the increasing emphasis in Hong Kong on accountability, 
first draw attention to where the functions and responsibilities of this task rest. 
You may not be aware of this, but the Chief Executive of the HKSARG, on 27 June last year, issued a 
public statement concerning the responsibilities of the Financial Secretary (FS) and the Secretary for 
Financial Services and the Treasury (SFST). Specifically in relation to the status of Hong Kong as an 
international financial centre, the statement specifies that: 
“FS  shall  be  responsible  for  determining  the  policy  objectives  at  a  macro  level. 
SFST  shall  be  responsible  for  formulating  specific  policies  to  achieve  such 
objectives  and 
the  regulatory 
authorities and other organisations as appropriate”. 
for  overseeing 
implementation 
through 
their 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
On  the  same  day,  the  Financial  Secretary  made  a  public  statement  concerning  the  macro  policy 
objectives  in  relation  to,  among  other  things,  the  maintenance  of  the  status  of  Hong  Kong  as  an 
international financial centre. He said that: 
“An international financial centre is a place where financial institutions from many 
different  jurisdictions  come  together  to  carry  out  financial  intermediation  of  an 
international  dimension.  The  Government  should  seek  to  maintain  and  enhance 
Hong Kong’s status as a major international financial centre. Towards this end, the 
Government should - 
a. 
maintain an appropriate economic and legal environment for an open, fair and efficient 
market, including through ensuring that Hong Kong’s laws continue to provide a level 
playing field; 
further  enhance  the  international  competitiveness  of  Hong  Kong’s  financial  services 
through promoting international financial intermediation and attracting foreign savings 
to Hong Kong; 
develop payment, clearing and settlement systems to facilitate the safe and efficient 
conduct of international and cross-border financial services in Hong Kong; and 
strengthen  corporate  governance  standards  with  a  view  to  fostering  international 
confidence in our financial markets.” 
b. 
c. 
d. 
I  think  these  macro  policy  objectives  for  the  maintenance  of  the  status  of  Hong  Kong  as  an 
international financial centre are very appropriate. Indeed, it seems that they are so appropriate that 
there has not been any difference of opinion expressed publicly since their promulgation in June last 
year. It may be that this is a reflection of a general lack of interest in the subject. I hope not. 
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority is one of the regulatory authorities responsible for implementing 
the specific policies for maintaining Hong Kong’s status as an international financial centre. You may 
have  heard  of  an  exchange  of  letters  between  the  Financial  Secretary  and  the  Monetary  Authority, 
also  in  June  last  year,  which  set  out  the  division  of  functions  and  responsibilities  in  monetary  and 
financial  affairs  between  the  two.  In  the  principal  letter,  the  Financial  Secretary  specifies  that,  in 
support of policies to maintain the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre: 
“The Monetary Authority, when discharging his responsibilities for maintaining the 
stability and integrity of the monetary and financial systems of Hong Kong, shall, in 
co-operation with other relevant authorities and organisations, seek to promote: 
a. 
the  development  of  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  to  facilitate  the  safe 
and  efficient  conduct  of  international  and  cross-border  financial  activities  in  Hong 
Kong; 
financial  systems 
confidence 
participation in international financial and central banking forums; and 
appropriate  market  development  initiatives  that  help  strengthen  the  international 
competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial services.” 
in  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  and 
through  active 
b. 
c. 
Against  this  somewhat  bureaucratic  but  politically  essential  background,  let  me  now  give  you  my 
views, for what they are worth, on a Mach Two International Financial Centre. 
As explained in the statement of the Financial Secretary last June, an international financial centre is a 
place for carrying out financial intermediation of an international dimension. This means, I think, not 
only  the  channelling  of  foreign  savings  into  Hong  Kong  investments  and  Hong  Kong  savings  into 
foreign investments. That would be too narrow an interpretation. In any case, the Hong Kong economy 
is  small  by  international  standard.  Savings  and  investments,  in  national  accounting  terms,  amount 
merely  to  HK$400  billion  a  year,  hardly  a  month’s  turnover  in  the  stock  exchange.  Financial 
intermediation  of  an  international  dimension  is,  I  think,  meant  to  include  also  the  channelling  of 
savings from one foreign jurisdiction into investments in another foreign jurisdiction, for example, US 
savings into investments in the Mainland of China, or vice versa, or German savings into Indonesian 
investments, and so on. To aspire to be an international financial centre, we must provide the platform 
whereby international financial intermediation can be conducted in Hong Kong, and for a substantial 
volume of the activity to be captured here. The question is: “How?” 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
respect for the rule of law and independence of the judiciary; 
a pool of skilled labour; 
a robust regulatory system with a light regulatory touch; 
a simple personal and corporate tax regime with a low tax rate; 
a government that is responsive to financial sector concerns; 
a stable and freely convertible currency; 
a clean and efficient government; and 
an attractive working and living environment. 
We should not, of course, forget the traditional Mach One answers. I am sure they are familiar to you 
all. They include: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
All these Mach One attributes continue to be important. They lie at the foundation of an international 
financial centre, and we must all do our best to ensure their continuity, and to strengthen them in the 
light of changing circumstances. But, as I said earlier, the dimensional jump in global finance arising 
from the globalisation of financial markets and the revolution of information technology has made them 
inadequate on their own. 
On the business side, we are now talking about, for example, the provident fund managers in a foreign 
jurisdiction who have access to up to the minute information on financial markets. They are nimble in 
making  portfolio  reallocations  among  bank  deposits,  debt  and  equity,  hopping  across  the  three 
different channels of financial intermediation and looking for financial arrangements and instruments 
that best suit their investment appetite. We are also talking about the increasing number of high net 
worth  international  citizens  who  carry  portable  computers,  and  who  are  quite  capable  of  managing 
their own finances and demanding direct access to financial markets. 
On the risk management side, we are talking about investors who are increasingly alert to risks and 
skilful in managing them. Apart from the minority who play the currency markets, the majority of them 
probably do not wish, for example, to incur the exchange rate risk of a second currency on top of that 
of the currency of the economy in which they are investing their savings. We are also talking about the 
increasing number of sophisticated market participants who are aware of the payment, clearing and 
settlement  risks  of  financial  transactions.  Receiving  a  cheque  does  not  necessarily  mean  finality  of 
payment. Striking a deal in a bond purchase does not necessarily mean that you have immediate title 
over the bonds. You do not necessarily get your US dollars or euros, when you buy them in Asian time 
zone out of Asian currencies, at the same time as you part with your money. Many of you probably still 
do not care. But increasingly you will when you realise what can happen to your money in the few 
hours of time difference in this age of information technology. I hope the wake-up call will not take the 
form of a major IT scandal in international finance. 
But let me offer a little comfort by telling you that the Mach Two International Financial Centre that I 
have in mind should go a long way towards meeting the business and risk management needs that I 
have just referred to. In fact, we have been quietly and effectively putting together the building blocks, 
plumbing and wiring to cater for those needs and enable Hong Kong to attain that Mach Two status. I 
think we are some way ahead of others in this effort, but quite a lot still needs to be done. And we 
need  more  time,  effort,  support  and  understanding  of  the  community,  particularly  the  financial 
community, parts of which may have a vested interest in the maintenance of the status quo. 
What  then  are  the  additional  attributes  that  qualify  a  Mach  One  International  Financial  Centre  as  a 
Mach Two? There are, as far as I can identify, four such attributes. 
The  first  attribute  is  the  more  obvious  one  and  this  is  the  existence  of  financial  intermediation 
channels  that  are  characterised  by  stability,  integrity,  diversity  and  efficiency.  I  believe  our  financial 
intermediation  channels  of  banking,  equity  and  debt,  and  their  derivatives,  already  enjoy  these 
characteristics. For many years after the series of banking crises in the eighties, the banking system 
has been serving as a reliable conduit for absorbing domestic as well as international savings, and 
channelling  them  to  those  who  borrow  funds.  Greater  competition,  particularly  after  interest  rate 
liberalisation, has increased efficiency and benefited borrowers. The many mortgagers of Hong Kong, 
for example, are now enjoying a mortgage interest rate, relative to prime, that is four percentage points 
less than six years ago. And greater depositor protection is on the way with the planned introduction of 
deposit insurance. The sharing of commercial as well as consumer credit information also helps those 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 3
with good credit standing to have ready access to funds, and at favourable interest rates. As banking 
supervisor we attach great importance to promoting “the general stability and effective working of the 
banking system” - a requirement that is clearly stated in the preamble of the Banking Ordinance. We 
take this responsibility seriously and have been able to work with the banks to ensure that confidence 
in  this  traditional  and  essential  financial  intermediation  channel  remains  high,  even  against  most 
unfavourable circumstances, such as those of the past few years. 
Similar progress has been made in the regulation of the equity market by the Securities and Futures 
Commission.  Long  gone  are  the  days  when  the  equity  market  was  run  by,  and  primarily  for,  the 
financial intermediaries rather than as a channel for financial intermediation. Long gone are the days 
when the market can be closed for days and this important financial intermediation channel brutally 
disrupted because the financial intermediaries got into difficulties. There is greater realisation now of 
the role of the stock exchange as a secondary market that provides the bedrock for the primary IPO 
market,  which  channels  savings  into  investments  to  promote  economic  growth  and  development. 
There  is  now  much  greater  appreciation  that  this  public  interest  is  of  importance  that  overrides  the 
private interest of financial intermediaries. Improvements seen in that market in the past decade have 
gone  way  beyond  the  governance  of  the  market  place  to  greater  market  transparency,  which  has 
enabled it to meet the best international standards. 
But in the diversity of financial intermediation channels, Hong Kong is still behind because the flow of 
funds  through  the  debt  channel  remains,  relatively  speaking,  small.  This  is  notwithstanding  our 
considerable efforts since 1990 to bring debt issues to the market, principally in the form of Exchange 
Fund  paper,  which  now  has  an outstanding  amount  of  HK$120 billion.  We have  also established  a 
reliable benchmark yield curve for Hong Kong dollar debt of up to ten-year maturity to assist private 
sector issuers in their pricing and built an efficient, paperless debt clearing system for the market as a 
whole. Perhaps a long period of low and sometimes negative real interest rates in the nineties was a 
disincentive for debt issues by the private sector. Indeed, the significantly positive real interest rates of 
the past few years and low nominal interest rates seem to have made a difference in both the number 
of and the amount involved in debt issues brought to the market. We need to sustain our efforts in the 
development  of  the  debt  market.  The  diversity  of  financial  intermediation  channels  is  not  only  an 
important  attribute  of  an  international  financial  centre:  it  is  also  essential  to  the  maintenance  of 
financial stability. Diversity reduces dependence on a particular financial intermediation channel, which 
in turn reduces the risk of systemic problems that seriously disrupt the normal conduct of economic 
activities in the event of a crisis in that channel. 
The  second  attribute  that  makes  a  Mach  Two  International  Financial  Centre  is  the  existence  of  a 
platform  for  financial  transactions  to  be  conducted  in  the  major  foreign  currencies  as  well as  in  the 
domestic currency. Foreign savings, particularly those with institutionalised management, tend to have 
a  small  appetite,  if  any,  in  the  assumption  of  currency  risks  in  seeking  investment  opportunities 
overseas. Hedging currency risks, when exposed to a relatively minor currency like the Hong Kong 
dollar, notwithstanding the exchange rate stability it has demonstrated over the past twenty years, can 
be expensive, to the extent of undermining the attraction of those investment opportunities. Currency 
hedging is even more difficult for investments in a jurisdiction with a non-convertible currency. I believe 
foreign  investors’  interests  in  the  many  financial  products  available  in  Hong  Kong,  not  least  those 
allowing participation in the rapid development in the Mainland, may be considerably enhanced if there 
is a choice in currency denomination for those products. This would also reduce the large capital flows 
into and out of our currency, which we get for example whenever there is a large IPO, and strengthen 
currency stability. 
Furthermore, from when New York goes to bed and before London wakes up the next day, there are 
quite a few working hours in which activity in the markets for financial instruments denominated in the 
US dollar and the euro traditionally goes into a lull. But financial globalisation will increasingly demand 
24-hour markets, not only those with over-the-counter trading but also those with a physical market 
place in the form, for example, of a stock exchange. Jurisdictions in our time zone collectively are a 
net lender to those in the other two time zones, and much of such lending takes the form of holdings of 
foreign  assets  denominated  in  the  two  large  currencies.  About  60%  of  the  world’s  foreign  currency 
reserves are held by jurisdictions in this time zone. Some of us would obviously welcome, and may 
even demand, the facility for managing our foreign assets in our time zone, not just to avoid having to 
stay up late, but also to avoid unnecessary delays to the execution of investment decisions. Events do 
occur in our time zone that move financial markets denominated in the US dollar and the euro. 
Whether  it  is  to  facilitate  the  management  of  currency  risks  by  investors,  or  our  management  of 
currency stability, or to complete the 24-hour trading loop for global financial instruments, there is a 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2004
growing  need  for  a  liquid  platform  in  our  time  zone  for  conducting  financial  transactions  in  foreign 
currencies.  However,  it  has  not  been  easy  to  acquire  this  particular  attribute  of  a  Mach  Two 
International Financial Centre. The difficulty lies in the understandable resistance against any intrusion 
into  the  proprietary  rights  over  the  market  place  of  individual  jurisdictions.  The  origins  of,  and  the 
justifications  for,  financial  markets  are  invariably  domestic  in  nature.  While  markets  have  become 
global,  market  structures  have  remained  largely  domestic.  There  are  not  a  lot  of  incentives  for  the 
largest markets to go global in terms of crossing time zones and denominating products also in foreign 
currencies.  The  hitherto  high  degree  of  domestic  orientation  of  those  markets  means  that  they  can 
afford such an attitude, but the high savings rate of Asia and its rapid accumulation of foreign reserves 
will force a change in that orientation, if this has not already taken place. Last year the net purchase of 
US Treasuries by ten Asian economies amounted to US$193.2 billion: this is almost 60% of the net 
increase in the supply of such paper. So far, there has been some progress in the form of the global 
harmonisation of standards and “strategic” linkages between equity markets in different jurisdictions, 
and  Hong  Kong  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  these  developments.  We  remain  alert  to  further 
opportunities. 
The  platform  for  the  conduct  of  financial  transactions  in  foreign  currencies  has  to  be  supported  by 
robust  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  This  is  the  third  attribute  of  a  Mach  Two 
International Financial Centre. The revolution in information technology has sped up the transmission 
of information tremendously. This also means a much higher speed in the movement of international 
capital and much higher settlement risks for financial transactions. Fortunately, information technology 
can  also  be  applied  to  the  prudent  management  of  settlement  risks.  The  question  is  whether  the 
authorities  responsible  for  the  financial  infrastructure  are  adequately  tuned  in.  When  you  are  living 
comfortably  at  home,  you  seldom  notice  the  importance  of  the  proper  functioning  of  the  plumbing, 
electricity and gas systems, until a failure occurs. A failure in the financial infrastructure can be quite 
damaging  to  the  integrity  of  and  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  and  if  this  occurs  in  an 
international financial centre the implications can be quite serious. 
In this age of information technology, the payment, clearing and settlement systems, particularly of an 
international financial centre, should be structured in a manner that minimises the risks of failure in the 
settlement of financial transactions. Let me make four brief points about the nuts and bolts of these 
systems. First, these systems should be designed to achieve real time gross settlement (RTGS) at 
least  for  large  financial  transactions,  delivery  versus  payment  (DVP)  for  the  trading  of  financial 
instruments  and  payment  versus  payment  (PVP)  for  foreign  exchange  transactions.  Secondly,  we 
have  already  made  significant  progress  in  building  such  a  financial  infrastructure.  We  are  clearly 
ahead of other financial centres in this, with operating RTGS systems for the US dollar, the euro and 
of course our domestic currency the Hong Kong dollar, and these systems are all linked up to provide 
PVP. Thirdly, we intend, as the next step and as you might have guessed, to include the renminbi in 
this  infrastructure  as  soon  as  circumstances  permit,  a  move  that  will  cement  our  position  as  the 
international financial centre of China. Our experience in building these systems puts us in a strong 
position to do so. We need a lead-time of only six to nine months to include an additional currency in 
our payment infrastructure. Fourthly, I urge all of you as significant users of financial services to use 
these systems and manage the settlement risks of your financial transactions. Your bankers should be 
able to help you to obtain the comfort of getting what you have bought at the same time as you paid 
for it. 
The  fourth  attribute  of  a  Mach  Two 
the  availability  of 
multidimensional and direct access to all that I have talked about just now - the channels of financial 
intermediation, the platforms for the conduct of financial transactions and the payment and settlement 
systems. Direct access to financial services should be available at the wholesale and retail levels, to 
financial  intermediaries  and  principals,  including  issuers  and  investors,  regardless  of  geographical 
boundaries. There is increasing demand for greater convenience and more direct access, given that 
modern information technology is quite capable of accommodating such demands. The market place 
for  finance  no  longer  requires  a  physical  location.  The  need  for  financial  intermediaries  is  also 
decreasing.  Technology  also  promises  finer  bid-ask  spreads  for  your  trades;  lower  transaction, 
settlement  and  custodian  costs;  and  instant  access  to  your  computerised  account  holding  your 
deposits,  debt  securities  and  stocks  of  various  currency  denominations.  Even  as  a  borrower,  you 
should,  on  the  basis  of  your  established  credit  rating  and  your  credit  history  that  are  available  to 
banks,  be  able  to  get  onto  your  computer  screen  competitive  offers  for  money.  This  is  not  too 
far-fetched. We are almost there for residential mortgages, except for the need to access a multiple of 
bank web-sites rather than a single one. 
International  Financial  Centre 
is 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 5
There is, understandably, some resistance against progress in this direction. It is natural, for example, 
that the intermediaries would resist disintermediation, even though it promises greater efficiency in the 
intermediation of funds to the benefit of the economy. Institutional rigidities, whether or not arising from 
the passage of time or from technological innovation, are always difficult to resolve to the satisfaction 
of  the  affected  parties,  particularly  when  some  are  enshrined  in  legislation.  So  the  achievement  of 
multidimensional access to financial services is likely to take a little more time than the achievement of 
the other three attributes of a Mach Two International Financial Centre. One helpful initiative may be to 
develop greater appreciation of the public interest among all concerned. But I am confident that market 
forces will assist in promoting the necessary changes, with or without the involvement of Government 
or the supervisory authorities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I hope this conducted tour of Two IFC has not been too boring to you. My aim 
has been to offer some views on how Hong Kong is developing as an IFC and what we need to do to 
maintain  the  edge  that  we  undoubtedly  have  in  our  financial  infrastructure.  As  users  of  that 
infrastructure, you will probably have views and perspectives of your own, and I would be most happy 
to discuss these and answer questions. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2004
