Bandid Nijathaworn: Thailand’s economic conditions and prospects - a 
mid-year update 
Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at a luncheon organised 
by the Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, 27 August 2004. 
 Let me begin first by thanking the Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce for the invitation to speak to 
you today. For the Australian-Thai Chamber, this is the first for me and I am very pleased to be here. 
Today,  I  plan  to  cover  the  evolving  economic  pictures  both  at  home  and  abroad.  For  the  global 
economy,  a  number  of  interesting  new  themes  are  now  emerging  and  I  will  try  to  put  these 
developments into the perspective as we understand it at the Bank of Thailand. 
As for the domestic economy, despite a number of risks and challenges, this year the economy has 
managed  well  under  the  circumstances.  Growth  momentum  remains  firm  and  economic  stability 
remains intact. Today, I will not open up any new kind of inquiry on the Thai economy, but will simply 
update you on the recent economic outturn and explain the rationale behind this week's decision by 
the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  increase  the  policy  interest  rate.  This  decision,  which  is  the  first 
increase in three years, has been expected by the market following signs of increased pressure on 
domestic prices and following our own assessment and communication to the market that low interest 
rates have become less necessary given the changed outlook on inflation. 
Let me begin with the global economy. 
At present, it is still very much the case of a firm recovery in the global economy continuing into the 
first half of this year. Growth of the G3 economies for first half of the year is estimated at 4.9 percent 
for the US, 5.2 percent for Japan, and 1.9 percent for the EU, all accelerating from the rates of growth 
observed in the second half of last year. For the whole of this year, even allowing for the recent higher 
oil prices, market still anticipates a continued recovery in the global economy driven by the economic 
expansion  in  the  US,  Japan,  and  Asia.  The  latest  consensus  forecast  now  puts  global  economic 
growth this year at about 4 percent, significantly higher than the average of the past three years. 
To put these numbers into perspective, it is worthwhile to note that sentiment on the global economy 
at this time is less robust than the perception we had six months ago. This change has been driven in 
part by the recognition that the reversal of several important factors that had been supporting global 
growth  since  the  second  half  of  last  year  is  now  beginning  to  impact  the  global  economy.  The  key 
factors  I  am  referring  to  here  include  the  higher  oil  prices,  the  rising  global  interest  rates,  and  the 
slowing  of  the  Chinese  economy.  While  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy  remains  firm,  the 
persistently higher oil prices and some softness in the recent US data have shifted the balance of risks 
more to the downside. The key issue at this time is thus the oil prices, and the key question is how the 
higher oil prices will affect the global economy going forward. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This  year  prices  of  oil  have  gone  up  by  more  than  40  percent.  The  Dubai  price,  which  is  the  key 
reference price for Thailand, went up from last year’s average of US$ 27 per barrel to now about US$ 
39 per barrel. Domestic retail oil prices, however, have gone up by less because of the price support 
scheme that the Government has been running. This has helped limit the immediate effects of the high 
global oil prices on the economy. But notwithstanding the subsidies, domestic inflation has been rising. 
Headline  CPI  inflation,  for  example,  rose  to  3.1  percent  in  July.  At  this  time,  we  believe  there  is 
substantial  price  pressure  building  up  in  the  economy  that  could  eventually  translate  into  higher 
consumer prices once the proft margin is adequately squeezed. This pent - up price pressure is linked 
not only to the higher global oil prices that have yet to be passed through to the consumer prices, but 
also to the continued high level of capacity utilization and to the reported tightening in some segments 
of the labour market. 
The risk to global growth from higher oil prices is now an issue that captures the attention of financial 
markets. Compared to the previous episodes of high oil prices, this time the high oil prices could very 
well persist longer because the increase has been driven by the rise in global energy demand as well 
as by supply disruptions. But because the oil prices in real terms are still lower than the peak levels 
during the oil crisis of the 1980’s, while the global economy has also become less dependent on oil, 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
common wisdom at this time is that the higher oil prices will put pressure on global growth and inflation 
but will not in itself derail the ongoing momentum of global recovery. 
As for the rise in interest rates, the risk to global growth coming from higher global interest rates so far 
looks less threatening. This is because interest rates especially in the US are being increased from 
very  low  levels  and  are  being  done  gradually.  In  the  case  of  the  US,  the  increase  is  more  of  an 
indication  that  the  Fed  is  regarding  the  current  recovery  as  being  solid.  Moreover,  because  the 
increase  in  rates  is  good  for  maintaining  economic  stability  as  well  as  for  addressing  global 
imbalances, the increase in interest rates should be seen as a good thing and should be welcomed. 
Against this background, we at the Bank of Thailand see the global recovery continuing firmly in the 
short term despite the higher oil prices. This year, Thailand’s export market - as measured by GDP 
growth of our major trading partners - is expected to grow by about 5 percent. This growth will be the 
key factor supporting our exports this year. At the same time, Thailand’s exports to China continues to 
expand,  though  at  a  lower  rate  compared  to  last  year’s.  Hence,  the  effect  of  the  slowing  Chinese 
economy on our exports is a factor that should be monitored closely. 
For  the  first  half  of  this  year,  I  am  happy  to  report  that  Thailand’s  exports  to  Australia  grew  by 
16.6 percent while  imports  from  Australia  grew by  38  percent.  Australia  is  now  Thailand’s 11th  and 
12th largest trading partner on exports and imports, respectively, claiming a share of 2.3 percent of 
Thailand’s total trade. And with the recent conclusion of the bilateral free trade agreement between 
our two countries, trade between our two economies is likely to grow and grow. 
As for the global financial markets, let me just say briefly that this year global financial markets have 
been  dominated  by  the  changing  expectations  about  the  pace  and  the  timing  of  monetary  policy 
tightening in the US. And this has led to a global repricing of financial assets and some reversal of 
international capital fows, especially away from emerging markets. So far, the repricing of assets and 
the unwinding of positions have been quite orderly and the financing of the US current account deficit 
continues to be smooth. In broad terms, bond yields have increased, equity prices have declined, and 
the US dollar has appreciated in nominal effective terms. 
In terms of policy, the key issue in the global economy now is how to manage the transition to a higher 
interest rates environment so as to safeguard economic stability in view of the continued firm growth. 
Another is the management of the risk that higher oil prices might affect the global recovery. And the 
third is the issue of addressing the major global imbalances without creating serious volatilities to the 
financial markets. 
Let me turn now to the domestic economy. 
This year a theme that has kept recurring in my presentation of the Thai economy is that of risks and 
adjustment. This is to say that, for Thailand, this year has been a year of greater risks and the key 
theme has been adjusting to risks as the global economic and financial environment has become less 
helpful. 
The key external pressure an the Thai economy throughout this year has been the higher oil prices, 
the  higher  global  interest  rates,  and  the  potential  impact  an  our  exports  of  a  slowing  Chinese 
economy.  
This year, we also have our own domestic challenges. These include the two episodes of bird flu that 
have  affected  production  and  exports  of  poultry,  and  the  uncertainty  linked  to  the  situations  in  the 
south which has importantly affected consumer confidence and business sentiment. 
So, for the most part, the performance of the Thai economy this year is essentially a story of how the 
domestic  economy  has  been  adjusting  to  the  risks  that  emerged.  This  includes  adjustments  in  the 
domestic  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy,  as  well  as  the  implications  for  economic  and 
financial stability. Let me go through each of these points in turn. 
As for the domestic financial markets, the adjustment has been led by the repricing of financial assets 
that  has  been  underway  since  the  second  quarter.  Yields  on  long  bonds  have  been  rising.  Equity 
prices  have  declined.  There  have  been  some  outflows  of  short  -  term  capital,  and  the  Baht  has 
weakened from last year. In all, the adjustment has been smooth and orderly, and has benefited from 
the flexible market mechanism that underpins the movements of the economy’s key prices. 
And for the real economy, the adjustment has been accompanied by a moderation in growth in the first 
quarter to 6.5 percent, led by the slowdown in agriculture because of drought and the bird flu. Output 
of manufacturing and services, however, has continued to expand robustly. On the demand side, the 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
dampened consumer confidence has moderated the momentum of private consumption in the first half 
of the year, but private investment and exports have expanded well and have been the key drivers of 
growth so far this year. On this point, it is comforting to note that domestic demand expansion has 
benefited  increasingly  more  from  the  pick-up  in  credit  extension,  driven  by  ample  liquidity  in  the 
system. Private credit growth was a high 9 percent at end-June. 
Turning to economic stability, with continued growth, pressure on resources has become more visible 
this year with output gap continuing to close, inflation rising, the trade surplus narrowing and some 
tightening in the labour market reported. Overall external stability, on the other hand, remains strong 
with continued current account surpluses, falling external debt, and higher international reserves. But 
the higher oil prices and the rebound in investment have evidently put greater pressure on imports and 
the trade balance. 
One thing that we have been monitoring more closely this year is financial stability. Some indicators of 
financial  fragilities  are  rising.  These  include  rising  household  indebtedness  and  a  very  active  real 
estate  sector.  Although  there  are  no  signs  of  overheating  as  yet  in  these  two  sectors,  their 
developments  need  to  be  monitored  closely  especially  with  the  credit  cycle  now  turning.  This  is 
because  they  have  the  potential  to  become  a  source  of  financial  fragility  if  their  growths  are  left 
unchecked. 
In  all,  the  domestic  economy  seems  to  have  adjusted  well  to  the  greater  risks  and  challenges  that 
have emerged. The pace of growth has moderated from last year’s but the overall growth momentum 
still looks firm and economic stability remains sound. The key issue going forward is the risk posed by 
the higher oil prices to the outlook on domestic growth and inflation. And under a more pessimistic 
scenario,  an  important  question  is  how  resilient  is  the  domestic  economy  to  absorb  a  much  larger 
shock, this is to say persistently higher oil prices. 
In the meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee last Wednesday, members of the Monetary Policy 
Committee spent considerable time discussing this type of questions based an preliminary analyses 
prepared  by  our  staffs  at  the  Bank  of  Thailand.  While  the  numbers  are  still  preliminary,  the  results 
seem to suggest a greater trade-off between growth and inflation going forward. In particular, higher oil 
prices will adversely affect both growth and inflation, but the effects on inflation is projected to be more 
pronounced because of the pent-up pressure on prices as mentioned earlier. 
Reflecting this, the Committee felt that the risks to economic stability have increased with higher oil 
prices and it is only proper that monetary policy should be vigilant on inflation. 
So, with the recovery momentum remaining firm but the risks to economic stability rising, the Monetary 
Policy Committee saw less need for maintaining low interest rates and felt that the monetary policy 
stance should be adjusted to give priority to economic stability, with the adjustment being gradually 
paced. 
This is essentially the rationale behind the decision on Wednesday by the Monetary Policy Committee 
to raise the policy interest rate by 25 basis points. 
At  this  juncture,  many  of  you  may  wonder  whether  higher  oil  prices  together  with  higher  domestic 
interest rates might be too punitive to the health of the domestic economy. 
Let me say that we have looked carefully at this issue and are of the opinion that the growth 
momentum at this time is quite firm. Although the adverse effects an growth from higher domestic 
interest rates will be there, the effects will not be large to the extent that they will derail the ongoing 
momentum of recovery. This is because the fundamentals of the economy at present are quite good, 
and with a strong fiscal position, these two factors should allow the economy to flexibly adjust to the 
negative shocks without interrupting the momentum of growth. On the contrary, the early rise in 
domestic interest rates will help maintain macroeconomic stability which is cruial for sustaining 
economic growth in the medium term.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A few weeks ago, I had the good fortune of visiting both Melbourne and Sydney and came across this 
concept of a cleanskin wine. For those of you who have not been home for a while, cleanskin wine is 
quality wine that is sold more cheaply because it is unlabeled. So, you are getting something good but 
you don’t know why because you don’t know what it is. 
Half an hour ago, the Thai economy this year to many of you was like cleanskin wine. You know the 
economy is doing better but you don’t know why. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
In this brief space of time, I hope I have given you an adequate account of how we at the Bank of 
Thailand  see  the  Thai  economy  evolving  this  year,  and  hopefully  have  helped  improve  your 
understandings of the economy. 
As  with  the  cleanskin  wine,  I  will  definitely  go  back  for  more.  I  only  hope  you  will  do  the  same  by 
continuing  to  have  confidence  in  the  Thai  economy  and  remain  a  trusted  friend  and  a  dependable 
partner of Thailand for many many years to come. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2004
