Zhou Xiaochuan: Some considerations in the study of monetary policy 
transmission 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, Beijing, 13 April 2004. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
This  high-level  seminar  on  China’s  Monetary  Policy  Transmission  Mechanism  jointly  held  by  the 
People’s  Bank  of  China  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is  an  important  and  meaningful 
cooperation  between  the  PBC  and  the  IMF.  First  of  all,  on  behalf  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  I 
would like to express the warmest congratulations on the opening of this seminar and the most sincere 
welcome and appreciation to foreign experts headed by Mr. Lipschitz, Director of the IMF institute, and 
the Chinese experts and scholars present at this seminar. During the meeting, Mr. Marvin Goodfriend 
discussed  the  analysis  framework  for  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism;  Mr.  Hervé  Ferhani 
presented on the impact of banking soundness and competitiveness on monetary policy transmission 
mechanism;  Mr.  Lajos  Bokros,  Director  of  the  World  Bank  financial  services  advisor/  Europe  and 
Central  Asia  office  and  Prof.  Bennett  T.  McCallum  from  Carnegie  Mellon  University  spoke  on  the 
experience  of  post-transition  and  industrial  countries  respectively;  and  this  afternoon,  Prof.  Noriyuki 
Takayama  from  Hitotsubashi  University  will  talk  about  the  impact  of  ageing  and  social  securities 
system  on  monetary  policy  transmission  from  the  Japanese  experience.  Their  research  and 
presentations are very helpful for us to learn the useful country experience and further improve the 
monetary  policy  transmission  and  adjustment  mechanism.  With  respect  to  China’s  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism, I would like to add the following points: 
I. 
The  study  of  monetary  policy  transmission  should  be  attentive  to  the  micro 
foundation,  and  to  the  sensitivity,  speed  and  effects  of  banks’  and  other  financial 
institutions’ response to monetary policy. Only with a sound micro foundation, could 
monetary policy transmission mechanism be improved. 
In recent years, in order to establish a micro foundation sensitive to price signals, much importance 
has been attached to strengthening corporate governance and the role of shareholder value. Whether 
economic agencies at the micro level are profit-maximizing has direct impact on the monetary policy 
transmission  and  its  effectiveness.  If  micro  economic  agencies  are  not  profit  maximizing,  it  is  no 
surprise that price instruments of monetary policy hardly works. 
With the deepening of the economic reform, it can be observed that financial institutions are gradually 
moving towards profit maximization, though still far from what would have been in a market economy. 
Some financial institutions, especially large ones, have not shed the bureaucracy-oriented mentality, a 
legacy  of  the  centralized  economy.  In  their  business  objectives,  personal  promotion  is  usually 
prioritized  over  profit  indicators,  which  will  definitely  affect  the  transmission  of  price  instruments  of 
monetary policy. 
In order to enhance the micro foundation, China has been strengthening financial supervision over the 
years. It should be noted that the choice of regulatory intensity and indicators has direct impact on 
monetary  policy  effectiveness.  For  instance,  with  increasing  concern  on  the  rise  of  non-performing 
loans  (NPL),  the  regulatory  authority  required  that  NPL  ratio  be  reduced  to  a  certain  level.  This 
regulatory  indicator  played  its  role  to  the  extent  that  commercial  banks  did  reduce  NPL  ratios. 
However,  in  order  to  comply  with  the  regulatory  requirement  of  lower  NPL  ratio,  some  financial 
institutions  increased  lending  in  an  attempt  to  inflate  the  denominator  and  grow  out  of  the  NPL 
problem. This exacerbated the excessive credit growth problem. At this point, some people started to 
realize that we should worry not only about the NPL ratios, but also the quantity of NPLs. Again, this 
was  also  an  over-simplified  perception.  It  was  only  after  some  time  of  market  development,  much 
experience and years of discussion, that consensus was finally reached in 2003 on the importance of 
capital  adequacy.  Only  when  agencies  at  the  micro  level  put  in  place  risk  control  and  capital 
constraint, could monetary policy transmission mechanism work. 
The Chinese financial community has always watched the evolution of the Basel Accord closely. As 
early  as  in  1994,  the  PBC  initiated  the  regulatory  indicators  on  commercial  bank’s  capital  in  its 
circular 38 entitled “Notification on Balance Sheet Management of Commercial Banks”, and required 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 1
that the ratio of monthly average capital of commercial banks to monthly average risk-weighted assets 
be  no  less  than  8  percent,  while  the  ratio  of  average  core  capital  of  commercial  banks  to  monthly 
average risk-weighted assets be no less than 4 percent. The Commercial Banking Act of 1995 also 
stipulated that capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of commercial banks be no less than 8 percent. 
However, for an extended period of time, no regulatory actions were ever taken against banks with 
inadequate capital. Concession was even allowed in the calculation of CAR. Compromise was made 
in  the  loan  asset  classification  and  bad  debt  provisioning  rules  in  1997.  In  the  absence  of  realistic 
classification  and  sufficient  risk  provisioning,  CAR  can  hardly  indicate  the  risk  of  the  bank.  These 
problems made it impossible for bank regulatory rules to rein in the excessive credit expansion of the 
commercial banks. The result was that bank rules were not fully implemented and capital ratio was 
notably inadequate. 
In fact, the Basel Accord is a comprehensive regulatory and internal assessment system. Its essential 
indicator, capital adequacy ratio embraces earning objective while effectively containing the excessive 
expansion  of  the  bank.  The  numerator  of  CAR  indicates  the  capital  adequacy  of  the  bank  and 
robustness of the buffer against shocks. The more capital, the more resilient a bank is against risks. 
Meanwhile, dynamics of capital depends on retained profit. When a bank calls for additional capital, 
the investors look at the earnings of the bank. An unprofitable bank can hardly attract external finance. 
In  addition,  expansion  through  merger  and  acquisition  is  also  subject  to  capital  constraint.  The 
denominator of CAR assigns different risk weights to assets so as to drive banks towards less risky 
business and away from high risk business. Risky business must be supported by more capital. This 
effectively contains the excessive growth of risky assets. The Basel II initiated the so-called “internal 
rating base” (IRB), encouraging banks to identify asset risks through internal rating system. The risk 
weighting  system  encourages  non-asset  business,  or  commission-based  business.  The  Accord  will 
also  boost  asset  securitization  since  securitization  lowers  risk  level  of  assets  thus  lowers  capital 
requirements.  In  a  way,  it  encourages  banks  to  shift,  sterilize  and  lower  risks  by  all  means.  In  this 
sense,  such  an  indicator  is  a  combination  of  incentive  and  control  mechanisms,  while  encouraging 
technical innovations to improve credit asset quality. 
Nevertheless,  a  principal  problem  in  applying  CAR  to  Chinese  banking  institutions  is  that  different 
banks bear different historical legacy, which is difficult to measure by a unified standard. This historical 
problem  should  be  solved  by  more  aggressive  reforms  before  more  stringent  regulations  could  be 
applied  and  serve  as  the  core  objective  to  improve  their  corporate  governance  and  business 
operation. In this spirit, in 2003, the China Banking Regulatory Commission initiated the 3-year plan for 
banks to comply with Basel II. 
Some  technical  issues  deserve  attention,  which,  if  not  properly  dealt  with,  may  dampen  the 
effectiveness  of  the  policy.  For  instance,  for  banks  with  inadequate  capital,  the  so-called  “shadow 
calculation” may leave a lot of leeway. For banks with lower than 4 percent of capital adequacy ratio, 
strict regulatory measures have been taken. However, for banks with capital ratio sliding down from 
8 percent to 4 percent, no adequate restrictions are imposed. In this respect the differentiated reserve 
requirement ratio to be applied from April 25 will help regulatory implementation. In sum, only when 
the micro foundation with well-defined business objectives and control mechanisms is in place, could 
monetary policy transmission work. 
II. 
In a transition economy, policy-makers tend to rely on quantity measures and avoid 
price instruments. In fact, the experience of price reform shows that price mechanism 
is often more effective than expected. 
Monetary policy transmission mechanism to a great extent determines the choice of instruments. In 
the  monetary  policy  conduct,  there  have  always  been  disputes  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  price  and 
quantity instruments. Currently, price instruments such as interest rate and exchange rate coexist with 
quantity instruments such as liquidity absorption and foreign exchange control. 
For an extended period of time in China, quantity measures were preferred while price instruments 
were seldom used. This was the expediency given the constraints of the transmission mechanism as 
well  as  the  result  of  the  policy  legacy  from  the  demand  economy  mentality.  A  centrally  planned 
economy  emphasized  quantity  control.  When  demand  and  supply  are  out  of  balance,  quantity 
indicators are often imposed to increase supply or contain demand. The same mentality, when applied 
to  the  financial  sector,  tends  to  tighten  liquidity  when  there  is  inflationary  pressure,  and  in  the 
sequence of policy choice, price instruments are only considered after quantity control. Some believe 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2004
that in financial sector transition, the borrowers, e.g. the SOEs, and lenders, e.g. state-owned banks 
are  not  sensitive  to  price  movements.  However,  empirical  studies  did  not  support  this  assumption. 
China has been gradually moving to focus on the use of price instruments. An example would be that 
when inflationary pressure emerged at the beginning of this year, the central bank adjusted its lending 
rate and rediscount rate. 
As a matter of fact, the effects of and responsiveness to price instruments usually turn out far better 
than  expected.  Examples  are  abundant.  It  is  foreseeable  that  with  market  liberalization  of  the 
economy, price mechanism will play a more prominent role and there will be more willingness to use 
price instruments. It should be noted that when the actual price is close to equilibrium, price is elastic 
and price instruments are more effective. Whereas if the actual price is too far from equilibrium, price 
may not longer be elastic and price instruments cease to be effective. This can be proved by empirical 
analysis. 
III. 
The  study  of  monetary  policy  transmission  should  also  look  at  the  game  between 
macro adjustment and micro agencies. 
The decision-making process and policy implementation have always been a game between macro 
adjustment and micro agencies. “When there is a policy, there are countermeasures to circumvent the 
policy”  would  be  a  vivid  description  of  this  game  relation.  Monetary  policy  transmission  and  its 
effectiveness are no exception. Any information structures and monetary policy conduct models will 
affect  the  monetary  policy  transmission.  For  instance,  market  can  often  find  ways  to  preempt  a 
monetary policy measure or sterilize its effects through ex post actions. Changes in the asset portfolio 
can help evade policy restrictions. An excellent example would be the textbook version of how micro 
agency could minimize the effects of official reserve requirement. 
In a transition economy, political bargaining and lobbying for “exemption” should be guarded against. 
In the transition process, due to difference of regions and sectors, to a policy that would have been 
applicable across the board, there will be large number of applications for “exemption”. In the financial 
sector, since quite a number of financial institutions have a variety of policy lendings as a historical 
legacy,  any  restrictive  policy  may  arouse  one-to-one  bargaining  and  dampen  the  monetary  policy 
effects.  For  instance,  central  bank  lending  was  originally  designed  to  provide  short-term  liquidity 
assistance, but evolved to be persistently abused for all sorts of reasons. When a change in central 
bank lending rate is called for, there will be bargaining for exemption. The floating lending rate recently 
adopted by the central bank was to curb the one-to-one bargaining bahavior in principle. Otherwise, 
central bank lending rate as a monetary policy instrument will fail in the transmission. 
IV. 
The  study  of  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  should  care  about  incentive 
mechanism. 
For an extended period of time, no sufficient importance has been attached to incentives. The current 
situation in China is that banks with good or bad performance have little difference in terms of rewards. 
In order for policies to be effective, positive incentives must be put in place to break the old system of 
“eating from the same big pot”, and “same reward for good and bad performers”. The phenomena of 
the “subsidizing the lean by exploiting the strong” or “the fast oxen get whipped “ should be guarded 
against.  Distorted  incentives  will  not  only  bring  down  a  good  bank,  but  also  result  in  “adverse 
selection” and “moral hazards”. There are ample examples in the financial sector. For instance, good 
performers  in  terms  of  earnings,  tax  payment  and  share-holder  return  are  usually  not  positively 
rewarded,  whereas  financial  institutions  in  distress  are  often  the  priority  of  re-capitalization  and 
favorable NPL disposal policies. It is worth noting that with market developments, the capital market 
will  promptly  catch  the  differences  among  banks.  With  corporate  restructuring  and  eventual  public 
listing  of  the  state-owned  commercial  banks,  the  market  will  gradually  play  the  role  of  incentive 
mechanism, thus enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission. 
In  this  respect,  we  can  learn  a  good  deal  from  the  experience  of  countries  of  more  mature  market 
economy.  And  prompt  corrective  action  (PCA)  is  a  valuable  tool.  Measures  must  be  available  to 
impose sufficient external pressure on financial institutions whose risk profile and asset quality worsen. 
These  actions  also  carry  the  unmistaken  messages  that  poor  performance  is  not  welcomed  but 
restricted. A typical example would be the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation Improvement Act 
(FDICIA) of 1991. The main content of the act is capital adequacy categories and their corresponding 
corrective  actions.  Banks  with  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  10  percent  and  more  are  defined  as 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 3
adequately capitalized. When capital ratio slides to 8 percent, mandatory corrective actions such as 
“may not take trust deposits” is imposed. Banks of lower than 8 percent capital are “under capitalized” 
and the correction actions include “may not take trust deposits; may not make any capital distribution 
or pay a management fee; growth of total assets must be restricted; must submit capital restoration 
plan and prior approval is required to acquisitions, branching, and new lines of business and some 
discretionary actions”. Additional discretionary corrective actions may be imposed. Fro banks of lower 
than  6  percent  capital,  in  addition  to  the  above  measures,  “transactions  with  alliance  must  be 
restricted; interest rates paid on deposits, and bonuses and salary raises to senior executives officers 
must be restricted”. Banks with under 4 percent capital adequacy ratio are “critically undercapitalized”, 
and must be prohibited from paying interest on subordinated debts and activities must be restricted. If 
things do not improve within 4 quarters, they must be placed under receivership. These actions proved 
effective in containing the business expansion of risky institutions and prevent risk from worsening. 
Currently,  a  large  number  of  countries  have  adopted  different  PCA  systems.  We  would  say  the 
differentiated  reserve  requirement  ratio  is  an  experiment  to  establish  positive  incentives  under  the 
given  circumstances  in  China.  In  any  country,  because  of  the  differences  in  the  legal  system  and 
regulatory authority, agencies have different competence and tools at hand. Therefore, it often calls for 
a  combination  of  forces  and  measures  to  implement  such  PCAs.  Currently  in  China,  the  incentive 
system is vulnerable. Reform will be accelerated to solve the historical problem and lay the level field 
for  competition.  Only  when  incentive system  is  established  and  improved  to  guard  against “reverse 
selection” and “moral hazards”, could the effectiveness of monetary policy be ultimately assured. 
V. 
The  study  of  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  should  also  consider  the 
impact of ageing and social security system on the effects of monetary policy. 
The current financial situation is characterized by fast growth of money supply and credit but muted 
CPI growth and high investment ratio. In 2003, investment ratio increased by 6 percentage points and 
M2-GDP  ratio  was  very  high.  This  should  draw  our  attention.  An  optimal  economic  structure  would 
have a higher consumption-GDP ratio. Final consumption is an important signal for future investment. 
Without a clear signal from rising final consumption, the future return and sustainability of investment 
are doubtful. To address this problem, it was suggested that consumer credit be increased, together 
with a number of supporting measures in pricing consumer credit, financing support and regulations. 
However, in this process, it is important to keep a balance between establishing social security system 
and encouraging credit consumption. 
Some  analysis  shows  that  consumption  in  China  is  greatly  constrained  by  two  factors.  One, 
inadequate  social  security  system,  especially  the  unfounded  pension  and  health  care  system 
dampened consumer confidence. On top of it is the concern over the education expense for children. 
In  the  transition  to  market  economy,  some  services  that  used  to  be  public  goods  gradually  turn  to 
operate under the rule of market. Meanwhile, no social security system is put in place. This deterred 
consumption, increased prudent savings and affected consumer confidence. It is encouraging news 
that Liaoning Province initiated the pilot programme on social security system reform. The intensity of 
the reform is probably not enough and more in-depth research is needed. The second constraint is the 
demographic structure. China will gradually move to an ageing society. The social security system is 
still largely built on a pay-as-you-go basis, which effectively makes the young generation save more to 
account  for  the  surging  claims  on  the  pension  system.  Under  these  circumstances,  efforts  to 
encourage consumer credit need to look at the inter-generation consumption behavior. If the young 
generation  takes  advantage  of  consumer  credit  while  the  share  of  aged  population  in  the  society 
increases, the sustainability of the PAYG system will be threatened, so will the future payments of the 
already  under-funded  pension  system. From  this standpoint,  careful  consideration  must  be given  to 
establishing and improving the social security system where the central bank’s concern is established 
from  a  macro  adjustment  perspective.  Moreover,  any  deficiency  in  the  social  security  system  may 
dampen the transmission of monetary policy intended to encourage consumption, and make such a 
monetary policy move impotent. 
A broader view reveals that another big threat to monetary policy and financial stability is fiscal deficit. 
Excessive  and  rolling  government  securities  also  affect  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy 
transmission. The current deficit in China is not large but implicit fiscal deficits are more difficult to deal 
with. Economic growth may help reduce the NPLs evolved from policy credit, implicit deficits of the 
under-funded social security system is more problematic. If no solution is found for the social security 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2004
issue, implicit fiscal deficits will hamper the monetary policy transmission and thus dampen the desired 
effects of monetary policy measures. 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 5
