L Wilson Kamit: Good governance and accountability 
Speech delivered by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
National  Research  Institute  (NRI)  Diploma  Program  in  Economic  Policy  Analysis  16th  Graduation 
Ceremony, Port Moresby, 25 June 2004. 
 Archbishop Sir Brian Barnes, Chairman of the NRI Council  
Members of the NRI Council  
The Acting Director of the National Research Institute (NRI), Dr. Richard Guy Heads of NRI Divisions 
and Staff members 
Graduands, family members and friends  
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am honoured to address today’s graduation ceremony of the National Research Institute’s Diploma 
Program in Economic Policy Analysis. Thank you, Dr. Richard Guy for the invitation. 
Over the past few years, I had had the opportunity to attend and address graduation ceremonies at 
various learning institutions around the country. These range from my former community school in the 
foothills of the Eastern Highlands province to two of our highest learning institutions, Unitech in Lae 
and UPNG in Port Moresby. Of course, there are the PNG Banking and Business Institute graduations 
which are obligatory because of the special ownership arrangements. The shareholders are the banks. 
The graduands at those previous ceremonies represented potential new intakes into our labour force. 
Today’s graduating class is different. Most, if not all, of you are current members of the workforce. And 
you would no doubt be aware of the challenges that we, in the public, private, formal and non-formal 
sectors continue to face in developing our country. That is, the need to forge a nation, and develop a 
progressive, prosperous and harmonious society for all of us, our children and future generations - a 
challenge today as it did at the time of political independence in 1975. You would have touched on 
most of these challenges and issues in your six (6) weeks course, as well as in your own workplace. 
For our country, Papua New Guinea, the facts speak for themselves. In spite of a richly endowed base 
of natural resources, we today have amongst the lowest socioeconomic indicators within the Pacific 
region. Our physical infrastructure has been allowed to deteriorate over the years, especially in the 
rural areas where the majority of our people live. Our schools have fewer teaching materials, hospitals 
are short of medicine and trained personnel, while roads, bridges and airstrips are in need of repair 
work  and  maintenance.  Many  of  you  can  relate  to  similar  situations  back  in  your  villages  or  local 
environment. 
All our natural wealth - the gold, copper, oil, coffee and other natural resources in the country - could 
produce a just and equitable society. However, the gap between the rich and the poor continues to 
widen and there is social disharmony in our communities. Economic inequalities confront us daily as 
we walk the streets, read the newspapers or watch the television. They remind us all of the challenges 
ahead of us - challenges to policy-makers, decision-makers, implementers of Government policies and 
providers of goods and services. 
Today, eighteen (18) of you will receive your diploma in the Economic Policy Analysis Program. This 
diploma and the course itself would have highlighted to you those very challenges I mentioned in the 
areas of public policy and macro and microeconomic management. 
The course you successfully completed would no doubt have given you an insight into what some of 
us in the forefront of economic policy design and implementation deal with on a daily basis. In the case 
of the Bank of PNG, the thrust is monetary policy, as well as advising the Government on appropriate 
fiscal  policy,  and  other  policy  areas  in  order  to  achieve  a  sound  and  sustainable  economic 
environment for PNG. 
From our experience, managing economic policy today is very different from what it used to be like ten 
years  ago  under  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  Since  the  exchange  rate  was  floated  in  1994, 
macroeconomic  management  has  become  more  vigilant  and  dynamic,  because  of  the  immediate 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
effects  policies  have  on  the  performance  of  the  economy.  For  example,  exchange  rate  movements 
now  impact  directly  on  domestic  prices  and  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  have  to  be  managed 
appropriately in a consistent manner to achieve price stability. Whilst we have seen improvements in 
our  economic  indicators  since  2003,  as  mentioned  in  our  just-released  March  Quarterly  Economic 
Bulletin,  including  stable  exchange  rates  and  increasing  foreign  reserves,  falling  interest  rates  and 
inflation, improved fiscal discipline and increasing employment, these have not translated into tangible 
benefits for the vast majority of our people - as yet. 
These  gains  however  should  not  allow  us  to  become  complacent.  Rather,  we  have  to  continue  to 
maintain vigilance in ensuring appropriate policies and actions are pursued so that we can continue to 
gain on these hard won gains. 
Whilst your course work covered areas of policy concerns as well as topical development issues, an 
important issue I want to continue to stress is that of good governance and accountability. This was 
also mentioned earlier in the speeches by the Chairman of the NRI Board and the Acting director of 
NRI. Besides the other buzz-words of transparency, independence and integrity, what do these words 
entail? 
You may also ask why I continue to speak on this particular topic, as in my previous speeches. This is 
because I have seen in practice what good governance and accountability can do to an individual, an 
organisation and society as a whole. It is an important issue which should be given more prominence 
in our various training programmes and courses. I am glad that the ‘governance’ topic in your course 
took up about 9 hours of your course programme and contributed 5 percent to your overall grade. This 
is a clear reflection of the importance of this issue in public policy and management. You can have the 
best  policies  and  strategies  but  these  may  not  work  if  good  governance  is  missing  in  their 
implementation. And in PNG, we have had a poor record - but it is improving. 
The lack of corporate governance and accountability in many of our institutions has been an area of 
concern.  Our  past  history  and  record  of  management  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  especially  in  public 
institutions  which  are  guardians  of  the  nation’s  interests  and  wealth,  has  given  rise  to  the  need  to 
reestablish  proper  procedures  and  order.  The  on-going  work  of  the  Parliamentary  Public  Accounts 
Committee,  which  is  an  attempt  to  instill  accountability  on  the  use  and  management  of  public 
resources,  is  commendable.  So  are  the  efforts  of  the  Ombudsman  Commission,  the  Institute  of 
Directors,  Inc.,  Transparency  International  and  other  organisations  that  aim  to  promote  good 
governance  and  accountability.  These  institutions  not  only  advocate  the  use  of  proper  rules  and 
guidelines in conducting business, but also the use of one’s good sense and due diligence. 
Whilst it is one thing to have in place the best rules and regulations, it is another thing to practice them 
using common sense. The collapses of large companies abroad, some due to accounting fraud but 
others  due  to  carelessness  and  neglect,  highlight  the  need  for  diligence.  Closer  to  home,  the  turn 
around  of  the  former  PNG  Banking  Corporation,  prior  to  its  sale,  other  financial  institutions  that  we 
supervise and pension funds (case of NPF) from loss-making institutions to profitable ones in a short 
space of time was based on one thing alone; the newly appointed Board and management of these 
institutions  ensured  that  everyone  was  diligent  and  followed  the  established  rules  and  guidelines 
re-sounding good governance. The important lesson here is, do not take short cuts. 
As you all return to your workplace, it is in your professional interests to also ensure that you remain a 
“Fit  and  Proper”  person  for  purposes  of  directorships,  management  appointments  and  general 
community recognition and acceptance. This applies equally to a Managing Director of a company as 
it does to an Honorary Treasurer of a Church. This good reputation must come to you over time and 
you must work at it - you cannot buy an excellent reputation. You must earn it. 
At  the  Bank  of  PNG,  following  the  passing  of  several  legislations  (CBA  2000,  BFIA  2000,  Life 
insurance and Superannuation Acts) our responsibility now covers the supervision of almost the whole 
financial system in the country. Besides the commercial banks, finance companies, and savings and 
loan  societies,  we  now oversee  the  life  insurance  companies,  superannuation  funds,  and  the  micro 
credit schemes. This is in addition to our sole responsibility of managing monetary policy. These are 
responsibilities we take seriously because the impact of our decisions and actions or inactions on the 
economy and society as a whole are profound. We insist on the same standards we expect from those 
we  supervise.  I  note  here  that  the  Boards  of  other  institutions  have  adopted  good  governance  and 
accountability procedures and processes for their organisations. 
At this point, one may ask; who then supervises the supervisor? This is an important question given all 
that I have talked about on good governance and our increased responsibilities. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2004
At  the  Central  Bank,  the  recently  passed  legislations  explicitly  state  that  the  Governor  is  solely 
responsible for managing monetary policy and supervision of the financial system. We have in place a 
Board  of  Directors  drawn  from  a  cross-section  of  the  community  -  comprising  presentation  from 
accountants,  trade  unions,  churches,  businesses,  and  prominent  individuals.  This  Board  is  very 
vigilant  and  their  statutory  role  is  to  ensure  that  the  Governor  performs  his  roles  diligently  and 
prudently  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  supervision.  Performance  can  be  gauged  from  the 
achievement of the objective of monetary policy, which is ‘price stability’, as well as the soundness of 
the financial system. 
The  Bank  realises  that  its  policies  and  activities  cannot  be  done  in  isolation  from  those  of  other 
organisations. As mentioned in the speeches by the Chairman of the NRI Board, Archbishop Sir Brian 
Barnes and the Acting Director of NRI, Dr. Richard Guy, NRI is ideally placed to carry out detailed 
research and provide quality advice in areas of concern on public policies and developmental issues. 
In  fact,  the  Central  Bank  did  engage  the  NRI  in  the  recent  past  to  conduct  a  study  on  the  public’s 
needs  and  requirements  of  our  copper  coins  (one  and  two  toeas).  I  would  like  to  see  greater 
cooperation  between  organisations  and  institutions  that  conduct  research  work.  We  at  the  central 
Bank have a research programme and would like to cooperate with various institutions, including the 
NRI, INA, the universities and various specialised research organisations in conducting and providing 
applied research work to ensure that policy decisions finally get translated into real benefits for our 
people. 
In conclusion, may I take this opportunity to thank the NRI for running this informative course annually 
since  1989.  Its  popularity  is  reflected  in  the  over  eighty  (80)  plus  applications  received  annually, 
though the usual admissions are limited to twenty-five (25) participants. This year, only 18 of you are 
privilege to participate and graduate from the program. 
Like  many  other  organisations,  we  have  encouraged  our  staff  at  the  Bank  of  PNG  to  attend  this 
program to keep themselves abreast of wider economic and social issues facing our country. Two of 
them  are  amongst  the  graduands  here  today.  Our  staff  had  found  this  course  beneficial  to  their 
understanding  of  the  PNG  economy  and  about  Government  policies  and  given  them  a  greater 
appreciation of their work in the Central Bank. 
May  I  once  again  thank  the  Chairman  of  the  NRI  Council,  Archbishop  Sir  Brian  Barnes,  the  NRI 
Council, the Acting Director of the NRI, Dr. Richard Guy, professors and lecturers for your invitation 
and for your contributions to the Institute. 
CONGRATULATIONS TO ALL THE GRADUANDS. 
Thank you and God bless all. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
