Michael C Bonello: Central bankers’ view of the new challenges 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at a conference entitled “The 
Challenges  for  Central  Banks  in  an  Enlarged  EMU”  organised  jointly  by  the  European  Community 
Institute 
Studies  Association 
(IEF)  and 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 20-21 February 2004. 
Mr Bonello was a panelist on the discussion regarding “Central Bankers’ View of the New Challenges”. 
(ECSA  Austria),  Research 
for  European  Affairs 
 When ten countries, including Malta, join the European Union (EU) on 1st May, they will assume the 
status of “Member States with a derogation”, meaning that they are exempt from the stricter rules of 
EMU.  This  may  seem  to  imply  that  the  transition  to  EMU  is  thereby  rendered  easier,  but  a  careful 
examination  of  the  conditions  attached  to  the  process  reveals  that  the  policy  issues  involved  are 
anything but straightforward. This is particularly true of a small open economy like Malta’s in which 
macroeconomic policy is strongly conditioned by the external environment, but which has nevertheless 
succeeding in reconciling a hard currency peg with relative exchange rate stability for over thirty years. 
Malta has a population of only 400,000. Its nominal GDP of €4.5 billion, or less than 0.1% of that of the 
EU,  translates  into  a  per  capita  income  which  is  around  69%  of  the  EU  average.  Market  services, 
including tourism and finance, account for nearly two-fifths of GDP, while manufacturing contributes 
almost a quarter. 
Given its size and lack of natural resources, it is not surprising that Malta has one of the most open 
economies in the world, with imports and exports each almost as large as the GDP. The EU is Malta’s 
main trading partner, accounting for over two-fifths of exports and two-thirds of imports in 2003. It is an 
even more important market for the tourism industry and is a major source of capital investment. 
For Malta, therefore, the prospect of being anchored in the relative safety of the world’s second largest 
economy  and  of  using  that  economy’s  currency  represents  a  considerable  advantage.  Perhaps  the 
foremost benefit of euro area membership is being able to share in the credibility of a Europe-wide 
monetary policy. This will not only mean reduced exchange risks and less uncertainty for economic 
operators, but also the elimination of the risk premium on the Maltese lira. The resulting reduction in 
interest rates, moreover, would be of direct benefit in terms of price competitiveness, as would also be 
the lower currency conversion costs and the increased price transparency. The euro should also act to 
spur  the  integration  process  with  the  EU  since  it  is  known  that  trade  and  investment  flows  tend  to 
increase  in  the  absence  of  exchange  rate  volatility,  and  also  that  the  trade  of  countries  sharing  a 
common  currency  can  be  as  much  as  three  times  higher  than  that  of  countries  with  different 
currencies. 
The Maltese economy is relatively well placed to secure these benefits of monetary union. For a start, 
the adoption of the euro should not involve any major regime shift. In fact, since the collapse of the 
Bretton Woods system the Maltese lira has been pegged to a basket of major currencies. Since then 
the lira was only devalued once, in the wake of the ERM crisis in 1992. Apart from that episode, the 
currency has enjoyed relative stability. In each of the past five years, for example, fluctuations in the 
euro/lira rate have moved within a band of between 1.4% and 3.3% around the average rate for the 
year. The fact that the currency peg has been successfully maintained for so long - as testified by the 
underlying  upward  trend  in  the  external  reserves,  which  today  represent  nine  months  of  imports  - 
suggests that this is a viable exchange rate regime for Malta. 
The choice of a fixed exchange rate as the intermediate target of monetary policy is dictated by the 
key characteristics of the economy. First, Malta’s size implies that it is a price taker and cannot hope to 
influence its terms of trade through nominal exchange rate movements. In addition, because of the 
economy’s openness, the conduct of monetary policy must take the exchange rate into account. This 
also means that the main cost of joining the euro area - the loss of monetary policy independence - 
has already been largely incurred as the euro carries a 70% weight in the currency basket and the 
progressive  lifting  of  exchange  controls  has  reduced  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  set  interest  rates 
independently of world markets. 
Second, the Maltese economy is already closely integrated with the euro area. This is borne out not 
only  by  trade  patterns,  but  also  by  the  similarity  of  Malta’s  sectoral  distribution  of  value  added  and 
employment. Our business cycle, too, has become increasingly correlated with that of the euro area. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 1
This synchronization is likely to grow further as exchange rate volatility declines and transactions costs 
fall and, if the correlation between business cycles is indeed endogenous in a monetary union, as our 
trade with the euro area intensifies. In addition, differences in productivity levels between Malta and 
the  euro  area  in  the  traded  goods  sector  appear  to  be  minor,  which  suggests  that  the  Balassa-
Samuelson effect is unlikely to be strong. Similarities are also to be found in the financial system. For 
example, the degree of financial intermediation in Malta is comparable to that of the euro area, and the 
long-term interest rate is well within the Maastricht reference value. 
Further  evidence  that  the  economy  seems  well  prepared  to  join  a  monetary  union  is  the  fact  that 
nominal  wages  have  been  sufficiently  flexible  to  carry  the  burden  of  adjustment  implicit  in  a  fixed 
exchange  rate  regime.  The  absence  of  extended  periods  of  high  unemployment  in  the  face  of 
significant  adverse  developments  suggests  that  labour  markets  have  been  able  to  adjust.  Indeed, 
unemployment in Malta has been less volatile than in the euro area. The exchange rate peg has also 
been a valuable nominal anchor, restraining price increases. In fact, inflation has averaged just 2.4% 
in the past five years (1.3% in 2003), indicating a considerable measure of nominal convergence with 
our major trading partners, and with the euro area in particular. 
Taken together, these features of the Maltese economy suggest that the likelihood of experiencing an 
asymmetric shock is small; and they lead us to believe that the exchange rate peg provides a suitable 
framework for joining ERM II and that the country should be able to adopt the euro sooner rather than 
later. We are also aware, however, that the peg will have to be maintained during the lira’s passage 
through what  is  essentially  uncharted  territory.  Professor  Eichengreen’s  words  of admonition  to  last 
November’s East-West Conference here in Vienna readily come to mind, “… prescribing bands for the 
new EU members for an extended period is the worst form of macroeconomic malpractice. Bands are 
fragile and difficult to manage. Their fragility is clear from Europe’s own experience in 1992.” 
In order to ensure a smooth transition towards, and through ERM II, therefore, it will be necessary to 
convince the markets that ERM II is indeed a natural culmination of the lira’s currency basket regime. 
In this regard, given our track record and assuming a strong national commitment to the convergence 
process, our strategy should also benefit from the added credibility which the prospect of support by 
the ECB and other NCBs would confer on it. On the basis of similar considerations, a leading credit 
rating agency has concluded that ERM II participation can be a rating strength. 
While  we  believe  this  to  be  a  viable  approach  to  euro  area  membership,  it  is  clear  that  new,  and 
possibly uncomfortable situations cannot be ruled out. International capital movements, for example, 
may  well  present  a  challenge  for  monetary  policy  during  the  ERM  II  phase.  While  econometric 
evidence  and  recent  experience  since  the  liberalization  of  capital  controls  suggest  that  the  Maltese 
economy has already coped successfully with significant capital outflows, it must nevertheless be clear 
that monetary policy will have to stand ready to neutralise any pressures on the exchange rate should 
these develop. Higher interest rates, of course, would not be helpful for economic activity; and they 
could compromise progress towards the achievement of the convergence criteria. 
Successfully managing the exchange rate will thus be a major challenge. And it is not the only one. 
There  are  others  at  the  broader,  macroeconomic  policy  level  and  which  arise  because  the  tools 
available  for  economic  adjustment  are  limited  compared  to  the  many  reforms  that  need  to  be 
undertaken.  Many  of  the  tasks  to  be  accomplished,  moreover,  are  subject  to  tight  deadlines.  As  a 
result,  tradeoff  situations  will  inevitably  arise,  and  this  will  complicate  the  simultaneous  pursuit  of 
nominal and real convergence. 
One such case is that of public finances. Here the task is to achieve further convergence in economic 
structures and income levels without endangering fiscal sustainability. The recent experience of some 
existing  Member  States  suggests  an  inherent  incompatibility  between  these  two  objectives.  On  the 
one  hand,  the  acceding  countries  must  undertake  the  structural  reforms  necessary  to  create  a 
congenial business environment and achieve an efficient allocation of resources, which would facilitate 
the  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  On  the  other  hand,  they  have  to  ensure  that  the 
expenditure associated with such reforms does not drive up fiscal imbalances beyond a level which is 
sustainable, or which in any case is considered excessive in terms of the Stability and Growth Pact 
(SGP). 
In Malta’s case another factor to be considered is the persistent weakness in our major export markets 
and its impact on the growth rate. Subdued growth does not only constrain the tax base, but through 
its negative effect on employment could generate opposition to the necessary structural reforms. The 
pursuit of fiscal balance is further burdened by the co-financing requirement built into most of the EU’s 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2004
funding  programmes;  by  demographic  trends  which  are  beyond  the  control  of  policy  makers, 
especially population ageing; and by the implementation of acquis-related obligations. 
I dwell at some length on this issue because the state of public finances is currently the only significant 
impediment  to  Malta’s  membership  of  the  euro  area.  While  it  is  encouraging  to  know  that  we  have 
been able to reduce the fiscal deficit/GDP ratio from 11% in 1998 to its current level of around 6%, 
getting to the Maastricht reference value of 3% by 2006, as the Government plans to do, will require 
unrelenting efforts and a greater emphasis on expenditure-cutting. 
This is not only because taxation levels are already relatively high for an economic downturn, but also 
because of  the  tradeoffs  involved  in pursuing  further  fiscal  consolidation.  Indeed,  the  Government’s 
resolve to trim the deficit will be a key determinant of the degree of exchange rate stability that it will 
be  possible  to  achieve  during  ERM  II.  This,  in  turn,  will  depend on  how  much  economic operators, 
taxpayers and recipients of social benefits and other transfer payments are prepared to give up today 
in exchange for sustainable public finances tomorrow. 
In the final analysis, therefore, the success of the euro strategy will hinge on consensus being reached 
on the implementation of the necessary reforms. In this context, discussions are underway in the Malta 
Council  for  Economic  and  Social  Development  with  a  view  to  reforming  the  pension  and  health 
systems, currently two major sources of pressure on public finances. If the social partners do indeed 
take  ownership  of  the  reforms,  the  credibility  of  the  country’s  overall  economic  strategy  will  be 
considerably enhanced. 
Agreement on the reforms is also important because in an ERM II context the room for manoeuvre 
available  to central  banks is restricted. The  implied commitment  to  a high  degree  of  exchange rate 
stability  -  and  for  countries  like  Malta  which  have  experienced  limited  day-to-day  exchange  rate 
movements,  the  concept  of  stability  has  taken  on  a  very  specific  meaning  -  means  that  monetary 
policy cannot be used for demand management purposes. The onus of adjustment must then fall on 
fiscal and structural policies. 
The implementation of effective policies must also be ensured because the financial markets will be 
quick  to  spot  any  incoherence  between  a  country’s  exchange  rate  and  its  underlying  economic 
condition. Since market behaviour, however, also has the potential to produce volatility to a degree 
unwarranted by the economic fundamentals, the exchange rate stability assessment at the end of the 
ERM II phase should take appropriate account of country-specific circumstances. 
Another precondition for maintaining the exchange rate peg and ensuring a smooth transition to the 
euro is financial sector stability. In this respect, a regulatory and supervisory framework based on best 
international  practice  is  already  in  place  in  Malta,  and  the  legislation  incorporates  almost  all  the 
features of the corresponding EU directives. Institutional responsibilities are divided between the Malta 
Financial  Services  Authority,  which  is  responsible  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  banking, 
insurance and investment services; and the Central Bank of Malta, which is charged with ensuring the 
financial stability of the system and is also responsible for the domestic payment system. In this regard 
it  is  reassuring  that  the  recently  concluded  IMF/World  Bank  FSAP  exercise  found  Malta’s  financial 
system  to  be  healthy  and  well  supervised,  with  a  comprehensive  legal  framework  and  strong 
adherence to most international standards and codes. 
An  issue  of  special  significance  for  central  bankers  is  the  need  to  preserve  the  integrity  of  their 
institutions.  Although  the  experience  of  current  euro  area  Member  States  already  provides  useful 
insights into the appropriate exchange rate strategies to be pursued prior to, and during ERM II, the 
acceding countries will have to arrive at this judgment on the basis of expectations of the future path of 
the economy. Expectations, however, are just that. 
This means having to stand ready to give satisfactory accounts of the rationale for the policy choices 
made,  to  explain  deviations  from  targets  and  to  ensure  that  governments  introduce  corrective 
measures without undue delay. Unfortunately, however, the information reaching economic operators, 
and financial markets in particular, is not always accurate. And yet, with only a few months to go to EU 
accession, the markets will be looking out for indications regarding the strategies we intend to pursue 
with respect to ERM II and entry in the euro area. It will be important, therefore, to be constantly on 
guard  against  any  imprecise  information  which  could  provoke  untoward  market  reactions.  This 
highlights  the  importance  of  an  effective  communications  strategy  and  of  appropriate  coordination 
between  central  banks  and  governments.  In  Malta  the  joint  working  committee  established  to 
elaborate the strategy for adopting the euro fulfils this role. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 3
Simultaneously with the need to contribute to the promotion of economic convergence within the EMU 
parameters, our central banks are engaged in the task of integrating themselves into the European 
System of Central Banks (ESCB). The challenge here is multifaceted in that it involves infrastructural 
and organisational changes that profoundly affect not only the central bank and the financial markets, 
but also the players in those markets. 
The  technical  aspects  of  ESCB  membership  represent  a  special  challenge  for  small  acceding 
countries like Malta. The domestic financial markets in most of our countries are small and less liquid 
that those of existing EU members, and typically less sophisticated. And yet, upon membership we will 
be expected to function on the same level as the long-standing and, in most cases, larger members of 
the System. Ensuring that the transition takes place with the least possible disruption has entailed a 
comprehensive reform of institutions and operating systems. 
For example, a real time gross settlement payment system (RTGS) has been put in place instead of 
the  existing  payment  infrastructure.  The  standards  of  the  securities  settlement  system  have  been 
upgraded  to  a  fully  ESCB-compliant  ‘delivery  versus  payment’  system,  which  ensures  the  risk-free 
transfer of collateral and, where necessary, of securities. Cross-border payment systems have been 
adapted  to  ensure  that  they  meet  today’s  ‘straight  through  processing’  standards.  Similarly,  with 
regard to statistics there has been an overhaul of methodologies and databases. The development of 
systems capable of delivering the quality-assured statistics necessary for the successful participation 
in EMU has understandably been a priority of the reform process. 
But the challenge of EMU extends beyond the Bank’s operational framework. For example, while we 
aim  to  participate  effectively  in  the  operational  structures  and  decision-making  bodies  of  the  ESCB 
alongside much larger central banks, we only have some 250 people to perform the tasks involved. 
We are, therefore, undertaking a critical analysis of each of the Bank’s areas of operation in order to 
devise ways of coping with the increased workload. The development of new skills in work areas that 
will become key to the Bank’s operations as a member of the ESCB is another objective. 
The  Bank’s  management  structure,  too,  is  being  reviewed.  The  policy-making  process  has  been 
reinforced in order to respond to the growing need to analyse issues and take decisions in a more 
timely fashion. Line management has been strengthened and authority delegated more extensively to 
allow  the  managerial  and  technical  staff  to  dedicate  more  time  to  ESCB-related  activities.  It  has 
additionally been felt necessary to introduce a more efficient and rapid exchange of information across 
the  Bank,  particularly  information  acquired  through  participation  in  ESCB  committees  and  working 
groups. 
While it is helping the Bank to become a more focused and efficient institution, effective participation in 
the ESCB undoubtedly represents a heavy claim on its limited human and financial resources. We do 
appreciate  that  the  System  is  still  in  a  developmental  phase  and  has  yet  to  reach  its  ideal 
configuration. The arrival of ten new members, moreover, will not make things any easier for a time. I 
would nevertheless like to suggest that a collective effort be undertaken to rationalise the work of the 
ESCB, not least by containing the number of meetings in Frankfurt and elsewhere. 
The challenges posed by EMU are clearly diverse and vary from country to country as well as across 
time, depending on a host of factors ranging from the extent of catching-up that needs to be done and 
the tools available to policymakers, to the degree of cross-sectoral linkages and of consensus on the 
respective  national  strategies.  In  practice,  however,  the  underlying  economic  causes  are  probably 
quite similar across countries, often being manifestations of macroeconomic imbalances and structural 
inefficiencies.  As  such  they  must  be  addressed  sooner  rather  than  later.  Only  in  this  way  will  it  be 
possible for our countries to derive full benefit from EU membership. 
That  probably  hardly  needs  emphasizing  in  this  forum  because  central  bankers  understand  the 
importance of coherent policies designed to achieve a more efficient allocation and use of resources. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  we  are  also  conscious  of  the  difficulties  involved  in  reconciling  what  is 
conceptually desirable with what is feasible in practice. It is to be hoped, therefore, that our countries’ 
considerable  efforts  to  integrate  successfully  and  without  undue  delay  into  EMU  will  receive  a 
sympathetic response and not be perceived as a potential source of instability. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2004
