Jean-Claude Trichet: The transformation of the international financial 
architecture to meet the challenges of globalisation 
Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
organised by the Atlantik-Brücke e.V., Frankfurt, 20 September 2004. 
 It is with great pleasure that I have accepted the invitation of the Atlantik-Brücke to give this year’s 
Arthur  Burns  Memorial  Lecture.  This  lecture  series  is  not  only  dedicated  to  an  outstanding  central 
banker but it has also had a history of eminent speakers in past years. Therefore, I would like to thank 
the Atlantik-Brücke for inviting me, and I also greatly appreciate the hospitality of the Bundesbank. 
Tonight, I would like to offer some thoughts on transforming the international financial architecture to 
meet  the  challenges  of  globalisation.  I  will  focus  on  developments  over  the  last  three  decades,  a 
period during which the international community has been confronted with tremendous and continual 
challenges  arising  from  important  structural  changes  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  system. 
During this period the international community has also learnt key lessons and has launched profound 
adjustments to what has been termed the international financial architecture, i.e. the policy framework 
of the global financial system. 
Let me first explain what I mean by structural changes in the global economic and financial system. 
The  steady  opening-up  of  goods  and  capital  markets  has  led  to  growing  integration  of  different 
countries around the globe, and we are still witnessing this process today with the opening-up of India 
and  China.  On  average,  trade  has  grown  much  more  rapidly  than  GDP  over  the  past  decades. 
Especially  from  the  mid-1980s  onwards  and  during  the  1990s,  world  trade  expanded  substantially 
more than world output growth in every year, with the difference reaching as much as 7 percentage 
points in some years. These different growth rates imply that over the last two decades, real GDP has 
doubled whereas the volume of world trade has more than tripled. Moreover, trade has increasingly 
expanded, and now includes the full spectrum of tradable goods from primary commodities to finished 
products, meaning that many production processes, such as automobiles or computers, today span 
not only several economies, but also several continents. Financial integration has also increased due 
to  capital  market  liberalisation,  rapid  technological  change  and  financial  innovation,  and  we  see  its 
strength both in good times and in bad. 
This  economic  and  financial  globalisation  has  enormous  benefits,  but  it  also  poses  challenges  and 
entails risks. One of the major benefits of globalisation is that emerging and also developing countries 
are increasingly involved in the exchange of goods and capital and can benefit from the transfer of 
know-how  and  technologies.  Especially  emerging  markets  have,  over  time,  become  major  global 
trading partners as well as recipients of financial flows. Some of them, especially in Asia, have turned 
into nearly industrialised countries with decades of growth rates above those of high-income countries, 
and  they  have  themselves  become  sources  of  international  capital  flows.  Over  the  last  four  years, 
these roughly 20 emerging countries in Latin America, eastern Europe and Asia have accounted for 
about 30% of world exports and received about 20% of gross global foreign direct investment (FDI), a 
figure which is close to the FDI inflows into the United States. 
Greater integration also means greater economic and financial spillover effects from one country or 
one region to the rest of the world. Some of these effects are positive, while others are less so. The 
main positive spillover, as I see it, is that the global economy has benefited from the strong growth in 
many  emerging  market  economies,  especially  in  Asia.  China  has  become  one  of  the  main  growth 
engines, not only for the region, but worldwide, contributing to about one-third of world GDP growth on 
average  over  2000-2003  (in  PPP-terms).  Moreover,  capital  mobility  and  financial  integration  allow 
savings to be invested on both the national and global scale, thereby increasing economic efficiency 
and promoting growth. 
What  about  the  challenges?  Globalisation  and  capital  mobility  also  makes  the  international  system 
more vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment. On several occasions we have witnessed contagion 
effects spreading from one country or one market to others. Some of these crises originated in the 
public  sector,  such  as  the  debt  crisis  during  the  1980s,  which  started  with  Poland  and  Mexico  and 
spread to Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and the Soviet Union, the Mexican crisis in 1994, the 
Asian crisis in 1997/1998, the Russian crisis in 1998, and the more recent crises in Brazil, Argentina 
and Turkey. Others, by contrast, stemmed mainly from events in the private sector, such as the stock 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 1
market  collapse  of  1987,  the  bond  market  crash  of  1994,  the  near-failure  of  the  large  hedge  fund 
Long-Term  Capital  Management  (LTCM)  in  1998,  the  stock  exchange  fall  and  the  bursting  of  the 
technology bubble in 2000. 
Despite their differences in origin, nature and magnitude, all these events had one thing in common: 
they represented major threats to the stability of the international financial system. The international 
community  has  always  managed  to  resolve  such  crises,  but  the  costs  incurred  by  the  respective 
economies have been significant. In many instances, the level of output fell dramatically, sometimes 
even in double figures. For example, in Argentina and Turkey real GDP fell by as much as 10-11% in 
the worst year of their crises. 
These  events  highlighted  the  potential  vulnerabilities  of  the  globalised  system  and,  in  that  way, 
underscored the need for systemic changes to the policy framework of the international economic and 
financial system. Policy-makers had to rethink how best to promote stability and achieve growth in an 
ever-changing  environment  characterised  by  globalisation.  An  impressive  reform  agenda  was 
gradually launched to cope with the new challenges. Many of these reforms have focused on how to 
prevent financial crises from happening and - should they still occur - on how to manage and resolve 
them. 
This  ongoing  work  is  influenced  considerably  by  the  widespread  recognition  of  two  fundamental 
principles. First, there is general consensus on giving the private sector and markets a central role, 
while  focusing  on  sound  public  policies  and  institutions  to  provide  market  participants  with  an 
appropriate environment. Given increasingly liberalised financial systems, the private sector is bound 
to play a key role not only in providing capital but also, and probably more importantly, in disciplining 
the overall economic policy. Second, increased international cooperation has been considered as key 
given the mismatch between globalised markets and national policy responsibilities. Indeed, the scope 
of international cooperation has widened, but also the forms of cooperation have evolved over time. 
Let me now expand on some key areas in which important lessons have been learnt and significant 
adjustments to the international financial architecture have been initiated and implemented. I will first 
talk  about  the  main  changes  in  the  international  monetary  system  and  then  comment  on  the 
institutional set-up of the international system, before touching upon reform efforts in the area of crisis 
prevention and resolution. 
International monetary system 
1.  
Looking at the international monetary system, some say that since the collapse of the Bretton Woods 
system of fixed exchange rates in the early 1970s, there has basically been no system in place. The 
current situation of manifold monetary arrangements is sometimes characterised as a “non-system”. In 
my  view,  this  is  not  true.  It  is  correct  that  we  are  living  in  an  increasingly  complex  world  with  a 
multitude of exchange rate regimes - about one-third of IMF countries have their currencies pegged to 
one major currency or currency basket, while others have various modalities of floating exchange rate 
systems  from  pure  floating  to  more  or  less  managed  float.  The  role  of  the  markets  in  determining 
exchange rates has become more important. And it had to be learnt - painfully - over the course of 
several crises that the economic fundamentals and policies of a country do play the decisive role in the 
development and stability of exchange rates. But a very important role attributed to the markets does 
not mean that there is no longer any role for exchange rate policy. Let me highlight two aspects. 
For one thing, country-specific characteristics have to be used to determine the most suitable regime 
for a country. While this holds true for every country, it is especially important for emerging market 
economies.  Economies  differ  widely  and  evolve  over  time.  The  exchange  rate  regime  needs  to  be 
compatible with economic fundamentals and the wider policy framework, including regional integration 
efforts as well as trade and financial links. From this perspective, all regimes are subject to change 
should the fundamentals evolve and if circumstances so dictate. 
It is not long since a consensus emerged that no single exchange rate system can insulate countries 
from  financial  crises.  A  few  years  ago,  there  was  a  widely  held  view  that  a  move  towards  corner 
solutions,  in  the  form  of  either  very  hard  pegs  or  free  floats,  would  help  prevent  crises.  However, 
recent  experience  has  shown  that  no  currency  regime  is  fully  crisis-proof.  Currency  float  does  not 
suffice by itself to eliminate difficulties and crises. At the other end of the spectrum, the currency board 
of Argentina have delayed, but did not prevent, a fully-blown crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2004
Another aspect is that, while the leading currencies are indeed floating, exchange rate developments 
are certainly not ignored. The preference of the major countries and economic areas for exchange rate 
flexibility is the natural consequence of their trade openness, their dependence on capital movements 
and  the  necessity  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy,  geared  towards  domestic  objectives. 
However, at the international level, there exist some mechanisms for policy cooperation, including on 
exchange rates. In particular, for the last 20 years the G7/G3 has proved a very effective forum where 
finance ministers and central bank governors can exchange views on a broad range of policy issues 
and where they can agree, if appropriate, on specific policy messages, including in foreign exchange 
markets  in  the  case  of  exceptional  situations.  Only  to  take  the  most  recent  examples  of  such 
messages I think that the agreed G7 Communiqués of the Boca Raton and the Spring meetings this 
year were useful. 
The institutional set-up 
2. 
The  second  area  of  major  change  that  I  would  like  to  highlight  is  the  institutional  set-up  of  the 
international system. Since their establishment in 1944, the Bretton Woods institutions, the IMF and 
the World Bank, have maintained their central role in the system. But they have been - and still are - 
subject to profound change. This year’s sixtieth anniversary of the Bretton Woods institutions was an 
occasion for many observers to review the development of the two institutions against the background 
of a changing environment. The most dramatic change for the IMF was the breakdown of the Bretton 
Woods system in the early 1970s, which meant that it lost its previous role as guardian of the fixed but 
adjustable exchange rate system and that it had to fundamentally adapt its mandate. 
Moreover, the international debt crises in the 1980s also had a transforming impact on the Fund, as 
this  was  the  first  time  that  the  IMF  acted  as  an  international  crisis  manager  -  a  role  that  it  is  still 
performing  today.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  IMF  refused  at  the  time  to  approve  standby 
arrangements for crisis-hit countries until it received assurances from bank creditors that they would 
share the burden by providing fresh money. Twenty years later, the involvement of the private sector is 
still  on  the  agenda  for better  crisis  management.  All  subsequent  crises  have reconfirmed  the  IMF’s 
central  role  as  a  crisis  manager,  in  which  it  tries  to  coordinate  reform  policies  in  the  countries 
concerned and temporary official financing with efforts to restore confidence and financial commitment 
on the part of private creditors. 
New challenges materialised for the IMF and the World Bank with the collapse of communism, which 
resulted in 20 new members needing specific policy advice for the transition from centrally planned 
economies.  Since  the  Asian  crises  in  the  1990s,  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have  again  been 
undergoing  considerable  changes.  They  have  been  pushed  to  become  more  transparent,  sharpen 
their respective focus, and reinforce their policy advice and financial support. Discussions are also still 
ongoing  about  the  appropriate  representation  of  developing  and  emerging  markets  in  the  two 
institutions. 
In  addition  to  the  changes  to  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  two  other  issues  were  addressed  with 
significant  consequences  for  the  institutional  set-up,  namely  the  representation  of  emerging  market 
economies and cooperation on financial sector issues: 
First, with the growing importance of emerging markets, ways had to be found to integrate them better 
into the international policy dialogue. The creation of the G20 in 1999 constituted in my view a decisive 
and highly welcome step to reflect adequately the newly globalised economy. The G20 is turning into 
the  international  forum  for  dialogue  and  consensus-building  between  all  economies  that  have  a 
systemic influence, whether industrialised or emerging. I am convinced that the discussions in the G20 
have facilitated consensus on important elements of the international reform agenda. 
Second, equally important is the Financial Stability Forum, which was established in order to improve 
international  cooperation  on  financial  sector  issues.  The  FSF  is  uniquely  positioned  to  review  the 
global financial system as a system, as it is the only informal forum which addresses issues from a 
cross-sectoral  perspective,  with  the  presence  of  global  associations  of  banking,  insurance  and 
securities supervisors, of pertinent international institutions, IMF World Bank, BIS, and of treasuries 
and central banks having to deal with major financial market places. 
Since 2001, the FSF has also held regional meetings with non-member financial authorities in Latin 
America, the Asia-Pacific region and central and eastern Europe to broaden the dialogue on financial 
stability issues. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 3
Conceptually, I think that the Financial Stability Forum represents a major advance because for the 
first time the international community stresses that issues, challenges and risks must be examined in a 
comprehensive and complete fashion, through all their systemic implications, whether analysed from 
the  standpoint  of  the  International  Financial  Institutions,  or  of  supervision  authorities,  or  from  the 
financial  stability  perspective  of  central  banks.  It  also  explicitly  points  out  that  optimising  the 
functioning  of  each  and  all  particular  subcomponents  of  the  global  financial  system,  in  their  proper 
spheres, does not suffice. A cross-checking at the level of the overall system remains of the essence. 
The  best  banking  supervision  concept  worked  out  in  an  isolated  manner  could  have  some 
counterproductive  features  from  a  global  stability  perspective.  It  would  be  the  same  for  the  best 
accounting  concept  or  for  the  most  creative  and  imaginative  functioning  of  securities  markets.  This 
sense  of  the  necessity  of  a  global  systemic  “optimisation”  on  top  of  the  “sub-optimisation”  of  each 
particular subcomponent is a very significant contribution of the Financial Stability Forum, even if a lot 
remains to be done in effective implementation. 
Crisis prevention 
3.  
Having talked about changes to the institutional set-up, I would like to discuss crisis prevention, which 
is a key area for all reform efforts. Given that crises are costly both for the countries concerned and for 
the  international  system,  all  emphasis  must  be  placed  on  learning  the  lessons  of  the  past  and 
implementing those lessons rigorously. I am pleased to note that considerable progress has already 
been achieved in making countries and the whole system more resilient to shocks. In that context, I 
would like to highlight transparency and the promotion of best practices, two key elements of crisis 
prevention. Transparency is a precondition for well-functioning markets, since it facilitates better risk 
management  and  leads  to  strengthened  market  discipline.  It  is  therefore  welcome  that  significant 
changes have been introduced in a number of fields. For example, it was not long ago that the IMF 
itself  started  to  disclose  information  on  its  policies  and  to  encourage  increased  transparency  by  its 
member countries. 
It is also reassuring that a large number of international standards and codes of good practice have 
been agreed upon, covering such different fields as transparency in fiscal policy or in monetary and 
financial polices, banking supervision, corporate governance, accounting and auditing. Transparency 
in the private sector is also crucial, as recent corporate scandals have again highlighted the crucial 
role that accounting standards play in this respect. 
I consider that the progress made in the field of transparency after the Asian crisis is one of the main 
reasons for the absence of contagion in Latin America and the emerging world following the Argentine 
crisis. I believe that enhanced transparency helps investors to differentiate better between countries 
and that the countries’ efforts to adhere to international standards and codes are well reflected in the 
markets’ assessment of these countries. 
Transparency  and  standards  and  codes  are  not  the  only  elements  that  have  been  implemented  to 
improve domestic policy-making, especially in emerging market economies, and to make them more 
resilient to shocks. The debates about sustainable exchange rate regimes, prudent and sustainable 
debt management and well-sequenced capital account liberalisation are just some examples of areas 
where  important  lessons  have  been  learnt.  In  addition,  in  response  to  the  growing  importance  of 
financial  markets,  there  is  an  increased  focus  in  the  policy  advice  given  by  the  IMF  and  the  World 
Bank on financial sector policies and on vulnerabilities in domestic financial systems. 
To sum up, I believe that the considerable progress made should help to reduce the frequency and 
severity of crises. However, we are still learning the lessons of the past, and more work will be needed 
in important areas. 
Crisis management 
4. 
Despite all the efforts put in on the prevention side, it would be too optimistic to assume that there will 
be no further crises. However, experience has shown that timely, efficient and smooth management of 
financial problems and their underlying causes in a country can help to minimise losses. Therefore, I 
will now address some issues related to the management of financial crises. 
Every  single  crisis  is  different.  Every  case  calls  for  an  appropriate  balance  between  domestic 
adjustment, private sector involvement and official support. Therefore, crisis management in practice 
has to struggle with the inherent tension between rules and clarity on the one hand and discretion and 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2004
flexibility on the other. However, we have learnt that the official sector needs to be more predictable 
and  clearer.  Only  consistent  behaviour  by  the  IMF  and  the  international  community  will  provide  the 
right incentives for countries and private sector investors. Some large financial packages granted by 
the  IMF  in  the  past  might  have  led  to  a  misperception  that  the  IMF  would  always  bail  out  private 
creditors. This, in turn, might have brought about an element of moral hazard, namely over-borrowing 
on the part of the countries and lenient risk management on the part of some private investors. Moral 
hazard concerns and the limited availability of official funds therefore have led to increasing calls for 
an appropriate involvement of the private sector in crisis management. 
In order to make official financing more predictable, specific criteria and procedures were set up last 
year for exceptional access to IMF resources. We in Europe have been very much in favour of setting 
such  clear  rules  and  clear  limits  to  IMF  financing  in  view  of  the  substantial  financing  packages 
provided to countries in the 1990s and the early years of this decade. It is important that these rules 
are implemented clearly, not least in order to send out the right signals to the markets. 
With  regard  to  an  appropriate  involvement  of  the  private  sector  in  crisis  management,  different 
proposals have been launched in the past ten years. In the wake of the Mexican crisis in 1994/95, the 
G10 recommended the increased use of so-called collective action clauses in sovereign bonds. It was 
argued that such clauses would help to overcome coordination problems between a sovereign debtor 
and  the  numerous  bondholders  since  they  enable  a  qualified  majority  of  creditors  to  agree  on  the 
terms of a restructuring, which is also binding for the dissenting creditors. But more time was needed 
to  convince  issuers  and market  participants  of  the usefulness  of  these clauses.  And  it also  needed 
Mexico to overcome the first-mover problem in February last year. 
Since last year, a remarkable convergence of market practice has taken place. In the first six months 
of this year, practically all bonds issued under New York law included collective action clauses, while 
worldwide  some  83%  of  all  foreign  currency  sovereign  bonds  included  such  clauses.  Despite 
widespread fears, experience so far has not revealed any discernible impact on borrowing costs for 
the countries concerned. 
Given their more limited use in the past, very little experience has so far been gained with the use of 
collective  action  clauses  in  the  actual  resolution  of  sovereign  debt  crises.  Ukraine,  Moldova  and 
Uruguay  used  such  clauses  in  the  context  of  bond  exchanges  in  order  to  bind  in  the  minority  of 
creditors that would otherwise have objected to the bond exchange. 
Besides this progress with collective action clauses, I am pleased to note that work is proceeding on 
the  development  of  a  Code  of  Good  Conduct.  I  have  suggested  myself  some  time  ago  that  there 
should be guidelines for the behaviour of debtor countries and creditors regarding information sharing, 
dialogue and close cooperation in times of financial distress. Such guidelines embedded in a Code 
agreed between countries and creditors might help to prevent liquidity problems turning into a deep 
financial  crisis  with  serious  repercussions  for  all  parties  involved.  They  would  also  improve  the 
handling  of  debt  restructurings,  if  they  become  unavoidable.  Discussions  are  currently  taking  place 
between emerging market issuers and private sector representatives on the main elements of such a 
Code. I would like to encourage all parties to be as active and constructive as possible. It is clear that 
this  initiative  can  only  lead  to  improvements  in  crisis  prevention  and  resolution  if  the  main 
stakeholders,  i.e.  emerging  market  issuers  and  private  sector  representatives,  fully  “buy  into”  the 
process. The official sector would play a catalysing role in that context. 
To sum up, important lessons have been learnt and significant changes have been introduced also in 
the area of crisis management. That being said, implementation of the agreed principles still remains a 
challenge. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are living at the beginning of the twenty-first century in a world which has 
been  very  profoundly  transformed  during  the  last  fifty  to  sixty  years  since  the  Bretton  Woods 
institutions were set up. In a way, what we see today is for a large part made of dreams of the second 
half of the forties and the fifties of the twentieth century becoming reality: 
• 
The  falling  down  of  the  iron  curtain,  the  European  unity  marking  the  end  of  the  dramatic 
political and conceptual divide has been the emblematic illustration of a world more united at 
a global level as far as values, principles and economic rules are concerned; 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 5
  The very rapid development of emerging countries and of countries in transition permits the 
catching up towards a better standard of living of a large proportion of the poorest citizens of 
the world located in China, India, emerging Asia, and Latin America; 
The acceleration of the scientific and technological advances, including - but not exclusively - 
in the domain of IT - is giving the full body of the global economy a major impulse; 
Under  these  profound  philosophical,  conceptual,  and  economic  transformations  we  have  been 
progressively  inventing  a  new  fully  globalised  economic  and  financial  system,  in  which  human 
resources, goods, services, capital, concepts, ideas are moving around the planet instantaneously or 
fairly rapidly. This has created, in turn, a wealth of new chances and new opportunities that are, as 
always,  associated  with  new  challenges  and  new  risks.  One  of  our  particular  responsibilities  in  the 
sphere of the central banks is to guard against financial instability, to promote financial stability. 
If I had to sum up what we to cope with in the present circumstances, I would say that we have three 
main challenges: to understand, to tirelessly upgrade institutions and to remain alert. 
• 
To  understand,  first.  Research  is  more  necessary  than  ever  to  have  a  deeper,  more 
profound and more operational understanding of this new global financial system. It has no 
precedent and its complexities defy previous modelling. We have already done a lot in this 
direction: we understand why credibility is so important, particularly credibility of authorities 
like central banks; we understand better the phenomenon of contagion, of herd behaviour in 
a globalised environment; we understand better why structural flexibility improves resilience. 
But a lot remains to be done, in particular to understand the dynamics of the system and its 
potential instability. 
Second, to upgrade tirelessly institutions, the informal groupings, the rules and regulations, 
the  codes  of  good  practices  and conduct.  A  global  system  must  be  monitored  at  a  global 
level with all parties concerned having a systemic influence. The aim of preventing instability 
must  be  present  in  all  respective  entities  concerned.  A  lot  has  been  done  in  this  domain 
which is sometimes underestimated. A lot remains to be done. 
And, third, to stand ready to weather economic and financial shocks and open crises if and 
when they come. There is no time for complacency. We can minimise risks. But economic 
theory and empirical observations suggest that chances and opportunities of the dimensions 
magnitude that the global economy presents displays suppose that risk are taken and that 
we cannot eliminate them totally. This calls for important progress in two areas: augmenting 
resilience  which  calls  for  structural  reforms  that  is  particularly  necessary  in  Europe;  and 
preserving the capacity to give fairly rapid response at a global level thanks to intimate and 
confident cooperation, in particular across the Atlantic between the two major industrialised 
economies. 
  It  is  on  that  remark  that  the  Atlantik-Brücke  is  more  important  than  ever  that  I  will  conclude  this 
exposition. Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2004
