I J Macfarlane: Geography, resources or institutions? 
Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to “The Bottom Line” Luncheon, 
Melbourne, 25 August 2004. 
 It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Melbourne,  particularly  when  I  am  in  these  gracious  and  peaceful 
surroundings  and  contributing  to  such  a  good  cause  as  the  Bottom  Line  Luncheon.  By  a  strange 
coincidence the Patron of the Foundation is Hugh Morgan, my fellow Board Member of the Reserve 
Bank, and the Chairman is Professor Adrian Polglase, an old school friend. How could I refuse the 
invitation to speak today? 
I  notice  on  the  invitation  that  I  am  listed  as  speaking  about  the  economic  outlook.  I  am  afraid  the 
author of the invitation took a few liberties here, and so I will disappoint those who are expecting an 
analysis of current economic conditions and prospects. We at the Reserve Bank put out an exhaustive 
account of these earlier in the month and my deputy elaborated on them a week ago. A third rendition 
within a month would be counter-productive, so I will speak on a different topic, although it could be 
considered my views on the economic outlook in a very long-term sense. 
I would like to look at the factors that shape the economic success of a country in the very long run - 
that is, over the centuries - and, of course, I will pay particular attention to Australia. I propose to do 
this by briefly examining four factors which influence growth, and which can be summarised by four 
distinctive  catchphrases:  the  tyranny  of  distance,  geography  is  destiny,  the  resource  curse,  and 
institutions matter. 
The tyranny of distance 
(a) 
The first factor is a country’s position on the map - its distance from other countries or its degree of 
isolation. My remarks on this will necessarily be heavily influenced by Geoffrey Blainey’s classic study 
which originated the term. 
We have always assumed that Australia was at a disadvantage because of its relative isolation from 
the world’s great centres of commerce. This has certainly been true from the beginning. The late start 
of  European  settlement  was  not  just  because  they  took  so  long  to  find  us,  or  that  for  the  first  two 
hundred  years  Europeans  only  sighted  the  barren  north  west  coast.  Even  if  they  had  found  the 
temperate east coast two hundred years before Cook, there would not have been an economic reason 
to  occupy  the  land.  There  were  no  valuables  to  be  exchanged  with  the  native  population,  such  as 
precious metals and spices, and no case for permanent settlement because the American continent 
offered  everything  we  could  offer  and  was  much  closer.  It  was  only  a  couple  of  coincidences  that 
caused the British Government to take the extraordinary decision to establish a settlement at a place 
only once visited, and at the other end of the earth. 
This  isolation  continued  to  disadvantage  us  economically  despite  our  abundant  resources  and 
relatively small population. Transport costs were enormous and delays immense. It took five months to 
reach England by sail, and even when steam replaced sail and modern ocean liners replaced steam, it 
still took about four weeks for the journey. Air travel has shortened it to about 24 hours, but it took 
ages for us to forget our old attitudes. 
We were accustomed to an overseas trip, even a business trip, being a long drawn-out affair. We had 
occasions before air travel when Australian Prime Ministers would spend more than a year at a time in 
London. Going over old Reserve Bank records of the 1960s and 1970s, I noticed earlier Governors 
going  on  business  trips  that  lasted  seven  weeks.  Today  a  one-week  business  trip  is  a  long  one. 
Modern transport and communications have enormously reduced the tyranny of distance, even if it has 
made our lives more hurried. 
The other factor that has reduced the tyranny of distance for us is the growth of Asia. The Atlantic 
Ocean, with Europe and America on each side, is no longer the undisputed centre of world economic 
activity.  Asia  and  the  Pacific  Rim,  while  not  as  rich  as  the  Atlantic,  are  clearly  the  area  of  fastest 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 1
growth and largest population. This has presented enormous opportunities for Australia and, by and 
large, we have been adaptable enough to seize the chances offered. But it still has not completely 
dispelled  the  tyranny  of distance.  For example,  many  international  companies headquartered  in  the 
United  States  or  Europe  still  find  it  more  convenient  to  put  their  Asian  headquarters  in  Singapore, 
Hong  Kong  or  Tokyo  because  they  are  only  one  flight  away  from  headquarters,  whereas  major 
Australian cities are two flights away. We should also remember that Australia’s capital cities are in its 
southern half, while the capitals of our big trading partners - Tokyo, Seoul and Beijing - are in northern 
Asia. It would be easier if we were talking about Darwin and Jakarta, but that is not where the real 
action is.  
Geography is destiny 
(b) 
It is widely believed that geography determines whether a country will be rich or poor. This is because 
most  of  the  world’s  poorest  countries  are  nearer  to  the  equator  than  the  richer  ones.  Being  in  the 
tropics is thus regarded as condemning a country to relative poverty. Of course, this does not have 
much relevance for Australia because the populous two-thirds of our country is in the temperate zone. 
But  it  is  also  interesting  to  reflect  on  the  question  of  why  we  should  expect  a  hot  climate  to  be 
associated with poverty. It certainly was not always so; in fact it was the opposite. For example, in 
pre-Columbian America, it was the hot areas populated by Aztecs, Incas and Mayans that were richer 
than  the  temperate  areas.  In  1667,  under  the  Treaty  of  Breda,  the  Dutch  gave  up  their  claims  on 
Manhattan to the English in order to retain the island of Run (in what is now Indonesia). The superior 
value  they  placed  on  Run  was  due  to  its  being  the  world’s  principal  source  of  nutmeg.  In  the 
18th century,  France  had  only  enough  armed  forces  to  protect  one  of  its  two  main  American 
possessions  -  Canada  and  Haiti.  It  chose  the  latter  because  it  was  more  valuable,  being  a  major 
producer of sugar. 
Even in recent years, some of the success stories among developing economies have been in tropical 
climates  -  Singapore,  Hong  Kong,  Thailand,  Malaysia  and,  until  recently,  Indonesia.  Certainly,  a 
tropical climate does not condemn a country to poverty, even if most of the world’s poverty is in the 
tropics. As I will explain later, the correlation between geography and poverty can be explained at a 
deeper  level  by  institutional  factors  and  the  incentives  that  businesses  and  workers  face.  There  is, 
however, a lot of evidence suggesting that to be landlocked and in the tropics is so big a disadvantage 
that no country has yet overcome it. Sub-Saharan Africa is the best example of this. 
The resource curse 
(c) 
There is a widespread view that countries with abundant resources (particularly of minerals and oil) 
under-perform resource-poor countries. There is even some statistical evidence to suggest that this 
has happened on average over the post-war period.1  
The arguments behind this relationship are based on the belief that: 
• 
possession of resources is a windfall which makes the community less energetic in pursuing 
other economic activities;  
resource extraction is a low-tech/low value-added activity; and  
the price of resources inevitably falls relative to the price of manufactured goods.  
• 
• 
The first response to this thesis is to recognise that, even if true, it only applies on average and that 
there are many cases where the opposite applies. We are all aware of the failure of countries such as 
Nigeria  and  Venezuela  to  capitalise  on  their  oil  reserves,  the  Congo  (Democratic  Republic)  on  its 
copper, or Argentina on its pastoral resources. But could anyone suggest that rich countries such as 
Australia  or  Canada  have  been  disadvantaged  by  their  possession  of  mineral  wealth.  A  better 
example  still  is  the  United  States,  “which  was  the  world’s  leading  mineral  economy  in  the  very 
historical period during which it became the world’s leader in manufacturing (roughly between 1890 
and 1910).”2  The answer again is that economic success or failure depends on the institutions and 
                                                      
1   Auty (2001), Sachs and Warner (2001), Sachs (2003). 
2   Wright and Czelusta (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2004
incentives. Those countries that get these right will not suffer a resource curse, but those that get them 
wrong  and  allow  policy  to  be  dominated  by  a  self-defeating  battle  over  economic  rents  will 
under-perform. 
The assumption that the extractive industries are low-tech is also quite wrong. If they are conducted 
efficiently, they are very knowledge intensive and research is continuing to lead to many technological 
breakthroughs. Of course, it was not always so. “Australia was a leading gold-mining country in the 
nineteenth century, but was an under-achiever with respect to virtually every other mineral, particularly 
coal, iron ore and bauxite. . . . Australia’s share of world production lagged well behind its actual share 
of mineral wealth (based on modern estimates). In a nation with a strong mining sector and a cultural 
heritage similar to that of the United States, why should this have been so?”3 
The  answer  is  that  we  did  not  have  the  right  set  of  institutions  or  sufficient  technical  know-how  to 
compete with the world’s best. That is no longer the case since a complete change of mindset in the 
1960s. For example, R & D expenditure by the mining sector now accounts for almost 20 per cent of 
R & D  by  all  industries  in  Australia,  and  we  lead  the  world  in  mining  software,  with  one  estimate 
suggesting we now supply 60 to 70 per cent of mining software worldwide.4 
On the third point about the prices of resources falling relative to the prices of manufactured goods, I 
will  say  little  because  I  have  covered  this  point  so  many  times  before.  Suffice  to  say  that  after  an 
80-year  trend-fall,  Australia’s  Terms  of  Trade  - which  is  the  ratio  of  our  resource-intensive  export 
prices  to  our  manufacturing-intensive  import  prices -  bottomed  in  1985  but  have  on  average  risen 
since.  More  importantly,  few  now  doubt  that  it  is  manufacturing  prices  which  are  under  continued 
downward pressure as a result of the rapid expansion of capacity in Asia, particularly in China. 
Institutions matter 
(d) 
More and more, development economists and economic historians are coming to the conclusion that, 
at the deepest level, a sound institutional framework is the crucial ingredient for sustained economic 
performance, and that it is far more important than distance, geography or the presence of resources. 
One only has to look at the extreme differences in economic performance between South and North 
Korea, or West and (formerly) East Germany to see how different institutions can outweigh the same 
geography, culture and resources. The different economic performance of Australia and Argentina is 
another clear case, as is the more general economic superiority of the former British colonies over the 
former Spanish colonies, which has been a subject of recent studies emphasising the importance of 
institutions over geography.5 
What are the “deep” institutions that are conducive to sustained economic performance? 
• 
The  first  one  is  the  enforcement  of  property  rights.  No-one  will  venture  capital  for  an 
economic  project  if  success  leads  to  confiscation  by  the  government  or  other  powerful 
forces.  Thus,  the  enforcement  of  property  rights  means  a  strong  body  of  commercial  law 
(particularly  the  law  of  contract),  impartial  courts,  honest  police  force,  etc.  It  also  means 
eliminating,  or  at  least  minimising,  corruption.  It  often  used  to  be  thought  that  corruption 
“greased the wheels of commerce” and helped things get done. But modern research has 
unequivocally  shown 
the  economic 
performance.6  
The  second  institutional  requirement  is  constraints  on  the  ability  of  government  or  other 
elites to exercise arbitrary power. This usually means an open society, democratic political 
system  and  a  free  press,  but  I  would  also  add  institutions  that  encourage  competition  by 
challenging monopoly powers. An important ally in this is the openness of the economy to 
level  of  corruption, 
the  higher 
the  worse 
the 
                                                       
3   Wright and Czelusta (ibid). 
4   Stoeckel (1999). 
5   Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2003). 
6   Mauro (1995). 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 3
 international  trade  in  goods  and  ideas,  which  has  been  shown  to  have  a  significant 
correlation with economic performance.7 
Some degree of equal opportunity so that people can invest in human capital formation. In 
this  area,  by  far  the  most  important  component  is  access  to  education  and  an  economic 
structure where positions of importance and authority are open to all comers on the basis of 
merit.  
The  term  “deep”  is  used  to  describe  the  above  institutions  because  they  are  embedded  in  laws, 
constitutions and culture and are not amenable to quick change. In addition to the deep institutional 
framework, there are a number of other practices and policies that a country has to get right in order to 
achieve sustained growth in living standards. The most obvious ones, from my perspective, are sound 
monetary and fiscal policy and a resilient exchange rate regime, but there are many more that space 
does not permit me to list. 
It takes decades, or perhaps centuries, for deep institutions to evolve, and many attempts to simply 
impose  these  institutions  in  developing  countries  have  failed.  But  that  does  not  mean  the  process 
should  not  be  continued,  only  that  it  needs  to  be  done  more  sympathetically  whereby  the  local 
population become more involved and can feel they own the reforms. 
For countries like Australia, that start with basically good deep institutions, the job of maintaining the 
standard is easier, but it still requires constant attention and change. For every reform that protects the 
weak against the strong, there are other reforms that break down some cosy arrangement and thus 
reduce the level of security for the weak or for the weak and strong alike. Useful reforms will often be 
opposed  by  either  organised  labour  or  organised  business,  and  sometimes  the  one  reform  will  be 
simultaneously  opposed  by  both.  It  is  always  difficult  when  a  reform  has  major  distributional 
consequences.  
Fortunately, in my own area the distributional consequences are of secondary importance, and with 
the  benefit  of  hindsight,  reform  has  been  easier  than  in  many  other  areas.  The  transition  from  a 
monetary policy regime that had quite short horizons, a multitude of aims and where daily decisions 
were taken politically as in the 1970s and 1980s, to the one we have today was achieved within a 
decade.  It  is  often  the  case  that  reforms  that  seemed  difficult  at  the  time  are  well  accepted  in 
retrospect, and may even come to be seen as inevitable. The present monetary policy regime based 
on central bank independence and an inflation target was controversial a decade ago, but with good 
results  now  on  the  board  it  has  undoubted  bilateral  political  and  community  support.  Similarly,  the 
floating  of  the  exchange  rate  was  a  decision  that  was  hotly  debated  over  a  long  period,  but  does 
anyone want to go back to any of the variants on a fixed exchange rate regime that preceded it? More 
controversial were the reductions in tariffs that have occurred over the past thirty years, but here again 
there  are  few  voices  that  would  wish  to  turn  the  clock  back.  Or  would  we  wish  to  go  back  to  the 
immigration policy we had during the first half of the twentieth century? The list could go on and on. 
It is the nature of a first-rate democratic country that it will constantly be involved in economic reforms, 
or at least constant updating of its economic framework, and that the changes involved will generate 
political uncertainty and resistance. But that is the price of achieving and maintaining a first-rate set of 
institutions, and that is an essential condition for our continuing economic prosperity. 
Bibiliography 
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J., “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the 
Making of the Modern World Income Distribution”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2002.  
Auty, R., “The Political Economy of Resource-Driven Growth”, European Economic Review, 45, 2001.  
Baldwin, R.E.,  “Openness  and  Growth:  What’s  the  Empirical  Relationship?”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
9578, 2003.  
Blainey, G., The Tyranny of Distance, Macmillan, revised edition 2001.  
Dowrick, S., “Openness and Growth”, in International Integration of the Australian Economy, Reserve 
Bank of Australia, July 1994.  
                                                      
7   Dowrick (1994), Baldwin (2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2004
Gylfason, T., “Institutions and Economic Performance”, CESifo DICE Report 2/2004.  
Mauro, P., “Corruption and Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 110, No. 3, 1995.  
Sachs, J. and Warner, A., “The Curse of Natural Resources”, European Economic Review, May 2001.  
Sachs, J., “Institutions Matter, But Not for Everything”, Finance and Development, June 2003.  
Stoeckel, A., Minerals: Our Wealth Down Under, Canberra, Centre for International Economics, 1994.  
Wright, G. and Czelusta, J., “The Myth of the Resource Curse”, Challenge, March/April 2004. 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 5
