Jean-Claude Trichet: Welcome remarks for the Euro-Mediterranean Seminar 
Welcome  remarks  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Euro-Mediterranean Seminar, Eurosystem and Mediterranean country national central banks, Naples, 
14-15 January 2004.  
 Your  Eminence,  Minister  for  European  Affairs,  Members  of  the  Italian  Parliament,  President  of  the 
Region, Mr Mayor, distinguished guests, fellow governors, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you most warmly to this first Euro-Mediterranean Seminar of central banks. I 
am  particularly  happy  to  see  so  many  governors  here  from  central  banks  of  non-euro  area 
Mediterranean countries, who are joining colleagues from Eurosystem national central banks.  
This  seminar  marks  the  will  of  the  Eurosystem  to  pursue  a  regular  and  active  dialogue  with  the 
national  central  banks  of  Mediterranean  countries.  It  is  also  a  good  example  of  the  fact  that  the 
Eurosystem acts as a team: in this spirit, we asked the Banca d’Italia to host the seminar and I would 
like to thank Governor Fazio for having accepted, for having co-organised the seminar with the ECB 
and, of course, for choosing Naples. There is hardly any other place in Italy, or even in Europe, more 
suited  to  serve  as  the  location  of  this  meeting.  From  its  foundation  by  Greek  settlers  to  the  city  of 
today,  Naples  has  retained  the  imprint  of  the  successive  cultures  that  emerged  in  Europe  and  the 
Mediterranean basin. This makes it a unique site indeed.  
Our meeting here in Naples is both a real novelty and a sign of continuity.  
As you are all aware, there are a number of meetings and fora, which bring together representatives of 
Mediterranean countries and the EU to discuss economic and financial issues. These meetings take 
place as part of the Barcelona process, which was initiated in 1995 to foster cooperation between the 
northern,  southern  and  eastern  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  in  various  spheres.  As  you  know,  it 
comprises  the  EU  and  12  partner  countries  in  the  Mediterranean.  So  far,  however,  central  banking 
issues have not played a prominent role in this framework, and central bankers from the two regions 
do not have a multilateral platform for an exchange of views.  
This high-level seminar, and the preceding workshop that was held in Frankfurt in October last year, 
are not formally part of the Barcelona process. They are events initiated by central banks for central 
banks. They fill a gap in the network of institutional relations with and within the Mediterranean, and I 
am convinced that these events will very usefully enrich and complement the dialogue on economic, 
monetary and financial issues.  
Although  this  pan-Mediterranean  dialogue  between  central  banks  is  new,  the  very  concept  of 
Eurosystem relations with central banks around the globe is not. Therefore, this seminar marks the 
continuity of the will of the Eurosystem to value international contacts and exchanges of views with 
other central banks. As a distinctive feature of our international relations, we would very much like to 
establish  regional  networks  of  central  bank  contacts,  and  to  share  our  experiences  within  such 
networks  to  the  extent  that  they  are  relevant  to  the  specific  region.  In  this  spirit,  the  ECB  has 
organised, together with several Eurosystem national central banks, high-level meetings with central 
bank governors of the 12 acceding and accession countries, and with Latin American and East Asian 
central banks. And we are already planning similar events with other neighbouring economies, such as 
Russia.  
Against this background, let me briefly explain what motivated the Eurosystem to turn its view to our 
southern neighbours and to take the initiative to organise this seminar and the preceding workshop: 
• 
the  close  economic  and 
First,  when 
links  and 
interdependencies that exist between the southern and eastern Mediterranean and the EU 
are striking. The close economic and financial links, which will be reviewed in depth in the 
first session of this seminar, are not least  a legacy of the region’s history and geography. 
Many  people  expect  these  links  to  intensify  in  the  future,  particularly  as  a  result  of 
Association  Agreements  with  the  EU  and  the  ambitious  objective  of  creating  a  Euro-
Mediterranean Free Trade Area by 2010. In addition, with Cyprus and Malta joining the EU in 
May 2004, and in view of Turkey’s status as a candidate country – with a decision by the EU 
Heads  of  State  or  Government  on  the  opening  of  accession  negotiations  expected  in 
the  region, 
looking  at 
financial 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 1
 December  this  year  –  links  with  the  EU’s  Mediterranean  neighbours  have  become  more 
important.  
Second, the Mediterranean region faces severe economic challenges. High unemployment, 
in some cases combined with poverty, is probably the most pressing one. While being rarely 
below  10%  in  any  country,  unemployment  rates  are  above  20%  in  some  countries,  which 
also results in migratory pressures. A weakness in attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) 
to the region is obvious. Despite the geographical proximity, less than 2% of EU FDI goes to 
the Mediterranean region, compared with 4.4% in the 12 acceding and accession countries, 
7.8% in South-East Asia, and 10% in Latin America. The extremely low level of intra-regional 
economic  integration  is  also  striking  –  on  average  only  5%  of  Mediterranean  countries’ 
external trade is intra-regional trade. I believe strongly that addressing these challenges is 
not only in the interest of each of the economies concerned. It would also help to create the 
conditions  for  peace,  stability  and  prosperity  in  this  region,  which  are  so  important  for  the 
whole Mediterranean area and for Europe as a major Mediterranean partner.  
In my view, such economic and financial links and challenges have a central banking dimension, given 
central  banks’  crucial  role  in  macroeconomic  management  and  their  involvement  in  the  financial 
sector. This central banking dimension has definitely grown with the introduction of the euro as the 
single currency in 12 EU Member States. It seems only natural that the euro should have an impact on 
Mediterranean countries given the economic and financial ties and the geographical vicinity of the two 
regions. This impact may therefore be one of the exciting, overarching issues in this seminar, which 
will be discussed in the session on economic and financial relations and in the subsequent ones on 
exchange rate policies and the financial sector. 
More generally, exchanging our experiences on monetary policy and financial sector stability would be 
of  great  value,  all  the  more  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  Mediterranean  countries  and  their 
economies  are  highly  heterogeneous.  Among  the  issues  that  are  worth  reflecting  on  in  a  regional 
context, I see two issues that are of particular interest in the region: first, the variety of exchange rate 
regimes  that  have  been  applied  over  the  past  few  decades  in  the  region  and  their  impact  on 
macroeconomic  stabilisation,  where  substantial  progress  has  been  made;  and  second,  the 
experiences  with  regard  to  the  sequencing  of  capital  account  liberalisation  and  financial  sector 
development.  
In this context, the Eurosystem felt it was worthwhile to organise this high-level seminar. We were also 
encouraged by a series of bilateral visits over the past two years between our staff and central bank 
counterparts  from  the  region.  Particularly  encouraging  was  the  workshop  preceding  this  seminar  in 
Frankfurt  last  October,  which  all  participants  described  as  a  highly  interesting  and  valuable 
experience. These extensive activities over the past two years have laid the groundwork for today’s 
seminar, both in terms of analytical preparation and the establishment of bilateral relations between 
our  central  banks.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  all  those  in  our  partner  institutions 
throughout  the  whole  Mediterranean  region  who  have  helped  to  develop  and  realise  this  Euro-
Mediterranean central bank dialogue, who have driven work on this project forward, and without whom 
this event here, today could not have taken place. 
So what are the objectives of this seminar from our point of view? 
• 
First,  it  should  be  a  platform  for  an  exchange  of  views  between  central  banks  of  the 
Mediterranean region and central bankers of the Eurosystem. This seminar should enhance 
the  Eurosystem’s  knowledge  of  the  economies  of  our  Mediterranean  neighbours,  and 
provide the central banks of the region with an opportunity to become more familiar with the 
Eurosystem.  
Second,  this  seminar  is  not  a  one-off  event.  We  see  the  potential  for  regular  and  active 
dialogue in the region. Therefore, it is also an opportunity to elaborate on the main features 
of future cooperation.  
Third,  but  by  no  means  least,  this  seminar  offers  a  unique  opportunity  to  strengthen 
professional and personal relationships between all central bankers of the region. Part of the 
region is haunted by conflicts, which impact the economies. All the more reason, I believe, 
for  us  as  central  bankers  to  develop  professional  relations  and  encourage  active  and 
constructive dialogue.  
  2 
 BIS Review 4/2004
I would like to encourage all of us to make the best use of this opportunity by participating actively in 
the seminar with frank, open contributions. I look forward very much to our discussions. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 3
