Jean-Claude Trichet: Paris seminar on the EU accession process (address) 
Address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Paris seminar on 
the EU accession process, Paris, 4 March 2004. 
 Colleagues, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, 
I speak to you on the eve of an inspiring moment in the history of Europe. In less than two months 
from  now,  the  European  Union  will  complete  its  largest  ever  expansion.  What  was  originally  a 
Community of six countries in western Europe will become a Union of 25 countries. A Union of some 
450 million people. 
This enlargement will be the EU’s greatest: not just in terms of size, but also because of its historical 
significance. Tomorrow it will be 58 years to the day that Winston Churchill gave a speech in Fulton, 
Missouri, in which he spoke of an iron curtain descending across Europe. Today, not only has that 
curtain been torn down; the edifice that had been painstakingly built on one side is being expanded to 
house those who once lived on the other side. The members of the East will finally join the members 
of the West as members of the same European Union. 
As European central bankers, our destiny is intertwined with the destiny of our continent. As Europe is 
being  rebuilt  and  reunited,  so  we  are  reinforcing  and  uniting  its  monetary  foundations.  We  have 
already created a single European currency and a European System of Central Banks (ESCB). And 
with it we are providing the monetary stability that eluded Europe for much of the last century. But we 
still face the task of eventually fully integrating new Member States into our common monetary area. 
This  is  indeed  a  challenging  task.  Challenging  because  we  must  ensure  that  the  process  runs 
smoothly,  without  jeopardising  the  monetary  stability  that  is  our  ultimate  duty  to  European  citizens. 
Challenging, also, because of the logistics involved. 
 Enlargement of the euro area is, first and foremost, a challenge for the new Member States seeking to 
join. If I may address directly those of us who come from the acceding countries, I would say that you 
face the challenge of preparing your economies for life in Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
In  this  respect,  let  us  not  forget  that  a  great  deal  has  already  been  achieved,  especially  in  those 
countries that have had to undertake a transition from planned to market-based economies. The fact 
that this major round of EU enlargement is taking place in less than two months’ time bears witness to 
your achievements. You have fulfilled the “Copenhagen criteria”. You have stable democracies. You 
have functioning market economies. You have adopted the acquis communautaire. 
But this is no time to rest on one’s laurels. Having travelled the road set out in “Copenhagen”, it is time 
to drive on; time to travel along the road mapped out in “Maastricht”. Along this road the watchword 
will  be  stability.  For  central  banks,  this  means  maintaining  price  stability  and  preserving  financial 
stability.  For  governments,  it  means  pursuing  stability-oriented  economic  policies  and,  in  particular, 
sound fiscal policies. Overall, these efforts should lead to a high degree of sustainable convergence, 
characterised by the fulfilment of the Maastricht convergence criteria. At the same time, these efforts 
must  be  made  in  the  context  of  a  parallel  process  of  real  convergence  of  economic structures  and 
income levels. 
We all know that this will be no easy task. The road to the euro will be long and demanding. But at 
least  it  is  a  road  that  has  been  travelled  along  before.  And  you  can  benefit  from  the  experience  of 
those who have already travelled along it. We, the Eurosystem, can also help this process by making 
sure that the right signposts are there along the way. As you know, last December, we published the 
policy position of the Governing Council on exchange rate issues relating to the acceding countries. In 
this document we have set out what are, in our view, the principles which should guide participation in 
ERM II and the adoption of the euro. I do not need to summarise this document during this dinner as it 
will no doubt be touched upon tomorrow. Let me just say that it is a product of ongoing efforts by the 
Governing Council to steer the process of monetary integration in the right direction. 
 BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
Guiding  this  process  is,  of  course,  not  all  we  must  do.  For  our  part,  we  must  also  make  sure  that 
everything is ready and in place for you when you arrive. This has been, and will continue to be, a 
challenge  for  the  ECB  and  the  ESCB.  To  be  ready:  first  for  enlargement  of  the  EU  and  later  for 
enlargement of the euro area. The operational framework, the IT infrastructure, TARGET. I could go 
on. It all needs to be ready in time for you to “move in”. 
Let me assure you that we do not underestimate the scale of this task. And let me also reassure you 
that we have a good track record in meeting such logistical challenges. Prior to the introduction of the 
euro,  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  the  ECB’s  predecessor,  established  a  Master  Plan.  A  plan 
setting  out  the  regulatory,  organisational  and  logistical  preparations  necessary  for  the  ESCB  to 
perform its tasks in Stage Three of EMU. Inspired by this, last year we devised a new Master Plan. An 
Accession Master Plan to guide all activities necessary for the enlargement of the ESCB and later the 
Eurosystem. 
Things are well on track. Indeed they have been for some time. For years now cooperation between 
the  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  central  banks  of  the  accession  countries  has  been 
intense. There have been regular meetings, visits and exchanges. These have covered the policy and 
technical aspects of all central banking activities. I am told that there have been more than 1,000 such 
“central bank cooperation activities” in the last four years. 
 Since  the  outset,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  very  committed  to  supporting  the  enlargement  process 
and  to  ensuring  its  success.  This  is  why  we  decided  back  in  1999  to  organise  a  seminar  bringing 
together the governors and senior officials of the ESCB and the central banks of accession countries. 
And we have met on an annual basis since then. Over the years, these seminars have proved to be a 
very  useful  forum  for  policy  dialogue  on  the  monetary,  exchange  rate  and  financial  aspects  of 
enlargement. They have also helped the ECB and the Eurosystem to develop and present their views 
and so, as I mentioned earlier, to steer the process in the right direction. 
After  Helsinki,  Vienna,  Berlin  and  Genval,  it  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  our  fifth 
seminar on the accession process here in Paris. And this time it is also a particular pleasure because 
it will be the last of these seminars. When I say this, it is not because I don’t enjoy these seminars or 
sharing  your  company  in  such  wonderful  cities.  And  it  is  not  because  I  have  lost  interest  in  the 
accession process. Certainly not. It is because for 10 of the 12 accession countries the process of EU 
accession is now effectively complete. From 1 May this year, the ten central banks of the acceding 
countries will become part of the ESCB. Part of the same monetary team. Since May last year, the 
governors of the acceding country central banks have already participated, as observers, in meetings 
of the General Council. The relevant experts from acceding countries have participated in meetings of 
ESCB committees. You are already effectively part of our team. And let us hope that those of you from 
the remaining accession countries will also be joining our team in the not too distant future. 
 Fellow members and future members of our team, ladies and gentlemen, 
on the eve of this historic moment in European history, I raise my glass to you, and look forward to our 
seminar on the EU accession process. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
