Emsley D Tromp: Recent financial-economic developments in the Netherlands 
Antilles in general and in St Maarten in particular 
Address  delivered by  Dr  Emsley  D  Tromp,  President  of  the  Bank  van  de  Nederlandse  Antillen  (the 
Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles),  on  the  occasion  of  the  start  of  phase  II  of  Princess  Juliana 
International Airport’s expansion project in Philipsburg, St. Maarten, 20 July 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning, 
I would like to start by congratulating St. Maarten and, in particular, my former colleague at the central 
bank and current president of Princess Juliana International Airport, Eugene Holiday, on the financial 
conclusion of phase II of the airport’s expansion. A great deal of skill and perseverance is required to 
conclude  the  financing  of  such  a  multi-million  dollar  project,  whose  size  is  large  compared  with 
St. Maarten’s economy. The total investment of approximately US$ 100 million comprises about 18% 
of the island’s GDP. I am convinced that Eugene’s experiences during his career at the central bank 
and at Winair contributed significantly to this achievement.  
Let me also congratulate RBTT Merchant Bank for its decision to finance this important investment 
project. That decision underscores the success of RBTT Financial Group in expanding its presence in 
the  financial  sector  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles.  This  expansion,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  should 
contribute to a more competitive domestic financial market. More competition will lead to lower cost of 
borrowing,  lower  prices  for  banking  services,  and  a  wider  range  of  financial  products,  contributing 
positively to economic growth. Moreover, the financing of this project in the form of negotiable bonds 
offers  a  welcome  domestic  investment  alternative  for  banks,  institutional  investors,  and  private 
investors.  
The expansion of St. Maarten’s airport is a welcome impetus to the strengthening of its economy and 
the  economy  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  in  general.  This  project  along  with  some  large  investment 
projects in Curacao, such as the expansion of the airport there, the construction of a utility plant, and 
the expansion of the economic zone, suggest an encouraging outlook for further economic growth. 
Let me give you a brief overview of the financial-economic developments in the Netherlands Antilles in 
2003  and  the  prospects  for  2004.  Since  we  are  here  together  to  launch  an  important  project  for 
St. Maarten, I shall include some references specifically to developments in St. Maarten’s economy. 
The Netherlands Antillean economy recorded its third consecutive year of economic growth in 2003, 
reflected by an expansion of 1.4% in real Gross Domestic Product. St. Maarten’s economy showed the 
largest  growth  rate,  4.3%,  while  the  economies  of  Curacao  and  Bonaire  grew  by  0.5%  and  3.4%, 
respectively. St. Maarten’s economy represents approximately 17% of the Antillean economy, second 
to  Curacao whose share  is  75%.  The  expansion  in  net  exports  and  higher private  and  government 
consumption were the main contributors to the overall growth in 2003. In contrast, investment declined 
because  private  investors  put  investment  decisions  on  hold  due  to  growing uncertainty  surrounding 
the sustainability of the economic recovery. The inflation rate increased from 0.4% in 2002 to 1.9% in 
2003, due mainly to a rise in world oil prices, the appreciation of the euro, and higher inflation rates of 
our main trading partners, the United States and Venezuela. St. Maarten’s inflation accelerated to a 
lesser extent from 0.5% to 1.5% during this period. 
The  improvement  in  exports  in  2003  was  attributable  primarily  to  the  tourism  and  transportation 
sectors. Tourism showed healthy growth with  increases of 10% in the number of stay-over visitors, 
6% in the number of cruise visitors, and 8% in the foreign exchange income generated. St. Maarten’s 
corresponding growth rates of 12%, 11%, and 7%, respectively, were a major contributor to the overall 
tourism performance. The importance of St. Maarten for the tourist sector in the Netherlands Antilles is 
well established: the island generated 60% of stay-over tourism, 75% of cruise tourism, and 63% of 
tourism-related foreign exchange earnings in 2003. 
The transportation sector also performed well in 2003. The Antillean carrier, Dutch Caribbean Airlines 
(DCA), registered a substantial growth in both the number of passengers and the amount of freight 
transported. In line with the growth in stay-over tourism, activities at the airports in the Netherlands 
Antilles also expanded. St. Maarten’s airport was the busiest in 2003 with 1.5 million passengers, 12% 
more  than  in  2002.  This  number  exceeds  the  current  maximum  capacity  of  the  airport  facilities  by 
300,000 passengers, illustrating that the expansion is urgently needed. After the expansion, the airport 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
will  be  able  to  handle  2.5  million  passengers,  67%  more  than  currently.  The  airport  of  Curacao 
handled 1.2 million passengers in 2003, an increase of only 1.5%. Bonaire’s airport handled 0.6 million 
passengers,  but  this  number  implied  a  growth  of  54%  because  the  number  of  transit  passengers 
doubled.  A  shift  in  transit  passengers  from  Curacao  to  Bonaire,  resulted  from  the  rerouting  of  the 
intermediate stops on KLM’s flights between Amsterdam and Latin America from Curacao and Aruba 
to  Bonaire  beginning  in  the  summer  of  2002.  This  development  illustrates  how  susceptible  the 
performance of our airports is to decisions of large carriers. This factor should be taken into account 
when developing and implementing big projects like the one at hand. 
Developments in the harbor industry were mixed. Curacao’s harbor reported a marginal growth in the 
amount  of  freight  handled,  but  the  number  of  ship  calls,  especially  tankers,  declined.  In  contrast, 
Bonaire’s harbor registered a marked increase in the number of ship calls, particularly in the tankers 
category. The development in tanker calls was related to the general strike in Venezuela at the end of 
2002, which also affected the Venezuelan state oil company, PDVSA, which leases the refinery from 
the  Curacao  government.  Because  the  refined  products  could  no  longer  be  exported,  they  were 
transshipped  primarily  to  Bonaire’s  oil  terminal.  As  a  result,  oil  storage  and  transshipment  activities 
expanded  considerably.  Unfortunately,  no  data  were  available  on  the  performance  of  St.  Maarten’s 
harbor. However, the new container facilities strengthened the island’s comparative advantage as a 
regional hub for cargo handling. In addition, information gathered by staff of our research department 
during a recent visit to St. Maarten revealed that cruise tourism is the main source of revenues for the 
harbor with a share of 60%. The remaining 40% is earned from cargo handling.  
Two other important pillars of the Netherlands Antillean economy, but less relevant for St. Maarten - 
the oil refining industry and the international financial and business services industry - did not perform 
well in 2003. The production of the oil refinery did not fully recover from the impact of the temporary 
shutdown  at  the  end  of  2002  related  to  the  general  strike  in  Venezuela.  In  addition,  receipts  for 
services rendered in the international financial and business services sector declined. This decline is 
related to the elimination of the distinction between onshore and offshore activities, effectuated with 
the  introduction  of  the  new  fiscal  framework  (NFR),  which  ended  the  low  tax  regime  for  offshore 
activities.  This  disadvantage  would  be  more  than  compensated  for  by  the  improved  competitive 
position  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  in  negotiating  new  tax  treaties,  supported  also  by  the  new  tax 
arrangement  for  the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands  (BRK).  However,  progress  in  this  area  has  been 
slow, affecting the creation of new business in the sector. On the other hand, the new BRK resulted in 
higher  tax  revenues  for  the  government  because  the  withholding  tax  on  dividends  from  the 
Netherlands to the Netherlands Antilles collected by the Dutch tax office is transferred entirely to the 
Antillean government. 
The balance of payments of the Netherlands Antilles improved for the third consecutive year in 2003. 
A significant part of this result was due to the improvement of the current account, which recorded a 
small  surplus,  because  of  higher  exports  related  to  bunker  sales  and  tourism,  the  transfer  of  the 
dividend tax by the Netherlands, and higher transfers by individuals from abroad.  
The public finances remained an area of major concern, reflected by a further deterioration of the cash 
deficit of the general government in 2003 to 5% of GDP. Noteworthy is that the general government is 
defined here as the central government and the island government of Curacao only because the other 
island governments, including St. Maarten, do not have a regular reporting framework. I welcome the 
recently drafted legislation stipulating regular reporting on the government finances of St. Maarten as a 
condition for the islands government’s permission to borrow.  
The  deterioration  of  the  general  government’s  deficit  was  attributable  entirely  to  the  rise  in 
expenditures, facilitated by the ample availability of finance on the local capital market since domestic 
government  securities  continued  to  offer  more  attractive  yields  compared  to  alternatives  abroad. 
Consumptive  expenditures,  domestic  interest  payments,  and  the  settlement  of  loan  guarantees 
accounted mainly for the rise in total expenditures. The financing of the cash deficit, the formalization 
of  accumulated  funds  deficits  of  the  social  security  bank,  SVB,  and  the  appreciation  of  the  euro 
contributed to the further accumulation of government debt in 2003, reaching 90% of GDP. 
Since St. Maarten does not submit data on its government finances to the Bank on a regular basis, 
assessing outright the island’s current financial state remains difficult. However, the island government 
has not approached the central government for support since the last quarter of 2003, indicating that 
the  finances  must  have  improved  or  at  least  not  deteriorated  further.  The  financial  situation  of  the 
island government seems stable, supported by the collection of back taxes and expenditure control. I 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2004
welcome  this  development  and  hope  that  the  authorities  persevere  with  their  fiscal  consolidation 
efforts, an important condition for making viable the desired transition towards more autonomy. 
Let me state, however, that the lack of transparency in the government finances in terms of the delay 
in regular and complete publication of budget and actual figures will stand in the way of transactions 
like  the  one  we  are  celebrating  today.  A  more  autonomous  St.  Maarten  means  that  the  current 
indebtedness  of  the  island  government  will  take  a  more  prominent  position  in  the  evaluation  of 
transactions like this one.  
The current constitutional arrangement masks the indebtedness of the various island territories giving 
them  a  false  sense  of  security.  With  a  share  of  17  percent  of  the  Antillean  economy,  an  eventual 
division  and  distribution  of  assets  and  liabilities  means  that  St.  Maarten’s  share  in  the  nation’s 
outstanding stock of debt will be well over Naf 500 million. Ladies and gentlemen, to a great extent this 
debt stems from arrears built by the St. Maarten government to the Civil Servant Pension Fund and 
the  Social  Security  Bank.  If  this  important  macro-economic  aggregate  is  taken  into  account,  a 
completely  different  macro-economic  picture  will  emerge  after  St.  Maarten  obtains  its  autonomous 
status. I, therefore, encourage the local authorities to continue with their efforts towards institutional 
capacity  building  to  create  the  necessary  institutional  infrastructure  to  make  the  dissemination  of 
financial  and  macro-economic  information  possible.  Collecting  and  disseminating  this  information  is 
critical for ambitious investment decisions like the current one and for macro-economic policymaking. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the monetary aggregates expanded further in 2003, albeit at a slightly slower 
pace  than  in  2002.  The  surplus  on  the  balance  of  payments  and  the  expansionary  impact  of  the 
government, particularly  the  central  government,  contributed  primarily  to  the  monetary  expansion  in 
2003. In addition, credit extension to the private sector grew moderately by 2%, but the developments 
on the two island groups diverged considerably with stagnation on the Leeward Islands and a growth 
of 9% on the Windward Islands. 
Based  on  this  overview,  we  can  conclude  that  St.  Maarten’s  economy  performed  better  than  the 
Antillean  average,  and  I  expect  this  to  continue  in  2004.  For  example,  first-quarter  tourism  data 
indicate a growth of approximately 20% each in the number of stay-over tourists, the number of cruise 
tourists, and the amount of tourism earnings in St. Maarten. Given the dominance of tourism in the 
island’s economy, buoyant growth in the tourist sector will translate into buoyant growth of the entire 
economy, supported further by the start of the airport expansion project.  
The  strong growth prospects  for  St.  Maarten’s  economy  will  contribute significantly  to  the  projected 
further expansion of the Netherlands Antillean economy by 1% in 2004. This growth is, however, a 
slowdown compared to the 1.4% growth rate in 2003 because of lower growth of net exports, private 
consumption, and the need for fiscal consolidation. The lower growth of net export is due mainly to the 
expected decline in bunker sales, while the slowing of private consumption growth can be attributed to 
the projected decline in private transfers from abroad. In contrast, private investment is expected to 
improve  because  of  the  implementation  of  various  projects  in  the  oil,  utilities,  tourism,  and 
transportation sectors. Moreover, inflation is projected to moderate to 1.5%, but this outcome depends 
heavily on developments in world oil prices. Developments in bunker sales and private transfers from 
abroad, together with higher imports related to the growth in private investment, will result in a lower 
balance-of-payments surplus than in 2003. 
In  concluding,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  state  that  while  the  growth  prospects  for 
St. Maarten  are  promising,  we  should  not  overlook  the  susceptibility  of  the  tourism  industry  to 
exogenous  factors.  Since  the  terrorist  attacks  of  9/11  in  the  United  States  and  the  passage  of 
hurricanes like Luis and Lenny, we have to realize that these outside forces can render our predictions 
useless.  The  authorities  must  take  those  exogenous  factors  into  account  when  devising  macro-
economic policy and must build the necessary absorption capacity to withstand eventual adversities. A 
critical  look  at  our  sister  island,  Aruba,  should  illustrate  that  with  similar  conditions  and  growth 
prospects, outside forces have clouded the economics of an otherwise important investment project, 
there.  
Finally,  let  me  wish  Eugene  and  all  stakeholders  success  with  the  timely  completion  of  the  airport 
expansion project. This project will make a significant contribution to the long-term growth prospects of 
the economy of St. Maarten. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
