Hermann Remsperger: Statistics for financial stability purposes 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Second ECB conference on statistics, Frankfurt, 22 April 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
Sound statistics are needed for both fields of central banking - monetary policy and safe-guarding of 
financial stability. Statistics for monetary policy purposes mirror the two pillars of the ESCB’s strategy: 
first, monetary statistics, such as monetary aggregates and their counterparts which are compiled by 
the  ESCB  on  the  basis  of  banks’  balance  sheet  data  and  second,  a  wide  range  of  real  economic 
indicators such as GDP growth, wage developments and price indices. Most of these indicators are 
collected and compiled by the European Statistical System. 
Statistics  on  financial  developments  are  needed  not  only  because  of  the  key  role  that  financial 
institutions and financial markets play for monetary policy. They are also needed because monetary 
stability  consists  of  both,  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  Central  bank  policy  is  more  than 
monetary policy. 
It is against this background, as Eugenio Domingo Solans pointed out in Berlin last year, that the ECB 
has added the development of a statistical framework for financial stability to its medium-term agenda. 
In this context I would like to raise two questions today. First, does financial stability require different 
statistics from those which are already available for monetary policy? And second, in which areas of 
financial  stability  can  deficiencies  concerning  the  availability  of  financial  stability  indicators  still  be 
identified? 
Measurement without definition? 
I 
Let’s approach these two questions by emphasising that financial stability is a very complex subject. 
According to Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, financial stability means “a condition whereby the financial 
system  is  able  to  withstand  shocks  without  giving  way  to  cumulative  processes,  which  impair  the 
allocation of savings to investment opportunities and the processing of payments in the economy”.1
This  definition  shows  that  financial  stability  is  not  confined  to  banking  stability.  Furthermore,  recent 
research points out that financial instability can occur even in an environment of price stability. 
This is the underlying situation that makes statistics for financial stability purposes more diverse and 
less well established than statistics for monetary policy. Moreover, and unlike statistics for monetary 
policy, financial stability indicators do not only focus on the euro area as a whole. They also have to 
cover financial stability at the national level.  
Against  this  background  the  message  I’d  like  to  convey  today  is  very  simple:  Although  a 
comprehensive set of harmonised and consistent series of euro area indicators for monetary policy is 
now available, there is scope for collecting and compiling new data which could be used for financial 
stability purposes.2
What we need to assess the stability of the financial system is a very complex statistical framework. 
Take the IMF initiative on Financial Soundness Indicators as an outstanding example. Its “monitoring 
grid” clearly shows what Andrew Crockett pointed out already a few years ago: There is not only a 
micro but also a macro-dimension to financial stability analysis.3  
                                                      
1   T Padoa-Schioppa, Central banks and financial stability, speech delivered in Jakarta on 7 July 2003. 
2   Even though most statistical indicators, such as balance sheet statistics, interest rates and exchange rates, can serve both 
monetary policy and financial stability purposes, there are also a number of indicators which relate exclusively to one area 
or the other. 
3   Andrew  Crockett,  Marrying  the  micro-  and  macro-prudential  dimensions  of  financial  stability,  speech  delivered  at  the 
Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Basel, 21 September 2000. 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 1
It  is  certainly  true  that  financial  stability  indicators  concentrate  more  on  the  distribution  within  peer 
groups (ie categories of individual banks) which are at risk rather than the “average” bank. 
However,  at  least  some  degree  of  aggregation  is  normally  necessary  as  the  causes  of  financial 
instability are often common to all banks. It is unlikely to be the occasional failure of one bank that 
triggers  a  crisis  but  rather  a  shock  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  caused,  for  example,  by  an 
earlier asset price boom and/or lending boom.  
While the analysis of shocks to the economy and the surveillance of macroeconomic conditions are 
also essential parts of monetary policy analysis, the question of how these shocks affect the financial 
sector is typically relevant to financial stability purposes only.  
Infinite variety of financial stability indicators 
II  
I suggest concentrating now on three areas. First, financial and real estate markets; second, financial 
institutions, and third, non-financial companies and private households. With this setup in mind, I will 
first  focus  on  the  situation  in  Germany  before  drawing  your  attention  briefly  to  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole. 
As  far  as  data  for  the  first  area,  namely  surveillance  of  financial  markets  are  concerned,  these  are 
more or less readily available with long time series and adequate frequency. Examples are stock price 
indices, bond yields and emerging market spreads, obtained through commercial data providers. 
However, the availability of indicators for other asset markets is less satisfactory. One example are 
price indicators for the real estate markets, where we at the Bundesbank currently calculate indicators 
for terraced houses and flats based on data from a commercial data provider at annual frequency only. 
We are now investigating a way to move to a quarterly frequency for these data.  
The  second  group  of  financial  stability  indicators  relates  to  financial  institutions,  in  particular  to  the 
banking  system,  which  forms  the  backbone  of  the  financial  system.  It  is  precisely  this  area  that  is 
stressed  in  the  IMF  project  on  Financial  Soundness  Indicators,  namely  setting  up  indicators  of  the 
vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  (such  as  credit,  liquidity  and  market  risk  indicators)  and  for  the 
capacity to absorb shocks. 
In Germany, there are two different data sources in this area. First, data collected for monetary policy, 
such  as  balance  sheet  statistics  and  all  kinds  of  interest  rate  statistics.  Second,  data  used  for 
supervisory purposes, such as data on profitability, risk and capital. 
These supervisory data cover the total business of individual German institutions, thus also branches 
abroad.  Sometimes  even  the  whole  bank  group  is  covered,  ie  including  domestic  and  foreign  bank 
subsidiaries or even other financial subsidiaries. 
We are currently working closely with the Federal Financial Supervision Agency and the Ministry of 
Finance  to  investigate  how  the  data  sets  could  be  combined  and  better  displayed.  The  aim  is  to 
improve the analysis under the “financial stability umbrella”. 
While a  near-comprehensive  set  of  raw  data  is more  or  less  readily  available,  further work  may  be 
necessary  in  respect  of  the  methodology  and  frequency  of  those  data.  From  the  perspective  of 
financial stability it would be helpful to have the statistics on banks’ profits and losses available on a 
quarterly basis.  
However, for the monitoring of financial stability it is not sufficient to look only at banks. You also have 
to look at other financial intermediaries, insurance companies and pension funds.  
A  very  important  issue  here  is  to  gain  more  insight  into  the  credit  risk  transfer  from  banks  to  other 
financial  institutions  through  credit  derivatives  or  the  securitisation  of  loans.  Although  some 
fundamental data do exist in this regard in Germany, data availability in this field should be improved 
to get more information on links between different sub-sectors within the financial industry. 
Let us now turn to the third area of financial stability indicators. What we also need are data on the 
financial  conditions  of  non-financial  enterprises  and  households.  Economic  shocks  might  also  be 
transmitted to the financial industry from these sectors - for example, via a deterioration of the quality 
of banks’ assets. 
It is precisely in this data segment, namely the quantification of the overall liabilities of non-financial 
corporations and households, that we at the Bundesbank are currently improving data availability. We 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2004
have established a data pool related to non-financial enterprises in Germany which is fed by various 
sources (our own information, associations of banks and credit insurers, public information services, 
etc). 
In addition to the banks’ balance sheet data which allow us to quantify the liabilities of non-financial 
corporations  and  households  vis-à-vis  banks,  supplementary  information  from  the  data  pool  on 
corporations may shed more light on the overall indebtedness of the private sector. Here, a possible 
indicator may be the ratio of non-financial corporations’ total debt to equity. A second set is composed 
of profitability indicators, such as return on equity. 
As regards households’ assets, the Bundesbank has reasonably comprehensive information on their 
securities  held  in  safe  custody  with  banks  in  Germany.  Admittedly,  these  data  are  supplied  on  an 
annual basis only. However, we are going to increase the frequency of the safe custody statistics to a 
quarterly basis. 
That is why we may be in a position in due course to monitor the specific developments of securities 
holdings of households, as well as of other economic sectors such as non-financial corporations, in a 
more timely manner and with greater precision. 
Turning now to the analysis of financial stability for the euro area as a whole, at least two additional 
issues arise from a statistical point of view. First, the degree of cross-country comparability of the data 
and, second, the availability of indicators at euro-area level. 
We  should  aim  to  achieve  a  sufficiently  high  degree  of  coverage  and  harmonisation  for  each  key 
indicator for the analysis of financial stability in the euro area. But this is a very ambitious target, even 
for the medium term. Harmonisation and coverage issues may arise in all the three areas, I adressed 
a minute ago. Let’s take the banking industry as an example. 
The  ESCB  already  collects  and  compiles  a  comprehensive  and  harmonised  set  of  statistics  for 
monetary policy purposes. This allows the derivation of high-quality indicators referring to the business 
of  bank  head  offices  and  bank  branches  located  in  the  countries  of  the  Eurozone.  However,  bank 
branches/subsidiaries  outside  the  euro  area  are  not  covered  by  these  data,  and  other  financial 
subsidiaries are excluded in general. 
At the same time, there are indicators covering the entire bank or bank group. These indicators are 
derived from national supervisory data sources and thus are not harmonised. To make a long story 
short: There is one data set which is harmonised but lacks coverage. And there is another one which 
reflects high coverage but lacks harmonisation. 
Feasibility constraints 
III  
I think we have to tackle these and other harmonisation gaps. Furthermore, there is no doubt that the 
availability of reliable statistical data for financial stability purposes is not yet complete. We are faced 
with data gaps. There are, however, practical difficulties with regard to gathering additional, and more 
detailed, statistical data. 
One  possibility  to  reduce  these  difficulties  is  to  consider  whether  more  data  from  commercial  data 
providers  could  be  purchased.  However,  the  scope  may  not  be  sufficient  as  the  focus  of  private 
providers is on financial market data. In addition, this option could turn out to be quite costly. 
Another option might be to consider extending the statistics produced under the stewardship of the 
ESCB in the field of money and banking statistics.  
However,  a  good  sense  of  proportion  is  necessary  when  deciding  on  new  harmonised  statistical 
requirements.  There  is  a  common  understanding  that  producing  statistics  is  a  costly  matter,  in 
particular from the viewpoint of the data suppliers. Any new statistical reporting will place an increased 
burden on the reporters and strain their resources.  
And let’s not forget that central bank statisticians and data reporters anyway have to cope with a whole 
bunch  of  new  challenges.  Examples  are  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union,  any  potential 
enlargement of the European Monetary Union, the change in accounting rules, and, last but not least, 
the requirement of calculating new indices and indicators for banking supervision purposes under the 
Basle II regime. 
Given all these tasks, it is absolutely essential to set priorities. The highest priority should be attributed 
to closing data gaps with regard to essential indicators for financial stability such as statistics on the 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 3
securitisation of bank loans. In order to narrow the data gap in this area we should use existing data 
with sufficient coverage from other sources. An obvious example is the biannual information by the 
BIS on derivative instruments which is collected from a small number of leading market players, which 
covers still 80% of the overall market volume. 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  check  whether  existing  statistical  surveys  could  be  discontinued  in 
exchange for any new data requirements. For example, regionally disaggregated balance sheet data 
of banks in Germany no longer have analytical relevance because of euro-area membership. 
In order to keep the costs within strict limits, statisticians may find it helpful to determine the extent to 
which one and the same data source might serve different analytical purposes.  
We  also  have  to  check  whether  new  data  requirements  can  be  met  from  existing  statistics  if  we 
estimate parts of the data cells and accept - as far as tolerable - estimation errors. This could apply to 
some  specific  sectoral  breakdowns  within  the  credit  aggregates  of  MFIs  which  are  not  actually 
reported but estimated from specific benchmarks. 
In order to reduce the reporting burden, statistics could be compiled, whenever possible, on a sample 
basis, in particular in those cases where prices or indices are to be calculated. The MFI interest rate 
statistics could be taken here as an example.  
At the very least, statistics, or surveys, could be reported on a voluntary basis. This would be feasible 
in cases where a very small number of institutions cover the bulk of the business in question. Statistics 
on derivatives and the bank lending survey are valid examples. 
Conclusion 
IV  
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasising  three  points.  First,  there  is  a  need  for  financial  stability  statistics 
beyond those that are already available for monetary policy purposes. Second, although progress has 
been made, a more extensive set of indicators is still missing. Third, clear-cut mandates are necessary 
for  the  formulation  of  reporting  requirements  and  for  the  cost  assessments;  all  the  parties  involved 
have to acknowledge that the production of statistical data is costly and burdensome and that budgets 
for statistical reporting are in no case “unlimited”. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2004
