Julian W Francis: The Bahamas economy - critical strategic issues 
Remarks by Mr Julian W Francis, Governor of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, at the 13th Annual 
Bahamas Business Outlook, Nassau, 20 January 2004. 
 An  attempt  to  form  a  view  on  the  short-to-mediumterm  Business  Outlook  must  necessarily  seek  to 
identify the principal challenges facing us and assess our readiness to confront them. 
What then are the challenges? 
These are not new; for years there has been general agreement on the list; what is changing is how 
the  Bahamas  economy  is  being  shaped  and  affected  over  time  by  these  challenges,  especially  in 
those areas where we have not been able to implement appropriate policy to address and cope with 
these external forces. 
The Bahamas has generally been able to hold its own and to perform well in the two major economic 
components  of  its  economy:  tourism  and  financial  services.  This  ability  to  compete  in  these  two 
industries can be explained largely by the related comparative advantage held by our country, vis-à-vis 
those who in fact can compete against us in those industries, given mainly geographic considerations. 
But, it is the result, also, of a long-standing significant openness in the broad policies governing the 
operation  of  those  activities  in  this  environment;  there  is  virtually  no  restriction  on  investments  by 
credible  and  acceptable  parties  in  either  sector  -  with  the  exception  of  the  domestic  retail  banking 
sector where, for a long time, some level of restriction on entry has applied. 
With respect to the labor policy applicable to these two major sectors, it has generally facilitated the 
management  and  technical  -  including  infrastructural  development  -  needs  of  these  sectors  and,  I 
believe, would be considered by those operating in the sectors as reasonably flexible. 
 The  Bahamas  government  has  consistently  sought  to  provide  necessary  fiscal  and 
administrative support to these sectors; the Hotel Encouragement Act, for example, and the 
incentives which it provides, has been critically important in attracting many hotel projects to 
the  Bahamas.  In  financial  services,  we  need  consider  only  the  recent  establishment  of  a 
Government  ministry  to  focus  on  issues  related  to  that  sector  to  have  clear  evidence  of 
Government’s commitment to support this industry. 
The policy of openness, and determination to be competitive in these two industries, its no doubt the 
result  of  the  realization  that  despite  the  comparative  advantage  enjoyed  in  each  instance,  because 
these are global industries which cannot be easily controlled by individual countries acting alone, and 
this is especially true of the smaller countries such as The Bahamas, one has to play by the rules of 
the  broader  global  environment  or  not  play  at  all.  Indeed  this  is  the  reality  which  has  been  lost, 
recently, on many who still pine for the old days of financial services; they do not fully understand, or 
agree, that The Bahamas, alone, cannot cause this industry to behave as we might wish. 
A  most  interesting,  even  intriguing,  paradox  is  that  while  the  Bahamas  has  thrived  and  built  its 
successful  economy  largely  through  the  embrace  of  these  two  global  industries,  which  have 
demanded and have largely received exemption from a more closed, inward-looking investment policy 
generally,  a  large  segment  of  our  economy  has  not  been  spared  the  reflex  of  protectionism  and 
administrative  control,  which  in  many  instances  probably  should  have  been  left  behind  when  we 
closed the doors on the decade of the sixties. To fully reinforce this point, let me ask you to consider 
for  only  a  second  what  the  respective  size  and  economic  contribution  of  our  tourism  and  financial 
services sectors would be, had these been restricted to a Bahamian-only- policy. 
It is probably not an exaggeration to assume that they would be considerably smaller, far more costly 
in  their  operation,  and  would  consequently  speak  for  only  a  fraction  of  the  contribution  the  actual 
industries make to our economy. 
I  think  its  important  to  point-out,  that  I  do  not  wish  to  suggest  an  inherent  inefficiency  in  domestic 
business,  although  this  is  often  the  experience,  but  rather  to  point  to:  (a)  the  resource  availability 
advantage of a non-restrictive policy, and (b) the fact that in an open economic environment, domestic 
resources  are,  like  those  from  abroad,  forced  to  be  efficient,  competitive  participants,  or  they  will 
dissipate,  not  benefiting  from  the  protection  of  public  policy.  The  domestic  economy,  and  whatever 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
opportunity there may be for the economy to develop, will benefit from the significantly higher levels of 
resources available and competitive efficiencies. 
Some of the principal areas of administrativeeconomic control include:  
– 
– 
The Exchange Control Policy; 
The  Investment  Policy,  which  restricts  entry  by  non-Bahamians  into  certain  areas  of  the 
economy; 
The  Public  sector  official  virtual  monopoly  over  provisions  of  electrically  and 
telecommunications services; 
The monopoly over provisions of legal services, held by the Bahamas Bar Association; 
and 
The Immigration Policy, which appears to be premised on the principle that work permits 
should be available only for positions which cannot be filled by Bahamians. 
   While I don’t propose to examine each of these in great detail, I feel a few comments could be useful: 
Exchange Controls: the need for these is, of course, rooted in the country’s decision, almost forty 
years ago, to adopt its own currency at values which have always been fixed and not permitted to float 
on the currency markets. Had the decision been taken at the beginning or early on to adopt the U.S. 
Dollar (for example) as the currency, or to allow the B. Dollar to float, exchange controls would not 
have been necessary. 
I  would  argue  that  we  are  too  far  down  the  path  of  having  pursued  the  fixed  exchange  rate 
arrangement to make a sudden complete reversal. It is therefore, in my view, necessary to pursue the 
measured  liberalization  path  which  has  been  followed  for  more  than  ten  years  now,  the  ultimate 
objective  being  complete  removal  of  controls  in  the  future.  I  have  said  on  a  number  of  occasions 
before, and sincerely believe, that The Bahamas will at some point during the next ten or so years 
decide to become a member of a larger currency arrangement. 
The main implication of such a step would be the loss of the Government’s ability to borrow from the 
Central  Bank.  The  most  important  theoretical  benefit  to  the  economy  of  the  eventual  removal  of 
exchange controls is the removal on restrictions to the movement of capital. 
I  believe  that  The  Bahamas  would  be  a  considerable  beneficiary  of  such  a  development  when  it 
eventually is possible, but wish to emphasize that it would probably not be possible in the very short 
term. 
Investments: National security, environmental, and reputational concerns dictate that there should be 
some  level  of  approval with  respect  to  proposed  investments  into  the economy.  However,  I  am  not 
certain that the strict reservation of certain activities for Bahamians can be maintained if our economy 
is  to  achieve  the  level  of  competitiveness  needed  in  the  current  and  developing  environment.  The 
policy requires review in the context of what is happening around us. 
Public Utilities: unless we move quickly to commercialize the benefit of the diminishing monopoly, we 
will completely lose the stock of value developed in the national telephone company over the years. As 
in  the  tourism  and  financial  services  industries,  and  numerous  others,  telecommunications  has 
become  one  of  those  industries  which  is  driven  by  global  forces.  In  the  same  way  that  communist 
China  found  that  they  could  not  control  it,  and  particularly  its  internet  applications,  The  Bahamas 
needs  to  embrace  international  telecommunications  industry  fully,  and  allow  business  and  the 
community  generally  to  realize  the  tremendous  benefits  it  provides.  I  realize  that  there  is  an 
understanding  of  this  reality  at  the  policy-making  level,  but  as  in  other  domains  we  do  have  to 
appreciate that developments will not wait for us. 
Equally, in the provisions of electric power to our economy, particularly in the more developed centers 
of The Bahamas, we should not be driven by protectionism, but should seek to offer to the Bahamas 
economy the very latest and most developed technology by way of commercial arrangements which 
allow our consumers to enjoy terms as similar as possible to those available anywhere else. 
Those who would have us believe that this has anything to do with our birthright or national pride are 
wrong!  The  best  long  term  interest  of  Bahamians  in  a  globalized  environment  is  served  by  policies 
which embrace all opportunities available to us, and which force us to be challenged by the highest 
standards practiced anywhere. 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
Legal  Services:  there  is,  I  think,  an  increasing  realization  that  the  maintenance  of  a  strict  legal 
monopoly in favour of members of the Bahamas Bar, certainly as it affects the delivery of international 
financial services, is highly counter-productive. The best that one can say for this anachronism is that 
it fails to appreciate to what extent legal services have become synonymous with this industry; some 
feel  that  like  some  of  our  labour  union  leaders,  legal  practitioners  who  refuse  to  contemplate  any 
compromise in this regard are simply pursuing naked self interest. If the policy-makers refuse to take-
on the Bar in a meaningful way on this issue, this is a matter which should be put to the Bahamian 
people  to  decide.  It  is  simply  too  important  to  the  future  of  a  potentially  more  vibrant  and  dynamic 
financial services industry to leave it as it currently stands. 
Immigration:  There  is  a  view  that  there  needs  to  be  a  separation  of  border  protection  from 
immigration issues related to the development of those business sectors which The Bahamas most 
favour  if  our  economy  is  to  compete  globally.  While,  as  I  suggested  earlier,  Tourism  and  Financial 
Services have probably not been significantly disadvantaged in this regard, especially during the last 
ten to fifteen years or so, there is room for considerable reform in this area, to provide the flexibility 
and  efficiency  which  business  should  enjoy.  The  Bahamas  needs  to  overcome  the  underlying 
unwillingness  to  accept  the  meaningful  and  equal  participation  in  our  economy  by  persons  from 
elsewhere.  This,  I  admit,  will  probably  change  more  quickly,  when  more  Bahamians,  themselves, 
venture to invest and pursue business beyond our borders. Again, though, if we have to wait for this 
type  of  “organic”  acceptance  to  occur  before  we  can  reform  the  way  our  economy  works,  we  risk 
missing-out  on  the  positioning  phase  of  this  new  global  economic  order.  We  should  consider  most 
carefully if we are to take such a risk. 
With  regard  to  labor  issues  more  generally,  our  country  is  clearly  faced  with  a  crisis  of 
unreasonableness in the expectations which labor has been made to understand it should have vis-à- 
vis what the economy can and should, given competitive realities, afford to labor. 
This,  I  think,  is  one  of  the  largest  issues  challenging  the  orderly  development  of  the  Bahamians 
economy. 
The time, I think, has come for tow things in particular to happen: 
(1) 
There needs to be careful reflections on the operation of labor unions, to ensue the they do 
not continue to capriciously hold the economy at ransom; and, 
The  institutionalization  of  a  meaningful  forum  for  dialogue  between  labor,  industry  and 
government, as employer, needs to be pursued, to - 
a) 
b) 
develop a better appreciation by labor of its appropriate place in the economy, and  
provide  for  a  long-term  stable  framework  within  which  orderly  negotiation  and 
determination  of  labor  contracts,  and  other  issues  of  importance  between  these 
groupings, could be pursued. 
(2) 
I would argue that the influence of labor leaders - as distinct from the union membership - is currently 
far in excess of what it should be given what they represent in the entire process. One can wonder 
whether they have not been allowed to direct the administration of labor far too much in their individual 
interest. 
Is The Bahamas ready for these types of reform? Certainly not for the most part. 
There is a pervasive Bahamian desire to resist change and to assume that our country can continue to 
enjoy the fruits of our traditional good fortune without any particular effort on our part. 
Of  course  this  is  a  badly  mistaken  view  which  in  any  event  does  not  seem  to  recognize  that  we 
ourselves demand an ever increasing improved standard and quality of life. 
Unless  we  are  willing  to  embrace  these  types  of  reforms  in  the  way  we  pursue  development,  the 
improvements which we have known for three half decades of development will become increasingly 
difficult to realize. 
A  development  vision  for  The  Bahamas  over  the  next  decade  must  be  based  on  the  principle  of 
openness. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 3
