Klaus Liebscher: Reviving the European economy 
Panel  statement  by  Mr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  EPP-ED 
Group Study Days, Vienna, 23 March 2004.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
the past three years are frequently cited as not having been too brilliant for the European economy. 
Triggered by adverse international developments, growth was sluggish or stagnated in the majority of 
Member States. Partly as a result, fiscal policies in a number of Member States slipped sharply into 
deficit, threatening the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact. Progress on the implementation of 
the  Lisbon  Agenda  was  slower  than  hoped  for,  and  the  Lisbon  Agenda  is  not  accorded  enough 
importance by observers. I want to argue today that things are not really that bad.  
• 
Europe has very successfully managed to achieve economic convergence among its present 
15 Member States. 
Europe has successfully introduced a single currency for 12 nations. 
Europe has designed an impressive agenda of structural reform at the Lisbon summit, and 
progress is being made. 
And  Europe  has  shown  remarkable  persistence  in  the  pursuit  of  its  ambitious  agenda  of 
further  development.  Eastern  enlargement,  which  future  history  books  will  quote  as  a 
landmark achievement on the path toward European integration, will become a reality in little 
more than a month’s time, work on the draft Constitutional Treaty is very far advanced, and 
the EU is by no means short of important projects for the near future. 
  However,  I  will  also  argue  that  we  must  not  be  complacent.  In  today’s  globalized,  fast-moving 
economy, more than ever standing still - or moving too slowly - is tantamount to falling behind.  
To my mind, the euro is a success story in several respects.  
That  this  outstanding  project  was  realized  bears  witness  to  Europe’s  will  to  push  forward  with 
integration. That its introduction went so smoothly is testimony to the creativity, project management 
capacity and cooperative spirit of everyone involved. The euro has made all our lives easier. The euro 
also  protects  our  economies  to  a  large  extent  from  foreign  exchange  turbulence.  Today,  our 
economies are - not completely, but to a considerable extent - shielded against the ups and downs of 
the U.S. dollar (just recall what that would have meant in the ERM I of the early 1990s!). Moreover, the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  has  established  sustainable  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Inflation 
expectations  have  been  stabilized  at  slightly  below  2%.  This  signals  the  high  credibility  which  the 
Eurosystem enjoys with professional analysts, financial markets and the general public. That success 
has  only  become  possible  against  the  background  of  the  lasting  consensus  among  European 
politicians  that  price  stability  is  an  important  goal  -  both  in  its  own  right  and  as  a  precondition  for 
sustainable growth.  
I mentioned before that we must never become complacent. We take this appeal very seriously in the 
Eurosystem.  The  quarterly  Bank  Lending  Survey,  the  new  euro  area-wide  interest  rate  statistics  or 
various measures of inflation expectations derived from surveys are just a few examples of continuous 
efforts the ECB and NCB staffs make to improve on the quality and diversity of the information sources 
employed to prepare the Governing Council’s monetary policy decisions. The Governing Council also 
undertook  a  major  review  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy  last  spring,  which  resulted  in  several 
refinements of how we structure monetary policy considerations and how we communicate with the 
public.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
the ECB Governing Council has noted the progress in fiscal consolidation envisaged in the Member 
States’ stability programs. Nonetheless, there continues to be cause for concern. In some countries, 
contrary  to  their  commitments,  adjustment  efforts  are  insufficient  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  excessive 
deficits. Moreover, several countries do not plan to attain sound budgetary positions by the end of their 
respective program horizons, despite favorable growth prospects. This would risk a repetition of the 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
policy errors of the last economic upswing, when insufficient consolidation efforts and tax cuts without 
adequate expenditure restraint laid the foundations for the recent fiscal difficulties.  
All Member States would benefit from the strengthening of the sustainability of their public finances. 
Determined implementation of comprehensive structural fiscal reforms, on both the expenditure side 
and the revenue side, will bring additional medium-term rewards in the form of higher growth and more 
sustainable public finances.  
Such consolidation and reform strategies are needed to secure a sound macroeconomic environment 
in  the  euro  area,  which  in  turn  enhances  confidence  and  promotes  investment,  growth  and 
employment in the euro area.  
As regards the institutional framework for fiscal policy, the Governing Council of the ECB shares the 
concerns of the European Commission regarding the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council in November 
last  year.  The  Commission  is  the  guardian  of  the  Treaty,  and  the  Eurosystem  respects  the 
Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity on the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
We  do  not  see  a  need  to  change  the  Treaty,  and  we  consider  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
appropriate  in  its  current  form.  It  provides  appropriate  incentive  structures  to  national  policymakers 
within  a  multi-country  monetary  union.  If  applied  appropriately,  the  framework  ensures  long-term 
sustainability  and  sufficient  room  for  an  automatic  smoothing  of  business  cycles.  The  Governing 
Council agrees with the Commission that the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact could be 
further improved, in particular in terms of the analysis of structural imbalances and the strengthening 
of incentives for sound fiscal policies during good economic times. The clarity and enforceability of the 
fiscal framework should be enhanced.  
Let me, as an aside, note that Austria successfully managed to implement its fiscal consolidation as 
planned  over  the  past  four  years.  The  Austrian  example  shows  that  structural  cuts  in  fiscal  deficits 
need  not  entail  below-average  macroeconomic  growth.  As  recent  research  by  the  European 
Commission shows, fiscal consolidation through cuts in expenditures is less likely to entail short-run 
growth-dampening effects than consolidation which relies on raising taxes. While recent tax cuts by a 
number  of  European  governments,  including  that  of  Austria,  are  in  principle  appropriate  given  high 
public  expenditure-to-GDP  ratios,  governments  should  use  the  coming  economic  upswing  to  bring 
their budgets into balance mainly through cuts in expenditures.  
There  is  a  general  consensus  that  the  euro  area  urgently  requires  further  structural  reforms  in 
financial,  product  and  labor  markets.  The  Lisbon  Strategy  provides  the  appropriate  blueprint  for 
progress. 
I think we can very much compare the current situation of the Lisbon Agenda with the state of EMU in 
the mid-1990s. 
• 
Then as now a project of historical dimensions and of the highest priority for the EU’s further 
economic development was at stake.  
Then as now there was a lot of scepticism about the project’s viability and timetable.  
Then as now there appeared to be lackluster support from some European leaders.  
• 
• 
The decisive move that brought EMU back on track in the mid-1990s was the meeting of the Euroepan 
Council in Madrid in December 1995. At that meeting, the date for the introduction of the European 
currency, January 1, 1999, the further steps necessary to reach this goal and the name “euro” were 
decided.  This  important  guidance  from  European  leadership  established  a  “pioneering  mood.”  It 
triggered the necessary work at the various technical levels dealing with the preparation of EMU. And, 
most  importantly,  it  created  confidence  in  European  leadership  and  problem-solving  capacity  in  the 
general public. 
I  therefore  welcome  that  the  forthcoming  spring  meeting  of  the  European  Council  is  set  to  give 
renewed  impetus  to  the  Lisbon  agenda,  speed  up  the  pace  of  reforms  and  strengthen  the 
effectiveness of the decision-making process. If done correctly and with the necessary commitment on 
behalf  of  the  Member  States,  European  leaders  should  be  able  to  manage  a  revival  of  the  Lisbon 
Agenda comparable to that achieved a decade ago on EMU. 
Structural reforms will  have  enormous benefits  for  the citizens  of  the  euro  area.  These  reforms  are 
crucial for sustained noninflationary growth and employment, and they are therefore also important for 
maintaining social cohesion in the long run. Confidence among European citizens in the future is vital 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
   for a stronger economic recovery and stable growth. The continued low level of consumer confidence 
is  also  related  to  uncertainties  about  the  appropriate  path  for  structural  reforms  in  many  euro  area 
countries. Further progress in the implementation of necessary structural reforms is key to stronger 
confidence, and such reforms create the conditions for consumption and investment, for growth and 
job creation. 
Let  me  emphasize  a  few  points  which  in  my  opinion  are  crucial  now  to  a  successful  revival  of  the 
Lisbon Agenda. 
• 
A first message is: Enough talk, now is the time for action!  
The necessary reform areas have been sufficiently discussed and have been clearly 
identified. We do not need more reform papers now, we need implementation.  
A second message is: Set clear priorities and use intelligent sequencing!  
Otherwise both politicians and electorates will simply be overwhelmed and discouraged.  
A third message is: Create clear responsibilities !  
It is not sufficient for European leaders to issue declarations and conclusions on what “the 
Community” needs to do. We need a binding commitment by each Member State on the 
concrete reform steps that it will implement until 2010. The Maastricht convergence criteria 
would probably never have been fulfilled if there had only been reliance on a general 
intention that the Community requires price stability, sound public finances and the like. You 
need to break objectives down to the national level and create incentives to ensure 
implementation.  
A fourth message is: Talk to people and get them actively involved!  
I think a major obstacle to implementation of the Lisbon Agenda by the various governments 
is a lack of communication with the public. It is thus not surprising that it seems to be rather 
difficult for people to accept the reforms. Thus, each Member State government needs to 
convince its citizens of the enormous potential and opportunities released by structural 
reforms. After all, what we aim for is higher per capita income, replacing redundant activities 
with more welfare-generating ones, investment in skills and education, a knowledge-based 
society, more innovation and sufficient research and development. I would think that these 
objectives are of such a genuinely positive nature that it should be possible to convince 
people of the reform steps necessary to reach them. At the same time, one should not - and 
cannot - conceal that some of the reforms necessary on the way are painful or unpleasant, 
and affect various groups of societies in different ways. In such cases of strong conflicts of 
interest it is all the more important to enter into an active, constructive dialogue and to jointly 
find acceptable, fair solutions, since, in the long run, no government can afford to ignore 
public opinion. I think that some of the official documents prepared ahead of the forthcoming 
European Council already touch on the course I have just outlined, but to my feeling not 
sufficiently.  
Let me conclude by quoting from Robert Schuman’s legendary Declaration of May 9, 1950: “Europe 
will  not  be  made  all  at  once,  or  according  to  a  single  plan.  It  will  be  built  through  concrete 
achievements.”  
I think that this statement is as true today as it was more than half a century ago. It will become even 
more  relevant  in  an  enlarged  European  Union  of  25  Member  States.  While  European  leadership  is 
becoming ever more important, the European Union can function well only if individual players perform 
their  roles  responsibly.  This  applies  both  to  the  division  of  labour  between  monetary,  fiscal  and 
structural  policies  and  to  the  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  EU  and  national  governments. 
Sound fiscal policies and a rapid implementation of the Lisbon Agenda are both areas where individual 
Member States have a pivotal role to play. Now it is time to act. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
