Jean-Claude Trichet: European economy - current state and prospects 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual 
Dinner 2004 of Financial Services Ireland (FSI), Dublin, 23 September 2004. 
 I am very honoured to have been invited here today. I would like to thank you, Mr Chairman, and the 
Executive Board of Financial Services Ireland for your invitation, and for giving me this opportunity to 
share my views on the state of the European economy and the prospects for the future. I will like first 
to discuss the current economic and financial situation in the euro area and prospects for the future, 
and  then  I  will  focus  on  some  of  the  conditions  which  need  to  be  in  place  to  ensure  sustainable 
growth, including the role of fiscal policy. 
Current economic situation and future prospects 
Let  me  start  by  describing  the  current  economic  and  financial  situation.  The  latest  data  releases 
confirm that the economic recovery in the euro area is continuing. Real GDP grew by 0.5% quarter on 
quarter  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  having  recorded  a  0.6%  increase  in  the  first  quarter. 
Moreover, the latest indicators of output and demand remain consistent with ongoing growth in real 
activity. 
Looking  ahead,  the  conditions  for  a  continuation  and  broadening  of  the  recovery  remain  in  place. 
Economic growth outside the euro area continues to be robust, and should continue to support euro 
area  export  growth.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  benefit  from  the  positive  global 
environment and the very favourable financing conditions. Improvements in corporate efficiency and 
higher  profits  are  also  supporting  business  investment.  Moreover,  private  consumption  should 
continue  its  gradual  recovery,  broadly  in  line  with  growth  in  real  disposable  income  which,  with  the 
usual lag, should be further underpinned by an increase in employment growth later on. 
Against  this  background,  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  continue  and  to 
become more broadly based over the coming quarters, leading to a somewhat stronger upswing in the 
course of 2005. 
I  should  note  that  this  scenario  of  an  ongoing  and  further  progressing  economic  recovery  is,  as 
always,  subject  to  some  risks  -  in  both  directions.  On  the  upside,  the  ongoing  momentum  of  the 
recovery may again imply more positive developments for economic growth in the coming quarters. 
On the downside, there are still concerns about continuing economic imbalances in other parts of the 
world. These imbalances could affect the sustainability of the economic recovery. 
Another downside risk to the growth projections relates to oil prices. If these were to remain higher 
than currently expected by markets, this would dampen both foreign and domestic demand. 
In assessing the real risks stemming from the oil prices, one should nevertheless take into account 
that, when expressed in euro, the recent rise in oil prices has been significantly smaller than during 
previous oil shocks, for example, in 1973, 1979 and 2000 when oil price increases had a major impact 
on the world economy. In addition, in real terms, oil prices are significantly below the peaks they have 
reached  in  the  past.  Moreover,  when  compared  with  the  1970s  and  1980s,  the  oil  intensity  of 
production in the euro area and elsewhere has fallen significantly. In 2001, the energy intensity of the 
euro  area,  measured  as  energy  consumption  in  tonnes  of  oil  equivalent,  in  relation  to  real  GDP, 
decreased by around 50%, compared with its peak recovered in 1973. That being said, I will echo here 
the calls for oil producers to be as responsible as required by the situation in the present juncture of 
the global economy. 
Turning to price developments, the recent oil price developments have had a visible direct impact on 
euro area inflation. The annual HICP inflation in August was 2.3%, unchanged from July. On the basis 
of current market expectations for oil prices, it appears unlikely that annual inflation rates will return to 
levels below 2% in the remainder of this year, and in the very beginning of next year. 
Looking  ahead,  however,  there  are  no  indications  at  present  of  stronger  underlying  inflationary 
pressures building up domestically. Recent wage developments have been moderate, and this trend is 
expected to continue for some time to come in view of the continued high level of unemployment in the 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 1
euro area. If this is the case, and provided that one-off shocks to prices from other sources such as 
those seen in 2004 are not repeated, annual inflation rates should drop below 2% in 2005. 
However, there are several upward risks to the projections for inflation. Concerns relate in particular to 
oil price developments, which may continue to have a visible impact on inflation. Oil price rises also 
imply  the  risk  of  second-round  effects  emerging  in  wage  and  price-setting,  a  risk  which  intensifies 
when  the  economic  upswing  strengthens.  A  further  upward  risk  relates  to  the  future  evolution  of 
indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices, as  very  little  specific  information  is currently  available  about 
these in 2005 and beyond. 
All  in  all,  while  the  available  indicators  are  consistent  with  price  stability  being  maintained  over  the 
medium-term,  a  number of  upside  risks  need  to  be monitored closely.  Cross-checking  this with  our 
regular monetary analysis indicates that there is substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is 
needed to finance non-inflationary growth. This also supports the case for strong vigilance with regard 
to the materialisation of risks to price stability. 
Having given you an overview of the current state of the euro area economy, and some prospects for 
the near future, I would like now to address some of the conditions that need to be in place to ensure 
sustainable growth. 
is  an  urgent  need 
Conditions for sustainable growth 
The key to the achievement and maintenance of strong growth in Europe requires a perspective that 
extends  beyond  shorter-term  cyclical  developments.  There 
to  promote 
growth-orientated  economics  strategies,  including  the  stimulation  of  productivity  and  employment 
rates, within a framework of sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies. It is widely recognised that the 
accelerated implementation of structural reform, framed within the Lisbon agenda, is the key to making 
the EU economies more competitive and dynamic. Structural reforms that are designed to increase the 
flexibility of  markets, open the path to achieving higher sustainable growth, increasing employment, 
promoting innovation and securing the sustainability of social security systems in the EU. 
Tackling  structural  problems  in  European  labour  markets  is  essential  to  this  process.  Particularly 
difficult  challenges  for  Europe  include  reducing  the  high  level  of  structural  unemployment,  including 
youth unemployment, and increasing the relatively low level of labour market participation, particularly 
of older workers, that persist in European labour markets. Overall, there is quite a distance to bridge 
before  Europe  reaches  one  of  the  key  goals  that  has  been  set  in  the  Lisbon  agenda,  namely  an 
employment rate of 70%. 
Some countries have started to undertake the needed reform their social security systems to reduce 
the  disincentives  to  work  currently  created  within  many  European  labour  markets.  Unemployment 
schemes have been amended and early retirement incentives have been reduced. But more progress 
of  this  type  is  necessary  to  attract  more  people  into  the  labour  market,  particularly  as  Europe’s 
population  becomes  older  in  the  face  of  demographic  change.  Here  the  remarkable  experiences  of 
Ireland  provide  a  strongly  positive  example.  Ireland’s  economic  success  can  be  linked  to  the 
successful transformation of its labour market into a plentiful supply of competitively priced and quality 
labour resources. Its experiences demonstrate that policies to increase the flexibility of labour markets 
can bring with them the opportunity for long term positive effects on growth performance. 
Stronger  product  market  competition  is  also  a  central  instrument  for  boosting  growth  in  Europe. 
EU countries, including Ireland, have made significant progress in product market reforms during the 
1990s,  having  positive  effects  on  the  integration  and  level  of  competition  in  goods  markets,  but 
barriers to competition and innovation in Europe remain, which urgently need to be tackled. Ireland’s 
experiences have  again  shown  that  the  further  reduction  of  these barriers  in  the  internal Market,  in 
particular  in  services  and  network  industries,  are  essential  to  promote  effective  competition  across 
Europe. The further reduction of red-tape in order to enhance productivity, job creation and the better 
use  of  information  technologies  is  another  priority.  Attention  should  also  be  paid  to  the  share  of 
EU Internal Market legislation not yet implemented in national laws. 
Finally much progress has been achieved in capital market reforms, not least due to the introduction of 
the  euro.  Whilst  in  most  countries  financial  markets  function  well,  there  is  still  some  market 
segregation. The completion of the Financial Services action plan is needed to promote pan-European 
competition and to further consolidate and restructure the financial sector. A recent study, for example, 
found that the overall level of EU-wide real GDP may increase by more than 1% over a decade as a 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2004
result of further integration, and that employment would also benefit. The further integration of national 
capital  markets  towards  a  truly  European  financial  market  could  also  make  a  more  important 
contribution  to  safeguarding  against  country-specific  shocks.  Another  of  Ireland’s  successes  -  as  a 
premier  host  country  for  foreign  investment  -  suggests  that  further  efforts  should  also  be  made  to 
promote  foreign  investment  in  the  financial  markets  of  the  euro  area,  in  order  to  attract  additional 
capital and promote a greater transfer of technology. 
Let me explain why we, at the ECB, keep stressing the importance of implementing structural reform. 
Confidence among European citizens is vital for a stronger economic recovery and sustained growth. 
Successful  structural  reform  that  credibly  reduces  disincentives  to  work,  invest  and  innovate  could 
have  significant  confidence  effects,  even  in  the  short  run.  The  impetus  from  determined  structural 
reforms  in  capital,  labour  and  product  markets  would  set  in  motion  a  virtuous  circle  of  increasing 
confidence:  the  more  credible  the  reforms  are,  the  more  confidence  they  will  create,  and  the  more 
confidence is created, the sooner positive results will be visible. 
To conclude on structural reforms, I think the key issue now is to put promised reforms into practice - 
to bridge the gap between strategy and implementation in Europe - to identify the best policy practices 
and make structural reform happen. We have a consensus on the “road map”. The issue today is to 
improve  “navigation”,  to  streamline  the  decision  making  process  and  the  effective  delivery  of  the 
reforms. Convincing the people of Europe that our countries will be better off thanks to these reforms 
is  absolutely  key.  It  was  clear  that  implementing  effectively  the  necessary  reforms  would  be  a  real 
challenge and this challenge requires that we win the heart and the trust of the people of Europe. 
Fiscal policy 
Implementing  structural  reforms  to  raise  potential  growth  is  a  major  challenge  facing  European 
governments. But it is not the only one. Achieving sustainable, non-inflationary growth also requires a 
strong commitment to fiscal discipline. 
In any economy, in the absence of fiscal discipline, price stability can only be maintained at a higher 
cost in terms of interest rates, and thereby growth and employment. By contrast, sound public finances 
facilitate the task of the central bank by strengthening the conditions for price stability, leading to a 
better ex post policy mix with more favourable financing conditions and thereby contributing to higher, 
non-inflationary growth. But it is all the more important in a monetary union, without a federal budget at 
the  area-wide  level.  A  credible  and  reliable  framework  ensuring  fiscal  discipline  at  the  level  of  the 
monetary union is a key component for the consistency and the cohesion of this union. Sound fiscal 
policies are necessary to avoid the negative spill over effects in terms of interest rate increases that 
could be caused by one country or a group of countries running large budget deficits. Reaching a safe 
budgetary  position  in  good  times  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  fiscal  policy  has  room  to  cope  with 
asymmetric  shocks,  which  can  no  longer  be  addressed  by  monetary  policy.  Not  least  for  these 
reasons, it is a matter of concern to the ECB that a number of Member States are struggling to live up 
to their commitment to fiscal discipline. 
In view of recent difficulties, the Commission has tabled some proposals and a discussion has been 
launched  to  consider  how  to  strengthen  and  clarify  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact. Of course the ECB itself is not a party to the Pact and decisions in this area are the responsibility 
of  governments  not  central  banks.  But  since  fiscal  policies  matter  for  monetary  policy,  we  central 
bankers are affected and we consider it appropriate to give our advice. 
We  can  find  common  ground  between  some  of  the  Commission’s  proposals  and  our  own  thinking, 
namely, as regards the preventive arm of the Pact. We agree that the implementation of the Stability 
and Growth Pact should be improved. We agree that ownership and incentives for compliance need to 
be  enhanced.  And  we  agree  that  implementing  the  Pact  in  a  way  that  best  reflects  its  economic 
rationale should help to achieve this end. 
At the same time, we are wary of excessive complexity or of relaxation of the rules. In particular the 
so-called “corrective arm” of the Pact must fully preserve the nominal anchor of 3%. The Stability and 
Growth Pact requires simple and transparent rules in order to facilitate effective monitoring; to provide 
an effective deterrence against unsound policies; and at the end of the day, to provide an anchor for 
long-term expectations, which results from the clarity, simplicity and credibility of the framework. In this 
respect,  we  stick  to  our  assessment  that  the  wording  of  the  Treaty  and  of  the  regulations  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact is appropriate in its current form and should not be changed. 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 3
Let me add one further word regarding the current discussions on the Stability and Growth Pact. Some 
proponents of reform - not all - argue that there is a need to focus more on growth, as if there was a 
contradiction between fiscal soundness and growth and job creation. On the contrary, economic theory 
and empirical observations support the idea that wise fiscal policies are fostering sustainable growth 
and job creation. There is no better example of this than here in Ireland where, in the second half of 
the 1980s, a vigorous fiscal consolidation was accompanied by an acceleration of economic activity. 
Indeed,  the  experience  of  Ireland  suggests  that,  when  needed,  a  credible  and  well  designed  fiscal 
consolidation can support economic growth not only in a medium and long term perspective but also in 
the short-run. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me conclude with two remarks which could be summed up in two words : 
Confidence and Conviction. 
Confidence first. We all know that the euro area has a considerable potential, which will progressively 
materialize in the period to come. The present gradual recovery is underway and conditions are there 
for it to be progressively more broadly based. In the present juncture confidence is of the essence. 
The  degree  of  confidence  in  all  economic  constituencies,  households,  savers,  entrepreneurs  and 
investors is a key factor to foster growth and job creation. A Central Bank is an anchor of confidence. 
We, in the ECB and in the Eurosystem, are doing all what is necessary to preserve and consolidate 
confidence: confidence in our currency, confidence in our capacity to deliver price stability, confidence 
in the stability of our monetary and financial environment. 
And  then  Conviction.  We,  in  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem,  are  convinced  that  fully  enhancing  and 
expressing  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  calls  for  reforms  to  be  implemented.  We  support 
governments  and  Parliaments  that  have  embarked  on  such  structural  reforms.  I  know  that  these 
reforms are neither easy to decide nor easy to put in place once decided. They need a great deal of 
courage and determination, particularly when the general public is not yet fully convinced that they are 
necessary. The sentiment of the public at large is decisive in any democracy. This is why I think that 
appropriate pedagogy and tireless explanations are more important than ever to convince our fellow 
citizens of Europe that reforms are paying off and that everyone would be better off, thanks to these 
reforms. We are part of this large, public explanation endeavour. The ultimate conviction of the people 
of Europe, of our fellow citizens, is of the essence. And Dublin is the best capital in Europe to stress 
this point, so visible and tangible are here the level of prosperity and the quantity of jobs that reforms 
can help delivering. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2004
