Axel A Weber: Financial stability and globalisation 
Opening  address  by  Professor  Dr  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Second  Conference  of  the  Monetary  Stability  Foundation  on  “Financial  Stability  and  Globalisation”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3 June 2004. 
 It is an exceptional pleasure and an honour for me to welcome you to the Second Conference of the 
Monetary Stability Foundation. 
I would like to extend a special welcome to the distinguished members of the diplomatic corps present 
this afternoon, Peter W Bodde, US Consul General in Frankfurt and Leonidas Contovounesios, Consul 
General of the Hellenic Republic in Frankfurt. 
It is a great pleasure to be able to welcome governors of central banks from all over Europe: Jaime 
Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Banco  d’España,  Ljubisa  Krgovic,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Montenegro, and Dr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank. 
I  am  exceptionally  pleased  to  be  able  to  welcome  Professor  Helmut  Schlesinger,  President  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank from 1991 to 1993. 
I am glad to have with us today Jürgen Hettinger, President of the Frankfurt Regional Office of the 
Deutsche Bundesbank. Thank you for hosting this conference. 
And, last but not least, I would like welcome the distinguished speakers who will make this conference 
an  inspiring  event:  Professor  Giancarlo  Corsetti,  Professor  Gerhard  Illing,  Professor  Philip  Lane, 
Professor Andrew K Rose, Professor Karlhans Sauernheimer, Associate Professor Philip E Strahan. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
I came into office as President of the Deutsche Bundesbank only five weeks ago. I have my roots in 
academia, and in this line of work I have participated frequently in conferences on monetary issues, 
not  least  various  conferences  hosted  by  the  institution  I  am  now  entrusted  with.  Therefore,  my 
introduction “it is an exceptional pleasure and an honour” is meant literally. 
The importance of monetary stability 
1. 
The overarching purpose of the Monetary Stability Foundation is to strengthen public awareness of the 
great importance of monetary stability. This objective is to be pursued mainly by means of financing 
research on monetary issues, thereby broadening the intellectual foundation of stability policy. 
In  December  2002,  the  Monetary  Stability  Foundation  held  a  first  conference.  Since  then, 
developments - and debates - have underlined just how important the nonstop emphasis on stability is. 
I would like to briefly comment on three issues that stand out in this respect. They also link the Stability 
Foundation’s academic approach to central banking in practice. 
1. 
Over the decades, inflation was occasionally declared dead. The latest events in this strand 
took  place  in  the  wake  of  the  New  Economy.  At  the  time,  it  was  widely  hoped  that 
globalisation and new technologies would put an end to inflation. 
The recession following the bursting of the New Economy bubble then even brought about a 
serious debate on whether deflation had replaced inflation as the main threat to monetary 
stability.  As  the  world  economy  regained  strength,  this  perception  reversed  itself.  In  the 
current  environment  of  substantial  global  economic  growth,  high  energy  prices  and  ample 
liquidity, the focus has shifted back to inflation. 
The hopes for an end to inflation did not materialise. 
The second development underlining the importance of the Monetary Stability Foundation is 
being  observed  in  the  institutional  environment.  The  institutional  framework  for  monetary 
stability featured as the topic of the first conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation. 
Since then, the institutional foundations of the euro area have repeatedly been faced with the 
danger  of  being  undermined.  The  European  Convention  presented  a  draft  for  an  EU 
  
2. 
 BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
Constitutional Treaty that might considerably weaken the institutional framework of the single 
currency agreed in the Maastricht Treaty. European Monetary Union is characterised by two 
key  features  designed  to  guarantee  monetary  stability:  a  primary  objective  of  maintaining 
price stability and central bank independence. 
The euro is still a very young currency with only a short - albeit encouraging - track record. 
The  sound  institutional  framework  lends  credibility  to  the  euro.  One  of  the  objections 
presented  by  European  central  bankers  has  recently  been  sustained:  price  stability  will 
remain one of the EU’s goals. I fully appreciate this response to our repeated intervention. 
European central bankers’ remaining key concerns in the field of the Constitutional Treaty 
pertain  to  the  independence  of  national  central  banks,  an  abridged  procedure  for  future 
changes to the monetary framework, and the ECB being listed among the “other European 
institutions”. Politicians must not jeopardise the foundations of a stable currency. 
This  holds  also  true  for  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  second  pillar  of  the  European 
monetary framework has also come under stress. Governments that hesitated to consolidate 
their  budgets  in  times  of  plenty  have  recently  faced  the  headwind  of  a  weak  economy. 
However, a regulation should not be classified as being inadequate just because it is causing 
the regulated parties to feel some discomfort. 
The objective laid down in the pact, namely achieving a budgetary position which is at least 
close  to  balance  in  the  medium  term,  is  an  important  feature  of  a  stable  environment 
conducive to economic growth. The debate on changing the pact is the wrong debate. The 
pact is fine. Its enforcement, however, must be improved. 
The  third  development,  an  intensification  of  the  international  debate  on  financial  stability, 
also  links  the  first  and  second  conferences  on  monetary  stability.  In  the  context  of  the 
institutional  framework  for  monetary  stability,  issues  such  as  crisis  prevention  and  crisis 
resolution, transparency and how to best organise prudential supervision have already been 
discussed in this forum. 
At this year’s conference we will focus on financial stability issues arising in the context of 
globalisation. 
      Globalisation and financial stability 
2. 
Globalisation  entails  considerable benefits  for  the world economy.  They  come  in  the  form of  higher 
standards of living not only for the residents of advanced countries, but also for the people in the less 
and least developed countries, which have increasingly been integrated into the world economy. 
The liberalisation of international capital flows started in the early 1980s. Since then, the volume of 
international  financial  transactions  has  risen  both  substantially  and  rapidly.  The  opportunities  for 
international portfolio diversification and risk reallocation have broadened markedly. 
However,  the  deregulation  of  international  capital  flows  seems  to  have  come  at  the  cost  of  an 
increasing number of international financial crises. In terms of output and welfare losses they tend to 
be costly. 
To gain, to maintain and - if necessary - to regain financial stability is a major challenge in a globalised 
world.  In  order  to  properly  design  appropriate  institutions,  tools  and  procedures,  we  need  to 
understand  how  globalisation  impacts  on  financial  stability.  With  this  conference,  the  Monetary 
Stability  Foundation  seeks  to  contribute  to  the  understanding  of  financial  stability  in  the  context  of 
globalisation. 
Tour d’horizon of this conference 
3. 
The  conference  will  start  with  a  stock-taking  exercise.  The  first  panel  will  provide  an  empirical 
assessment of how far the “International integration of financial systems” has advanced. The level and 
composition of gross and net holdings of foreign assets and liabilities are surely a good starting point 
for quantifying the state of financial globalisation. Their evolution over time may provide useful help in 
identifying the driving forces behind the growth of international holdings. What is behind what looks 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
like a widespread shift from debt to equity and FDI instruments? What implications should we expect 
from the ensuing changes in cross-border flows of investment income? 
The  quantitative  picture  of  the  web  of  international  financial  linkages  will  be  amplified  later  this 
afternoon by three contributions highlighting “International contagion in financial markets”. Contagion 
has  become  an  issue  after  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  To  define  contagion  is  not  a  trivial  issue.  Did 
countries suffer from crises in other economies because they were fundamentally in a similar position? 
Or were economies infected despite sound fundamentals? How and when does contagion happen? 
Can a country effectively “immunise” itself from contagion? 
Tomorrow’s  session  will  start  with  a  panel  on  “Exchange  rate  regimes  and  worldwide  stability”. 
Exchange  rate  regimes  are  among  the  main  suspects  in  creating  financial  instability  -  if  domestic 
macroeconomic  policies  are  not  in  line  with  the  chosen  exchange  rate  regime.  In  choosing  an 
exchange  rate  regime,  it  has  to  be  decided  which  is  more  important:  the  advantages  afforded  by 
flexibility  for  domestic  policy  or  the  monetary  policy  credibility  that  may  be  gained  by  an  external 
anchor.  Contrary  to  the  widely  held  bipolar  view,  intermediate  exchange  rate  regimes  have  shown 
some durability. How can the choice of exchange rate systems contribute to worldwide stability? 
A  panel  on  “Internationalisation  of  banks  and  the  risk  implications”  will  attempt  to  shed  light  on  the 
impact of banks’ international assets on financial stability. It will strive to enquire into the net effect of 
financial institutions’ international portfolio diversification on financial stability. The stabilising effects of 
international portfolio diversification contrast with potentially destabilising effects resulting from faulty 
risk assessment due to information asymmetries. 
The fifth and last panel of this conference will explore financial stability issues of “Financial systems in 
emerging markets”. As regards investing financial institutions, the question is which specific risks they 
incur  when  “setting  up  shop” 
the 
internationalisation  of  the  financial  system  has  been  deemed  as  both  a  blessing  and  a  curse.  Host 
countries  sometimes  fear  that  an  internationalisation  of  their  banking  systems,  eg  via  foreign  direct 
investment, will entail more volatility and more vulnerability. However, the east European has shown 
that internationalisation has had very positive effects on the efficiency of their financial systems and 
the economy in general. 
in  emerging  markets.  As  regards  emerging  markets, 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
This conference is academic in nature; the majority of speakers therefore come from academia. Thank 
you all for contributing to the Second Conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation. 
I  am  glad  that  the  Bundesbank  has  again  been  successful  in  talking  several  distinguished  policy 
makers  into  speaking  at  this  conference.  Thank  you  for  enhancing  theoretical  approaches  with  the 
view from the business of policy making. I am especially delighted that Jean-Claude Trichet will join us 
tonight and will speak at our conference dinner. 
As I approach the end of my remarks, I would like to thank Professor Hermann Remsperger, Chairman 
of the Supervisory Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation, and Dr Reiner König, Chairman of the 
Executive Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation, for conceiving and preparing this conference. 
It is my wish that this conference will ultimately help to improve our understanding of financial stability 
in a world experiencing rapid globalisation. I now officially declare this conference open and shall give 
the  floor  to  Professor Remsperger, who  will chair  today’s session  of  the  Second Conference  of  the 
Monetary Stability Foundation. 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 3
