Paul Hartmann: The impact of financial infrastructure transformation on 
monetary policy execution - the Namibian experience 
Keynote address presented by Mr Paul Hartmann, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Namibia, on behalf 
of  Mr  Tom  Alweendo,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  at  the  Perago  User  Conference  2004, 
Pretoria, 22 September 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman 
Participants from Central and Commercial Banks 
Representatives from various Corporations 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure to address you this morning at this Perago’s User Conference 2004, which is the 
second user conference that Perago has arranged. In line with the theme of this conference, which is 
“inventing  and  enabling  our  future”,  the  focus  of  my  address  today  is  on  the  impact  of  financial 
infrastructure transformation on monetary policy execution in relation to the Namibian experience. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  when  we  refer  to  payment  systems,  we  are  looking  at  instruments, 
organisations, operating procedures, and information and communication systems used to initiate and 
transmit  payment  information  from  payer  to  payee  to  settle  payments  -  that  is,  transfers  of  money. 
When such systems are designed, it is critical that they enhance the efficiency with which monetary 
policy is conducted, the soundness of financial institutions, and the functioning of the economy as a 
whole.  The  growing  complexity  and  diversity  of  financial  markets  and  financial  instruments, 
globalisation  and  integration  of  markets,  and  strong  growth  in  private  capital  flows  call  for  the 
strengthening  of  such  links.  The  payment  system,  therefore,  represents  the  interaction  between 
transactions  in  the  real  economy,  such  as  purchase  of  goods  and  services,  including  financial 
instruments  and  financial  transactions,  and  this  interaction  gives  rise  to  payment  and  settlement 
obligations.  Banking  institutions  play  a  role  of  payment  intermediaries  because  they  hold  the 
settlement accounts of those engaged in economic activity. Amongst the banks there should be an 
interbank  transfer  system,  representing  the  clearing  and  settlement  process.  The  central  bank  is 
responsible  for  final  settlement  and  payment  transfers  that  take  place  across  the  accounts  which 
banks hold at central banks.  
Mr. Chairman, the increased attention being paid to modern payment systems was triggered by the a 
massive  increase  in  the  number  and  value  of  settlement  transaction,  as  well  as  the  technological 
advances that caused much faster movement of funds. There is also widespread consensus of the 
pivotal role that payment systems play in any market economy, that is: 
• 
• 
as a vital element in the financial infrastructure of the economy; 
as a necessary channel for effective economic management, particularly through monetary 
policy; 
as a means of promoting economic efficiency. 
• 
In my address today, I am expected to focus primarily on the role of payment systems in monetary 
policy  execution  with  respect  to  the  Namibian  experience,  but  it  would  be  to  the  benefit  of  the 
audience if I take the scope of my presentation a bit wider. I must also stress right at the outset that as 
a  member  of  the  Common  Monetary  Area  (CMA)  it  is  not  possible  for  Namibia  to  pursue  an 
independent  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  intervention  is  very  much  dictated  by  the  monetary 
policy  stance  taken  by  South  Africa.  Therefore,  the  use  of  our  RTGS  system  in  monetary  policy 
execution  is  quite  limited.  Nevertheless,  the  financial  infrastructure  transformation  that  Namibia  has 
undertaken and continues to undertake has enabled us to better understand and manage domestic 
and cross-border payment and liquidity flows and to institute appropriate risk management strategies. 
Against  this  background,  I  will  firstly  deal  with  the  role  of  payment  systems  in  monetary  policy 
implementation.  Secondly,  I  would  like  to  share  our  experience  in  reforming  the  Namibian  payment 
system. Then I will outline issues related to the Bank of Namibia’s accommodation policy that had to 
be reformed to allow for the smooth and efficient functioning of our RTGS system. 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 1
Payment systems and monetary policy implementation 
1. 
The  large-value  payment  system  of  a  developed  market  economy  has  a  major  role  to  play  in  the 
successful  implementation  of  the  key  responsibly  of  every  central  bank  -  namely  achieving  and 
maintaining monetary and financial stability. 
In a modern market economy, the main instrument of monetary policy is the short-term interest rate, 
i.e. the rate at which commercial banks can borrow from and lend to each other in the money markets. 
Central banks control this interest rate through their ability - as the ultimate provider of liquidity to the 
banking system - to influence the balance between supply of and demand for funds in money markets. 
In some countries, changes in the level of mandatory reserves that the commercial banks are required 
to  hold  with  the  central  bank  are  also  used  to  influence  the  supply/demand  balance  and  hence 
generate the required movement in short-term interest rates, and therefore in the whole spectrum of 
interest rates in the economy. Through open-market operations some central banks intervene in the 
market to maintain interest rates at desired levels. 
An efficient interbank money market is a prerequisite for these processes to be successful. Also, the 
central bank should be in a position to reliably forecast factors that influence the daily liquidity in the 
monetary  system.  A  reliable  RTGS  system  is  therefore  indispensable  to  enable  central  banks  to 
determine the monetary conditions in the economy and to implement appropriate monetary policy. 
The Namibian RTGS system certainly enables us to monitor the monetary conditions, but the Bank of 
Namibia does not have the ability to use its Bank rate to influence the liquidity situation and market 
conditions in the way that most central banks can do. Also, we do not manipulate the reserve asset 
requirement to manage the liquidity situation in Namibia. Moreover, an active interbank market is still 
lacking in Namibia, as banks conduct interbank transactions with their South African parent companies 
rather than with other domestic banks. However, as I will indicate later on there are still other tools and 
methods with which we can manage liquidity within the RTGS system. 
Let me now retract a bit by giving you an overview of the payment system reform project in Namibia. 
Namibia’s payment system reform project 
2. 
Namibia’s payment system reform project is essentially driven by three key considerations: 
• 
Firstly,  the  foremost  driving  force  behind  the  project  is  the  realisation  that  the  Namibian 
payment  system  reform  process  is  essential  to  reduce  various  payment  system  risks  and 
increasing the efficiency of the Namibian financial system and the functioning of its economy. 
Secondly,  South  Africa,  having  been  the  settlement  centre  for  a  long  period  of  time,  has 
realised by allowing its payment system to be used by other countries it could introduce risk 
from  these  countries,  which,  in  turn,  could  destabilise  its  financial  system.  CMA  countries 
were  therefore,  encouraged  to  establish  their  own  domestic  clearing  and  settlement 
arrangements and to institute appropriate arrangements for cross-border transactions. 
Thirdly, under the consultative framework provided by the SADC Central Bank Governors, 
an initiative was established to define and implement safe, efficient and harmonised payment 
systems  in  SADC  member  states  and  to  implement  a  regional  cross-border  payments 
strategy in support of the free-trade protocol. 
  The guiding principle that led our reform programme was the realisation that safe, efficient and cost 
effective payment systems are critical to the sound functioning of the financial system and are a key 
requirement  in  maintaining  and  promoting  financial  stability.  A  sound  and  safe  functioning  payment 
system also facilitates prudential supervision, and improves monetary policy intervention and liquidity 
management.  
The national payment system reform project is driven by the entire banking industry and led by the 
Bank of Namibia as overseer of the clearing and settlement processes. The Bank of Namibia and the 
Bankers Association of Namibia have agreed that the Bank would spearhead the settlement leg of the 
project, while commercial banks would assume responsibility for seeking appropriate solutions for the 
Namibian  payment  and  clearing  arrangements.  Commercial  Banks  are  driving  the  payment  and 
clearing process in line with standards laid down by the Bank of Namibia. Both projects are closely 
co-ordinated between the Bank and commercial banks and for each a steering committee has been 
created. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2004
Namibia  has  implemented  a  settlement  system  through  Perago  who  was  the  system  and  service 
provider and also project manager. This system is called NISS - the acronym for Namibia Inter-bank 
Settlement System that went live on the 10th June 2002. The system is based on Real-Time Gross 
Settlement  principles  and  has  enabled  Namibian  banks  to  exchange  payments  electronically,  in 
real-time, amongst each other and between themselves and the Bank of Namibia. In accordance with 
international practices, these funds transfers are final and irrevocable, and in this way the Namibian 
system  is  brought  in  line  with  generally  accepted  principles  for  safe  and  efficient  national  payment 
system. All commercial banks in Namibia are connected to NISS via SWIFT, the international de facto 
financial message carrier. They are entering the system through the NISS entry user interface also 
provided  by  Perago.  On  the  16th  April  2004  the  Bank  of  Namibia  and  two  commercial  banks  have 
switched  to  Trustlink  a  bureau  service  for  SWIFT.  This  link-up  will  improve  efficiency  in  that  all 
services related to SWIFT will be provided by the bureau, while there is also a substantial cost savings 
to this arrangement. 
Namibia’s RTGS system is not simply the installation of computer hardware and software - it involved 
the reengineering of the financial system in Namibia. A number of existing policies, procedures and 
rules have been modified and fine-tuned to support the overall financial system of the country and to 
enhance the effectiveness of central bank policies. Some legal statutes have been created such as 
the Payment System Management Act and some amended such as the Bills of Exchange Act in order 
to make the system legally enforceable and to properly align it to the Namibian legal environment. As 
such, it required a willingness to change from existing policies, practices and processes that existed 
then. 
The advantages of NISS to commercial banks are the improved visibility and management of risk and 
exposures, optimal usage of own liquidity and possible new services to customers. For the Bank of 
Namibia, the system led to enhanced mechanism supporting monetary policy execution, containment 
of systemic risk and a platform for financial market deepening. Overall, the system has improved the 
international risk profile of Namibia. 
Payment instruments take many forms, such as cash, money orders, cheques, debit and credit cards, 
electronic  funds  transfers,  point  of  sale  and  automated  teller  machines.  The  importance  placed  on 
these  instruments  is  its  liquidity,  which  relates  especially  to  general  acceptability  and  marketability, 
with  little  or  no  risk  of  capital  loss.  These  payment  instruments  must  be  cleared  and  this  is  done 
normally through a clearing process that will allow settlement to take place. 
In  Namibia,  NISS  is  currently  settling  obligations  resulting  from  domestic  cheques  and  high-value 
interbank payments. The remaining payment streams i.e. cards and electronic payments will follow at 
a later stage. This means that the annual turnover in the NISS is still quite small: in 2003 the ratio of 
settlement turnover to GDP was about 7:1, compared to ratio of more than 30:1 in South Africa. 
Apart from the domestic cheque clearance, most domestic and cross-border payments arrangements 
and clearing systems are still integrated and intertwined in the South African payment system, making 
use of various payment and clearing services through Bankserv, the South African inter-bank payment 
services utility company. 
The Namibian clearing project is therefore aimed at designing, developing and installing systems that 
will  support  paper,  card  and  electronic  transactions  through  Namibianised  systems.  The  clearing 
system project is primarily driven by the commercial banks in accordance with a high-level project plan 
has been approved by all parties. The Clearing System Steering Committee has agreed to appoint a 
project adviser to assist in defining the system architecture, preparing a Request-for-Proposal (RFP) 
and  evaluating  the  system  proposals.  The  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (EFT)  system  should  be 
operational  at  the  end  of  May  2004.  By  October  2004  the  EFT  and  Cheque  streams  should  be 
migrated to the new platform (NAMCLEAR) and fully integrated with the settlement system. 
All current paper, card or electronic based transactions will continue to be offered to the public and 
businesses. The significant difference, however, is the fact that all these transactions will be supported 
by Namibian systems. Moreover, cheque clearance should be much faster than is currently the case, 
meaning that beneficiaries will obtain quick value for cheque payments. People and businesses that 
make  and  receive  payments  will  have  the  advantage  of  improved  cash  flows,  which  may  further 
stimulate trade and the velocity of money in circulation. 
One area where further consideration will have to be given is transactions to and from South Africa. At 
the time when Namibian payment systems become operational and Namibia no longer depends on 
South  African  payment  systems,  cross-border  payments  will  have  to  be  made  on  a  correspondent 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 3
banking relationship. Still, the Bank of Namibia and the banking industry will continue seeking system 
solutions that will allow and support electronic linkages between Namibian and South African payment 
systems. 
Issues pertaining to liquidity management 
3. 
The  implementation  of  the  NISS  on  10  June  2002  and  the  subsequent  introduction  of  Intra-day 
Repurchase Agreement (repo) on 27 October 2003 compelled the Bank to introduce a new lending 
policy and credit facilities for local banking institutions. More specifically, the Bank introduced a lending 
system comprising the following components: 
• 
Before the implementation of NISS, the Bank allowed banking institutions to overdraw their 
current account against securities pledged to the Bank. The purpose of the facility was not 
specified meaning it could be used for liquidity for settlement and non-settlement purposes. 
The  facility  did  not  have  any  time  limit.  Collateralised  credit  attracted  interest  at  the  Bank 
Rate, while double the Bank Rate was charged for uncollateralised credit. 
Shortly  after  the  introduction  of  NISS,  as  an  interim  measure,  the  Bank  provided  credit  to 
banking institutions through the Credit Limit Module in NISS. In this arrangement a limit for 
each participant was set daily against the collateral pledged to the Bank. This facility was 
added  to  an  existing  credit  facility  offered  by  the  Bank,  which  provides  credit  for 
non-settlement purposes. Both facilities attracted interest at the Bank Rate. 
With the introduction of the intraday repo on 27 October 2003, the Bank started providing 
credit  to  participants  through  repurchase  agreements  and  credit  limits  collateralised  by 
reserve balances. In this case credit is only available for intra-day and overnight purposes. 
For longer periods, credit was provided on a facility outside NISS. The Bank Rate applied to 
both facilities. 
  In  September  2003,  all  settlement  transitions  were  brought  on  a  same-day  settlement  basis. 
Previously,  NISS  participants  had  until  09h00  the next  morning  to  obtain sufficient  liquidity  to  settle 
obligations  accrued  during  the  previous  fund  settlement  value  date.  This  modification  has  obliged 
participants  to  retain  sufficient  liquidity  on  their  settlement  accounts  to  meet  their  daily  settlement 
obligations. 
Same-day settlement also saw increased liquid deposits held by commercial banks on the Bank’s call 
account.  Interest  payable  on  these  balances  in  a  way  became  a  policy  tool  to  manage  liquidity  to 
some extent. During times of high outflows, the rate is increased, while the rate is decreased at times 
of excess domestic liquidity. 
Moreover, same-day settlement has sharply reduced the used the intraday credit / repo, because it 
obliged participants to use their own liquid funds rather than rely on central bank intraday credit (which 
was  actually  overnight  credit).  For  example,  maximum  intraday  credit  extended  to  NISS  participant 
was  about  14  percent  of  the  settlement  value  in  June  2003;  this  ratio  has  come  down  to  about 
6 percent in April this year. 
These reforms were mainly meant to improve the ability of the central bank to manage the liquidity of 
the monetary system and to manage risk exposures. Let me now turn a few further reforms that the 
Bank of Namibia is currently envisaging. 
Bank of Namibia’s proposed accommodation policy 
4. 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to turn our attention to Bank of Namibia’s accommodation policy, since I 
regard this as an important component of monetary policy. 
A central bank could provide credit facilities as part of its payment services, especially in connection 
with  large  value  transfer  systems,  to  facilitate  a  smooth  flow  of  settlement  in  the  payment  system. 
But, the  central  bank  will  not  want  these  credit  operations  to  reduce  its  control  over  liquidity  and 
monetary management. It will also want to avoid becoming lender of first resort for market participants. 
On the contrary, it would want to foster the development of private money markets, including those for 
intraday funds. Moreover, in granting credit, a central bank will typically wish to use both prices and 
objective rationing criteria comprising (i) observance of regulatory and supervisory norms, (ii) provision 
of collateral, and (iii) requirements for borrowers’ capital. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2004
      Our new policy focus is for the Bank to provide liquidity to banking institutions through four different 
facilities,  each  with  different  terms  and  conditions.  These  facilities  are  the  Intraday  Repurchase 
Agreement, the Seven-day Repurchase Agreement, the Marginal Lending Facility, and Lender of Last 
Resort. Since the Lender of Last resort would be highly discretionary, I will focus more on the other 
three. 
Before I move on to explain how the facilities are applied, let me explain the underlying principles of 
our accommodation policy: 
• 
The Bank recognises its distinct role of short-term liquidity provider to NISS participants with 
a  view  to  enhance  timely  and  smooth  settlement.  This  role  should,  however,  not  interfere 
with the Bank’s monetary policy or liquidity management roles. 
In the same vein, the Bank should guard against perpetual lending as this could bleak the 
view on financial soundness of banking institutions. For this reason, any lending to banking 
institutions shall be for a limited time period. 
The  RTGS  environment  requires  participants  to  maintain  adequate  balances  on  their 
settlement accounts at the Bank and not rely on the central bank to fulfil that obligation. 
Liquidity  provision  by  the  Bank  should  not  come  at  the  expense  of  local  interbank  money 
market development. Therefore, since the Bank prefers not to be the lender of first resort, it 
encourages banking institutions to first seek liquidity in the local market and increase their 
holding of eligible financial instruments. 
In  providing  accommodation  to  banking  institutions,  the  Bank  shall  ensure  that  credit 
extended  shall  at  all  times  be  fully  and  appropriately  secured.  Banking  institutions  are 
therefore encouraged or even compelled to hold appropriate mix of securities reflecting their 
liabilities. 
For  each  accommodation  window,  the  Bank  shall  ensure  that  securities  repoed  or 
collateralised to each facility will not overlap with securities in other facilities. For this reason, 
securities will be differentiated in terms of maturities and issuers. 
Having  expressed  the  principles  of  our  accommodation  policy,  let  me  explain  the  three  main 
accommodation windows that the Bank is currently considering. 
Intraday Repurchase Agreements 
In  this  facility,  the  Bank  grants  short-term  or  intraday  liquidity  to  banking  institutions  in  NISS  for 
settlement needs only. Credit is extended primarily through the following: 
• 
The automatic repo facility using eligible securities in a Repurchase Agreement between the 
Bank and banking institutions. 
Banking  institutions  are  allowed  to  use  up  to  25  per  cent  of  funds  held  in  the  minimum 
reserve account at the Bank, provided that the prescribed balance is restored to the required 
minimum over the 14 day averaging period. 
 The facility is automatic provided that: 
• 
• 
a banking institution has entered into a valid repo agreement with the Bank; 
a banking institution has sufficient and appropriate securities reserved for repo purposes with 
the Bank of Namibia; and 
a  banking  institution  has  maintained  a  sufficient  balance  on  its  minimum  reserve  account 
over a 14 day maintenance period. 
Credit  through  this  facility  will  only  be  provided  during  the  day,  i.e.  intraday.  However,  it  may  be 
expandable overnight and must be repurchased before the close of the next working day i.e., before 
the  second  night.  If  a  banking  institution  does  not  have  sufficient  funds  to  repurchase  its  securities 
back,  it  could  obtain  credit  from  the  next  facilities  i.e.,  Seven-day  Repo  and/or  Marginal  Lending 
Facility. 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 5
Seven-day Repurchase Agreement 
This facility provides liquidity to banking institutions under the premise of monetary policy or liquidity 
management. Accordingly, it provides liquidity to banking institutions when they do not have sufficient 
securities for additional credit at the intraday facility in the NISS. For this reason, a banking institution 
may  apply  to  obtain  credit  to  either  repurchase  its  securities  and/or  obtain  sufficient  credit  for 
anticipated settlement needs. Liquidity is provided under this facility through a Seven-Day Repurchase 
Agreement. 
This facility operates under standing conditions and it is obtained through prior application to the Bank. 
It is, however, managed outside the NISS. 
Marginal Lending Facility 
This facility has been introduced to offer special assistance to banking institutions that could not obtain 
sufficient liquidity at the first two facilities. The use of this facility is highly discouraged and would only 
be  used  under  special  circumstances.  Thus,  lending  through  this  facility  would  be  considered  on  a 
merit of each case presented to the Bank. This facility serves as an important indicator for example: 
• 
• 
• 
It gives clear indication as to when a banking institution should be suspended from the NISS. 
It gives indication as to when Banking Supervision Department should be notified. 
It provides a smooth path to action under the lender of last resort policy. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Mr. Chairman, in my address today I have given you a generic overview of the importance of payment 
systems in monetary policy implementation. To understand the Namibian situation, I have also given 
you  a  brief  impression  of  our  payment  system  reform  process  and  the  strategic  and  policy 
considerations that went into the design and operation of the systems. Yet the reform process is not 
over yet. There are always areas where one can modify or fine-tune certain procedures, operations 
and policies to improve the effectiveness of the system and to reduce or contain risks. 
I  trust  that  the  audience  has  obtained  a  better  understanding  of  the  role  of  payment  system  in 
monetary  policy  implementation  and  the  way  Namibia  has  addressed  certain  vital  policy  issues.  In 
hindsight, I think the capital we have invested in our RTGS system has proven to be worthwhile. With 
the implementation of an electronic settlement system, a number related policy issues became evident 
and  were  reconsidered  and  reformed.  The  system,  accompanied  with  our  accommodating  policies, 
has  enabled  Namibia  to  come  closer  to  meeting  the  BIS  core  principles  for  systemically  important 
payment systems. What remains to be achieved is to complete the Namibianised clearing systems for 
the three payment streams, to establish a clearing house and payment system management body and 
to effectively oversee the payment systems to ensure that sufficient attention is given to risk reduction 
and  management  of  their  design  and  operation.  The  infrastructure  that  we  have  developed  has 
certainly  enabled  Namibia  to  fulfil  its  statutory  role  to  promote  and  maintain  an  efficient  payment 
system. 
Finally, I would like to thank Perago for hosting this meeting as the continued consultation between 
Perago  as  suppliers  and  developers  of  payment  system  applications  and  we  as  users  is  vitally 
important. I wish you all fruitful deliberations over the next few days. 
I thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2004
