David Klein: The changing exchange rate regime - background, policy and 
implications; the case of Israel 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Klein,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Euro-Mediterranean  Seminar, 
Eurosystem and Mediterranean country national central banks, organised by the Bank of Italy and the 
European Central Bank, Naples, 14-15 January 2004. 
 The exchange rate regime is an important component of macro-economic policy. After experiencing a 
period of sluggish growth and rapid inflation in the ‘70s and the first half of the ‘80s of the last century, 
Israel  changed  its  economic  strategy.  In  a  series  of  agreements  with  the  European  Union  and  the 
United  States,  all  barriers  to  international  trade  were  removed.  Unilaterally  Israel  removed  those 
barriers  on  trade  with  other  countries  as  well,  and  cemented  all  these  changes  in  a  number  of 
agreements in the framework of the WTO and by accepting Article 8 of the IMF Articles of Agreement. 
Furthermore, in the ‘90s and the first few years of this decade, Israel gradually abolished all exchange 
controls. The concept behind this economic strategy was that a small economy like that of Israel, can 
exhaust its growth potential only by being open to the world. 
As a result of this basic strategy, the central bank, which was its main promoter, had to overhaul its 
policy to maintain price and financial stability. The change entailed replacing the exchange rate by an 
inflation target as the nominal anchor. To do that a few steps had to be implemented simultaneously: 
First, to render the exchange rate regime more flexible. We realized that removing exchange controls 
would make it difficult, if not impossible, to maintain a fixed exchange rate. This meant moving from a 
fixed exchange rate regime through a horizontal exchange rate band, to an upward sloping diagonal 
band, to an ever-widening band and, finally, to a floating exchange rate regime. The gradual approach 
was required to give time to an inter-bank foreign currency market to develop, including the creation of 
financial instruments, traded and over the counter, to hedge against the exchange rate risk. 
Second, in order to go along with the lifting of the foreign exchange controls, the central bank and the 
government had to implement an extensive deregulation of the domestic money and capital markets. 
This  meant  abolishing  numerous  directed  credit  facilities,  and  extensive  commercialization  of 
government debt in the framework of capital market reform. 
Third, working with inflation and price stability targets required shaping of appropriate monetary policy 
instruments. In this context we scraped the high and rigid reserve requirements, and  replaced it by 
daily,  weekly  and  monthly  auctions  of  monetary  loans  and  deposits  of  commercial  banks  with  the 
central bank. In the last two years we are gradually replacing these monetary auctions with treasury 
bills which will be our main instrument for conducting monetary policy vis-a-vis the market as a whole.  
Judging from the results, the outcome is rather satisfactory: 
• 
• 
Israel enjoys price stability. 
The  foreign  currency  market  functions  smoothly,  with  relatively  narrow  spreads  and  low 
volatility. At the background, the central bank watches the market but does not intervene and 
the shekel, the domestic currency, is fully convertible. 
The  foreign  currency  position  of  the  Israeli  economy  is  positive:  the  current  account  is 
roughly balanced; FDI 
 and portfolio investment started to go up again in the wake of the rebound in world financial markets; 
and foreign exchange reserves held by the central bank are ample. 
To sum it up: the decision to regard the exchange rate as a policy instrument or let it be a market-
determined variable is an integral part of the general strategy of macro-economic policy. In our case 
we let it be determined by the interbank market and used the short-term interest in its stead. 
A  final  word on  the  financial  relations among  Mediterranean countries. While the  potential for  intra-
regional trade does not seem to be large at this stage, there seems to be some scope for furthering 
financial ties, especially under the auspices of the European Central Bank:  
• 
One example can be joint missions and consultations to review the stage of development of 
various financial markets. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
  Another example, based on the trend toward a flexible exchange rate regime, is a framework 
for  collaboration  among  central  banks  to  promote  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and 
open information channels among supervision authorities. 
A third example deals with the sequencing of liberalizing the capital account in connection 
with changing the exchange rate regime. 
The  initiative  of  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  European  Central  Bank  should,  therefore,  be  seen  as  a 
successful beginning. This is the most suitable forum to discuss and strengthen financial ties between 
the Eurosystem and Mediterranean Central Banks. 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
