Otmar Issing: The ECB and the euro - the first five years 
The Mais Lecture by Mr Otmar Issing, member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the City University Business School, London, 12 May 2004. 
 A new central bank and a new currency 
1. 
When the European Central Bank started to think about how to conduct monetary policy for what has 
since become the euro area, it faced extraordinary challenges. A single monetary policy for a currency 
area comprising 11 - and now 12 - countries with sovereign national governments - how was this going 
to work? To start with, there was a general consensus among academics that the euro area was ex 
ante not an optimum currency area.1 And this was not the only complicating factor: there were national 
differences in the transmission of monetary policy; there was the risk that countries could be hit by 
asymmetric  shocks;  there  was  the  issue  of  whether  autonomous  national  fiscal  policies  could  be 
considered compatible with a supranational monetary policy; and, moreover, there was the question of 
whether, on account of the decentralised nature of the Eurosystem, national interests would dominate 
the implementation of monetary policy. Critical observers took the view that a single, stability-oriented 
monetary policy was doomed to failure. 
The factors contributing to economic divergence in the euro area need not necessarily be regarded as 
a  given.  In  particular,  one  might  expect  that  closer  financial  market  integration  would  also  entail 
convergence in the transmission of monetary policy impulses.  
Furthermore,  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  all  countries  adopting  the  euro  successfully 
undertook considerable efforts to implement sustained, stability-oriented policies. The criteria agreed 
upon  at  the  EU  Council  meeting  in  Maastricht  in  1991  (relating  to  price  stability,  public  finances, 
exchange  rate  stability,  long-term  interest  rates  and  central  bank  independence)  served  as  both  a 
target and a disciplining device for economic policies in EU Member States throughout the 1990s.  
However, there were also more practical concerns regarding the actual conduct of monetary policy. 
Particularly  at  the  outset,  the  Governing  Council  had  only  a  very  limited  set  of  reliable  harmonised 
macroeconomic data at its disposal which it could rely on in order to assess the economic situation. 
Some important data were not even available for the euro area. 
Today,  the  euro  has  not  merely  survived:  it  is  firmly  established  as  a  stable  currency.  Against  the 
background of all the concerns expressed and in the light of the experience gained over the first five 
years of monetary policy, it is time to take stock. This lecture will look at the key elements of the ECB’s 
monetary  policy  strategy,  namely  the  framework  for  internal  analysis  and  decision-making,  which 
encompasses the ECB’s economic and monetary analysis. With particular regard to the role of money 
and the ECB’s medium-term orientation, I will consider the extent to which this approach differs from 
inflation targeting strategies. I will also discuss the considerations underlying our quantitative definition 
of price stability, such as the trade-off between the costs related to inflation and reasons for tolerating 
small  positive  rates  of  inflation.  I  will  also  dwell  briefly  on  our  approach  to  communicating  with  the 
markets and the wider public. The ECB has been granted full independence from political interference 
in  the  pursuit  of  its  overriding  objective:  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  However,  it  is  still 
accountable to the European public in that respect. This requires transparency in all areas relevant to 
the fulfilment of its mandate and a willingness on our part to convey to the public, in a consistent and 
systematic way, all information relevant to our decision-making. 
                                                      
1  See Bayoumi and Eichengreen, 1993a and 1993b. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 1
2. 
Mandate and strategy of the ECB 
2.1  Main elements of the strategy 
The degree of uncertainty with which the ECB was confronted at the outset made it necessary, first 
and  foremost,  to  avoid  major  errors.  Not  least  because  of  the  ECB’s  lack  of  a  track  record,  it  was 
simply inconceivable for the single monetary policy to be pursued on a purely discretionary, ad hoc 
basis.  A  systematic  framework  for  decision-making,  communication  and  the  assessment  of  the 
economic situation and future risks to price stability was therefore needed.  
In  October  1998  -  that  is  to  say  well  before  the  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  passed  from  the 
national central banks to the ECB - the Governing Council decided on a stability-oriented strategy that 
would meet these requirements.2 The strategy was based on fundamental theoretical considerations 
and empirical knowledge, as well as on decades of policy experience acquired by the national central 
banks.3 When the ECB’s strategy was evaluated - and reaffirmed - in 2003, it was necessary to review 
those  considerations  in  the  light  of  the  experience  gained  over  the  first  four  and  a  half  years  of 
monetary policy.  
As I have already mentioned, the Treaty establishing the European Community makes price stability 
the primary objective of the ECB. However, the Treaty gives no indication of how exactly that is to be 
understood.  In  October  1998  the  ECB  chose  to  specify  its  mandate  by  announcing  a  quantitative 
definition of price stability. It thereby sought to establish a solid anchor for inflation expectations and 
set a benchmark which the public could use to hold the ECB accountable. Price stability was defined 
as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of 
below 2% to be maintained in the medium term. This recognises that monetary policy cannot control 
price  developments  in  the  short  term  and  should  not  therefore  seek  to  do  so.  The  use  of  the  term 
“increase” made it clear from the outset that extended periods of deflation are no more compatible with 
price stability than deflation. The 2% upper bound for price increases was set some way above zero, 
providing a safety margin to guard against deflation. There were uncertainties concerning the possible 
extent  of  any  measurement  bias  in  the  HICP.  As  a  result,  the  ECB  did  not  define  a  specific  lower 
bound for the rate of price increases. 
2.2  Considerations regarding the definition of price stability  
A  number  of  features  were  relevant  to  the  choice  of  the  price  index.  The  index  was  to  be 
comprehensible for the public and not subject to excessively frequent revision. Furthermore, it was to 
be available with sufficient timeliness and frequency, if possible on a monthly basis. The ECB, seeking 
a price index that met those criteria, chose to define price stability in terms of the HICP, as calculated 
by Eurostat.  
When establishing a quantitative definition of price stability, it was necessary to balance the costs of 
inflation  against  possible  reasons  for  tolerating  low  positive  rates  of  inflation.  The  welfare-reducing 
effects of inflation, identified by a large body of research, are well known, even if they are difficult to 
measure:  the  disruption  of  the  allocation  of  resources  through  the  distortion  of  relative  prices;  the 
effect of the level of inflation on uncertainty surrounding inflation and associated risk premia in long-
term interest rates; the exacerbation of the distortionary effects of taxation; the artificial expansion of 
the  financial  sector;  and  other  wasting  of  resources.4  Looking  at  recent  research  on  the  basis  of 
general equilibrium models, one could even conclude that central banks should aim at zero inflation.5
However, there are several factors in favour of basing the monetary policy objective on a positive, but 
low,  rate  of  inflation.  One  fundamental  reason  relates  to  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest 
rates. The nearer the target inflation rate is to zero, the greater the risk that central banks might be 
unable to react sufficiently to deflationary shocks by reducing interest rates. If the shock were severe 
                                                      
2  See ECB, 1998. 
3  See Issing, Gaspar, Angeloni and Tristani, 2001. 
4   See in relation to the costs of inflation Feldstein, 1997 and 1999; Fischer, 1981, the collection of papers presented at the 
ECB conference Why Price Stability?, ECB, 2001, and the overview in Rodríguez-Palenzuela, Camba-Mendez and García, 
2003. 
5  See Rodríguez-Palenzuela, Camba-Mendez and García, 2003.
2 
 BIS Review 29/2004
enough, the economy could even be pushed into a deflationary spiral, in which price falls accelerate. 
Although  monetary  policy  in  such  a  situation  still  disposes  of  other  instruments,  the  reduction  of 
nominal  interest  rates  will  have  reached  its  limits  at  the  zero  bound.  The  real  interest  rate  would 
therefore increase with deflation. If, on the other hand, the central bank’s target in the medium term is 
not zero inflation, but rather a low, positive rate of price increases, the nominal interest rate will, with a 
given  real  equilibrium  interest  rate,  also  rise.  That  provides  greater  scope  for  reacting  to  negative 
demand  shocks  by  means  of  interest  rate  reductions.  Numerous  studies  indicate  that  this  can  be 
assumed to be the case if central banks aim to maintain the inflation rate above 1%.6  
A  further  factor  in  favour  of  tolerating  low,  positive  levels  of  inflation  is  the  possible  existence  of  a 
positive measurement bias in the calculation of the consumer price index. This can arise as a result, in 
particular,  of  inadequate  compensation  for  improvements  in  the  quality  of  goods  in  the  underlying 
basket.  Research  suggests  that,  with  regard  to  the  HICP  used  by  the  ECB,  the  size  of  the 
measurement bias is minimal. And, in view of the improvements being made to Eurostat’s calculations, 
this can be expected to decline even further.7
A further argument relates back to the idea that a positive rate of inflation may support the necessary 
adjustment of relative prices to economic shocks where wages and prices are subject to downward 
nominal rigidities. However, the degree of such rigidities may very well depend on the extent to which 
a stability-oriented monetary policy regime is successful in gaining credibility. Such rigidities cannot be 
regarded as an invariable structural feature of an economy. So, a central bank certainly does not want 
to be seen to be accommodating nominal rigidities by consciously aiming at a higher rate of inflation.8
Inflation  differentials  brought  about  by  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect9  are  often  cited  as  another 
reason  for  seeking  to  achieve  a  positive  rate  of  inflation.  Otherwise,  the  possible  existence  of 
downward rigidities in prices and wages in the euro area could give rise to excessive costs in countries 
and  regions  with  lower  than  average  inflation  over  the  longer  term10  and,  in  extreme  cases, 
deflationary trends could even take hold at a local level. Inflation differentials within a currency area 
are  a  perfectly  normal  phenomenon,  and  so  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  does  not  seem  to  be  a 
particularly important consideration either. A number of empirical studies suggest that the average rate 
of inflation in countries with a lower rate of price increases will be at most half a percentage point lower 
than the euro area average. The potential enlargement of the euro area does not fundamentally alter 
this picture.  
In  May  2003  the  Governing  Council  conducted  a  careful  reassessment  of  these  principal 
considerations  underlying  the  definition  of  price  stability.  In  confirming  the  quantitative  definition  of 
price  stability,  the  Governing  Council  made  it  clear  that,  over  the  medium  term,  its  monetary  policy 
would seek to achieve an inflation rate “below, but close to, 2%”.11 This takes sufficient account of all 
the factors in favour of aiming at a low, positive rate of inflation. 
2.3  The two pillars of the strategy 
In view of the uncertainties mentioned at the beginning of this lecture, the strategy had to provide a 
sound and systematic framework for internal analysis and decision-making. This framework was also 
needed as a basis on which to communicate our decisions to the public. 
A price stability-oriented policy must always take account of the nature and size of economic shocks, 
from  which  risks  to  price  stability  can  emerge,  and  of  the  way  in  which  these  shocks  affect  the 
expectations of economic agents. This requires the comprehensive and systematic use of all relevant 
information,  based  on  a  diverse  set  of  indicators  and  models.  In  this  vein,  the  Governing  Council’s 
strategy  review  confirmed  that  its  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  encompasses  two 
                                                      
6  See Coenen, 2003b; Klaeffling and Lopez-Perez, 2003; and Orphanides and Wieland, 1998. 
7  See Camba-Mendez, 2003, and Wynne and Rodríguez-Palenzuela, 2002. 
8  See Coenen, 2003a and 2003b, Card and Hyslop, 1997, Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996). 
9  See Balassa, 1964, and Samuelson, 1964. 
10  See Rodríguez-Palenzuela, Camba-Mendez and García, 2003. 
11  See ECB, 2003a and 2003b. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 3
complementary perspectives: an economic and a monetary analysis. These have become known as 
the two pillars of the ECB’s strategy.  
The  economic  analysis  focuses  mainly  on  the  assessment  of  current  economic  and  financial 
developments  from  the  perspective  of  the  interplay  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  goods, 
services  and  factor  markets.  In  this  respect,  the  macroeconomic  projections  serve  to  structure  and 
synthesise  a  large  amount  of  economic  data.  Nevertheless,  these  cannot  be  regarded  as  an 
all-encompassing tool for the conduct of monetary policy. I will elaborate on this issue in a moment. 
The monetary analysis serves as a means of cross-checking, from a medium to long-term perspective, 
the  short  to  medium-term  indications  arising  from  the  economic  analysis.  In  October  1998  the 
Governing Council assigned a prominent role to money in recognition of the fact that, in the medium to 
long run, monetary growth and inflation are closely related. This provides the Governing Council with 
key  information  at  time  horizons  stretching  beyond  those  usually  adopted  for  the  construction  of 
central  bank  inflation  projections.  The  prominent  role  assigned  to  money  in  the  ECB’s  strategy  is 
signalled  by  the  announcement  of  a  reference  value  for  monetary  growth.  However,  the  monetary 
analysis seeks to provide a comprehensive survey of the liquidity situation, thereby going far beyond 
an assessment of monetary growth in relation to the reference value.  
In 1998 the ECB also discussed a strategy of direct inflation targeting as a particularly relevant option. 
In its strategy review the Governing Council again looked closely at the arguments. 
In the last two decades many countries have moved to a stability-oriented monetary policy framework. 
As a result, central banks have made a credible commitment to targeting low and stable inflation rates. 
In this context, a number of central banks have chosen a strategy of inflation targeting. Essentially, this 
encompasses the following: (1) price stability as the primary objective; (2) the public announcement of 
an inflation rate to be maintained over a more or less precisely defined time horizon; (3) transparency 
of the monetary policy strategy through appropriate communication with the markets and the public on 
monetary policy decisions; and (4) greater accountability on the part of the central bank as regards the 
fulfilment of its mandate. In retrospect, the policies pursued within this framework have been a great 
success in terms of achieving price stability. Particularly in countries which, starting from a relatively 
high level of inflation rates, announced a disinflation process, inflation targets were a suitable means 
of bringing inflation expectations into line with the monetary authorities’ objective. 
These  features  of  inflation  targeting  characterise  nearly  all  stability-oriented  central  banks.  In  this 
general sense, Ben Bernanke has even described the Deutsche Bundesbank as a “prototype inflation 
targeter”.12  Much  the same could  be  said  of  the  ECB.  Normally,  however,  inflation  targeting is  also 
defined as a strategy in which macroeconomic forecasts - in particular for the inflation rate - serve as 
an  intermediate  target,  i.e.  as  the  primary  or  even  all-encompassing  variable  for  monetary  policy 
decision-making  and  external  communication.13  In  this  respect,  inflation  targeting  has  been 
understood as inflation forecast targeting.  
The ECB quite consciously dismissed this strategy, and - I believe - with good reason.14 The use of 
inflation  forecasts  as  an  intermediate  target  has  mostly  taken  the  form  of  a  procedure  whereby  a 
central bank selects, from among a range of simulated alternatives, the interest rate path for which 
expected inflation at a certain point in the future coincides with the inflation target.15 Such focus on a 
fixed  horizon  does  not  seem  robust;  nor  would  it  appear  optimal  from  a  welfare  perspective.  The 
horizon over which to pursue price stability is to a substantial degree contingent on the size and nature 
of  shocks  affecting  the  economy,  as  well  as  on  the  initial  state  of  the  economy.  For  example,  to 
maintain  the  same  degree  of  volatility  of  inflation  and  output,  monetary  policy  can  compensate  for 
demand shocks over shorter periods than price shocks, which move inflation and output in opposite 
directions. Furthermore, this approach ignores the implications which an interest rate path simulated in 
this  way  may  have  for  price  stability  at  longer  horizons.  In  particular,  it  ignores  the  fact  that  -  for  a 
given  interest  rate  path  -  the  longer  the  horizon,  the  further  the  inflation  rate  can  deviate  from  the 
target. 
                                                      
12  See Bernanke, 2003. 
13  See Svensson, 1997; 1999, p. 623.  
14  See Issing, 2003. 
15  See Svensson, 1999; Bowen, 1995, p. 57.  
4 
 BIS Review 29/2004
In  addition,  the  construction  and  publication  of  central  bank  forecasts  can  raise  a  whole  number  of 
problems which severely limit the relevance of such forecasts for monetary policy. One of the main 
problems  lies  in  constructing  a  forecast  which  is  consistent  with  the  underlying  interest  rate  path. 
Exogenous  assumptions  with  regard  to  the  interest  rate  path  -  such  as  assuming  constant  interest 
rates  -  typically  lead  to  instabilities  or  indeterminacy.16  At  the  same  time,  bringing  exogenous 
assumptions on the interest rate policy into line with the expectations of economic agents underlying 
these forecasts in a credible and convincing way constitutes a considerable challenge in practice. The 
aforementioned simulation of alternative interest rate paths is thus barely practicable. An alternative to 
this would be to use market interest rates, as opposed to a fixed interest rate. If the central bank’s 
reaction  function  is  understood  by  the  public  and  the  markets  and  if  its  monetary  policy  enjoys 
credibility, the interest rate path expected by the market will mostly be consistent with the envisaged 
inflation target. However, if new economic shocks arise, it can be extremely difficult to communicate 
necessary deviations of the monetary policy stance from the interest rate path anticipated in this way. 
This can place an undue restriction on the ability  of monetary policy to react in a timely manner to 
changes in economic conditions and in risks to price stability.  
Last  but  not  least,  inflation  forecast  targeting  neglects  the  information  stemming  from  monetary 
developments. Up to now it has not proved possible to integrate the monetary side into the inflation 
forecast in a satisfactory manner. Whether this will ever be possible in a convincing way - not least on 
account of the different horizons involved - remains a matter of conjecture. At any rate, the Governing 
Council  is  adhering  to  its  stance  of  considering  all  important  indicators  and  of  according  monetary 
factors  a  prominent  position  in  its  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  developments  and  thus  in  its 
monetary policy. 
2.4  The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s strategy and the role of money 
For good reason the ECB has chosen a strategy which does not focus exclusively on either a single 
indicator or a single analytical tool - be it money or an inflation forecast. By contrast, the strategy offers 
an  appropriate  means  of  bringing  together  different  analytical  perspectives  and  of  using  all  the 
information  relevant  to  decision-making  in  a  systematic  way.  The  advantages  of  this  approach  are 
increasingly  being  recognised,  not  least  from  the  perspective  of  the  relationship  between  monetary 
and credit developments and asset prices. 
The appropriateness of inflation targeting strategies has come under particular scrutiny in the context 
of the share price booms witnessed in the 1990s, their subsequent collapse and the effects that this 
had on the financial system.17 If financial imbalances accumulate and there is, for example, a sharp, 
broadly based increase in asset prices, there is little sense in continuing to pursue an inflation forecast 
for  consumer  prices  over  a  horizon  of  one  to  two  years.  In  such  circumstances  it  may  instead  be 
advisable to set interest rates with a view to a time frame extending well beyond conventional forecast 
horizons  -  e.g.  in  the  face  of  substantial  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of  asset  price 
movements.18 With its medium-term orientation, the ECB pays due attention to the need to take into 
account the entire horizon over which monetary policy impacts on the state of the economy.19
Here the pre-emptive role of the monetary analysis has also been acknowledged.20 Growth rates of 
money and credit which are persistently in excess of those needed to sustain economic growth at non-
inflationary levels may, under certain circumstances, provide early information on emerging financial 
instability. Such information is of relevance for monetary policy because the emergence of asset price 
bubbles could have a destabilising effect on activity and, ultimately, prices in the medium and longer 
term.21
                                                      
16  See Woodford, 2000.  
17  See Bean, 2003. 
18  See Kent and Lowe, 1997; Bordo and Jeanne, 2002. 
19  See Issing, 2003.  
20  See Borio, English and Filardo, 2003.  
21  See Borio and Lowe, 2002; Masuch, Nicoletti Altimari, Pill and Rostagno, 2003. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 5
2.5  Transparency and accountability 
The Maastricht Treaty clearly assigns to the Eurosystem responsibility for the  maintenance of price 
stability.  And  it  has  granted  the  ECB  full  political  independence  in  its  pursuit  of  this  goal.  The 
independence of the ECB and the need for transparency and accountability go hand in hand. Given 
the European nature of its mandate to maintain price stability and its independent status, the ECB is 
accountable to the European public and its elected representatives. This requires transparency in all 
areas relevant to the fulfilment of its mandate and a willingness to convey to the public, in a systematic 
and consistent way, all information relevant to its decision-making. Transparency is also essential to 
the effectiveness and success of the ECB’s monetary policy. It should contribute to the anchoring of 
inflation expectations and minimise false expectations on the part of financial markets and the wider 
public regarding policy responses. For these reasons, the monetary policy strategy has been a key 
device. It clearly specifies how the ECB’s policy objective is to be understood. And it provides a clear 
and  coherent  framework  for  structuring  information  and  the  decision-making  process  internally  and 
explaining the ECB’s policy stance to the general public.  
The full specification of a policy rule or complete transparency as regards the underlying information 
set  is  impracticable.  Where  communication  with  the  public  is  concerned,  it  must  therefore  be 
acknowledged that a higher degree of disclosure does not necessarily mean greater transparency.22 
There  is  clearly  a  need  to  strike  a  balance  between,  on  the  one  hand,  being  clear  enough  to  be 
properly understood by the general public and, on the other, providing information which is sufficiently 
comprehensive  to  do  justice  to  the  uncertainties  and  complexity  of  the  decision-making  process.  In 
fact,  it  has  been  a  particular  challenge  to  achieve  clarity  in  our  communication  -  i.e.  to  send  clear, 
coherent  and  consistent  messages  to  the  markets  and  the  wider  public,  thereby  preventing 
misunderstanding and false expectations. 
The  regular  publication  of  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  and  the 
associated risks to price stability are an important part of our quest for transparency. Monetary policy 
decisions are regularly explained at the press conference which takes place immediately after the first 
Governing Council meeting of the month. Further details are presented in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, 
in the speeches given by members of the Governing Council and in the President’s testimonies before 
the  European  Parliament. With  its  monthly  press conference,  the  ECB was  the  first  central  bank  to 
provide such extensive and open real-time diagnosis - and other central banks are now moving in the 
same direction. 
The conduct of monetary policy: the experience of the first five years 
3. 
Since the introduction of the euro, how successful has the ECB’s strategy been as a monetary policy 
framework for reacting to economic shocks in a way that ensures that price stability is maintained over 
the medium term? 
One of the features which dominated the early years of European monetary policy was the existence 
of  substantial  and  prolonged  price  shocks  between  the  second  half  of  1999  and  2001.  Initially  the 
strongest impact came from a sharp increase in oil prices in conjunction with a general rise in import 
prices,  reflecting  exchange  rate  and  global  price  developments.  By  the  end  of  2000  oil  and  import 
prices had risen to levels unseen since the beginning of the 1990s. While this trend reversed in 2001, 
the food price component of the HICP rose considerably on account of livestock diseases. These were 
the main reasons why year-on-year inflation rose to more than 3% in May 2001. 
These  factors  were  naturally  beyond the  ECB’s  control.  In  this  context,  and  also  on  account  of  the 
robust  economic  growth  witnessed  in  1999  and  2000,  the  still  booming  stock  markets  and  the 
continued accumulation of excess liquidity, the Governing Council progressively increased the interest 
rates on the main refinancing operations by 225 basis points between November 1999 and October 
2000  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  In  particular,  the  aim  was  to 
prevent the shocks in question from affecting medium to long-term euro area inflation expectations.  
Despite  the  prolonged  impact  of  sharply  rising  food  prices,  it  emerged  in  2001  that,  on  account  of 
weakening demand and the gradual reversal of monetary trends, lower interest rates were required in 
order to maintain price stability over the medium term. Accordingly, the Governing Council decided to 
                                                      
22  See Poole, 2004 and Issing, 1999. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2004
lower interest rates from the spring of 2001 onwards. In so doing, the Governing Council reacted in a 
timely fashion to a number of negative demand shocks which later continued in the context of global 
uncertainties (such  as  those related  to  the  terrorist attacks  on  11  September  2001 and  the  wars  in 
Afghanistan and Iraq). Since June 2003 the Governing Council has kept interest rates steady, with the 
minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations remaining at the historically low level of 2.0%. 
Since the second half of 2003 prospects for a gradual economic recovery have brightened. However, 
as a consequence of adverse food price developments and higher oil prices - although the latter were 
attenuated by the appreciation of the euro - it was only in early 2004 that inflation fell below the upper 
ceiling of 2% laid down in the definition of price stability.  
In  line  with  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  interest  rate  adjustments  in 
response to economic shocks have generally been made gradually, thereby avoiding frequent shifts in 
the ECB’s policy stance. This non-activist policy has contributed strongly to stabilising medium-term 
interest rate expectations in accordance with the definition of price stability. It has also ensured that, in 
the  face  of  strong  share  price  fluctuations  resulting  from  the  initial  new  economy  euphoria  and  the 
subsequent  disillusionment,  monetary  policy  has  not  itself  become  a  source  of  destabilising 
expectations. This has helped to anchor long-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with price 
stability.  The  medium-term  perspective  of  the  ECB’s  policy  is  also  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the 
Governing Council decided to lower interest rates in May 2001 - i.e. at a time when consumer price 
inflation had just peaked and real growth rates for the previous few quarters were still robust. 
Did this monetary policy strategy prove to be a success in the first five years of its existence? Has 
confidence in the ECB’s ability to fulfil its mandate strengthened? Of course, one measure would be to 
look at developments in the HICP. In fact, the average annual increase in the HICP over the first five 
years was slightly below 2%, despite substantial adverse price shocks that occurred during that time. 
Another measure of the ECB’s success can be derived from developments in long-term interest rates, 
reflecting  market  expectations  for  long-term  inflation  risks.  For  example,  developments  in  French 
HICP-indexed  bonds23  show  that  since  the  beginning  of  Monetary  Union  long-term  inflation 
expectations  have  been  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  the  definition  of  price  stability.  This,  I 
believe, can rightly be regarded as an indication of the high degree of credibility enjoyed by the ECB. 
Communication between the ECB on the one hand and the financial markets and the general public 
on  the  other  has  -  especially  at  the  start  of  the  single  monetary  policy  -  not  always  been  without 
difficulties.  However,  it  is  clear  that  communication  between  the  ECB  and  both  the  public  and  the 
financial markets has improved considerably over time. So, too, has the public’s understanding of the 
ECB’s  strategy.  For  example,  some  commentators  initially  confused  the  reference  value  with  a 
monetary target and assumed that the ECB was pursuing a monetary targeting strategy, while others 
implied that it was pursuing an inflation targeting strategy on the basis of an inflation forecast or even a 
mixture of both. Such misinterpretations have since become rare. 
Since  the  ECB’s  inception  the  institutional  framework  for  securing  a  stable  European  currency  and 
lasting  economic  success  has  proved  itself  in  practice.  None  of  the  fears  mentioned  above  has 
materialised.  However,  for  the  benefits  of  a  stable  single  currency  to  be  reaped  in  full  by  all 
participating Member States, a number of challenges have yet to be met. The ECB has emphasised 
time and again that the single monetary policy remains handicapped by the existence of considerable 
structural rigidities in the European Union. As much has been left undone in recent years, it is now 
more crucial than ever to implement structural reforms in order to improve the growth potential of the 
euro  area  economies.  This  would  also  strengthen  their  capacity  for  responding  appropriately  to 
macroeconomic shocks.  
Significant challenges also lie ahead in the area of fiscal policy. This is perhaps the area in which the 
need  for  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  for  structural  reform  are  most  closely  related.  In 
particular,  primary  expenditure  needs  to  be  restrained  in  order  to  finance  further  consolidation  and 
reduce high tax burdens without undermining the sustainability of public finances.  
In view of the enlargement of the European Union, it is more important than ever that governments be 
mindful of their own particular responsibility and thereby help to ensure lasting prosperity.  
                                                      
23  See ECB, 2003b, p. 33. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 7
Bibliography 
Akerlof, G.A., W.T. Dickens and G.L. Perry (1996), The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1-59. 
Alesina,  A.,  O.  Blanchard,  J.  Galì,  F.  Giavazzi  and  H.  Uhlig (2001),  Defining  a  macroeconomic 
framework for the euro area, Monitoring the European Central Bank 3, CEPR, London. 
Angeloni, I. and M. Ehrmann (2003), Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area: Any Changes 
After EMU? ECB Working Paper No 240. 
Angeloni I., A. Kashyap and B. Mojon (eds.) (2003), Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area, 
forthcoming, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Atkeson, A. and T. Bayoumi (1993), Do Private Markets Insure Against Regional Shocks in a Common 
Currency Area? Evidence from the US, Open Economies Review 4, 303-324. 
Balassa,  B.  (1964),  The  purchasing  power  parity  doctrine:  a  reappraisal,  The  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 72, 584-596. 
Bayoumi,  T.  and  B.  Eichengreen  (1993a),  Shocking  Aspects  of  European  Monetary  Unification,  in: 
F. Giavazzi  and  F. Torres  (eds.),  Adjustment  and  Growth  in  the  European  Union,  Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 193-230. 
Bayoumi, T. and B. Eichengreen (1993b), Is There a Conflict Between EC Enlargement and European 
Monetary Unification, Greek Economic Review 15, 131-154. 
Bean,  C.  (2003),  Asset  Prices,  Financial  Imbalances  and  Monetary  Policy:  Are  Inflation  Targets 
Enough? mimeo, BIS, March 2003. 
Begg, D., F. Canova, P. De Grauwe, A. Fatás and P. Lane (2002), Surviving the slowdown, Monitoring 
the European Central Bank 4, CEPR, London. 
Benati, L. (2003), Investigating Inflation Persistence Across Monetary Regimes, forthcoming as Bank 
of England Working Paper.
Bernanke,  B.S. (2003),  A  Perspective  on  Inflation  Targeting,  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual 
Washington Policy Conference of the National Association of Business Economists, Washington, D.C., 
25 March 2003. 
Beyer,  A.,  J.A.  Doornik  and  D.F.  Hendry  (2001),  Constructing  Historical  Euro-Zone  Data,  The 
Economic Journal 111, 102-121. 
Blanchard,  O.  and  L.  Katz  (1992),  Regional  evolutions,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  1, 
1-75. 
Bordo,  M.  and  O.  Jeanne  (2002),  Inflation  Shocks  and  Financial  Distress:  An  Historical  Analysis, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Working Paper Series, No 2000-005A. 
Borio,  C.,  B.  English  and  A.  Filardo  (2003),  A  tale  of  two  perspectives:  old  or  new  challenges  for 
monetary policy? BIS Working Paper No 127. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus, BIS 
Working Paper No 114. 
Bowen,  A. 
L.E.O. Svensson (eds.), Inflation targets, Center of Economic Policy Research, London, 53-68. 
Brainard, W. and G. Perry (2000), Making Policy in a Changing World, in: G. Perry and J. Tobin (eds.), 
Economic Events, Ideas, and Policies: The 1960s and After, Brookings Institution Press, 43-82. 
Brand, C.  and  N. Cassola  (2004),  A  money  demand  system  for euro  area  M3,  Applied  Economics, 
forthcoming.  
Brand,  C.,  D.  Gerdesmeier  and  B.  Roffia  (2002),  Estimating  the  Trend  in  M3  Income  Velocity 
Underlying the Reference Value for Monetary Growth, ECB Occasional Paper No 3. 
Brand,  C.,  F.  Seitz  and  H.-E.  Reimers  (2003),  Narrow  money  and  the  business  cycle:  theoretical 
aspects and euro area evidence, in: O. Issing (ed.), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of 
its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 301-328. 
(1995),  British  experience  with 
in:  L.  Leiderman  and 
targetry, 
inflation 
8 
 BIS Review 29/2004
Bruggemann, A., P. Donati and A. Warne (2003), Is the demand for euro area M3 stable?, in: O. Issing 
(ed.), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 245-300. 
Calza, A. and J. Sousa (2003), Why has money demand been more stable in the euro area than in 
other economies? A literature review, in: O. Issing (ed.), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation 
of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 229-244. 
Calza, A., D. Gerdesmeier and J. Levy (2001), Euro area money demand: measuring the opportunity 
costs appropriately, IMF Working Paper, No. 01/179. 
Camba-Méndez, G. (2003), The Definition of Price Stability: Choosing a Price Measure, in: O. Issing 
(ed.), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 31-42. 
Card, D. and D. Hyslop (1997), Does inflation ‘grease the wheels’ of the labor market?, NBER Working 
Paper No 5538. 
Castelnuovo, E., S. Nicoletti Altimari and D. Rodríguez-Palenzuela (2003), Definition of price stability, 
range and point inflation targets: The anchoring of long-term inflation expectations, in: O. Issing (ed.), 
Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 43-90. 
Coenen,  G.  and  J.-L. Vega  (2001),  The  demand  for  M3  in  the  euro  area,  Journal  of  Applied 
Econometrics, 16, pp. 727-748.  
Coenen,  G.  (2003a),  Zero  lower  bound:  Is  it  a  problem  in  the  euro  area?,  in:  O. Issing  (ed.), 
Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 139-156. 
Coenen,  G.  (2003b),  Downward  nominal  wage  rigidity  and  the  long-run  Phillips  curve:  Simulation-
based evidence for the euro area, in: O. Issing (ed.), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of 
its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 127-138. 
Cogley, T. and T.J. Sargent (2001), Evolving Post-WWII U.S. Inflation Dynamics, in: B. Bernanke and 
K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, The MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 331-337. 
De  Grauwe,  P.  (2002),  Economics  of  monetary  union,  fifth  edition,  Chapter  8.,  Oxford  University 
Press, Oxford. 
Dotsey,  M.  and  P.  Ireland  (1996),  The  welfare  costs  of  inflation  in  general  equilibrium,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 45, 631-655.  
European Economic Advisory Group (2003), Report on the European Economy 2003. 
ECB  (1998),  A  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  for  the  ESCB,  ECB  press  release, 
13 October 1998, http://www.ecb.int/press/pr981013_1.htm.  
ECB (1999), The stability-oriented monetary policy of the Eurosystem, Monthly Bulletin, January 1999, 
pp. 39-50. 
ECB (2000a), The switch to variable rate tenders in the main refinancing operations, Monthly Bulletin, 
July 2000, pp. 37-42. 
ECB (2000b), The two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, Monthly Bulletin, November 2000, 
pp. 37-48. 
ECB  (2001),  Why  Price  Stability?,  First  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference,  November  2000, 
http://www.ecb.int/home/conf/cbc1/cbc1.htm 
ECB  (2003a),  The  ECB’s  Monetary  Policy  Strategy,  ECB  Press  Release,  8  May  2003, 
http://www.ecb.int/press/03/pr030508_2en.htm. 
ECB (2003b), The outcome of the ECB’s evaluation of its monetary policy strategy, Monthly Bulletin, 
June 2003, pp. 79-92. 
ECB  (2003c),  Changes  to  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  for  monetary  policy,  Monthly 
Bulletin, August 2003, pp. 41-54. 
ECB  (2003d),  Inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area:  potential  causes  and  policy  implications, 
September 2003, http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/inflationdifferentialreport.pdf. 
Fagan,  G.,  J.  Henry  and  R.  Mestre  (2001),  An  Area-Wide  Model  (AWM)  for  the  Euro  Area,  ECB 
Working Paper No 42.
BIS Review 29/2004 
 9
Feldstein, M. (1997), The costs and benefits of going from low inflation to price stability, in: C. Romer 
and D. Romer (eds.): Reducing inflation: Motivation and Strategy, 136-156, The University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago. 
Feldstein,  M.  (1999),  The  costs  and  benefits  of  price  stability,  The  University  of  Chicago  Press  for 
NBER. 
Fischer,  S.  (1981),  Towards  an  understanding  of  the  costs  of  inflation:  II,  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy 15, 5-41. 
Fitoussi, J.-P. and J. Creel (2002), How to reform the European Central Bank, Centre for European 
Reform, London. 
Friedman, M. (1968), The Role of Monetary Policy, American Economic Review, 58, 1-17. 
Gerlach, S. (2003), The ECB’s two pillars, CEPR Discussion Paper No 3689. 
Gerlach, S. and L.E.O. Svensson (2004), Money and inflation in the euro area: A case for monetary 
indicators?, in: Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 1649-1672. 
Gros, D., J. Jimeno, C. Monticelli, G. Tabellini  and N. Thygesen (2001), Testing the speed limit for 
Europe, Third Report of the CEPS Macroeconomic Policy Group.  
Hayo, B., M.J.M. Neumann and J. von Hagen (1998), A monetary target for the ECB?, EMU Monitor 
background paper, Universität Bonn. 
in: 
Issing,  O.  (1998),  Die  Europäische  Zentralbank  -  Das  Problem  der  Glaubwürdigkeit, 
D. Duwendag (ed.), Finanzmärkte im Spannungsfeld von Globalisierung, Regulierung und Geldpolitik, 
Schriften des Vereins für Socialpolitik, N.F. Volume 261, Berlin, 179-192. 
Issing, O. (1999), The Eurosystem: Transparent and Accountable or ‘Willem in Euroland’, in: Journal 
of Common Market Studies, 37, 503-519. 
Issing,  O.  (2001),  The  Single  Monetary  Policy  of  the  European  Central  Bank:  One  Size  Fits  All, 
International Finance 4, 441-462. 
Issing, O. (2002a), Monetary Policy in a Changing Economic Environment, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City Economic Review 87, 15-36. 
Issing, O. (2002b), Monetary Policy in a World of Uncertainty, speech delivered at the Economic Policy 
Forum, Paris, http://www.ecb.int/key/02/sp021209.htm. 
Issing, O. (2003), Inflation targeting: a view from the ECB, speech delivered at the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  St.  Louis  Symposium  “Inflation  Targeting:  Prospects  and  Problems”,  16-17  October  2003. 
Forthcoming in the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review. 
Issing, O., V. Gaspar, I. Angeloni and O. Tristani (2001), Monetary policy in the euro area: strategy 
and decision-making at the European Central Bank, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
IMF (2002), Concluding statement of the IMF mission on the economic policies of the euro area - in 
the context of the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions with the euro area countries, 12 July 2002. 
Jaeger, A. (2003), The ECB’s money pillar: An assessment, IMF Working Paper WP/03/82. 
Kent, C. and P. Lowe (1997), Asset-price bubbles and monetary policy, Research Discussion Paper 
No 9709, Reserve Bank of Australia. 
Klaeffling,  M.  and  V.  Lopez  (2003),  Inflation  targets  and  the  liquidity  trap,  in:  O. Issing  (ed.), 
Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 157-186. 
Lucas, R.E. (1976), Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series 
on Public Policy 1, 19-46. 
Lucas, R.E. (1981), Discussion of S. Fischer, Towards an understanding of the costs of inflation: II, 
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 15, 43-52. 
Masuch, K., S. Nicoletti Altimari, H. Pill and M. Rostagno (2003), The role of money in monetary policy 
making,  in:  O. Issing  (ed.),  Background  Studies  for  the  ECB’s  Evaluation  of  its  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy, ECB, pp. 187-228. 
Meltzer, A.H. (1999), The transmission process, working paper, Carnegie Mellon University. 
10 
 BIS Review 29/2004
der 
zur  Begutachtung 
gesamtwirtschaftlichen  Entwicklung 
Nelson,  E.  (2002),  Direct  effects  of  base  money  on  aggregate  demand,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 49, 687-708. 
Nicoletti Altimari, S. (2001), Does money lead inflation in the euro area?, ECB Working Paper No 63. 
Orphanides,  A.  and  W.  Wieland  (1998),  Price  stability  and  monetary  policy  effectiveness  when 
nominal  interest  rates  are  bounded  at  zero,  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  Federal 
Reserve Board No 35; Washington, DC. 
Poole,  W.  (2003),  Fed  Transparency:  How,  Not  Whether,  in:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis 
Review, 85(6), 1-8. 
Reifschneider, D. and J.C. Williams (2000), Three lessons for monetary policy in a low inflation era, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pp. 936-966. 
Rodríguez-Palenzuela,  D.,  G.  Camba-Méndez  and  J.A.  García  (2003),  Relevant  Economic  Issues 
Concerning  the  Optimal  Rate  of  Inflation,  in:  O. Issing  (ed.),  Background  Studies  for  the  ECB’s 
Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, ECB, pp. 91-126. 
Rogers, J.H. (2001), Price Level Convergence, Relative Prices and Inflation in Europe, International 
Finance Discussion Papers No 699, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Sachverständigenrat 
Jahresgutachten 2002/2003: Zwanzig Punkte für Beschäftigung und Wachstum, Stuttgart. 
Samuelson, P. (1964), Theoretical notes on trade problems, Review of Economics and Statistics 46, 
1-60. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (1997), Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets, 
European Economic Review 41, 1111-1146. 
Svensson,  L.E.O.  (1999),  Inflation  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Rule,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 43, 607-654. 
Svensson,  L.E.O.  (2002),  A  Reform  of  the  Eurosystem’s  Monetary  Policy  Strategy  is  Increasingly 
Urgent,  briefing  paper  for  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (2003), How Should the Eurosystem Reform its Monetary Strategy?, briefing paper 
for the quarterly testimony of the President of the European Central Bank before the Committee on 
Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament. 
Trecroci, C. and J.-L. Vega (2000), The information content of M3 for future inflation, ECB Working 
Paper No 33, October 2000. 
von Hagen, J. and M. Brückner (2001), Monetary policy in unknown territory: The European Central 
Bank in the early years, ZEI Working Paper 2001/0018. 
Wynne, M. and D. Rodríguez-Palenzuela (2002), Measurement bias in the HICP: what do we know 
and what do we need to know?, ECB Working Paper No 131. 
Woodford,  M.  (2000),  Pitfalls  of  Forward-Looking  Monetary  Policy,  American  Economic  Review 
Papers and Proceedings 90, 100-104. 
Yates, A. (2002), Monetary policy and the zero bound to interest rates: a review, ECB Working Paper 
No 190. 
(2002), 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 11
