Lars Heikensten: Monetary policy and the economic situation 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Handelsbanken,  Karlstad, 
26 January 2004. 
 It  is  nice  to  meet  a  group  of  representatives  of  the  business  and  social  community  in  this  way  in 
Värmland. I would therefore like to begin by thanking the organisers of today’s lunch meeting. 
When  I  took  office  as  Riksbank  Governor  last  year  I  decided  that  I  would  leave  Stockholm  shortly 
before each monetary policy meeting and visit different parts of the country; both to learn more about 
developments in various parts of Sweden and to explain the Riksbank’s work and actions. My visit to 
Karlstad today is the first of these trips. During the morning, I visited the university and spoke about 
how the Riksbank works. Later this afternoon I will first be visiting coffee manufacturer Löfbergs Lila 
and thereafter be discussing labour market conditions at the county administrative board. We at the 
Riksbank make these visits in order to meet the Swedish people and increase understanding for our 
policy, something that is particularly important today given our statutory independence. 
In Sweden we have an inflation target, which the Riksbank has defined as 2 per cent with a tolerance 
interval of plus/minus one percentage point. As I see it, our policy of inflation targeting has worked 
well. We managed to gain respect for our conduct of monetary policy a lot quicker than many other 
countries.  Moreover,  in  the  ten  years  that  have  passed  since  the  introduction  of  the  new  regime, 
average inflation has been very close to our target. At the same time, growth has been higher than in 
previous decades. Prospective inflation has also been remarkably stable for the past 6-7 years despite 
periods of rather large transitory fluctuations in actual inflation. The stable inflation expectations have 
been  particularly  important  for  wage  negotiations,  which  have  been  able  to  proceed  against  a 
completely different, more secure background than during the 1970s and 1980s. 
When  we  conduct  monetary  policy,  we  do  so  on  the  basis  of  forecasts  of  inflation  for  primarily  the 
coming 1-2 years. The reason we work with this time perspective is that the effects of our actions are 
exerted  mainly  during  this  horizon.  When  our  forecasts  indicate  that  inflation  in  the  relevant  time 
horizon  will  be  above  target,  there  is  normally  reason  to  raise  the  repo  rate,  and  vice  versa. 
Particularly when it comes to debate situations such as that we have been involved in recently, it feels 
secure to gain a foothold in the clear framework that we have developed for our work in the past ten 
years. Although we do not mechanically set the repo rate in relation to our inflation forecasts, everyone 
that is interested in our work methods knows that our forecasts play a decisive role for our actions. 
Permit  me  now  therefore  to  move  on  and  say  something  about  my  current  views  on  inflation 
perspectives before I comment on monetary policy.  
The international recovery is progressing 
It is natural to begin a survey of inflation perspectives by touching upon the international economy. At 
the end of 2002, the Riksbank and other forecasters expected world economic activity to embark on 
an upturn. However, during spring 2003, we gradually had to revise down our growth forecasts. While 
a recovery in the world economy was still expected, it was now judged to occur at a later stage. The 
weak  growth,  however,  prompted  a  shift  to  more  expansionary  economic  policy  in  many  countries. 
Both the European Central Bank (ECB) and the US Federal Reserve, as well as the Riksbank and 
other central banks, continued to cut key interest rates to historically very low levels. 
However,  most  factors  now  indicate  that  both  the  Riksbank  and  other  forecasters  were  somewhat 
overly  pessimistic  in  connection  with  the  Iraq  war,  particularly  regarding  the  view  of  economic 
developments in the US. During the second half of 2003, we have had reason to again revise up our 
growth forecasts for the world economy. 
What has happened then since December, when the Riksbank published its latest Inflation Report and 
forecasts? The most apparent and perhaps the single most important change in the world economy 
has been the sharp depreciation of the dollar, mainly against the euro.  
It is likely that the dollar’s weakening against both the euro and the yen is an effect of the US current 
account deficit, coupled with a growing deficit in the US federal budget. Concern over how to resolve 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 1
these problems has overshadowed factors that have been pointing to a strengthening of the dollar, 
mainly the relatively favourable US growth and the investment opportunities that this is likely to bring 
about. 
The weaker dollar can be assumed to have implications for the euro area and Japan, where growth 
has been fuelled in recent years by high net exports. A substantial appreciation in the exchange rate 
similar to what we have seen now will make it more difficult to increase exports, which means that 
growth will have to come from domestic demand to an even greater extent than today. At the same 
time,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  depreciation  of  the  dollar  has  occurred  from  levels  that  were 
generally  deemed  much  too  high,  and  that  a  change  in  the  dollar  exchange  rate  is  likely  to  be  a 
precondition for resolving the problem of the high US current account deficits in the long term. 
There has also been some new data on the real economy. As regards the US, the data suggest that 
economic  growth  there  last  year  -  once  again  -  may  have  to  be  revised  up.  For  example,  housing 
construction  reached  record  highs  in  October  and  November.  In  addition,  consumption  growth  was 
stronger  than  expected  during  the  same  period.  One  reason  for  this  was  that  households  chose  to 
save a smaller proportion of their income than expected. A pattern can be discerned here; on several 
occasions  before  we  have  underestimated  US  consumer  demand,  in  spite  of  rather  optimistic 
forecasts. Thus, there may be reason to revise down the forecast of households’ saving ratio in the 
coming years, which if so would point to higher consumption growth. The increasingly weak dollar and 
stronger euro should also boost US exports, particularly in Europe. In the short term, there is really 
only  one  serious  concern  in  the  US  economy:  that  employment  growth  continues  to  be  weak.  This 
could create uncertainty among households and contribute to subduing consumption. But it is hard to 
believe that it would derail the current upswing. 
Also  with  regard  to  Europe,  we  began  to  see  signs  of  somewhat  more  robust  growth  and  greater 
optimism at the end of last year. In our assessment in December, we forecast a rise in growth in the 
years  ahead.  New  data  received  since  December  broadly  supports  this  assessment.  Business 
tendency surveys for manufacturing indicate that optimism has continued to increase while industrial 
production has now begun to rise slowly, although for the euro area as a whole the picture is still not 
as unambiguous as in the US. The strong performance of the euro could also result in higher imports 
and lower exports than expected, which of course would have an impact on demand in the economy 
and growth. 
To sum up, as I see it there is no reason to change the main features of the assessment we presented 
in  December  regarding  international economic  activity  and  price developments.  It  could perhaps be 
argued that the upswing in Europe may be somewhat weaker as a result of the stronger euro, whereas 
the opposite may prove to be the case in the US. Therefore, there is neither any strong reasons to 
change our view of Swedish export market growth compared with December. In the period ahead, the 
rate  of  growth  can  still  be  expected  to  accelerate  in  the  world  economy  and  in  Swedish  export 
markets. 
Developments in equity markets also indicate expectations of a continued strengthening of economic 
activity in the period ahead. The rise in equity prices around the world, which began in the spring last 
year, has continued. At the same time, long-term international interest rates have fallen recently. It is 
difficult to determine how much of this is due to lower optimism about growth in the coming years or if 
it perhaps is more indicative of lower expectations of inflation. Looking ahead, there is reason for some 
concern regarding developments in long-term interest rates, partly against the background of the weak 
US public finances.  
Upswing also evident in Sweden, but the picture is not entirely clear 
With  that,  I  am  now  ready  to  discuss  the  Swedish  economy.  Allow  me  to  begin  by  noting  that  the 
Swedish economic outlook last year changed in approximately the same way as internationally. During 
the  first  half  of  the  year,  the  economic  outlook  became  increasingly  pessimistic.  In  Sweden,  it  was 
mainly investment that was weaker than expected. The weak economic activity was also reflected in 
the Riksbank’s forecasts of inflation. This in turn was a contributory factor in the Riksbank’s decisions 
to cut the repo rate on three occasions for a total of one percentage point. During the latter part of the 
year, however, the outlook became somewhat less pessimistic. In Sweden, the weak investment was 
countered by favourable growth in consumption, both private and public, and a rise in exports. The 
assessment at the end of the year was that growth had increased gradually in 2003 and would reach 
1.5 per cent. Growth in 2004 and 2005 was forecast to be approximately 2.5% both years, which on 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2004
the whole is somewhat faster than what the Riksbank considers to be possible in the long term without 
giving rise to inflation. 
New Swedish data support this scenario, but the picture is still not entirely unambiguous. The National 
Accounts  for  the  third  quarter  showed  higher  growth  compared  with  previous  quarters.  Household 
consumption  also  rose,  as  did  exports.  At  the  same  time,  business  tendency  data  are  indicating 
growing optimism among firms during the latter part of the autumn, while retail sales continue to grow 
at  a  historically  high  level.  But  growth  in  industrial  production  was  relatively  weak  in  October  and 
November while there was a reduction in the number of new orders. Moreover, new estimates of the 
public finances indicate that public consumption this year may be somewhat weaker than assumed in 
December.  This  is  mainly  due  to  the  financial  situation  of  municipalities.  The  municipal  sector  as  a 
whole is running a deficit, which must be redressed in the years ahead. 
One issue that has been debated recently is the effects on the Swedish economy of the weaker dollar. 
It  is  true  that  the  dollar’s  performance  has  been  weak,  but  this  is  not  the  whole  picture.  In  trade-
weighted terms (TCW), the krona has not strengthened recently. This is mainly because the krona - 
quite  contrary  to  what  many  had  expected  -  rather  has  weakened  slightly  against  the  euro.  So  for 
foreign trade as a whole, the currency developments should not constitute any great problem. Another 
issue of course is if the weaker dollar, primarily in relation to the euro, could jeopardise the revival in 
the  world  economy.  Neither  does  this  appear  likely  as  long  as  the  adjustment  is  fairly  orderly.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, it is probable that growth in Europe will be slowed down somewhat, but on the other 
hand it is likely to be more robust in the US. Moreover, the most recent data for the National Accounts 
and  foreign  trade  indicate  that  we  so  far  rather  have  been  slightly  too  pessimistic  about  Swedish 
exports. 
The  most  palpable  concern  is  the  labour  market,  where  growth  has  been  weaker  than  expected 
particularly towards the end of 2003. Employment was indeed somewhat higher in 2003 as a whole 
than we expected at the beginning of the year. But this was primarily because the unexpectedly robust 
growth in the public sector countered weak growth in the private sector. We have no reason to expect 
any  such  pattern  during  2004.  The  strained  financial  situation  in  the  public  sector  points  to  weak 
employment growth in the public sector, while the economic upswing is likely to be reflected to a rather 
small extent in a rise in employment during 2004 in the private sector. Of course there is a risk that the 
weak  labour  market  growth  will  affect  households’  expectations  of  the  future  and  propensity  to 
consume, which is a risk that we highlighted back in December. The higher the rate of unemployment, 
the more cautious households are likely to be when it comes to purchasing and consuming. This in 
turn could entail a risk of lower growth in 2004. 
Nor as regards domestic economic activity is there now reason to make any large revisions compared 
with our assessment in December. A number of factors are indicating possibly weaker growth, but at 
the same time there are factors that are pointing in the opposite direction. Compared with the picture 
we had in December, however, developments in the labour market at the end of the year constitute a 
somewhat greater risk to economic activity at least in the coming year. Our growth forecast entails that 
resource utilisation is still expected to rise only weakly and thereby remain relatively moderate during 
2004 and 2005. 
Signs of lower domestic cost pressure 
Last  year  employment  growth  in  the  business  sector  was  weaker  than  expected,  while  economic 
growth was approximately in line with expectations. This means that productivity growth exceeded our 
expectations. The most recent National Accounts figures also indicate stronger productivity growth last 
year than was assumed in December. It is likely that this has contributed to lower inflationary pressure 
during  2003.  However,  of  greater  interest  for  monetary  policy  is  what  this  says  about  the  future;  is 
what we’re seeing an indication of permanently higher productivity growth? We don’t know this yet of 
course. There are many problems associated with the data in this area and even if this were not the 
case, it would be difficult to determine what had caused the developments we have seen recently. But 
this uncertainty is no reason to completely disregard the new information we have received. Just like 
the latter part of the 1990s, when productivity was also unexpectedly positive, there is now perhaps 
cause for a somewhat more optimistic view of supply conditions in the Swedish economy. 
One  important,  perhaps  decisive  question  is  what  consequences  the  weak  labour  demand  and  the 
strong  productivity  growth  will  have  for  the  outcomes  of  wage  negotiations.  It  is  clear  that  labour 
market conditions suggest moderate wage rises. As opposed to the situation in the two most recent 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 3
wage bargaining rounds, unemployment has risen recently. There is neither any shortage of labour 
other than within very limited areas. It is also positive that the rate of wage increases last year was 
decelerating  and  that  this  was  also  the  case  for  expected  inflation.  With  the  currently  low  rate  of 
inflation, even limited nominal wage increases would imply higher real wages. The demands that have 
been put forward are also lower than what has been the case in recent years. At the same time, there 
is always the risk of disturbances from the negotiation process itself. Neither is it inconceivable that 
some of the productivity gains will be taken to justify a higher wage-payment capacity. 
In December, the Riksbank revised down its forecast of unit labour costs somewhat. Behind this was 
both a marginally more positive view of productivity growth and a small decline in the rate of wage 
increases. The data that has been received since December reinforces this picture. As I see it, there is 
probably reason now to further revise down the forecast of unit labour costs somewhat and thereby 
also the forecast for domestic inflationary pressure. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
That  brings  me  to  the  inflation  assessment.  In  2003  average  inflation  was  somewhat  above  target. 
However, the situation changed considerably over the year. Inflation rose from just over 2 per cent at 
the end of 2002 to just below 3.5 per cent in February, after which it fell back again. One reason that 
inflation  rose  so  sharply  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  was  that  electricity  prices  increased  due  to 
weather-related  supply  problems  in  hydroelectric  power  stations,  while  oil  prices  increased  at  the 
prospect of war in Iraq. During the spring energy prices then declined, as did inflation. 
However,  it  was  not  only  developments  in  energy  prices  that  caused  inflation  to  decline  during  the 
year. The fall in prices was broader and probably due in part to lower resource utilisation and higher 
productivity  growth.  Of  even  greater  importance,  however,  were  falling  import  prices,  which  were  a 
result of both weak international economic activity and the appreciation of the krona.  
Our forecast at the end of last year was that inflation would continue to fall over the coming months 
due to a return of energy prices to more normal levels. In the late spring 2004, however, inflation was 
expected  to  rise  again,  partly  because  the  restraining  effect  of  energy  prices  on  inflation  would 
diminish.  The  rise  was  also  due  to  expectations  of  a  slight  rebound  in  import  prices.  However, 
domestic cost pressure was only expected to contribute marginally to the increase. UND1X inflation 
excluding  energy,  which  at  the  time  was  considered  to  be  the  best  indication  of  the  more  cyclical 
inflationary pressure, was forecast to be in line with the inflation target both one and two years ahead. 
Thus, the Executive Board decided to leave the repo rate unchanged. 
However,  the  decision  we  made  in  December  was  not  clear-cut.  Factors  supporting  an  unchanged 
repo rate - as I see it - were mainly that new economic data indicated that the upswing was proceeding 
as expected, not least internationally, and that this in due time was likely to affect both growth and 
inflation in Sweden. What advocated a rate cut was that our forecasts were below target in the short 
term.  Moreover,  a  new  factor  in  the  balance  of  risks  in  December  was  signs  that  domestic  cost 
pressure may be lower than expected; these signs included unexpectedly robust productivity growth, 
the  fact  that underlying  inflation  adjusted  for  energy prices  had risen  less  than  expected  during  the 
year  and  the  weak  growth  in  the  labour  market.  However,  these  signs  were  still  fairly  new  and  I 
personally found reason to await further information to confirm this picture before I was prepared to 
take action. Thus, at the meeting, I stressed the importance of monitoring that economic activity was 
strengthening as expected and also monitoring how supply conditions were developing in the period 
ahead in order to ascertain whether a repo rate cut in February would be warranted. 
As I see it now, the data that has been received since December has largely confirmed the picture of 
international and domestic economic activity that was presented in the Inflation Report. We are some 
way into a cautious upswing both in the world economy and the Swedish economy. There is possibly a 
risk that labour market conditions in Sweden could result in a somewhat weaker economic upswing 
than we expected, mainly in the current year. As regards the view of domestic cost pressure, there are 
reasons to be somewhat more optimistic. It appears possible that the rate of wage increases could be 
slightly lower. At the same time, productivity was unexpectedly positive last year. Inflation in November 
and December has also been slightly lower than we expected in our last forecast. One of the risks of 
higher inflation that we stressed - that rises in electricity prices would filter through to other areas of 
the economy - also appear now to be somewhat lower. This is both because electricity prices have 
fallen  sharply  and  that  those  rent  negotiations  that  have  been concluded  have  not  resulted  in  such 
high outcomes as could have been feared. So it is a case of small adjustments to our assessment on 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2004
a few points that, on the whole, imply somewhat lower inflation. But as the inflation outlook as early as 
December was judged to be fairly benign, even a small revision as I now see it could be significant for 
the monetary policy decision we will make at the beginning of February. 
By way of conclusion, there is, as always, reason to underline the fact that new data is being received 
every day and that any decision on interest rates at the next monetary policy meeting can not be made 
now. This must be taken in the light of all the information that is available at the time. For my part, I will 
also look forward with great interest to what my colleagues have to say. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 6/2004 
 5
