Jaime Caruana: Latest progress on Basel II 
Inaugural address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  5th  Annual  Risk  Management  Convention  of  the  Global 
Association of Risk Professionals, New York, 24 February 2004. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  the  Basel  Committee  to  participate  in  GARP’s  Risk 
Management  Convention.  Last  year,  you  were  kind  enough  to  welcome  as  a  keynote  speaker  Bill 
McDonough, the former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and then the chairman of 
the Basel Committee. Today I am honoured to represent the Committee as Bill’s successor. 
The  agenda  for  this  week’s  program  demonstrates  just  how  important  and  tough  the  job  of  a  risk 
manager  has  become.  Risk  is  no  stranger  to  any  business,  and  good  business  people  have  long 
sought ways to control their exposures to risk. Yet advances in technology and marketplace practices 
have sharpened our sense of the risks we face and of their potential costs should we fail to manage 
them. 
In recent years, for example, bankers have adopted an ever-widening array of databases, analytical 
tools,  and  sophisticated  software  packages  to  lend  quantitative  insight  into  risks  that  were  once 
assessed mainly subjectively. Impressive advances have been achieved in measuring and managing 
exposures to market risk, credit risk and, more recently, operational risk. 
Just  as  the  application  of  information  technology  revolutionised  the  business  of  banking  and  risk 
management in the second half of the twentieth century, I expect that the increasing quantification of 
risk  will  drive  tremendous  advances  in  the  first  half  of  the  twenty-first  century.  But,  as  prudent  risk 
professionals  and  bank  supervisors,  you  and  I  know  that  quantifying  risk  involves  making 
assumptions. And no model, and no software package, no matter how sophisticated, can ever replace 
the skills of a trained, experienced, and conscientious risk manager. Banking, finance, and insurance 
are, at least in part, an art, not a science. We can and should supplement and enhance our judgement 
with the best technical tools available. Yet - against the backdrop of unpredictable markets and times - 
it would be folly to derive business strategies purely from the projections of a mathematical model. 
And that is why the work of an organisation like GARP matters so much. GARP creates a forum for its 
30,000 members to share ideas on new ways to approach risk or to share suggestions on ways to 
improve current practices. Furthermore, GARP and similar professional organisations encourage all of 
us to improve our own skills constantly and to probe and understand emerging issues in the market. 
So it is a particular pleasure for me to share some thoughts on the Basel Committee’s progress to 
develop regulatory capital standards that reflect the best practices in risk management today - and that 
recognise  the  importance  of  exercising  prudence  and  sound  judgement  when  taking  on  risk  in 
banking. 
Overview 
In my remarks today, I’d like to share with you the latest news on the status of our work. We continue 
to  move  forward  on  the  basis  of  our  commitment  last  October  to  finalise  outstanding  issues  by 
mid-year and have made significant progress in a number of important areas. 
As I will discuss in more detail today, by calibrating regulatory capital to unexpected losses only, we 
found  a  better  solution  which  will  make  regulatory  capital  requirements  for  credit  losses  more 
consistent  with  bank’s  own  economic  capital  models.  We  have  made  significant  progress  in 
securitisation, credit risk mitigation and operational risk. We have clarified Pillar 2, and we continue to 
make progress in the implementation of the Accord. 
After sharing this news with you on our progress to date, I’ll conclude with thoughts on the work ahead 
in the final months. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 1
Common factor 
But first let me begin with a reminder of a goal that is a common factor in all our work: namely, the 
objective to recognise good risk management practices and to create additional incentives to further 
advance the discipline of risk management. 
This  is  possibly  the  most  important  and  powerful  channel  of  the  New  Accord  for  fostering  financial 
stability in the medium and long run. And it builds on the widespread acceptance of the existing 1988 
Basel Accord while addressing its key weakness. The 1988 Accord was in many ways a success, as it 
was simple and represented the first internationally accepted standard for defining and measuring the 
adequacy of a bank’s capital. 
But simplicity became its drawback. Leading institutions quickly moved toward more sophisticated risk 
measurement and management techniques. The Basel Committee believes that this progress in risk 
management deserves recognition and encouragement. 
So, together with leading institutions worldwide, supervisors began exploring ways to incorporate more 
sensitive measures of risk into the capital framework. The initiative can be attributed above all to the 
person  who  delivered  this  address  last  year,  Bill  McDonough.  Bill  brought  intellectual  leadership, 
exacting standards, and unflagging enthusiasm to a project so important that quickly consumed much 
more than the two years some initially thought it would take to complete. 
But Bill knew it was worth it. He convinced leaders in the industry, in central banks, and in supervisory 
agencies that merely revising the rules would be unsatisfactory. Instead, he wanted to advance the 
state  of  the  art  in  risk  management  across  the  industry.  He  did  not  seek  a  reduction  in  capital 
requirements but rather an increase in the stability of the global financial system - a goal that would 
benefit not just banks, but more broadly businesses and consumers. 
It was a privilege to work with Bill on a project that represents not just good banking policy, but most 
importantly good public policy. He has moved on to new challenges as head of the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board in Washington, but the U.S. delegation to the Basel Committee remains in 
excellent hands. 
The three pillars 
This goal of creating incentives to foster sound risk management is so important that it is reflected in 
all of the “three pillars” of the New Accord. They are intended to encourage institutions to improve their 
management of risk on the one hand, which promotes the supervisory goal of financial stability, while 
calling on banks to remain adequately capitalised on the other hand, which supports the regulatory 
requirement for banks to operate safely. 
The first pillar is intended to be compatible with the best and most widely adopted practices today for 
managing exposures to credit and operational risk. By aligning regulatory capital requirements more 
closely  with  the  actual  degree  of  underlying  risk  that  a  bank  faces,  the  Committee  is  creating  an 
economic incentive for bankers to refine their measures of risk. 
Of course, no two banks are truly alike; a “one-size-fits-all” requirement would actually fit no individual 
bank very well. Risk profiles vary. Skills and strategies differ. Banks, after all, seek to distinguish their 
services and products from those of their competitors. 
So  the  second  pillar,  supervisory  review,  is  premised  on  a  bank’s  responsibility  to  exercise  sound 
judgement regarding the best way to manage its unique risk profile - and on the duty of supervisors to 
evaluate that judgement. 
By encouraging a dialogue between bankers and supervisors through Pillar 2, the Committee believes 
that the New Accord will create additional and powerful incentives for banks to exercise care in their 
internal assessments. But equally important, by agreeing on shared guidelines for supervisory review, 
we expect that the New Accord will promote greater consistency in the manner in which supervisors 
apply  the  capital  framework.  When  supervisors  across  jurisdictions  share  similar  expectations  for 
capital  adequacy,  the  regulatory  burden  on  banks  operating  in  different  jurisdictions  can  be  eased 
greatly. 
The third pillar - market discipline - seeks to leverage the influence that other marketplace participants 
can bring to bear on a bank to manage its risks appropriately. By enhancing transparency in a bank’s 
public reporting, counterparties, rating agencies, and even customers will have better access to timely 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2004
and meaningful information about a bank’s activities and exposures. They will, in turn, be better able to 
make  business  or  investment  decisions.  That  will  help  markets  to  reward  banks  that  manage  their 
risks judiciously while penalising those that do not. 
By  matching  the  minimum  capital  requirements  with  a  robust  supervisory  review  and  enhanced 
financial transparency, the Committee is embracing a philosophy of incentive-based supervision that 
will encourage banks and supervisors to focus on the quality of their risk management processes. 
So the basic three-pillar structure of the New Accord is rather simple to explain. The challenge lies in 
specifying principles and rules for banks and markets of many sizes and shapes. The members of the 
Committee viewed this challenge as an opportunity to advance the state of the art in risk management 
worldwide. Just over the past few months we have resolved some of the most difficult technical issues 
that arose in recent discussions with the industry. This brings me to the status of our work today, my 
second topic. 
The Status of the New Accord 
To test the quality of our proposals, and to ensure that our new framework would be more sensitive to 
risk  and  would  create  incentives  for  advances  in  risk  management,  the  Basel  Committee  has 
undertaken three global public consultations. The third consultation concluded last summer attracted 
over 200 comments from the industry and the public. We’ve also conducted massive impact studies, 
gathering detailed information from over 350 banks worldwide on how the new rules would affect their 
capital requirements. 
This public consultation process and our series of impact studies would have been impossible without 
the  tremendous  support,  candour,  and  hard  work  that  so  many  banks  and  other  organisations 
worldwide offered. I would like to express my thanks to the many organisations in North America that, 
together  with  peers  from  around  the  world,  wrote  comment  letters,  participated  in  discussions,  and 
provided  data  to  the  Committee.  You  have  helped  us  to  ensure  that  the  proposals  reflect  best 
practices. Your suggestions have helped us to clarify and simplify the proposals. Thanks to your hard 
work, and thanks to the cooperation and support from many supervisory agencies and central banks, 
we are confident that the New Accord will represent the best possible framework. 
In last summer’s consultations, the industry acknowledged the many improvements in the proposals 
that we have achieved to date. At the same time, public comments identified a number of technical 
concerns  related  to  the  treatment  of  credit-related  losses  and  of  some  of  the  most  sophisticated 
financial  instruments  and  activities.  We  took  these  comments  to  heart  and  spent  the  next  several 
months developing solutions.  In  October  2003,  the Committee  agreed  in  Madrid  on a  breakthrough 
plan to resolve these issues by the middle of this year. 
I  must  say  that  I  have  been  pleasantly  surprised  by  the  progress  the  Committee  has  made  in  the 
extremely  short  period  of  time  since  then.  Just  three  weeks  ago,  for  example,  we  published  three 
detailed technical notes outlining changes to the proposals. These covered revisions to the treatment 
of expected and unexpected credit-related losses and of securitisation exposures, as well as principles 
on the recognition of operational risk capital across home and host jurisdictions. 
I’d like to share with you the latest information on each of the areas addressed in the technical papers 
and in the press releases. 
EL/UL 
First, let’s turn to the New Accord’s treatment of expected and unexpected losses, or “EL” and “UL” as 
we say in Basel. 
Under the internal ratings-based (“IRB”) approach to credit risk, the third consultative paper originally 
would have required capital sufficient to absorb expected and unexpected credit losses. At the time, 
we considered this a practical arrangement to address differences in national accounting practices and 
the authority of supervisors regarding provisioning. However, in the light of the public comments we 
received  on  CP3  -  including  from  quite  a  few  banks  in  the  United  States  -  and  after  subsequent 
research, we agreed in Madrid to adopt an approach based on unexpected losses only. 
Fifty-two  organisations  commented  on  the  Madrid  proposal  to  re-orient  the  IRB  capital  charge  to 
unexpected losses only. The Committee was pleased to note the tremendous level of support for the 
solution and the strongly expressed view that this change will align the calculation of regulatory capital 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 3
requirements  more  closely  to  the  economic  capital  calculations  that  leading  institutions  already 
perform. 
The  technical  note  issued  last  month  on  the  treatment  of  credit-related  losses  set  out  details 
concerning how risk weights would be calculated only on the basis of unexpected losses. Of course, 
banks  should  provide  for  expected  credit-related  losses,  so  the  New  Accord  will  require  banks  to 
compare  their  actual  level  of  provisions  with  expected  losses.  Any  shortfalls  will  be  deducted  from 
capital  -  equally  from  Tier  1  and  Tier  2  components  -  while  excess  provisions  will  be  includable  in 
Tier 2 capital up subject to a limitation. 
With regard to this last point, the Committee has decided that the amount of excess provisions that 
can  be  included  in  Tier  2  capital  will  be  limited  to  a  certain  percentage  of  a  bank’s  risk-weighted 
assets, which is still to be determined. 
This change represents a major improvement that will go a long way toward ensuring that a bank’s 
capital will adequately protect it against unexpected losses and that it will provide incentives to sound 
provisioning. I am also pleased to note that the early reactions to these changes have been positive. 
Securitisation 
The  second  note  published  in  January  addressed  changes  to  the  treatment  of  securitisation 
exposures.  We  are  particularly  committed  to  developing  an  appropriate  and  balanced  treatment  for 
banks’  exposures  to  securitisations  since  the  1988  Accord  does  not  address  this  important  risk 
management tool. At the same time, a securitisation transaction can result in an extremely intricate 
structure, which makes it hard to specify a simple rule. 
Public comments on our proposals acknowledged this challenge, as many found the proposed capital 
rules in the third consultative paper for securitisations to be among the most complicated parts of the 
New Basel Accord. Many also thought the treatment to be perhaps too conservative. 
In  response,  members  of  the  Committee  pledged  in  Madrid  to  streamline  the  relevant  proposals. 
Equally important, we wanted to adopt, where possible, requirements that are more compatible with 
the best practices in use today. 
The  note  released  in  January  illustrates  the  progress  we’ve  made.  For  example,  the  industry  had 
previously  criticised  the  differences  in  the  treatment  of  banks  that  originate  and  hold  rated 
securitisation tranches versus banks that invest in the same exposures. The Committee will eliminate 
this difference. Instead, it will treat all rated exposures to securitisation structures in the same manner, 
regardless  of  whether  they  are  held  by  an  investing  or  an  originating  bank.  This  will  furthermore 
streamline the proposals. 
Likewise,  the  Committee  is  introducing  an  internal-assessment  approach  for  determining  capital 
charges  against  exposures  to  certain  low-risk  unrated  securitisation  positions.  Under  the  new 
treatment,  banks  will  be  allowed  to  derive  the  risk  weights  for  unrated  exposures  to  asset-backed 
commercial  paper  conduits  (mainly  liquidity  facilities)  by  mapping  their  internal  risk  assessments  to 
external  credit  ratings.  This  simplifies  the  rules  by  allowing  qualifying  banks  to  rely  on  existing 
processes and, at the same time, incorporates best practices into the securitisation framework. 
Other simplifications and improvements include the introduction of greater flexibility in calculating the 
capital charges on certain pools of assets that may underlie a securitisation transaction and the review 
of the calibration of the securitisation RBA risk weights to ensure a closer alignment with the level of 
risk inherent in the positions. 
Based  on  the  positive  initial  reactions  that  we  and  our  member  agencies  have  received  from  the 
industry  to  date,  the  Committee  is  confident  that  the  revisions  will  help  to  clarify  and  simplify  the 
treatment of securitisation exposures. 
Home-host operational risk capital 
The third paper published in January laid down key principles regarding the cross-border recognition 
of operational risk capital charges for those banking organisations that use the advanced options. 
As you know, one of the improvements of the New Accord is that it will “unbundle” operational risk 
from  other  risks  and  apply  a  separate  capital  charge  for  it.  This  reflects  the  emerging  view  among 
leading banks and supervisors that we should evaluate and seek ways to reduce losses arising from 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2004
failures  in  processes,  systems,  people,  or  external  events.  While  operational  risk  is  not  as  readily 
quantified as these other exposures, the Basel Committee has noted genuine progress among leading 
institutions in measuring and controlling it. Assigning an explicit capital charge was intended to support 
these private-sector efforts and to reward firms that develop better measures of operational risk. 
For  the  most  sophisticated  institutions,  the  “advanced  measurement  approach”  -  or  “AMA”  -  is  the 
ultimate expression of the Committee’s goal to incorporate banks’ own sense of risk into the capital 
framework. Because the AMA is not subject to supervisory “floors,” the Committee expects it to serve 
as a true catalyst for innovation. 
The January technical note on operational risk addresses an issue that banks raised concerning the 
allocation of AMA capital across the subsidiaries of an internationally active banking organisation. 
Many  banks  questioned  whether  operational  risk  capital  requirements  should  be  calculated  on  a 
consolidated,  institution-wide  basis  rather  than  on  a  legal  entity  basis.  Most  banks,  and  especially 
large  and  internationally  active  institutions,  would  understandably  prefer  to  calculate  the  relevant 
capital  requirements  on  a  firm-wide  basis.  Their  comments  highlighted  the  technical  and  logistical 
constraints on developing an AMA, indicating that it is more difficult, from a modelling perspective, to 
estimate the potential for operational losses at even a medium-sized entity because of the need for a 
large body of data. 
Internationally active institutions in particular cited the practical challenges of developing, and seeking 
approval for, a separate model for each legal entity in every jurisdiction in which they operate. Many 
banks thought the New Accord should recognise fully the economic benefits they gain from operating 
across  a  diversified  mix  of  business  lines  and  entities,  since  they  believe  it  unlikely  that  a  large 
organisation would suffer high losses from operational failures in many businesses or entities at once. 
The Committee acknowledges the technical and practical challenges associated with developing and 
implementing  AMAs  for  large,  diversified  firms.  We  are  likewise  working  to  reduce  unnecessary 
burdens on banks adopting them. 
Still, the question of whether capital requirements could be allocated not just across legal entities, but 
also  across  national  borders,  raises  difficult  legal  questions.  The  Committee  must  respect  the  legal 
mandate given to national supervisors in regulating locally chartered banks, branches, or subsidiaries. 
This usually includes the duty for the national supervisor to verify that local banking subsidiaries are 
adequately capitalised on a stand-alone basis. 
In our note, we explain that the Committee is pursuing a “hybrid” approach to recognised operational 
risk  capital  across  jurisdictions  for  such  institutions.  Under  this  hybrid  approach,  a  banking  group 
would  be  permitted  -  subject  to  supervisory  approval  -  to  use  a  combination  of  stand-alone  AMA 
calculations for significant internationally active banking subsidiaries and an allocated portion of the 
group-wide  AMA  capital  requirement 
internationally  active  subsidiaries.  As  a 
consequence: 
First, a significant, internationally active institution will be expected to calculate its capital needs under 
the AMA on a stand-alone basis. It will be able to consider a well-reasoned estimate of diversification 
within its own operations, though not across the rest of its group. Where a significant internationally 
active institution is a subsidiary of a larger organisation, it will be allowed to rely on resources, data, 
and parameters calculated at the group level. 
Second, an institution that is not considered significant could receive approval from its supervisors to 
apply  a  capital  charge  against  operational  risk  that  is  allocated  to  it  from  a  group-wide  AMA 
calculation. 
The principles articulated in the January note are intended to facilitate the implementation efforts. They 
should,  moreover,  ease  the  burden  on  institutions  that  adopt  the  AMA  across  jurisdictions  yet  still 
respect host countries’ laws that may require local subsidiaries to comply with a minimum standard on 
their own. Achieving this balance should encourage more institutions to improve their management of 
operational risk and to strive to adopt more advanced approaches as their capabilities grow. 
its  other 
for 
Credit risk mitigation 
With regard to credit risk mitigation, although no paper was released on this topic, the Committee 
has made good progress in this area.  While some issues are not yet finalised, the Committee has 
agreed to make some refinements to the rules. For example: 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 5
  The Committee decided to eliminate excess conservatism in an approach to assess repo-
style transactions. That is, it decided to reduce the level of multipliers to be applied to the 
outcome of the VaR model (backtests) from the level proposed in CP3 to that which would 
restore the 99th percentile confidence level. 
It also decided to recognise credit risk mitigants whose maturity does not match that of the 
underlying exposures up to three months before these mitigants mature. 
In the January press release we signalled that we recognise that the existing treatment of credit risk 
mitigation must continue to evolve in order to reflect industry practices, particularly as they relate to 
double default effects. 
The Committee plans additionally to undertake a review of counterparty credit risk and trading book 
issues in coordination with the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 
This  brings  me  to  a  concept  that  we  have  emphasised  many  times:  the  Basel  2  approach  is 
evolutionary.  This  means  that  some  issues  -  such  as  those  just  mentioned  plus  others  such  as 
recognising the economic benefits of diversification in credit risk models - will be considered by the 
Committee as part of its future work. 
This evolutionary approach requires two things: first, a stable framework which provides certainty for 
the industry so that the accord is not a moving target; second, enough structured flexibility to be able 
to adapt to relevant changes in best practices. 
Schedule 
With  the  release  of  the  three  papers  on  unexpected  losses,  securitisation,  and  the  recognition  of 
operational  risk  capital  across  home  and  host  jurisdictions,  the  Committee  has  come  a  long  way 
toward resolving many of the most complicated issues raised in consultations. These revisions to the 
framework will, moreover, help to ensure that the New Accord is more sensitive to the actual degree of 
risk  that  banks  face  and  even  more  supportive  of  future  improvements  in  the  measurement  and 
management of risk. 
The Committee’s working groups are refining these and other technical matters in the New Accord and 
will report their solutions to the Committee by May 2004. That will allow the Committee to meet its goal 
of resolving outstanding issues by the middle of this year and agreeing on the text of the Accord that 
will  provide  a  solid  basis  for  national  rule-making  processes  and  for  the  industry’s  preparations  to 
continue. 
Concluding thoughts 
Over  the  next  two  days,  you  will  have  an  opportunity  to  discuss  and  share  ideas  on  the  latest  risk 
management practices in the areas of market, credit, operational, and insurance risk. A great deal of 
what  you  will  discuss  has  direct  relevance  to  developing  and  implementing  advanced  risk 
management techniques. That will help all of us to consider the work ahead and make us even better 
prepared for the implementation of the New Accord by the end of 2006. 
Indeed,  those  of  you  in  the  audience  from  institutions  that  anticipate  adopting  the  most  advanced 
approaches  available  when  the  New  Accord  is  implemented  have  already  begun  to  collect  and 
process  the  necessary  data.  You  know,  as  well  as  anyone,  that  the  required  commitment  is 
substantial, and that supervisors’ expectations are high. 
Reading the results of the global Basel II survey conducted by GARP during the month of January, 
presented in your monthly newsletter, I was encouraged to see that “Most financial institutions (77%) 
across  the  globe  are  confident  that  they  will  achieve  full  compliance  with  the  Basel  II  risk-capital 
accord in time for the 2006 implementation deadline.” Perhaps even more important is the conclusion 
that  “these  institutions  are  confident  that  their  internal  risk  management  will  be  at  least  somewhat 
improved (86% somewhat or greatly improved) following the rollout of Basel II”. 
This  is  why  I  think  that  what  you  will  discuss  at  this  conference  mean  much  more  than  simply 
complying with new regulations and calculating capital requirements appropriately. We want banks to 
manage risks, not to manage Basel II. The essence of Basel II is not just the set of rules and formulas 
to calculate regulatory capital, these are necessary and very important but, in my view, the heart of 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2004
Basel II is the incentives for banks and risk management professionals to advance risk management 
and the recognition of this progress. 
Studying  and  understanding  the  drivers  of  credit,  market,  and  operational  risk,  and  probing  the 
relationships between them, will help all of us to get a better sense of the risks and rewards we face 
today,  and  how  well  we  are  prepared  to  navigate  changes  in  the  landscape  of  opportunity  and 
challenge tomorrow. 
Improving our understanding of risk, and strengthening our ability to manage it, offers the promise not 
just of better administered banks, but more importantly the promise of a more stable financial system - 
one  that  is  better  able  to  serve  as  a  source  of  credit  and  sustainable  growth  for  businesses  and 
consumers alike. 
Thank you again for welcoming me to this conference, and I offer my best wishes for an enjoyable and 
educational event. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 7
