Rakesh Mohan: Ownership and governance in private sector banks in India 
Address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference on 
Ownership  and  Governance  in  Private  Sector  Banking  organised  by  the  Confederation  of  Indian 
Industries, Mumbai, 9 September 2004. 
 I  am  grateful  to  the  Confederation  of  Indian  Industries  to  arrange  a  seminar  on  a  subject  of  great 
importance today. This gives me an opportunity to discuss the issues with various stakeholders. 
On July 2, 2004, RBI issued draft guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector banks in 
India. These guidelines were placed in the public domain for wider debate and feedback. The RBI is to 
put  out  a  second  draft  and  then  finalise  the  policy  taking  into  account  the  feedback  received.  The 
intention  is  to  continue  strengthening  the  Indian  Banking  System  and  keep  moving  towards 
international best practice through a consultative process.  
If the importance of the issue of ownership and governance in banks is to be gauged by the number of 
responses received to any public document issued by RBI then I would say that it is overwhelmingly 
important!  
We had said in the guidelines that banks are special. Several responses have been received asking 
us what we mean by ‘special’. Banks are financial intermediaries critical for mobilising public savings 
and  for  deploying  them  to  provide  safety  and  return  to  the  savers.  They  thus  have  fiduciary 
responsibility.  The  deployment  of  funds  mobilized  through  deposits  involves  banks  in  financing 
economic activity and providing the lifeline for the payments system. The banking system is something 
that is central to a nation’s economy; and that applies whether the banks are locally- or foreign-owned.  
The  owners  or  shareholders  of  the  banks  have  only  a  minor  stake  and  considering  the  leveraging 
capacity of banks ( more than ten to one) it puts them in control of very large volume of public funds of 
which their own stake is miniscule. In a sense, therefore, they act as trustees and as such must be fit 
and  proper  for  the  deployment  of  funds  entrusted  to  them.  The  sustained  stable  and  continuing 
operations depend on the public confidence in individual banks and the banking system. The speed 
with  which  a  bank  under  a  run  can  collapse  is  incomparable  with  any  other  organisation.  For  a 
developing economy like ours there is also much less tolerance for downside risk among depositors 
many of whom place their life savings in the banks. Hence from a moral , social, political and human 
angle,  there  is  a  more  onerous  responsibility  on  the  regulator.  Millions  of  depositors  of  the  banks 
whose funds are entrusted with the bank are not in control of their management.  
Thus, concentrated shareholding in banks controlling huge public funds does pose issues related to 
the risk of concentration of ownership because of the moral hazard problem and linkages of owners 
with businesses. Hence diversification of ownership is desirable as also ensuring fit and proper status 
of  such  owners  and  directors.  At  the  same  time with  diversified  ownership,  there  is,  perhaps,  even 
greater concern over corporate governance and professional management, in view of this, apart from 
ensuring fit and proper considerations, in order to safeguard depositors interest and ensure systemic 
stability, the regulatory and supervisory framework has to ensure that banks have adequate capital to 
cushion  risks  that  are  inevitable  in  their  operations,  follow  prudent  and  transparent  accounting 
practices and are managed in accordance with the best practices for risk management. Seen from this 
standpoint, great responsibility is imposed on the regulator. 
The issue has been raised as to why now- what is new that these concerns are being raised now? 
After nationalisation of major banks in 1969 and in 1980, in a sense, being government owned the 
issue did not arise till recently. As part of financial sector reform and keeping in view the growth needs 
of the economy it is expected that the significance and share of the private sector banks will increase 
as also public shareholding in the public sector banks within the current policy framework. The banks 
are  expected  to  grow  with  the  economy.  There  is  also  opening  up  of  the  economy  and  increasing 
integration  with  the  global  economy.  As  this  happens,  the  regulator  has  to  ensure  that  the  banking 
system is strong, healthy and resilient to withstand shocks. We also want to ensure that transparency 
improves and want to move to international best practices in regulation, supervision, risk management 
while at same time calibrating the suitability to the domestic conditions and needs at the current stage 
of development 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
Key features of the guidelines 
To begin with, let me enumerate the salient features of the guidelines.  
1. 
All shareholding of 5 per cent and above representing important shareholding will have to 
meet the ‘fit and proper’ tests of competence, reputation, track record, integrity, satisfactory 
outcome  of  financial  vetting,  source  of  funds  and  so  on.  Where  the  applicant  is  a  body 
corporate,  fit  and  proper  would  include good corporate  governance,  financial  strength  and 
integrity in addition to the assessment of individuals and other entities associated with the 
body corporate as enumerated above.  
In the interest of diversified ownership of banks, the objective will be to ensure that no single 
entity or group of related entities have shareholding or control, directly or indirectly, in any 
bank in excess of 10 per cent of the paid up capital of the private sector bank. Any higher 
level  of  acquisition  will  be  with  the  prior  approval  of  RBI  and  in  accordance  with  the 
guidelines of February 3, 2004. These guidelines state that where acquisition or investment 
takes the shareholding of the applicant to a level of 10 percent or more and up to 30 percent, 
the  RBI  will  also  take  into  account  other  factors  including  but  not  limited  to  the  following: 
(a) source  and  stability  of  the  funds  for  the  acquisition  and  the  ability  to  access  financial 
markets as a source of continuing financial support for the bank, (b) the business record and 
experience  of  the  applicant  including  any  experience  of  acquisition  of  companies,  (c)  the 
extent to which the corporate structure of the applicant will be in consonance with effective 
supervision  and  regulation  of  the  bank;  and  (d)  in  case  the  applicant  is  a  financial  entity, 
whether the applicant is a widely held entity, publicly listed and a well established regulated 
financial entity in good standing in the financial community. In addition as indicated in the 
July  draft,  where  the  investing  entity  is  a  corporate  entity,  it  will  be  seen  whether  there  is 
diversified shareholding of the investing entity. For acquisition or investment exceeding the 
level of 30 percent the criteria will also take into account but will not be limited to whether 
(a) the acquisition is in public interest, (b) the desirability of diversified ownership of banks, 
(c)  the  soundness  and  feasibility  of  the  plans  of  the  applicant  for  the  future  conduct  and 
development of the business of the bank; and (d) shareholder agreements and their impact 
on control and management of the bank. 
The  main  difference  between  the  February  guidelines  and  the  July  draft  is  that  the  latter 
requires prior approval for shareholding above 10 per cent and is also applicable for existing 
shareholding  above  such  level.  The  criteria  laid  down  in  the  guidelines  will  be  applicable 
equally  for  higher  level  of  acquisitions  as  also  for  time  bound  plan  for  continuance  or 
reduction in cases where the limits exceed those indicated. 
Minimum of Rs 300 crore of net worth is perceived as being desirable on grounds of optimal 
operations  and  systemic  stability.  Banks  with  net  worth  lower  than  Rs  300  crore  will  be 
encouraged  to  increase  it  to  this  level  through  organic  or  inorganic  growth  within  a 
reasonable period.  
In  case  of  new  licenses,  promoter’s  shareholding  will  normally  be  expected  to  be  brought 
down to 10 per cent in a period of three years even if higher to begin with.  
Large industrial houses as per existing policy will be permitted strategic investment in banks 
up to 10 per cent subject to fulfilling the other criteria. 
While  guidelines  have  already  been  issued  to  banks  and  Fis  in  India  to  minimize  cross 
holding to 5 per cent, symmetrically, the draft guidelines require foreign banks operating in 
India  to  restrict  their  acquisition  (either  directly  or  through  any  entity  in  the  group)  of 
shareholding in Indian banks to 5 per cent .  
The maximum limits for portfolio investment through stock exchanges by individual NRIs and 
FIIs at 5 per cent and 10 per cent respectively and aggregate limits at 10 per cent (can be 
raised to 24 per cent through special resolution of general body) and 24 per cent (can be 
raised  to  49  per  cent  through  special  resolution  of  general  body)  respectively,  currently 
permissible, as reiterated in the GOI press note of March 5, 2004, have been retained in the 
draft  guidelines.  These  will  be  subject  to  government’s  policy  in  this  regard.  All  cases  of 
acquisition or holding of 5 per cent and above, in case of FIIs, will require acknowledgment 
by RBI as per February 3, 2004 guidelines. Where the investing entity is a ‘sub account’, full 
details of the investor/s and other particulars required for due diligence will be called for.  
BIS Review 49/2004
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
2 
 9. 
10. 
11. 
While  most  of  the  elements  of  the  draft  guidelines  in  case  of  directors  have  been 
implemented already, the provision relating to the desirable practice of having not more than 
one  member  of  family  close  relative  or  associate  on  the  Board  of  a  bank  is  yet  to  be 
introduced. 
All  transition  arrangements  for  compliance  with  the  guidelines  for  existing  holdings  will  be 
subject to submission of time bound action plans by the concerned banks. The intention as 
already  indicated  will  be  to  move  towards  the  desired  objectives  in  as  non-disruptive  a 
manner as possible.  
Continuing compliance of ‘fit and proper’ criteria for shareholders and directors will have to 
be  ensured  by  the  bank  on  an  ongoing  basis  subject  to  independent  verification  by  RBI 
where felt necessary.  
How did we come to devise these guidelines? Apart from an internal review, we scanned international 
practice. 
an enabling and proactive regulatory and supervisory oversight, 
internal control through a vibrant and professional Board and  
market discipline  
International approaches 
Internationally,  the  regulatory/supervisory  approach  has  been  evolving  into  cohesive  and  inclusive 
regulatory  paradigm  involving  three  different  monitoring  perspectives  on  the  overall  functioning  of 
banks -  
• 
• 
• 
All three in isolation have their limitations and are effective differentially based on the overall systemic 
contexts such as the level of maturity of the economy, and hence the markets, the efficacy of the legal 
system and the resolution mechanisms in place, the prevalent business culture etc. Market discipline 
may not be very effective till transparent disclosure requirements are put in place. Even then the ability 
of the market to discipline the constituents would depend on its own structural strength as well as the 
economic  setting  in  which  it  operates.  Therefore  a  significant  level  of  reliance  has  to  be  placed  on 
internal control effected through Board oversight. 
An important factor, in this context, that defines the business culture is what has come to be termed as 
“corporate governance”. It is a nebulous concept whose essential elements were part of the business 
ethos in all societies but which has in recent times come under sharp focus and acquired a heightened 
significance partly due to the process of globalization and the increasingly overarching role of business 
on the society at large.  
From  a  banking  industry  perspective,  corporate  governance  involves  the  manner  in  which  the 
business  and  affairs  of  individual  institutions  are  governed  by  their  boards  of  directors  and  senior 
management, affecting how banks1: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
set corporate objectives (including generating economic returns to owners); 
run the day-to-day operations of the business; 
consider the interests of recognised stakeholders; 
align  corporate  activities  and  behaviours  with  the  expectation  that  banks  will  operate  in  a 
safe and sound manner, and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations; 
protect the interests of depositors. 
• 
The  two  major  concerns  that  arise  in  context  of  corporate  governance  in  banks  and  need  to  be 
addressed  are  (i)  the  concentration  of  ownership  and  (ii)  the  type  of  people  who  control  the  bank. 
Diversified ownership becomes a necessary postulate as it provides balancing stakes which may not 
be possible otherwise, even in the case of voting right limits. A related concern is the ‘quality’ of control 
over the functioning of banks manifest in the credentials of the various stakeholders.  
                                                      
1   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, ‘Enhancing Corporate Governance in Banking Organisations’, 1999.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 3
quantum of ownership by single person/associated persons 
ownership restrictions for domestic entities based on nature of entity 
non-bank financial firms 
non-financial entities 
other banks 
ownership restrictions for foreign entities 
A  survey  of  the  regulatory  regimes  in  major  countries  brings  out  that  most  of  the  regimes  address 
these  two  concerns  through  a  set  of  restrictions  on  the  ownership  of  bank  stock  on  the  following 
parameters: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Major inferences that can be drawn from the international practices are as follows : 
In  most  of  the  countries,  ownership  concentration  is  regulated  through  a  layered  threshold 
structure as per which any person wishing to acquire/increase shareholding in a bank beyond those 
thresholds  would  be  required  to  seek  regulatory  approval  .  The  qualifying  threshold  level  in  most 
countries  is  10%.  Most  of  the  countries  though  do  not  have  an  explicit  cap  on  the  maximum 
shareholding  by  a  single  person/entity.  The  above  structure  applies  to  direct  as  well  as  indirect 
control by a person singly or jointly through a group of associates or related parties. 
The  regulators  give  approvals  on  a  case  to  case  basis  subject  to  a  number  of  considerations 
including  the  overall  sectoral  impact  of  the  transaction  and  the  satisfaction  of  ‘fit  and  proper’ 
principles by the person(s) acquiring the stake. 
Acquirers  of  shares  beyond  thresholds  need  to  provide  comprehensive  information  to  the 
authorities for their approval including the intent of purchase, terms and conditions, if any, manner of 
acquisition, source of funds etc. 
In  terms  of  the  nature  of  the  entity,  non-banking  financial  firms  and  non-financial  firms  are 
permitted to acquire shares in banks subject to the overall ceilings in respect of single entity in most 
countries albeit with regulatory approval in most cases. The non-discriminative treatment of the two 
classes of entities is reflected in dovetailing of the restrictive clauses, wherever applicable, with the 
norms on ownership by single entity.  
Crossholding amongst banks i.e., acquiring shares in a bank by another bank, directly or indirectly, 
is subject to regulatory approval in most of the regimes and the thresholds, in some cases, are lower 
than those for non-bank entities.  
Background for the draft guidelines 
Having dealt with the international approaches , I would like to highlight some facts and developments 
which should serve as a background information for this seminar. 
• 
Unlike  in  many  other  countries,  the  various  laws  relating  to  banking  in  India  [Banking 
Regulation  Act  1949,  Banking  Companies  (Acquisition  and  Transfer  of  Undertakings  Act, 
1970 and 1980, the State Bank of India Act 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) 
Act  1959]  do  not  provide  for  prior  approval  of  the  regulator  for  acquisition  of  significant 
ownership in banks - either in the public sector or in the private sector. There is, therefore, a 
need for an articulation of policy in public interest and depositor’s interest.  
On February 3, 2004, the Reserve Bank came out with the guidelines for acknowledgment 
for  acquisition  and  transfer  of  shares  in  private  sector  banks.  These  guidelines  took  into 
account the emerging trends in banking and international practices. For the first time, it was 
spelt out that the term ‘holding’ will refer to both direct and indirect, beneficial or otherwise 
and will be computed with reference to the holding of the applicant, relatives and associates.  
On  5  March  2004,  press  note  4  was  issued  by  Government  of  India  covering  foreign 
investment  in  banking.  The  operational  guidelines  are  yet  to  be  issued.  Hence  the  draft 
guidelines  do  not  cover  the  policy  in  regard  to  investment  by  foreign  banks  or  form  of 
presence of foreign banks for which there will be separate guidelines. Before issuing these, it 
  4 
 BIS Review 49/2004
  is felt necessary to streamline the national policy for ownership, domestic and foreign, and 
governance. 
On June 25 2004, ‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors of private sector banks were spelt out 
by  RBI  based  on  qualification,  expertise,  track  record  and  integrity  of  persons  to  be 
appointed  as  directors  of  banks.  The  process  of  due  diligence  is  to  be  undertaken  by  the 
bank at time of appointment and renewal.  
On July 6 2004, banks / FIs were advised that they should not acquire any fresh stake in a 
bank’s equity shares, if by such acquisition, the investing bank’s/FI’s holding exceeds 5 per 
cent of the investee bank’s equity capital. 
Why are the guidelines being made applicable for existing banks? 
The banking sector is already quite large and widespread. There are several banks of varying sizes, 
composition of shareholding and directors. The issues of size and governance are extremely important 
from point of view of financial stability. This draft policy is in consonance of treating banks as special 
and  is  setting  upfront  a  road  map  in  a  transparent  manner  for  the  existing  investors  to  align  their 
policies and potential investors to make informed decisions. The intention of the policy is to ensure 
adequate  capital  and  consolidation  in  the  banking  industry  with  the  regulator  being  aware  of  the 
intention  of  existing  and  potential  shareholders.  Since  one  of  the  fundamental  presumption  in  the 
policy  is  that  any  shareholding  above 10  per cent would  have  to  satisfy  the regulator of  the  fit  and 
proper status and sound governance principles on a continuing basis, it is necessary that the same 
principles are applicable to existing owners but done so in a non-disruptive and consultative fashion. 
In regard to banks permitted recently or rehabilitated recently on the basis of specific approvals, the 
commitments made as part of the approval process would undoubtedly be taken into account as also 
continuing compliance with ‘fit and proper’ and sound governance. The same criteria as applicable for 
higher level of ownership as articulated in the February 3, 2004 would form the basis for dealing with 
the cases under transition as well.  
The discussion paper is an illustration to the consultative process that has been increasingly adopted 
in the policy making by the Reserve Bank. As far as banking business is concerned, we appreciate the 
role of promoters in general and strategic investors in particular; although the distinction between them 
is  often  blurred  in  practice. The  comments  on  the  first  draft  of  this  discussion  paper  will  definitely 
enable us to fine tune the policy for the better.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 5
