Y V Reddy: The outlook for Indian economy - an update  
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 76th Annual General Meeting 
of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), New Delhi, 7 January 2004. 
 Friends,  I  am  thankful  to  President  Mr.  Muthiah  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  the 
76th General Meeting of FICCI. I had the privilege of addressing FICCI in New Delhi about a year ago 
(October 24, 2002), at the invitation of Mr. Lodha and the subject was, if I recall right, “World Economic 
Outlook  and  Financial  Market  Developments  –  Implications  for  India”.  Today,  I  will  share  with  you 
Reserve Bank of India’s latest assessment of outlook for Indian economy for the rest of the current 
fiscal year, while no doubt also capturing some global developments.  
You may recall that on November 3, 2003, we set out the Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit 
Policy for the year 2003-04. The first part of the Statement, as in the past, provided a mid-year Review 
of the macroeconomic and monetary developments of the economy with a focus on the outlook for 
2003-04.    In that  light,  the  stance  of  the  monetary  policy  set  out in  April  2003  was  left  unchanged. 
Today, I propose to place before you an update on the outlook for the Indian economy in the light of 
developments since November 3, 2003. The structural reforms mentioned in Part-III of the Mid-Term 
Review  will  not  be  part  of  the  presentation  today,  though  they  remain  important  in  achieving  the 
progress that we anticipate. 
It may be recalled that at the time of the Mid-Term Review, there was reasonable expectation of an 
overall GDP growth of 6.5 per cent to 7.0 per cent, with an upward bias, for the year 2003-04. This 
projection was actually an upward revision from the earlier projections of around 6.0 per cent made in 
the April Policy Statement. At the time of the Mid-Term Review, Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) 
estimates of GDP growth were available for the first quarter of 2003-04. These estimates placed the 
first quarter growth at 5.7 per cent over the GDP in the corresponding quarter of the preceding year. 
We  made  an  upward  revision  in  our  growth  assessment  as  several  other  indicators  that  pointed  to 
acceleration in real economic activity were available. The second quarter estimates that have recently 
been  released  by  the  CSO  validate  our  view  of  high  growth  in  2003-04.  The  impressive  real  GDP 
growth of 8.4 per cent in the second quarter places us firmly amongst the fastest growing economies 
in  the  world  during  the  current  year.  More  importantly,  the  second  quarter  estimates  show  that 
buoyancy  has  been  spread  across  most  sectors  of  the  economy  and  is  not  confined  merely  to 
agriculture, which still accounts for most of the rebound.  The manufacturing sector has recorded a 
significant  growth  of  7.3  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2003-04,  continuing  the  sustained 
acceleration  from  the  low  of  2.9  per  cent  growth  registered  in  first  quarter  of  2001.    The  improved 
prospects  for  real  activity  globally  should  add  strength  to  the  upward  momentum  in  growth.  On 
balance, therefore, there is room at this juncture for greater optimism in growth prospects than before.  
It is reasonable to expect that unless there are unforeseen circumstances, the overall GDP growth for 
the year 2003-04 as a whole, which was estimated at 6.0 per cent at the beginning of the year and 
6.5-7.0 per cent in November is, on latest assessment, likely to be higher and around 7.0 per cent with 
a continued upward bias.  
Inflation is the other key parameter that is taken into account in monetary policy formulation and it is 
measured primarily in terms of variation in the wholesale price index (on a point to point basis). The 
Mid-Term Review had placed the inflation projections for policy purposes in the range of 4.0 per cent 
to 4.5 per cent with a possible downward bias. It was also mentioned that the RBI would continue to 
closely monitor the price behaviour leaving no room for complacency on the inflation front. As you are 
aware, the annual rate of inflation was 6.7 per cent at the time the April policy projections were made 
and it continued in the range of 6.3-6.9 per cent for nearly two months thereafter. It, however, declined 
to around 4.0 per cent in August, before climbing back to 5.0 per cent or more since September 20, 
2003.  Inflation  rate  has  risen  further  since  the  Mid-Term  Policy  on  November  3,  2003  and  as  on 
December 20, 2003, the point-to-point inflation rate was 5.6 per cent. The inflation trends in the last 
two months have not been unexpected but, the magnitude of price rise has been above the original 
expectations.  
The increase in inflation in the last two months appears to be mainly on account of fruits, vegetables, 
mineral  oils, fuels,  and cotton  textiles.  Two  important  international  factors  have  contributed  to  more 
than the unanticipated upward pressure on prices. First, international oil prices have remained firm. 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 1
The average price of OPEC basket had reached US$29.5 a barrel at the end of 2003, while US prices 
are hovering around US$32 a barrel. The global oil prices today are thus about 10 per cent higher 
than they were at the time of the Mid-Term policy Statement. The outlook for oil prices in the near term 
appear  highly  uncertain.  Secondly,  world  primary  commodity  prices  have  also  increased  in  2003. 
These  trends,  along  with  revival  of  growth  and  falling  excess  capacities  in  several  advanced 
economies  have  brought  about  a  noticeable  shift  in  the  outlook  for  prices.  The  fear  of  deflation  in 
advanced  economies  has  been  replaced  by  a  possible  upward  pressure,  led  by  increases  in 
commodity  prices.    No  doubt,  these  international  developments  enhance  the  probability  of 
international transmission of inflation.  At the same time, there are three favourable factors to counter 
these recent adverse global developments.  First, in the normal course, it is expected that the inflation 
rate would fall in the period mid-January to March 2004.  Secondly, there are cushions in terms of food 
stocks  and  ample  forex  reserves.  Thirdly,  our  economy  has,  in  recent  years,  shown  remarkable 
resilience in absorbing shocks including on the oil front.  In view of all these factors, it is possible that 
the downward bias may not be attainable but it appears that the range of 4.0 per cent to 4.5 per cent 
for inflation indicated in the Mid-term Review continues to be relevant for policy purposes unless there 
are  unanticipated  severe  shocks.    It  may  be  noticed  that  the  policy  assumption  in  April  2003  was 
5.0-5.5 per cent and the latest assessment placing it in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent demonstrates 
that, overall, inflationary situation continues to be benign for 2003-04.       
There  has  been  a  marginal  improvement  in  central government  finances  since  the  Mid-Term  policy 
Statement.  The gross fiscal deficit of the Central Government as at the time of Mid-term Review which 
was higher by 40.3 per cent (based on fiscal data available up to September 2003) is now higher by 
12.3 per cent (based on fiscal data available up to November 2003) over the corresponding periods of 
last year.  Similar improvement is also seen on the revenue account, which was higher by 37.4 per 
cent, is now higher by 13.0 per cent over the same periods under reference.  The gross fiscal deficit of 
the Central Government may get relief by virtue of the debt swaps of the State Governments but a 
clearer picture would be evident in the next few months. At this juncture, it is necessary to reiterate the 
importance of pursuing promptly, and with resolve, fiscal consolidation for the medium term.  
There  are  some  signs  of  pick  up  in  credit  off-take  in  recent  months.  scheduled  commercial  banks’ 
non-food credit, in the current financial year, increased by 8.1 per cent by mid-December [upto Dec. 
12,  2003],  as  compared  with  an  increase  of  only  2.7  per  cent  upto  mid-September  [upto  Sept.  19, 
2003]. While credit expansion till Mid-September this year was clearly lower than in the corresponding 
period of last year, the credit expansion in three months since then, i.e. between mid-September and 
mid-December has been nearly 50 per cent more than in the corresponding period of last year. The 
total resource flows to the commercial sector in 2003 so far, i.e., up to end-November 2003 has been 
higher  than  last  year  by  Rs.3,058  crore.    There  are  continued  indications  of  a  shift  in  corporate 
financing pattern in recent years with increased reliance on internal finance and on external borrowing.   
Consistent with these developments, in the current financial year up to December 26, 2003, money 
supply  (M3)  remained  with  an  increase  of  10.1  per  cent  as  compared  with  10.1  per  cent  in  the 
corresponding period of the previous year.  Reserve money increased by 6.9 per cent this year so far 
as  against  an  increase  of  1.5  per  cent  in  the  corresponding  period  of  the  previous  year,  mainly 
reflecting the large capital inflows and consequent increase in RBI’s net foreign currency assets. 
The financial markets continue to remain generally stable.  While the average daily absorption in the 
repo transactions under the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) during the year continue to be in the 
same  range  during  the  last  two  months  as  it  was  in  previous  months,  the  average  call  money  rate 
moved  down  by  a  little  over  20  basis  points.  The  yield  on  treasury  bills  of  different  maturities  has 
declined, while the yield on Government securities with 10-year residual maturity has marginally firmed 
up since November 2003. In fact, a slight steepening of the yield curve is noticeable with shifts in yield 
at the very long-end. By and large, the behaviour of the fixed income market has been in consonance 
with the monetary policy stance. 
In the light of expectations in the monetary policy about a reduction in the lending rates, there is some 
evidence  of  a  commitment  by  banks  to  reduce  the  Prime  Lending  Rates  (PLRs)  in  January,  2004.  
Following  the  introduction  of  the  benchmark  PLR  (BPLR)  concept,  11  public  sector  banks  have 
already announced their BPLR while the rest have assured the Indian Banks Association (IBA) that 
they will similarly announce their rates.  As a result, the new BPLRs are now lower by 25-50 basis 
points. The progress in regard to movement of interest rates by the banking system has been largely 
in consonance with policy expectations. While no direct link can be established between lending rates 
and  credit  off-take,  simultaneous  and  intensive  efforts  will  have  to  be  undertaken  by  the  banking 
system  to  remove  the  procedural  and  transactional  rigidities  in  the  delivery  of  credit,  particularly  to 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2004
agriculture  and  small  industries.  A  noteworthy  feature  of  credit  off-take  has  been  the  impressive 
increase in priority sector lending in the current financial year and this has posted the highest growth in 
recent  years.  There  is  scope  for  further  improvement  in  regard  to  both  credit  pricing  and  credit 
delivery.  Efforts by RBI, with close co-operation from banks, will have to be intensified.  
Now, let me turn to external developments.  Since the Mid-term Review, the prospects for the world 
economy  have  improved  further,  while  at  the  same  time,  the  uncertainties  relating  to  the  currency 
movements of major currencies have increased.  Whereas the monetary policy in many countries has 
moved  to  mild  tightening  in  some  countries,  in  others  there  is  a  neutral  bias  with  expectations  of 
tightening,  particularly  in  the  U.S.,  with  no  firm  indication  on  the  timing.  These  uncertainties  would 
necessarily have an impact on global liquidity as well as the flow of resources to emerging countries 
including India.  As far as India is concerned, the relative weight of the fundamentals and confidence 
in the economy appears to be more than the global liquidity factors that govern the capital flows. As 
such, on current reckoning, for us there could be some moderation, but no dramatic deceleration, in 
capital inflows.  
The Indian forex market generally continued to witness orderly conditions during recent months. At the 
time  of  the  mid-term  policy,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee,  over  the  end-March  2003  levels,  had 
appreciated by 4.8 per cent vis-à-vis the US dollar but depreciated by 2.3 per cent against the Euro, 
2.5  per  cent  against  the  Pound  Sterling  and  4.2  per  cent  against  the  Japanese  Yen.  During 
November-December 2003, the US dollar has depreciated by 7.9 per cent against the Euro, 4.7 per 
cent against the Pound Sterling and 3.0 per cent against the Yen.  During November-December, 2003, 
the rupee has depreciated against all these currencies; by 8.5 per cent against the Euro, 5.3 per cent 
against the Pound Sterling and 3.6 per cent against the Yen and by only 0.6 per cent against the US 
dollar.  It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  the  phenomenon  in  the  last  few  months  should  appropriately  be 
described as a significant depreciation of the US dollar. In general, the adjustment in the US dollar, 
which was considered to be essential, seems to have taken place in large measure in a non-disruptive 
manner  so  far.    There  are,  however,  emerging  pressures  on  the  distribution  of  the  burden  of 
adjustment mainly between US, Euro area, and Asia, especially Japan and China.  
Under  these  circumstances,  there  appears  to  be  considerable  merit  in  continuing  with  our  policy  of 
exchange  rate  management  of  the  rupee  addressing  essentially  the  volatility  issues  without  a  fixed 
target. As a result of this policy of exchange rate management, in the context of maintaining orderly 
conditions  in  the  forex  markets,  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  increased  by  US  $8.0  billion  during 
November-December 2003. As mentioned in my recent address at the Bank Economists Conference, 
considering  the  state  of  markets  and  the  capabilities  of  the  market  participants  in  our  country, 
non-volatility  in  financial  markets  has  to  be  treated  as  a  public  good  and  perhaps  it  is  worthwhile 
reiterating this today.  
The growth rate in our exports in the current financial year continue to be around half of what it was in 
the  corresponding  period  of  last  year.  Though  half,  the  export  growth  of  8.8  per  cent  during 
April-November 2003 is on top of an increase of 18.0 per cent in the corresponding period of last year. 
In November 2003, export growth accelerated to 13.7 per cent, which was higher than 10.8 per cent 
growth  in  November  2002.    On  current  reckoning,  the  prospects  for  exports  appear  to  be  as 
anticipated two months ago. 
Imports have accelerated this year on the back of revival of domestic economy [22.0 per cent in US 
dollar terms during April-November 2003]. Oil imports in US dollar terms are higher by 12.4 per cent. 
Non-oil imports have increased at a high rate of 26.5 per cent. Detailed commodity data available till 
August shows that during the first five months of the current financial year, non-oil, non-gold import 
increased by 23.1 per cent as compared with an increase of 11.9 per cent in the corresponding period 
last year. The trade deficit in the current financial year so far has widened, in fact is double of last 
year.  The current account, however, remains in surplus on account of robust invisible earnings.  
It  will  be  useful  to  conclude  this  presentation  with  an  overall  assessment.  The  macroeconomic 
environment has continued to improve during the year.  It has reinforced the positive outlook on the 
domestic economy, though some uncertainties prevail in regard to global environment. Furthermore, 
comfort can be drawn from the fact that the Indian economy has demonstrated considerable resilience 
to exogenous shocks in recent years. The optimism reflected in business confidence surveys at the 
time of Mid-Term Policy Review seems to have been further enhanced and the credit rating agencies 
have taken positive note of recent developments.  The inflation outlook by and large remains benign, 
though  careful  monitoring  and  management  would  have  to  continue  with  a  view  to  cushion  supply 
shocks and better manage supply bottlenecks for individual commodities so that price volatilities are 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 3
evened  out.  The  money,  government  securities  and  forex  markets  remain  stable.    The  foreign 
exchange reserves are at a more comfortable level than ever before and there is adequate liquidity in 
the system. The yield curve has slightly steepened. These gains can be, however, consolidated with 
further progress in regard to credit delivery and credit pricing.  Moreover, investment activity, both in 
the public and private sectors has to pick up to enable sustained acceleration in growth.  
In brief, I would like to submit that the monetary policy stance set out earlier in April 2003, has served 
us well so far.  In fact, growth in GDP for 2003-04 which was estimated at 6 to 6.5 per cent at the 
beginning  of  the  year,  now  appears  to  be  around  7.0  per  cent  with  an  upward  bias;  while  inflation 
which then was assumed to be in the range of 5.0 to 5.5 per cent may now be in the range of 4.0 to 
4.5  per  cent.  Assuming  that  there  are  no  unexpected  adverse  developments,  there  is  merit  in 
maintaining the status quo as far as the monetary and credit policy measures are concerned, while 
pursuing  with  the  reform  process.      Hence,  unless  unforeseen  circumstances  emerge,  the  current 
measures should in the normal course remain till the next Monetary and Credit Policy in April 2004.  
Against this backdrop, the Reserve Bank expects the growth momentum to be reinforced, inflation to 
be contained as indicated, financial stability continued to be maintained and external sector to perform 
well.    In  conclusion,  may  I  say  that  the  overall  developments  in  the  economy  are  favourable  and 
provide the main springs for a strong revival of investment by industry?     
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2004
