David Dodge: Canadian monetary policy in an evolving world economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Calgary, Alberta, 20 September 2004. 
 Good  afternoon.  I'm  glad  to  be  back  in  Calgary.  We  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  welcome  these 
opportunities to get out across the country, to speak to business people, and hear your perspectives 
on the economy. The feedback we receive from businesses from coast to coast is an important part of 
our monetary policy deliberations. I know that the staff of our regional office here in Calgary work hard 
to stay on top of local business conditions on the Prairies, as do our other offices for their regions.  
I am happy to have the opportunity to meet with the national body of the Chamber of Commerce. I can 
tell you that my regular contacts with the Ottawa liaison group are very valuable to me. The Bank does 
look to the Chamber to help us understand how economic developments are unfolding at the industry 
level.  And  I  particularly  want  to  thank  the  Chamber  for  being  an  ongoing  partner  in  our  efforts  to 
smoothly introduce three new high-denomination bank notes this year. This is the second straight year 
in which we have set up a currency-education kiosk at your annual meeting, to help spread the word 
about  our  new  bank  notes.  You  can  learn about  the security  features  that we  have  included  in our 
high-denomination notes. And we have materials about our new $20 note that we unveiled last month, 
and which goes into circulation beginning next Wednesday, 29 September.  
I should add that I'll be back here in Calgary on 13 October to unveil the new $50 bank note, which 
goes into circulation beginning in mid-November. 
During  the  past  year,  powerful  forces  have  continued  to  shape  the  global  economy.  Alberta,  and 
indeed  all  of  Canada,  have  felt  the  impact  of  these  forces.  Of  course,  the  evolution  of  the  global 
economy is not a short-term event. Some of the forces currently at work have been building for years. 
Similarly,  today's  developments  may  have  repercussions,  and  raise  the  need  for  adjustments,  for 
years  to  come.  So  today,  I  want  to  talk  about  Canada's  economic  outlook  and  the  prospects  for 
monetary policy within the context of the evolving world economy. 
How the monetary policy framework works 
I  will  start  with  a  brief  review  of  our  monetary  policy  framework.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  goal  of 
Canadian monetary policy. Experience has taught us that the best contribution the Bank of Canada 
can make to good economic performance is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. By doing so, 
we can provide the backdrop that best allows our economy to grow in a strong and sustainable way.  
We aim to keep inflation - as measured by the annual rate of increase in the consumer price index - at 
2 per cent. It's important to note that we conduct monetary policy in a symmetric way. This means that 
we will raise interest rates to dampen total demand when we see that inflation is threatening to rise 
above our 2 per cent target over the next 18 to 24 months. In the same way, we will lower interest 
rates to stimulate demand when we see that the trend of inflation is poised to fall below the target. This 
symmetric approach to monetary policy has delivered an average rate of inflation that has been very 
close to 2 per cent since inflation targeting was adopted in 1991. 
It is also important to keep in mind that monetary policy actions take time to have their full effect. The 
lags are variable, but it typically takes a year and a half to two years for a change in interest rates to 
have  its  full  impact  on  the  economy  and  inflation.  That  is  why  we  say  that  we  need  to  be  forward 
looking  with  our  monetary  policy,  and  that  is  why  we  are  always  trying  to  assess  the  state  of  the 
economy 18 to 24 months into the future. Specifically, we try to evaluate the various factors that will 
affect supply and demand, to help us estimate the future size of the output gap. 
What do I mean by "output gap?" That term refers to the difference between actual output - what the 
economy  is  producing  -  and  potential  output  -  the  maximum  amount  the  economy  could  produce 
without triggering higher inflation. Another way that we sometimes refer to this concept is to talk about 
how close the economy is to its production capacity. This idea is important because when economies 
operate above their capacity - or, as economists like to put it, there is excess demand and a positive 
output gap - inflationary pressures can build. But when economies operate below capacity - meaning 
that there is excess supply and a negative output gap - disinflationary pressures can set in. Ideally, we 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 1
want to see the economy operating close to its capacity, with total demand roughly in balance with 
total supply. If we achieve this, we can have the best outcome over time - strong, sustainable growth 
that avoids booms and busts, along with rising employment and low inflation. 
One major problem is that we cannot directly measure potential output. Further, the economic data 
that measure actual output are often revised - sometimes significantly so. The challenge for us, then, 
lies in estimating the size of the output gap, and there is always a significant degree of uncertainty 
around that estimate. So we look at a number of other economic variables to help us form an opinion 
about how large the output gap is. You can find out more about these variables on our Web site. They 
include, among others, indicators of capacity in goods markets, signs of tightness in labour markets, 
and  signals  of  pressures  in  the  real  estate  market.  Some  of  these  are  quantitative,  and  some  are 
qualitative, based on surveys of businesses conducted by our regional offices. Another indicator is the 
rate  of  inflation  itself.  If  core  inflation  -  which  strips  out  eight  highly  volatile  components  of  the 
consumer price index - is consistently coming in above or below our expectations, it may lead us to 
adjust our view about the current size of the output gap. 
Earlier, I said that when the economy is operating near its capacity, total demand for Canadian goods 
and services - or what economists like to refer to as "aggregate demand" - is roughly in balance with 
total supply. Total demand has two components - domestic demand and foreign demand. Assessing 
foreign demand is difficult, but because it represents such a large share of total output in Canada, we 
at the Bank spend a great deal of time and effort trying to gauge that demand.  
Of course, it is nothing new to say that our economy is importantly affected by events abroad. Canada 
has always relied on international trade. For a long time now, the United States has been the focus of 
attention in assessing the world economy. But many of today's global economic developments have 
their origins outside North America, most notably in Asia. Before I talk about their current implications, 
I  would  like  to  take  a  few  minutes  to  discuss  the  nature  of  these  developments  and  their  likely 
implications over the next decade or so. 
The medium-term implications of global developments 
Just as Japan and Korea emerged as major players on the global stage in previous decades, China is 
now quickly becoming an economic powerhouse. And India is not far behind. When you consider that 
these two countries account for 40 per cent of the world's population, it is not hard to see why they are 
having such an impact on the global economy. 
As  we  look  ahead,  it  is  clear  that  China  and  India  will  be  major  global  competitors,  not  just  in 
labour-intensive  industries,  but  increasingly  in  skill-intensive  industries  as  well.  It's  a  pattern  of 
development that the world has seen before. Established firms in many industries will feel competitive 
pressure  from  China  and  India,  until  the  large  pool  of  surplus  labour  in  those  countries  can  be 
absorbed. But at the same time, this process will create income and wealth in China and India and, 
hence, increase their ability to buy more goods and services from abroad. 
So, the integration of these countries into the global economy represents both a competitive challenge 
and  a  tremendous  opportunity  for  the  industrialized  world.  These  emerging  markets  are  just  that  - 
markets. China is already one of the largest importers in the world and its importance will increase 
over the next decade. This source of growing demand can provide a much-needed boost to the global 
economy  in  general  and  to  the  Canadian  economy  in  particular.  We  have  already  seen  some 
Canadian  commodity  producers  step  in  to  fill  the  demand  from  Asia.  Indeed,  Statistics  Canada 
recently reported that the value of Canadian exports to China in the first seven months of this year 
rose by 58 per cent compared with the same period in 2003.  
There  will  also  be  opportunities  for  Canadian  firms  to  integrate  low-cost  components  into  their  own 
production  processes,  through  direct  investment  or  joint  ventures.  This  will  be  an  increasingly 
important way for Canadian firms to maintain cost competitiveness. 
Over the medium term, it will be absolutely crucial for all Canadian businesses and governments to 
continue to take advantage of these opportunities as they arise. 
At  the  same  time,  Canadian  businesses  and  governments  need  to  recognize  that  these  global 
developments will require adjustments here in Canada. There will be some activities, particularly those 
that  are  labour-intensive  and  lower-value-added,  where  Canadian  firms  will  not  be  well  placed  to 
compete  with  lower-cost  producers  in  Asia.  The  key  will  be  to  adjust  by  shifting  resources  into 
expanding,  higher-value-added  activities,  where  Canadian  firms  can  exploit  the  opportunities 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2004
presented by the changing world economy. By making these adjustments, we will be able to increase 
productivity and raise our standards of living over the medium term.  
Of course, it is not just developments in Asia that will require us to make adjustments here in Canada. 
We will also have to adjust as the U.S. economy reduces the size of its fiscal and current account 
deficits. But the subject of adjustments to global imbalances is beyond the scope of my remarks today. 
What I can say, though, is that the Bank of Canada will facilitate whatever adjustments are necessary 
by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  This  will  help Canadian  firms  and  individuals  read 
market signals more clearly and allow them to make plans with confidence in the future value of their 
money. 
Near-term implications of global developments 
That's a look at the medium term, and it is important for business people and economic policy-makers 
to always keep an eye on the horizon. But, as you run your business from day to day, and as we at the 
Bank  conduct  monetary  policy,  it  is  the  shorter-term  developments  that  are  the  greater  focus  of 
attention. So, let me spend a few minutes on the near-term outlook for the world economy, and what 
that outlook implies for foreign demand for Canadian goods and services.  
As I said before, the emergence of China and India is having an important impact on the Canadian 
economy  through  an  increase  in  demand  for  many  of  the  commodities  that  we  produce.  This  has 
caused a run-up in the prices of nickel, potash, and steel, among others. And, in turn, this has boosted 
the  income  of  many  Canadian  producers,  even  after  taking  into  account  the  effects  of  the  large 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar that we saw in 2003. 
Of course, the most high-profile price increase recently has been that of oil. Very rapid growth in Asia 
has  led  to  unexpected  additional  demand  for  oil.  For  the  time  being,  this  unanticipated  demand  is 
putting  pressure  on  a  market  that  already  had  little  spare  capacity.  Over  the  medium  term,  oil 
production  will,  in  all  likelihood,  increase  to  meet  this  additional  demand.  But  it  takes  time  for  new 
production to come on line. Thus, it is not unreasonable to think that oil prices will be higher in the near 
term than what we might expect them to be over the medium term. 
Our  best  judgment  at  the  moment  is  that  high  levels  of  growth  in  Asia  will  continue  over  the  next 
couple of years, and that demand for commodities will continue to grow, although perhaps not quite as 
rapidly  as  in  the  past  couple  of  years.  This  is  based  on  the  not-unreasonable  assumption  that  the 
Chinese authorities will be able to manage economic growth at a more sustainable pace.  
While developments in Asia are likely to play a very important role in supporting continued strength in 
the global economy, developments in the United States will still have the largest impact on the volume 
of Canada's exports over the short term. As we said in our July Monetary Policy Report Update, recent 
data point to some slowing of U.S. growth from the red-hot pace of the second half of 2003 and the 
first quarter of 2004. Higher oil prices appear to be having some restraining effect on U.S. consumer 
spending, and both consumers and businesses seem to be somewhat less optimistic than they were 
earlier this year. Nevertheless, we still expect growth to be similar to what we forecast in July - that is, 
faster  than  the  growth  rate  of  U.S.  production  capacity.  This  strong  U.S.  growth  bodes  well  for 
continued high levels of Canadian exports, although they are unlikely to continue to grow at the rapid 
pace of the first half of this year.  
Consistent  with  this  profile  for  solid  U.S.  and  global  economic  growth  and  with  the  expectations  of 
financial markets, we continue to assume some upward movement in global policy interest rates to 
moderate inflation pressures as output levels approach production capacity.  
Canada’s economic prospects 
Let me now turn to Canada, beginning with a quick recap of the first half of 2004. 
At the start of the year, we said that we did not expect net exports - the difference between what we 
export and what we import - to make a significant contribution to Canada's economic growth in 2004 or 
2005, because of the sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar last year. We also said that economic 
growth would have to come primarily from domestic demand in order to eliminate the excess supply 
that  existed  at  the  start  of  the  year  and  to  close  the  output  gap.  To  facilitate  growth  in  domestic 
demand, we reduced our key policy interest rate from 2 3/4 per cent to 2 per cent in three steps earlier 
this year. 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 3
However,  Canada's  economic  performance  in  the  first  half  of  2004  turned  out  somewhat  differently 
from our expectations. The volume of exports grew much more rapidly than we had anticipated. So did 
imports,  but  not  to  the  same  extent  as  exports.  As  a  result,  net  exports  made  a  very  significant 
contribution to growth, and aggregate demand in the first half of the year grew more strongly than we 
had  expected  at  the  beginning  of  2004.  So  the  output  gap  at  mid-year  was  smaller  than  we  had 
projected.  Indeed,  the  Bank  judges  that  the  Canadian  economy  is  now  operating  close  to  its 
production capacity.  
As we look ahead to the remainder of this year and to 2005, we expect that exports will grow more 
slowly than in the first half of 2004. But there are lots of uncertainties that cloud the outlook for foreign 
demand and Canadian growth. These include uncertainty about the western grain crop, the re-opening 
of  the  U.S.  border  to  live  cattle  exports,  and  auto  production,  as  the  "Big  Three"  automakers  face 
softer markets for their products. Despite these caveats, aggregate demand will likely grow at a rate 
equal to, or marginally above, the rate of growth of production capacity over the next four quarters.  
With the economy currently operating close to capacity, we reduced the amount of monetary stimulus 
in the economy two weeks ago by raising our key policy interest rate to 2 1/4 per cent.  
Inflation, both total and core, has been volatile in recent months, primarily because of swings in energy 
prices and because of automobile purchase-incentive programs. But despite this volatility, we continue 
to  project  that  core  inflation  will  be  a  bit  above  1.5  per  cent  for  the  second  half  of  2004,  before 
gradually moving up to the 2 per cent target in 2005. 
Looking  forward,  we  will  need  to  continue  to  reduce  monetary  stimulus  to  avoid  a  buildup  of 
inflationary pressures and to contribute to sustainable, solid economic growth. However, the pace of 
our  actions  will  depend  on  our  continuing  assessment  of  the  evolving  prospects  for  pressures  on 
capacity and inflation. 
In this context, there are several key factors that the Bank will be watching closely. As always, there is 
uncertainty about the exact size of the output gap. There is also considerable uncertainty at this time 
about the future growth rate of both exports and imports, and about the evolution of world prices for 
energy and non-energy commodities. And we will be watching the impact of geopolitical developments 
on global confidence and demand. We will update our outlook for the Canadian economy in our next 
Monetary Policy Report, which will be published on 21 October. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by going back to my earlier point about the need to adjust to changes in the world 
economy. We can be certain that the powerful global economic forces I spoke of today will continue to 
be felt as the world economy continues to evolve. This evolution will lead to challenges that we must 
face, but it will also lead to opportunities that we must seize. 
At the Bank of Canada, we will continue to monitor these global forces closely and assess their impact 
at home and abroad. This will help us contribute to Canada's future economic prospects through low 
and stable inflation.  
For Canada to grow and prosper over the long run, Canadian businesses and governments will need 
to make the right adjustments to the evolving world economy. As leaders in the business community, 
your job will not be easy. But over the past several years, we have seen ample evidence that you can 
face challenges and take advantage of opportunities. I am confident that you will continue to do so in 
the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2004
