P M W Tucker: Keynote speech at the NAPF annual investment conference 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  P  M  W  Tucker,  Executive  Director  and  member  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee of the Bank of England, at the National Association of Pension Funds Annual Investment 
Conference, Edinburgh, 19 March 2004. 
 It’s very good to be here - or, I should say, good to be back. About seven or eight years ago I spoke to 
this conference about the raft of reforms then underway in the gilt market: repo, strips, regular auction 
schedules etc.  
Market intelligence and the Bank of England’s mission 
Since the 1997-98 reforms that gave the Bank monetary independence, codified our financial stability 
role  and  created  the  FSA,  gilt  issuance  has,  of  course,  been  the  responsibility  of  the  Debt 
Management Office. There is, though, an important continuity in the Bank’s role and outlook: seeking 
dialogue with market practitioners. Just as many of those mid-1990s’ reforms came from listening to 
the  asset  managers  who  bought  and  held  gilts,  so  now  we  seek  a  dialogue  to  support  our  core 
mission: monetary and financial system stability. Let me stress: the Bank’s interest in financial markets 
and participants in markets - and our use of market intelligence to help us figure out what is going on 
in markets - is undiminished. If anything, our range of interests and contacts has been expanding as 
financial markets become more sophisticated and integrated.  
On  the  monetary  side,  the  main  focus  is  on  markets  and  financial  intermediaries  as  part  of  the 
transmission mechanism through which our interest rate settings affect the economy: credit conditions, 
financial wealth, the exchange rate etc. And, of course, we implement policy in the money markets, 
with the yield curve reflecting expectations of the path of policy. This means that, on the monetary side 
of our business, we tend to focus on core markets - money markets and government bonds, equities, 
exchange  rates.  Markets  that  are,  on  the  whole,  pretty  efficient.  So  our  starting  point  -  our  default 
hypothesis, if you like - is to assume that asset prices in these markets reflect fundamentals, and that 
we can use them as a diagnostic of expectations of economic prospects and of the path of policy. We 
do  not,  though,  kid  ourselves  that  we  can  stop  there.  We  are  on  the  look  out  for  where  there  are 
transitory or persistent frictions that distort the message from asset prices - for example, on account of 
regulation,  features  of  the  infrastructure,  particular  market  conventions,  or  information  asymmetries. 
Identifying and making sense of such frictions requires intelligence about actual markets in the real 
world. Plenty of examples come to mind that will be familiar to this audience, not least the hump that 
featured in the gilt forward curve for so many years on account of the demand for long-dated bonds 
from life companies and pension funds.  
On  the  financial  stability  side  of  our  business,  we  think  of  markets  as  a  medium  for  taking  and 
hedging risk. Most of the time, they promote stability by dispersing risk. But they are also part of the 
mechanism through which a crisis could spread from one part of the system to others, including across 
product,  sector  and  geographical  boundaries.  Contributing  to  avoiding,  or  containing,  debilitating 
systemic disorder in markets is part of our mission. So for financial stability, the canvas is wide. We 
are on the look out for symptoms of actual or incipient stress: for example, high leverage coupled with 
‘crowded’ trades - ie with ‘everyone’ positioned similarly - in markets that could prove illiquid just when 
trades are suddenly unwound. In the event of a crisis, we are not going to be able to cope - indeed, 
the  financial  authorities  collectively,  here  and  internationally,  are  not  going  to  be  able  to  meet  the 
challenge - unless we can comprehend the instruments and structures involved. Given the growing 
technical  sophistication  and  complexity  of  today’s  capital  markets,  that  is  unavoidably  more  difficult 
than a decade or more ago - a world in which exotic options, securitisation, hedge funds etc hardly 
featured. One precondition for doing our job properly is that we should understand how global financial 
markets and the key players in them fit together. Another is to understand modern risk management 
structures and practices.  
For many of the core markets, we have a natural entry - in the sterling money markets because that is 
where we implement monetary policy; in the high-grade sovereign bond, swap and foreign exchange 
markets through our management of the government’s foreign exchange reserves and liabilities and of 
our  own  balance  sheet.  But  for  both  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  the  Bank’s  market 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
surveillance role has to extend beyond those markets, including to a wide range of derivative markets 
and structured finance.  
This  is  not  the  kind  of  task  we  can  begin  to  fulfil  solely  by  sitting  in  our  building  doing  desk-based 
analysis and research. That vital work has to be integrated with intelligence gained from a wealth of 
relationships across the market, both in the UK and overseas. Thanks to many of you here - and I 
really  do  mean  a  big  thank  you  -  we  already  have  a  good  network.  But  we  have  more  to  do.  The 
Governor, Mervyn King, has asked me to develop a medium-term strategy to deliver our goals on this 
front, so I was really delighted to be invited here today to leave the Bank’s calling card.  
With  that  bit  of  advertising  out  of  the  way,  let  me  say  something  about  how  I  see  the  current 
environment as it affects monetary policy and financial stability. 
The monetary policy environment 
Compared with when you met at this event a year ago, conditions both for you as asset managers - or 
rather, I should stress, asset-liability managers - and for us as monetary policy makers are brighter in 
some important respects but uncomfortably familiar in others.  
Most obviously in the context of today’s event, equity prices are some 15% off their March 2003 low, 
even after the falls since the second half of last week. And default risk in the corporate bond markets 
seems  to  have  receded  -  partly  reflecting  balance  sheet  restructuring  amongst  large  corporates  on 
both sides of the Atlantic, itself aided by low yields encouraging firms to extend debt maturities.  
These  improvements  in  asset  markets  have,  of  course,  both  reflected  and  contributed  to  stronger 
global  macroeconomic  conditions.  I  was  recently  asked  at  a  conference  whether  the  external 
environment mattered to UK monetary policy - with a goal specified in terms of preserving domestic 
purchasing power, did we look beyond the domestic economy?  
In fact, of course, as a highly open economy, the UK is very much affected by international conditions: 
more so than either the US or the euro area. Indeed, for some years now, UK monetary policy has 
been  directed  at  offsetting  weaknesses  in  the  external  environment.  In  other  words,  we  have  been 
stimulating  domestic  spending  in  order  to  keep  aggregate  demand  more  or  less  in  line  with  the 
expansion in the economy’s productive potential, consistent with keeping inflation expectations in line 
with  our  target.  In  terms  of  our  mandate,  it  has  worked:  inflation  has  stayed  pretty  close  to  target, 
averaging 2.3% on the RPIX measure since the beginning of 2000. But as is now familiar, this has 
been accompanied by accumulating ‘imbalances’ in the economy, manifested in a variety of ways - 
weak manufacturing but strong services; consumption growing well above its long run average rate for 
the past three years, or more rapidly than disposable income since; rapid accumulation of debt by the 
household sector alongside burgeoning house price inflation. 
That strategy has in principle always had limits, but whether they would be tested - and whether we 
would  identify  them  -  has  depended,  in  part,  on  external  prospects.  Other  things  being  equal,  the 
healthier  the  international  environment,  the  more  we  could  withdraw  the  stimulus  to  domestic 
spending. 
For policy, that is the significance of the recovery over the past year in the US. Until last summer, the 
risks looked to me to be pretty clearly weighted to the downside relative to a central projection of a 
fairly rapid return to trend levels of output. But, after declining for five quarters, business investment 
spending in the US has bounced back since Q2, with output recovering rapidly back towards trend and 
capacity  utilisation  rising.  Risks  do  nevertheless  remain.  For  a  while  last  autumn  it  looked  like  the 
recovery in demand was being accompanied by similarly robust job growth, but since December net 
job creation has fallen back to well below the average rate of growth of the workforce. Commentators - 
and policymakers, it should be said - take two views on this. The first view sees employment picking 
up in an environment of sustained output growth and reduced scope, over time, for extracting greater 
efficiency  from  current  labour  and  capital  inputs  at  the  rates  recently  achieved.  That’s  persuasive, 
particularly  with  US  monetary  policy  remaining  so  accommodative.  The  other  view  worries  that 
protracted weakness in the jobs market could dent household confidence and so spending, slowing 
output growth. US surveys suggest that sentiment is sensitive to job prospects, but so far spending 
has remained robust, as has house price inflation (over 3½% quarter-on-quarter in Q4). My take is that 
the most likely outlook is positive but that downside risks have, again, become tangible.  
I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  analysis  of  the  euro  area  is  tougher  -  on  both  the  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability sides of our business. Essentially, that reflects less timely and rich data, together with 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
varying regional conditions - and so economic stories - across the area. For some time now, we have 
been forecasting recovery. That is based on stimulative monetary policy - short real rates are around 
zero  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  -  and  some  recovery  in  consumer  and,  particularly,  business 
confidence. Signs of recovery have, though, recently been more apparent in the surveys than in the 
data. In particular, domestic demand has remained weak, although it picked up in France in Q4. In 
Germany, not only has household spending been subdued, but investment (at current prices) is lower 
relative to economy-wide output than at any time since unification. On the one hand, that suggests 
that there is plenty of scope for recovery back to trend levels. But, on the other hand, there has to be 
some risk - perhaps not high - that trend output growth is down a bit. If so, and if that were to have 
adverse knock-on effects on other parts of the euro area, it would create downside risks for us as the 
euro area is by far our largest trading partner. For the moment, I continue to place greater weight on 
the encouraging surveys.  
The euro area may be our biggest trading partner, but conditions in the rest of the world make quite a 
difference to us, both directly and indirectly. In fact, growth has been so strong in parts of Asia that in 
2002-03, the ‘rest of the world’ contributed more than a percentage point on average to UK-weighted 
world  output  growth.  The  outlook  in  various  parts  of  Asia  and  the  Far  East  may  mean  we  have  a 
second engine of global growth alongside the US. 
The  domestic  picture  has  also  gradually  changed  since  the  autumn.  Last  October,  there  were  the 
upward  revisions  to  the  Q2  GDP  data,  a  pick  up  in  business  surveys,  and  greater-than-expected 
strength in the housing market. Taken alongside diminished risks in the external environment, that was 
enough for me to vote for a 25bp rise. I regarded that as unwinding the Committee’s July cut, which I 
had viewed as ‘precautionary’ or ‘insurance’ against the downside risks then apparent.  
In the event, the MPC’s rate was raised a month later, November, and since then the debate about the 
course of policy has altered somewhat. There have been references to ‘caution’ in raising rates, and to 
moving  ‘gradually’  as  medium-term  inflationary  pressures  mount.  I  hope  I  can  provide  some  clarity 
about what those terms mean for me.  
Our January minutes recorded that if the economy evolved as envisaged in the November  Inflation 
Report,  with  inflationary  pressures  gradually  building,  then  a  gradual  rise  in  interest  rates would  be 
necessary. We are in a similar position now. The February increase in the MPC’s rate, bringing it to 
4%, leaves policy stimulating the economy. Indeed, I prefer to think of our recent policy adjustments as 
withdrawing some - but not all - of the previous stimulus.  
If,  as  projected,  output  continues  to  grow  above  trend  then,  depending  of  course  on  any  other 
developments  affecting  the  outlook,  I  for  one  would  expect  us  to  continue  gradually  to  reduce  the 
degree  of  stimulus  to  demand  broadly  in  line  with  the  take  up  of  slack  in  the  economy  and  any 
consequent pick up in inflationary pressures looking ahead. That seems to be more or less the view of 
the market, as reflected in our February Inflation Report projections using market interest rates; and in 
the  implied  forward  curve,  derived  from  index-linked  gilts,  for  short-maturity  real  rates  relative  to 
longer-maturity real rates, which in principle should not be affected by cyclical variations (Chart 1). 
While policy must be forward-looking rather than overly focused on the current rate of inflation, which 
at  1.3%  in  February  is  obviously  below  our  2%  CPI  target,  there  is  already  some  evidence  of 
inflationary pressure. Looking at the categories of goods and services in the CPI basket, the median 
rate of inflation has risen over the past year or so, as have the 70th and 30th percentiles (ie cutting out 
the categories for which prices have risen most and least in order to exclude erratic changes) (Chart 
2). But we take a month at a time. As each month passes, data may reveal that the outlook is either 
weaker or stronger than expected. 
This takes me to what has been said about ‘caution’ in raising rates, which at times has perhaps been 
misconstrued as implying ‘hesitant’. The idea here is that we care about the extent to which inflation 
varies around the target and so, amongst other things, about the degree of uncertainty about the effect 
on  inflation  of  changes  in  our  interest  rate.  The  marked  increases  in  household  debt  do  somewhat 
increase that uncertainty. With higher debts relative to incomes, interest rate changes will tend to have 
a bigger effect on the income that households have free to spend after servicing their debts. But we do 
not know what the sensitivities are. The implication is that, other things being equal, policy would tend 
to  move  towards  neutral more slowly  than would  otherwise  be optimal,  or  ‘cautiously’  for want  of  a 
better word. 
But  care  is  needed  here,  as  developments  in  the  economy  associated  with  the  debt  accumulation 
have other possible implications. I want to mention two.  
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
First, household borrowing has grown alongside a robust housing market. The ratio of house prices to 
earnings  is  up  by  over  40  percentage  points  since  2001.  The  increased  value  of  collateral 
consequently  available  to  households  to  secure  borrowing  has,  unsurprisingly,  been  evident  in 
mortgage  equity  withdrawal,  which  as  a  percentage  of  personal  disposable  income  is  estimated  to 
have  reached  around  7%  in  the  third  quarter  of  last  year.  Some  of  that  borrowing  has  probably 
substituted  for  more  expensive  unsecured  debt;  some  of  it  has  been  used  to  finance  consumption. 
Either way, the increased collateral values will plausibly have reduced the credit constraints faced by 
some  households.  If  so,  other  things  being  equal,  the  short-run  effect  may  have  been  to  increase 
slightly the level of interest rates at which output and inflation are stabilised. So the same underlying 
phenomenon could have more than one effect on the optimal path of interest rates.  
The second point is that, although there has been some deceleration since the end of 2002, house 
prices have continued to rise more rapidly than expected over recent months. This is not especially a 
London  or  South  East  of  England  thing.  Over  the  past  nine  months  or  so,  prices  have  risen  more 
strongly in the north of England, Scotland and Wales. Indeed, the regional dispersion of house price 
inflation remains very high by historical standards (Chart 3 and 4).  
For the UK as a whole, relative to the path we incorporated into our February projections, there appear 
to be upside risks in the near-term. As well as straightforward momentum, that would seem to be the 
message from the rise over the past few months of the ratio of the number of houses sold by estate 
agents to the stocks of unsold houses on their books - one measure of ‘tightness’ in the market. This 
has been a reasonable contemporaneous, or even slightly leading, indicator in the past (Chart 5). The 
significance for policy is that, taken together with fairly buoyant business surveys, it suggests that the 
near-term  outlook  for  domestic  demand  may  be  slightly  stronger  than  it  looked  a  couple  of  months 
ago.  We  will  need  to  consider  that  in  reaching  our  policy  judgment,  alongside  other  developments, 
including risks in the international environment. 
But, in addition, it separately suggests an argument to be placed alongside that in favour of ‘caution’. 
Namely, that it could be argued that policy may need to be tighter than would otherwise be the case in 
order to arrest somewhat the continuing strength in the household sector. The argument would be that 
we should try to reduce the risk of an abrupt correction, which would complicate monetary policy and 
so make achievement of the inflation target more uncertain further ahead. This is an argument that 
has to be weighed alongside the analysis pointing towards ‘caution’. I would not, however, subscribe 
to making a surprise policy tightening as a form of shock therapy. One of the emphases of the MPC’s 
approach  has  been  to  do  our  utmost  to  help  households,  businesses  and  financial  markets  to 
understand our strategy and, in particular, how we react to developments in the economy.  
From my perspective, that was the backdrop to the Committee’s debate and to my vote at our most 
recent meeting at the beginning of March. A tightening then would have come as a surprise. My own 
view  was  that  there  was  not  sufficient  evidence  to  construct  a  compelling  explanation  for  a  rise  in 
terms  of  the  outlook  for  inflation.  And  that  being  so,  I  was  concerned  that  an  earlier-than-expected 
policy  change  might  well  have  been  misunderstood  as  implying  that  my,  or  more  broadly  the 
Committee’s, policy reaction function had changed for some reason. With inflation expectations well 
anchored, that was not a risk worth taking. So I voted for no change. Looking ahead, I just take one 
month at a time, assessing the domestic and international data, and revising my view of the outlook 
where necessary. 
Financial stability environment 
A  few  words  on  financial  stability.  The  past  year  or  so  has  also  brought  calmer  conditions  in  most 
financial markets. Signs of some potential fragility were perhaps most evident around October 2002. 
Credit default swap prices for a number of the world’s largest banks registered sharp rises as losses in 
corporate loan portfolios, and volatile trading revenues coincided with an uncertain macro outlook, the 
unwinding of the equity bubble, continuing worries about some emerging market economies, and the 
fallout from Enron and Worldcom.  
On the whole, the environment now looks somewhat more comfortable. In the equity markets, realised 
and forward-looking volatility is down, and the IPO market seems to have sprung back to life. Most 
measures  of  credit 
ratings 
downgrades-to-upgrades - have improved (Chart 6). At the banks and dealers, profits have been used 
to bolster or replenish capital; and credit default spreads are lower for virtually all banks (Chart 7). 
-  spreads,  credit  default  swap  premia,  default 
rates, 
risk 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2004
But the environment is not without hazards. One may be sourced in the ‘search for yield’ that has been 
a  feature  of  international  markets  over  the  past  [18]  months  or  so  -  as  evidenced,  for  example,  by 
record inflows into hedge funds and into emerging market and high-yield bond mutual funds in the US 
(Chart 8). Just as eighteen months ago some commentators asked whether credit spreads may have 
overshot  on  the  upside,  over  the  past  few  months  some  have  wondered  whether  they  might  have 
overshot on the downside - although there has perhaps been a degree of correction since January. 
Separately,  the  global  pattern  of  current  account  deficits  and  surpluses  creates  risks  for  financial 
markets, most obviously the foreign exchange markets - although, as I have taken to noting on these 
occasions,  one  wouldn’t  guess  that  from  what  seem  to  be  quite  low  implied  volatilities  on  most 
currency pairs. 
Perhaps  more  significantly,  there  are  risks  of  volatility  in  fixed-income  markets  given  the  inevitable 
uncertainty about the path that the FOMC will take back towards a more neutral rate. There are signs 
of that uncertainty in options markets (Chart 9). Those implied volatilities might be exaggerated by the 
bid for options to manage the negative convexity of US mortgage-backed security portfolios. But, in 
terms of the risk of volatile markets, that convexity hedging can itself create strains, as events during 
July-August last year underlined rather graphically.  
I mention the US MBS market because I guess it has some interest to you  given your demand for 
long-duration fixed-income assets to match long-dated fixed-income-like liabilities etc. So it was good 
to  see  that,  in  his  review  of  the  UK  mortgage  market,  David  Miles  flags  the  importance  of  thinking 
through  how  any  prepayment  risk  in  UK  fixed-income  mortgages  could  be  managed.  Since 
prepayment in the US seems to have a ‘behavioural’ element, it is not so easy to get an exact hedge 
via  a  ‘matching’  financial  option.  It  was  also  good  to  see  that  David  has  not  advocated  a  Fannie-
Freddie  type  structure  for  the  UK,  with  the  attendant  concentration  and  moral  hazard  risks  -  a 
conceivable source of systemic issues in global markets.  
Intelligence on fixed-income markets and UK long-term savings industry 
This  takes  me  back,  briefly,  to  the  Bank’s  market  intelligence  work,  as  I  want  to  conclude  by 
mentioning just a few of the issues that we would like to explore with you going forward. 
In  particular,  we  have  an  interest  in  understanding  the  implications  for  asset  prices  and  market 
dynamics  of  the  increasing  emphasis  on  joined-up  asset  and  liability  management,  including  giving 
fund managers benchmarks based on actual liabilities rather than standard market indices. Some of 
these  implications  arise  from  the  demand  for  long-duration  assets  to  match  long-term  liabilities; 
moving towards hedging more directly the optionality present in some liabilities, such as guaranteed 
nominal return annuities; and the search for returns from a wider class of assets. Concretely, the big 
issue has been - and probably remains - the balance of equity and bonds in asset portfolios. But there 
are also questions such as whether the industry is a material participant in the newish inflation-swaps 
market  in  order  to  hedge  long-dated  real  defined-benefit  pension  liabilities;  whether  swaptions  and 
equity derivatives are being used more to manage risks, and if so whether near to being ‘in-the-money’ 
options  and  well  ‘out  of  the  money’  options;  why  demand  for  long-dated  gilt  strips  has  not  been 
greater, especially as many in the industry called for strips; the extent of UK pension fund investment 
in hedge funds, and whether that is pursued principally via funds of funds; the degree of involvement 
in other ‘alternative asset classes’, such as private equity or emerging markets; more speculatively, 
whether  there  are  ‘missing  markets’  that  would  be  useful  to  the  long-term  savings  industry  -  for 
example,  longevity-risk  securitisations;  and,  more  prosaically,  whether  there  is  a  greater  interest  in 
more mundane ways of enhancing returns on asset portfolios, such as securities lending.  
Finally, in that connection, I hope that the recent multi-agency report on securities lending will prove 
helpful to pension fund trustees and others. As some of you will know, my colleague David Rule, chair 
of the Stock Lending and Repo Committee, helped to facilitate the exercise. But it was written by the 
industry for the industry, and it has been welcomed by the NAPF. It has been an exercise where the 
Bank has learned from interaction with you. I hope there will be other such occasions to do so.  
BIS Review 17/2004 
 5
My thanks again for inviting me to join you today. 
Chart 1 
UK short versus long-maturity forward
real interest rates
Market rs-rl
Percentage points
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5
16-Mar-04
22-May-03
Survey rs-rl 
CPI
RPIX
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Chart 2: Percentiles of the distribution of 
inflation rates in CPI and RPIX
70th percentiles 
(dotted lines)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
30th percentiles
(dashed lines)
Median inflation rates
(solid lines)
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
 BIS Review 17/2004
 6 
 Chart 3 
Quarterly regional house price growth
mean
interquartile range
median
per cent
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
1983 1985 1987 1990 1992 1994 1996 1999 2001 2003
Source: Halifax
  Chart 4 
Dispersion of annual regional house price 
growth
percentage points
60
absolute 
dispersion
dispersion of 
interquartile range
50
40
30
20
10
0
1983 1985 1988 1990 1993 1995 1998 2000 2003
 Source: Halifax
 BIS Review 17/2004 
 7
Chart 5 
hand scale)
ratio sales to stocks(a) (left-
Housing market tightness
ratio
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1983 1985 1987 1989 1992 1994 1996 1998 2001 2003
quarterly growth in 
house prices(b) (right 
per cent
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
hand scale)
Source: Halifax, Nationwide and RICS
(a) Ratio of number of houses sold per surveyor over the past three months to  stocks of houses on 
b ooks per surveyor.
(b) Average o f the Halifax and Nationwide indices.
 Chart 6 
Changes in credit spreads by rating(a)(b)
AAA AA
BBB
BB
A
US dollar
Euro
Source: Merrill Lynch
(a) Spread over swaps.
(b) Changes between 22 May 2003 and 16 Mar. 2004.
 B
C
0
+
50
100
-
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Basis points
BIS Review 17/2004
 8 
 Chart 7 
Highest CDS premia of major banks in selected 
countries
Abbey National
JP Morgan 
Banca Intesa
UFJ
HVB
Societe Generale
Credit Suisse 
Basis points
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Feb.
2004
Feb.
Apr.
Aug.
Oct.
Dec.
Jun.
2003
Source: Mark-it Partners and MorganMarkets.
 Chart 8 
Cumulative corporate bond issuance
Cumulative emerging market corporate bond 
issuance
US$ billions
US$ billions
2003
2001
1999
1997
2002
2000
1998
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Source: Dealogic bondware
 BIS Review 17/2004 
 9
Chart 9 
Implied volatility of 3 month into 5 
year swaptions
bp
UK
US
EU
Feb 96
Feb 98
Feb 00
Feb 02
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
10 
 BIS Review 17/2004
