T T Mboweni: Developments in the foreign exchange markets during the 
last couple of years  
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the cocktail function in 
honour of the ACI South Africa, Pretoria, 20 September 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the South African Reserve Bank. We thank you for being here this 
evening,  and  we  feel  honoured  that  you  should  have  accepted  our  invitation.  As  most  of  you  are 
engaged in the foreign exchange markets, we thought that it might be useful to make a few remarks 
on our involvement in the markets and refer to recent developments in this regard. We think that you 
are an important and critical constituency as far as our work is concerned, and it is only correct and 
proper  that  from  time  to  time  we  should  come  together  to  exchange  views  and  interact  with  one 
another. 
Allow  me  to  congratulate  ACI  South  Africa  for  being  selected  to  host  the  ACI  Council  Meeting  in 
Sandton from the 23rd to 27th November this year. It will be the first time that this prestigious event 
will be held in South Africa. We wish you good luck with the organisation of that event and we are 
certain that you will do us proud! We have also noted from your website that you are also taking this 
opportunity to draw attention to the "sights and sounds" of our beautiful country.  
We are also aware of the important role, which the ACI is playing in actively promoting the educational 
and  professional  interests  of  the  financial  markets.  In  particular,  the  active  role  in  the  education  of 
dealers with a view to establishing an accreditation standard and developing the technical skills and 
knowledge of financial market dealers in South Africa and Africa as a whole is to be appreciated. It is 
assumed  here  that  as  an  organisation  you  are  also  an  active  participant  in  the  financial  services 
charter process.  
We  also  admire  your  efforts  in  compelling  your  members  to  maintain  the  professional  level  of 
competence  and  the  ethical  best  practices  of  loyalty  as  set  out  in  your  Model  Code.  We  strongly 
support all your attempts to promote professional and ethical behaviour in South Africa as these are 
essential  in  building  credible  international  trading  relations,  and  in  establishing,  maintaining  and 
enhancing the reputation of our financial markets. 
Our remarks this evening will focus on developments in the foreign exchange markets during the last 
couple of years. A good starting point appears to be the last time we met with you as an organisation 
here at the central bank.  
What were the big issues at the time of the last ACI cocktail? 
Just to touch on a few issues: If my memory serves me well, we met in May 2001, at a time when the 
currency markets were dominated by a strong US$ on the back of strong flows into the USA, although 
at  the  time  the  strong  economic  growth  seen  in  2000  was  already  giving  way  to  a  somewhat  less 
favourable growth prospect in the USA. We were all surprised that the US$ was still showing some 
resilience and continued to be generally strong. As we all now know, things did not stay that way. 
In the year 2000, the Rand lost 22% of its value against the US$ and during the first five months of 
2001 the Rand lost about 5.5% against the US$, which did not seem too strange based on economic 
fundamentals at the time. Little did we know, of course, that at the end of the year 2001 we would be 
talking about a 37% depreciation and that there would have been the attacks on the United States, 
which would precipitate more conflicts and wars, and change risk perceptions in financial markets. 
We  talked  then  about  volatility  in  the  financial  markets  and  acknowledged  that  it  was  becoming  a 
constant feature as the processes of deregulation, liberalisation and globalisation continued to gather 
momentum.  
Trading in our foreign exchange markets and in the Rand was very much influenced by the existence 
of the NOFP and the Forward Book, with the NOFP still registering a negative balance of US$9bn, in 
spite  of  significant  progress  that  had  been  made  in  reducing  it  from  the  precarious  levels  of  over 
US$23bn in 1998. This was seen as a negative factor by rating agencies and investors, and we were 
constantly called upon to explain how we were going to deal with that situation. 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 1
Where did the journey take us after that? 
As you all know, the period after our last meeting brought with it some major challenges for the world 
economy, which South Africa as a small open economy got its fair share of. However, we also had to 
face serious challenges that were more related to our own situation. 
The second half of 2001, especially the fourth quarter saw a steep depreciation of the Rand, not only 
against the US$, but on a broad base. The situation got to a point where the two-way risk inherent in 
trading the currency was temporarily dislodged, and a perception existed in the market that the Rand 
was a one-way downward bet. Our observation of the existence of large speculative positions at the 
time  compelled  us  to  issue  the  now  famous  statement  of  October  16,  2001,  in  which  we  reminded 
market participants to adhere to existing rules and regulations covering currency trading. It is worth 
noting  at  this  stage  that  we  very  much  valued  the  cooperation  we  received  from  the  ACI  when  we 
attempted  to  clarify  certain  issues  to  market  players  at  the  time.  Whilst  many  reasons  have  been 
advanced,  and  even  a  commission  of  enquiry  established,  to  some  extent  those  developments  still 
remain unexplained. That massive depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand led to a deterioration 
in  inflation,  which  represented  a  serious  setback  for  us  in  the  early  stages  of  South  Africa's 
implementation  of  a  formal  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy  framework.  Having  registered  some 
success since the introduction of formal inflation targeting, and even managing to steer CPIX into the 
target  range  in  September  and  October  2001,  the  knock-on  effects  of  the  currency  depreciation 
resulted in a sharp increase in inflation during 2002, with CPIX peaking at 11.3% in November 2002. 
These  developments necessitated  a  tighter  monetary  policy  stance,  which was  delivered  by  way  of 
repo rate increases totalling 400 basis points during 2002. 
But we are now back on track… 
We are, however, pleased to say that the pressures that we faced then were relatively short-lived. Our 
policy  responses,  whilst  admittedly  painful  at  the  time,  together  with  global  and  domestic 
developments allowed us to resume the positive path we had been travelling on before the interruption 
of 2001. The currency has recovered very well, and contributed to better inflation outcomes as well as 
a much improved inflation outlook. This in turn has allowed the Monetary Policy Committee to reduce 
the  repo  rate  by  as  much  as  600  basis  points  between  June  2003  and  August  2004.  It  is  indeed 
pleasing to note that the CPIX inflation measure, which is the one that our policy is judged against, 
has now been within the specified target range of 6 - 3 % for almost a year. 
As  you  are  well  aware,  owing  to  the  combined  efforts  of  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  and  the  National 
Treasury (NT), the net open foreign currency position (NOFP) was finally eliminated in May 2003, and 
the  oversold  forward  book  of  the  Bank  was  closed  out,  in  February  2004.  We  are  glad  to  say  that 
these developments, resulted in fully transferring the function of forward cover provision back from the 
Bank  to  the  authorised  dealers.  Those  positions  also  had  major  consequences  for  liquidity 
management in the money market. In fact they complicated our lives very badly! Whereas previously 
the huge losses from the forward book led to a structural liquidity surplus in the money markets, which 
had to be mopped up by using expensive instruments such as the so called special money markets 
swaps,  our  operations  in  the  money  markets  now  follow  what  one  may  refer  to  as  normal  central 
banking patterns.  
Moreover,  all  these  achievements  also  enabled  the  Bank  to  focus  more  on  increasing  the  official 
reserves to more internationally acceptable levels. What that level is, is rather difficult to say, and there 
appears  to  be  no  universally  agreed  upon  international  benchmark  in  this  regard.  The  appropriate 
level  may  need  to  be  evaluated  against  a  country's  specific  circumstances  such  as  the  size  of  its 
economy and degree of openness, its exchange rate regime, credit rating, risk of capital flight, and 
many  other  factors.  Extensive  research  on  the  subject  continues  to  be  undertaken  here  and 
internationally. 
As  stated  previously,  whilst  not  working  toward  a  specific  target  for  reserves  within  a  specific  time 
frame, the Bank is strengthening its reserves mainly by means of purchasing, in a reponsible manner, 
moderate amounts of foreign exchange in the market, as and when, in our opinion, market conditions 
permit  such  purchases  without  unduly  influencing  the  exchange  rate  and  introducing  unnecessary 
volatility in the market. We continue to accept that the exchange rate is set in the market. From time to 
time the Bank was also supported by the National Treasury in the process of accumulating reserves, 
when the proceeds of foreign bond issuances were sold to the Bank in exchange for Rand. In addition 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2004
to "creaming-off" and foreign borrowing by government, the Bank also borrows foreign currency in its 
own name mainly through the syndicated loan market, which increases the level of gross reserves. 
The international liquidity position has increased to $8,6 billion as at 31 August 2004 and the gross 
reserves  (including  gold  reserves  of  approximately  4  million  fine  ounces)  increased  to  slightly  more 
than  $12  billion  at  the  end  of  last  month.  This  is  indeed  a  remarkable  achievement,  when  one 
considers that at the time of our meeting in 2001, the negative NOFP stood at US$9bn, as indicated 
earlier.  Some  observers  at  times  blame  the  Bank  for  not  increasing  the  pace  at  which  it  is 
accumulating foreign exchange reserves. These well 'educated and informed' folks sometimes forget 
that  converting  a  negative  NOFP  position  of  $23,2  billion  in  September  1998  into  a  positive  net 
reserve  position  of  $8,6  billion  in  August  2004,  implies  that  over  this  six-year  period,  the  Bank  has 
acquired  a  staggering  amount  of  almost  $32  billion,  most  of  which  was  obtained  from  the  forex 
markets.  
After  a steady  appreciation  in  the exchange  rate of the  Rand since 2003,  the  currency  depreciated 
moderately after the reduction in the repo rate on 12 August this year and appears to have settled 
between R6,50 and R6,70 per dollar - approximately the same level as at the end of 2003. 
Various factors are in one way or the other responsible for the Rand's general appreciation so far this 
year. Firstly, the US dollar has depreciated against major currencies, benefiting the currencies of many 
emerging-market  countries.  Secondly,  high  commodity  prices  in  international  markets  supported 
commodity-based currencies like the Rand. Thirdly, accommodative policy stances in some developed 
countries resulted in positive interest-rate differentials for emerging market countries compared with 
their counterparties within the industrialised countries. This is still the case with respect to South Africa 
despite the overall reduction of 600 basis points in the repo rate since June 2003. Fourthly, a number 
of significant corporate transactions resulted in an increased supply of foreign exchange and fifthly, 
momentum  and  technical  trading  may  also  have  contributed  to  some  of  the  Rand  strengthening  in 
recent months. 
Another  important  factor  generally  supporting  the  above  mentioned  has  to  do  with  the  fact  that  the 
overall  perception,  or  sentiment  as  you  like  to  call  it  in  the  markets,  of  South  Africa  has  been 
improving,  with  international  investors  making  positive  assessments  of  the  political,  fiscal  and 
monetary management process in the country over recent years. 
It is also interesting to note that the volatility conditions in the domestic foreign exchange market seem 
to have normalised during the course of 2004. For example, the one-month historical volatility of the 
Rand declined from a most recent high of 28,4 percent in January 2004 to 12,2 per cent in June 2004, 
before picking up again to just below 20 per cent. Another measure of volatility, namely the difference 
between  the  highest  and  lowest  exchange  rate  recorded  during  a  month,  declined  from  R1,36  in 
January 2004 to around 50 cents during the last few months. Although by some standards this still 
represents a fair degree of volatility, one should see this in the context that South Africa is an open 
economy  exposed  to  international  foreign  exchange  markets  that  have  been  fairly  volatile  recently. 
Our efforts with regard to strengthening our reserves level should over time contribute to a less volatile 
exchange rate. 
The average daily turnover against the Rand in the domestic foreign exchange market declined to just 
below US$6 billion in 2002, and remained fairly subdued at US$7,7 billion in 2003. In 2004 to the end 
of  September,  the  average  daily  turnover  against  the  Rand  increased  to  above  US$8  billion,  and 
reached levels last recorded in 1999. We continue to see active participation by non-residents in our 
forex markets, especially in the swap market, where the share of non-residents currently amounts to 
around 65%. Non-residents accounted for about 60% of total turnover in the foreign exchange market.  
Higher turnover generally correlates positively with market activity and also provides a good measure 
of  market  liquidity.  Liquidity  in  the  Rand  market  usually  increases  when  the  currency  behaves  in  a 
predictable manner. However, in an uncertain trading environment, bid-offer spreads widen and the 
market loses its depth as market participants become reluctant to quote prices, which was the case in 
2001. During the latter part of 2001, bid-offer spreads widened to approximately ten cents (from only 
three cents earlier in that year) on regular trading amounts. Conditions have improved drastically since 
then  and  spreads  have  narrowed  back  to  approximately  three  cents  currently.  The  price  discovery 
mechanism in our forex markets now follows a much more normal pattern of two-way-risk. Given that 
you are forex dealers, there is no need to elaborate. Many of you have lived to be able to tell the story 
of the Rand much better. One thing seems to be confirmed now: the Rand is no longer a one-way 
downward bet. Hopefully some of the lessons learnt in this regard, in the dealing rooms, were not too 
expensive! 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 3
Conclusion 
As  you  can  deduct  from  the  above,  there  are  many  areas  where  the  Bank  has  daily  contact  with 
yourselves  in  the  market  place.  We  value  these  relationships  dearly.  It  is  through  yourselves,  the 
banking industry and financial markets in South Africa, that the Bank is able to implement monetary 
policy. You are an essential pillar in our monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
We wish you well as an organisation. We hope that you may grow from strength to strength. Once 
again thank you for the role you play in enhancing the reputation of our financial markets. Enjoy the 
evening with us and have a safe journey home. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 51/2004
