European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
5 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to this press conference. The Vice-President and I will now report on 
the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB.  
On  the  basis  of  our  economic  and  monetary  analysis,  we  have  concluded  that  there  are  no 
fundamental changes to the medium-term outlook for price stability. Accordingly, the current stance of 
monetary policy remains appropriate and the key ECB interest rates have been kept unchanged at 
their  low  levels.  Inflationary  risks  should  be  contained  by  somewhat  more  favourable  import  price 
developments,  while  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  should  proceed  in  line  with  our 
expectations. We will continue to monitor carefully all developments that could affect our assessment 
of risks to price stability over the medium term. With regard to exchange rates, we again particularly 
stress stability and remain concerned about excessive exchange rate moves.  
Let me now explain our decision in more detail. 
Starting  with  the  economic  analysis,  the  latest  data  on  euro  area  production  as  well  as  survey 
evidence on business confidence remain consistent with ongoing growth around the turn of the year.  
Looking ahead, the external environment of the euro area should continue to develop favourably. In 
particular,  robust  real  GDP  growth  in  our  major  trading  partners’  economies  can  be  expected  to 
support  foreign  demand  for  euro  area  goods  and  services,  while  export  growth  may  be  dampened 
somewhat by the decline in price competitiveness.  
The  conditions  for  an  improvement  in  domestic  demand  are  also  favourable.  Investment  activity 
should  not  only  profit  from  global  trends  in  demand,  but  also  from  companies’  efforts  to  enhance 
productivity and profitability, from the low level of interest rates and from generally favourable financing 
conditions.  Growth  in  private  consumption,  which  has so  far  remained rather subdued,  can  also  be 
expected to recover in line with an increase in real disposable income. This assessment is reflected in 
all available forecasts from official and private sources and seems to be confirmed by developments in 
financial markets. 
Looking at the risks to this outlook, there are no new factors to be taken into account. Over the shorter 
term, risks remain balanced. Over longer horizons, uncertainties relate to the persistent imbalances in 
some regions of the world and their potential repercussions on the sustainability of global economic 
growth. This calls for sustainable macroeconomic policies and structural reforms which foster a sound 
balance between savings and investment in all major partner countries, which enhance the production 
potential in the euro area and which support a further expansion in trade of goods and services at the 
global level.  
Turning to price developments, we have seen a fall in the HICP inflation rate for December to 2.0%. 
The same rate was estimated by Eurostat for January. In the course of this year, inflation rates should 
fall  below  2%  and  remain  in  line  with  price  stability  thereafter.  While  US  dollar-denominated  global 
commodity prices have been on an upward trend over recent months, the past appreciation of the euro 
is dampening their effects on domestic prices. Moreover, we continue to expect wage developments to 
remain  moderate  in  the  context  of  high  rates  of  unemployment  and  a  gradual  economic  recovery. 
Recent  data  on  labour  costs  seem  to  broadly  confirm  the  assessment  of  a  levelling-off  of  wage 
increases. On the whole, inflationary pressure remains limited - an assessment that is confirmed by all 
available  forecasts.  Given  the  conditional  nature  of  any  forward-looking  evaluation,  it  is  of  course 
important to bear in mind all elements of risk to the outlook for price stability and to monitor inflation 
expectations closely.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, annual M3 growth has continued to moderate slowly over recent 
months. This can be explained by the still cautious reallocation of portfolios by economic agents and 
the effects of generally low interest rates on the growth of very liquid assets. At the same time, the 
growth of loans to the private sector reflects the effects of both low interest rates and an improvement 
in the economic environment. 
BIS Review 8/2004 
 1
The strong monetary growth over the past few years means that there is significantly more liquidity 
available  in  the  euro  area  than  needed  to  finance  non-inflationary  growth.  Whether  or  not  the 
accumulated excess liquidity will translate into inflationary pressures over the medium term depends 
on  the  extent  to  which  past  portfolios  shifts  are  reversed  and  on  the  future  strength  of  economic 
growth. Should excess liquidity persist, it could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
In  summary,  the  economic  analysis  continues  to  indicate  that  the  main  scenario  for  price 
developments  in  the  medium  term  is  in  line  with  price  stability.  Cross-checking  with  the  monetary 
analysis does not alter this picture. 
With regard to fiscal policies, there are several important issues that warrant close attention. First, 
the implementation of fiscal policies should be in line with the commitments made late last year. In this 
connection, a thorough assessment of the new Stability Programmes of Member States is currently 
under way. All parties involved need to live up to their responsibilities and commitments. Sound public 
finances  support  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework,  which  in  turn  enhances  confidence  and 
promotes investment, growth and employment in the euro area.  
Second, as regards the Stability and Growth Pact, the Governing Council shares the concerns of the 
European Commission regarding the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council in November last year. The 
Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and the ECB respects the Commission’s decision to seek 
legal clarity. Furthermore, we do not see a need to change the Treaty and, in our view, the Stability 
and Growth Pact in its current form is appropriate. We are in agreement with the Commission that the 
implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact could be further improved, in particular in terms of the 
analysis of structural imbalances and the strengthening of incentives for sound fiscal policies during 
good economic times. Clarity and enforceability of the fiscal framework should be enhanced.  
A stable macroeconomic framework is necessary to enhance our growth potential, but it alone is not 
sufficient. Boosting employment, fostering labour productivity and making the best use of technological 
and scientific progress in the context of an ageing society all require structural reforms - in the fiscal 
domain  as  well  as  in  financial,  product  and  labour  markets.  The  Lisbon  Strategy  provides  the 
appropriate  blueprint  for  progress.  The  responsibility  for  its  implementation,  however,  lies  with 
governments,  parliaments  and  social  partners.  The  Governing  Council  strongly  supports  ongoing 
efforts in a number of countries to proceed with structural reforms. At the same time, we fully share the 
view  that  additional,  sustained  efforts  are  required,  as  recently  reiterated  by  the  Commission  in  its 
progress report on the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy and the priorities for 2004. It is a major 
challenge to convince the public at large that everybody would benefit - in terms of growth, more and 
better jobs, and higher incomes - if the reforms needed were indeed implemented. 
Finally,  allow  me  to  add  a  short  remark  regarding  the  publications  of  the  ECB.  As  you  may  have 
noticed, the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin has been enhanced in a number of ways relating to its design, 
structure  and  general  presentation.  The  in-depth  coverage  of  all  economic  and  monetary  aspects 
relevant to monetary policy has of course been maintained, together with the statistical information. 
However, we believe that the report is now more accessible to the Press, financial market participants, 
policy-makers, and academics and students, as well as those members of the general public with an 
interest in European economic and monetary affairs. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2004
