Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s use of statistics and other information for 
monetary policy 
Keynote address delivered by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, on the occasion of the 
OECD’s  World  Forum  on  Key 
“Statistics,  Knowledge  and  Policy”,  Palermo, 
11 November 2004. 
Indicators 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great honour and a pleasure to be invited to speak at the OECD World Forum on Key Indicators. 
The links between statistics, knowledge and policy are of crucial importance for policy-makers and for 
society as a whole. I can only congratulate the organisers for the impressive programme they have 
drawn up and I am sure that we shall all leave Palermo full of ideas on how statistical knowledge can 
be better used to face current and future economic and social challenges. 
Central bankers, like all other policy-makers, operate in an environment of high uncertainty regarding 
the functioning of the economy as well as its prevailing state and future development. In addition, the 
second  half  of  the  1990s  and  the  first  years  of  this  century  have  been  characterised  by  structural 
changes, some of them on a global scale, others confined to Europe, all of which have added to the 
“normal”  sources  of  uncertainty.  At  the  global  level,  the  fall  of  the  Soviet  empire,  the  conversion  of 
emerging Asia to market economics, accelerating advances in science and innovation in information 
technology and a deepening and widening of globalised financial markets have all been, or are, part of 
the  powerful  phenomenon  of  globalisation.  At  the  European  level,  the  adoption  of  the  euro  by 
12 countries, structural reforms in goods and labour markets and the enlargement of the Union are 
some of the key developments in this respect. Therefore, disentangling the shocks that continually hit 
the euro area economy and assessing their impact on the risks to price stability in real time remains a 
very demanding task, in spite of the progress made in statistical data compilation, economic theory 
and econometrics over the past decades.  
In  such  a  complex  environment,  a  single  model  or  a  limited  set  of  key  indicators  is  not  a  sufficient 
guide  for  monetary  policy.  Instead,  an  encompassing  and  integrated  set  of  data  is  required.  The 
development of statistics for the euro area and the future priorities for further enhancements reflect 
this  requirement.  A  rich  set  of  timely  statistical  data  is  a  necessary  but  insufficient  precondition  for 
sound monetary policy-making. Only if the information is structured and analysed in a consistent way 
will  monetary  policy  makers  be  in  a  position  to  take  the  most  appropriate  decisions  to  obtain  their 
policy goals.  
Let me elaborate a bit more on these three themes: the need for an encompassing and integrated set 
of  data,  the  achievements  of,  and  outlook  for,  euro  area  statistics  and  the  ECB’s  framework  for 
analysing this information. 
Monetary policy and the need for an encompassing and integrated set of data 
If  we  lived  in  the  world  of  macroeconomic  textbooks,  a  few  simple  models  with  a  limited  set  of 
variables would be a sufficient basis for monetary policy-making and the statistical requirements could 
be  kept  to  a  minimum.  As  we  all  know,  the  real  world  is  much  more  complex  and,  therefore, 
information  needs  are  much  more  elaborated.  In  such  a  world,  a  rich  and  integrated  set  of  data  is 
needed because macroeconomic models, synthetic indicators and unconnected statistical indicators 
are often too rough a guide to the current and likely future development of the economy.  
As mentioned before, central banks have to take decisions under conditions of constant uncertainty. 
The economy is never at rest. A multitude of disturbances of diverse nature affect the economy all the 
time: financial shocks, demand shocks, supply shocks etc., and these cannot easily be distinguished 
in real time, let alone foreseen.  
In  their  attempts  to  identify  disturbances  and  track  how  they  spread  through  the  economy,  central 
banks  are  assisted  by  models.  But  too  often,  existing  models  are  not  sufficiently  sophisticated 
instruments to identify shocks. For one thing, their focus may be too narrow, in a way that makes them 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 1
unduly selective. A partial representation of the economic structure can only partially help in monetary 
policy decision-making, notably in real time. For instance, it is very difficult to find empirical models 
that allow for an integral view of both non-financial (‘real’) and monetary-financial phenomena. So, it 
may be impossible to arrive at a convincing explanation of the origin and propagation of a significant 
financial shock, say, on the basis of sets of equations that do not elaborate on the role of the financial 
sector or account for only tenuous links between that sector and the rest of the economy.  
Another  example  is  provided  by  the  many  pitfalls  that  come  with  using  “synthetic”  indicators  of 
inflationary  pressure.  The  most  famous  of  these  “synthetic”  indicators  is  the  so-called  “output  gap”. 
The “output gap” can be defined as a measure of the deviation of the aggregate output of an economy 
from the maximum level that would be consistent with price stability. This maximum level is then the 
“potential  output”.  When  current  output  is  above  potential,  the  pressure  on  the  scarce  resources 
should then translate into an increase in prices, that is, inflation.  
In  the  real  world,  the  monetary  authority  constantly  faces  the  challenge  of  observability  and 
measurement. Unfortunately, we cannot “assume” to know the “potential output”. The best we can do 
is to try to “estimate” the output gap by using observations of many other correlated variables. We all 
know  how  imprecise  and  model-dependent  this  “estimated”  measure  can  be.  It  would  then  be 
dangerous to derive monetary policy decisions from such an indicator. In my view, the example of the 
“output  gap”  demonstrates  that  theoretical  economic  models  and  monetary  policy  practice  are,  at 
times, quite far apart. 
A second reason why models - and the synthetic theoretical constructs that accompany them - may 
often be elusive guides for policy lies in the fact that they are subject to rapid obsolescence as the 
structure of the economy is subject to permanent change. We, central bankers, like private agents, 
need to learn constantly about the environment in which we operate.  
In the face of structural changes we are like “sailors in uncharted seas”. Under these conditions we 
cannot afford to rely on a few sources of information nor can we simply use the “old navy maps” that 
are incorporated in existing models - even those that provided valuable information in the past. What 
used to be a key indicator under the “old regime” might not be so useful under the “new regime”. What 
used  to  suffice  in  order  to  describe  the  old  data-generating  process  might  be  insufficient  for  an 
accurate description of the new environment. 
If this is of the essence for all central banks, this is particularly true for the ECB, which has been put in 
charge of the monetary policy of a totally new economic entity. 
The  creation  of  EMU  represents  a  major  structural  change  for  the  European  economy  and  a  great 
challenge  to  policy-makers.  Nobody  could  tell,  at  the  outset,  to  what  extent  the  introduction  of  the 
single currency would affect the functioning of the single market of goods and services, or the very 
nature of financial markets or price and wage-setting behaviour across the euro area. Indeed, times of 
institutional change are arguably times in which private expectations may fail to converge on a focal 
point. The widely-held assumption has been that the statistical patterns emerging from an aggregation 
of  pre-EMU  data  may  not  reveal  much  about  the  structure  of  the  new  economic  entity,  and  any 
inference drawn on its basis may - in extreme cases - even be misleading. This is all the more likely 
when we consider the fact that, as far as monetary and financial convergence in the future euro area 
was  concerned,  it  was  based  upon  a  concept  of  “benchmarking”,  namely  convergence  towards  the 
best performers, which suggests that aggregation of the EMS data might be even less predictive. Such 
a situation has called for a cautious interpretation of model results and, even more importantly, for a 
broad information basis in order to cross-check the interpretation of various pieces of information. This 
implies a need for detailed and high-quality statistics for the euro area. 
The  construction  of  a  comprehensive  statistical  support  has  confronted  the  ECB  with  a  number  of 
practical issues, to which I now turn. 
Statistics for the euro area: achievements and outlook 
Over the past ten years, major progress has been achieved in developing statistics for the euro area. 
Less than a decade ago, we did not even have the statistical requirements for the Monetary Union, let 
alone the statistics themselves for the euro area. Today, euro area statistics compare favourably with 
those  of  other  major  countries  in  many  respects.  A  concrete  example  is  the  monthly  balance  of 
payments for the euro area and the availability of a timely, flash estimate of the euro area Harmonised 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2004
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). Moreover, the ECB compiles an elaborate and timely set of monthly 
statistics on monetary developments in the euro area and interest rates. 
Statistical preparations had to start early, due to the long lead times involved. On average, it takes 
around 18 months from inception to delivery of a new set of statistics that involves the collection of 
additional information from economic agents.  
While there is still room for improvement, which I will explain later on, I feel confident that the ECB has 
now at its disposal a solid set of statistics of sufficient quality for the conduct of monetary policy. Let 
me share with you some of the success factors and ‘lessons to learn’ from this development process. 
First  and  foremost,  the  achievements  have  been  possible  thanks  to  the  intensive  and  fruitful 
cooperation  and  coordination  with  other  statistical  agencies.  In  particular,  the  efficient  and  effective 
coordination between the statistical departments of the ECB and of the national central banks within 
the ECB’s Statistics Committee has been very conducive to the development of the comprehensive 
set of euro area statistics that is disseminated by the ECB. Equally, the cooperation between Eurostat 
and  the  ECB’s  Directorate  General  Statistics  is  very  intensive  and  fruitful,  and  is  based  on  the 
allocation of tasks laid down in the Memorandum of Understanding signed in March 2003.  
Secondly,  I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  close  cooperation  with  users,  which  should 
guarantee  that  the  statistics  are  “fit  for  purpose”.  At  the  same  time,  with  the  right  institutional 
arrangements  in  place,  responsiveness  to  user  needs  in  the  design  and  accessibility  of  statistics 
should not undermine the independence of statistics and statisticians, which is an essential factor.  
A third important “success factor” in the design of statistical systems is a strong legal basis. Article 5 of 
the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB states that “in order to undertake the tasks of the ESCB, the 
ECB ... shall contribute to the harmonisation, where necessary, of the rules and practices governing 
the  collection,  compilation  and  distribution  of  statistics  within  its  fields  of  competence”.  As  a 
consequence, the ECB developed a legal framework for the collection of statistics and for ensuring 
compliance with these legal acts. Legal instruments are necessary to achieve satisfactory standards 
and equal treatment across Member States.  
Fourthly,  the  setting-up  of  euro  area  statistics  from  scratch  has  required  an  intensive  process  of 
harmonisation of the methodologies used by the various countries for the collection and production of 
statistics. This enables us, for example, to compile meaningful area-wide aggregates. The need for the 
harmonisation  of  statistical  concepts  also  applies  at  an  international  level.  The  application  of  the 
international  standards  is,  first  of  all,  a  way  to  ensure  that  the  statistics  remain  independent  of  the 
policy users. Secondly, application of the international standards allows for meaningful comparisons 
and aggregation. Given that cross-country comparability of official statistics is key to their usefulness 
and credibility, all countries across the globe should want to implement worldwide standards in their 
statistics.  
Take, for example, balance of payments statistics. Countries will only be able to achieve a common 
analysis of their bilateral economic and financial relationships if their mutual external statistics mirror 
each other. A recent study by the ECB comparing the mirror data for direct investment between the 
euro area, the UK, the US and Japan shows that, in all cases, sizeable asymmetries in these data still 
exist.  Eliminating  these  asymmetries  requires  not  only  an  adherence  to  international  standards,  but 
also  good  worldwide  cooperation  between  the  statisticians  involved  and  probably  an  exchange  of 
micro-data for statistical purposes.  
Finally, perhaps the most important lesson of all, the independence of statistical institutes is key to the 
quality  and  integrity  of  the  underlying  statistics.  Recent  incidents  involving  government  finance 
statistics have demonstrated this very clearly. The compilation and reporting of statistics must not be 
vulnerable to political and electoral cycles. Countries should consider the quality and integrity of their 
statistics as a priority matter, to ensure that a proper system of checks and balances is in place when 
compiling  these  statistics,  and  should  apply  minimum  standards,  reinforcing  the  independence, 
integrity and accountability of national statistical institutes.  
Despite  the  significant  achievements  and  the  good  quality  of  euro  area  statistics  in  general,  further 
improvements  and  enhancements  are  planned.  Ongoing  economic  transformation  has  to  be 
accommodated in a forward-looking manner and statistical gaps identified by users inside and outside 
the ECB have to be filled in as far as possible. Given the long lead times which characterise statistical 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 3
projects, the Directorate General Statistics of the ECB has established medium-term priorities in this 
field.  Important  items  on  this  agenda  are:  a  full  system  of  euro  area  quarterly  accounts  for  each 
institutional sector1, more comprehensive statistics for the monitoring and analysis of financial stability, 
the  further  development  of  external  statistics,  promoting  the  compilation  of  Principal  European 
Economic Indicators, including the application of the first-for-Europe principle, and an increasing focus 
on the various quality dimensions of European statistics. Let me elaborate a bit more on the first two 
items. Progress in these areas is expected to have a major influence on policy analysis. 
The work currently undertaken by the ECB and Eurostat on quarterly euro area accounts aims at a 
fully integrated system of sectoral financial and non-financial accounts. Having such a system in place 
may  lead  over  time  to  major  progress  in  both  the  structural  analysis  of  the  euro  area  and  the 
assessment  of  the  current  economic  situation.  Fully  integrated  sectoral  accounts  provide  the  ideal 
framework  for  analysing  the  structure  of  the  economy  and  its  changes  over  time  as  well  as  the 
propagation of shocks through the system. This helps to gain further insights into the monetary policy 
transmission  mechanism  and  the  relative  importance  of  the  various  transmission  channels.  At  the 
same  time,  monitoring  a  wide  range  of  key  indicators  in  a  single  macroeconomic  accounting 
framework provides a coherent picture of the current economic situation. This is particularly important 
in  the  context  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  takes  into  account  a  broad  range  of 
indicators.  
Integrated  financial  and  non-financial  sector  accounts  provide  a  framework  for  analysing  the  link 
between the financial and the real economy - an issue notoriously difficult to analyse on the basis of 
the currently available analytical framework. An integrated system of quarterly sector accounts would 
also  provide  a  powerful  information  basis  for  forecasting,  allowing  what  is  nearly  impossible  today, 
namely the integration of monetary and financial variables in macro-econometric models. Of course, 
many of these uses will only be possible once an integrated system of sectoral accounts has been 
available for quite a number of years and with an appropriate timeliness. But being forward-looking 
and developing visions is of great importance in the field of statistics. 
Another highly relevant area of statistical work for central bankers concerns statistics and indicators for 
financial  stability  analysis.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crises,  which  brought  to  the  fore  the 
importance  of  financial  stability  analysis,  the  related  conceptual  framework  was  strengthened  and 
progress in understanding the genesis and propagation of financial instability was made. 
Central  banks  have  an  interest  in  financial  stability  issues  particularly,  but  not  exclusively,  because 
financial  stability  supports  sustainable  price  stability  in  the  medium  and  long  run.  This  implies  that 
financial  stability  indicators  -  whether  in  the  form  of  key  balance  sheet  ratios  for  monetary financial 
institutions or leverage indices for non-financial corporations - may acquire an important status in the 
data set on which the central bank bases its assessment of the risks to price stability over extended 
horizons. The forward-looking nature of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy allows an extension of the 
policy-relevant horizon sufficiently into the future to factor in the likely effects of financial imbalances 
that may be forming. At the same time, obtaining a comprehensive and timely statistical view of the 
financial system helps to identify the sources of such risks.  
This is the rationale for central banks’ keen interest in financial stability analysis. But financial stability 
analysis  is  complex  and,  hence,  information-intensive.  Data  are  needed  not  only  on  the  financial 
situation  of  banks,  but  also  on  that  of  other  financial  corporations,  such  as  insurance  corporations. 
Moreover,  the  financial  position  of  non-financial  corporations  and  households  has  to  be  carefully 
assessed.  Finally,  not  only  financial  markets  but  also  other  asset  markets,  such  as  real  estate 
markets, have to be monitored closely. 
Currently, financial stability issues in the euro area are analysed on the basis of existing data collected 
for monetary policy or supervisory purposes. Evidently, the coverage and definitions of data collected 
for monetary policy purposes do not always fulfil the needs of financial stability analysis. In addition, 
the data from supervisory sources are not harmonised across countries. 
The  development  of  harmonised  bank  profitability,  asset  quality  and  capital  adequacy  data  is  a  big 
challenge for a multinational economy such as the euro area. The same applies to the much needed 
enhancement  and  harmonisation  of  information  on  insurance  corporations  and  on  the  financial 
                                                      
1   The  financial  and  non-financial  accounts  would  cover  the  following  sectors  in  principle:  households  (including  non-profit 
institutions serving households), non-financial corporations, financial corporations, government and the rest of the world. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2004
situation of firms and households. Moreover, this work should exploit synergies with the initiatives of 
other international organisations, in particular the work of the IMF on financial soundness indicators.  
The need for a comprehensive analytical framework 
Statistics as well as additional information such as synthetic indicators, model forecasts and anecdotal 
evidence provide economic analysts with the raw material to derive a consistent and timely judgment 
about  the  true  prevailing  economic  circumstances  and  the  position  of  the  economy  in  its  business 
cycle.  At  the  same  time,  just  as  a  good  meal  not  only  requires  high-quality  ingredients  but  also  an 
excellent cook and recipe, high-quality monetary policy analysis also requires excellent staff and an 
appropriate analytical framework. The importance of the latter can hardly be overstated. While central 
bankers around the world are “data fiends” in their heroic attempts to minimise errors of inference and 
to make robust decisions amidst uncertainty about the true structure of the economy, the availability of 
a  vast  wealth  of  raw  data  from  diverse  sources  may  mean  that  policy-makers  become  constantly 
bombarded by conflicting signals. Amidst such a flood of information, policy runs the risk of losing its 
bearings and of over-reacting to the latest indicator.  
It is against this background that the ECB decided to adopt an analytical framework within which all 
possible  sources  of  information  -  statistical  as  well  as  judgemental  -  can  be  brought  together  in  a 
coherent fashion while at the same time allowing for alternative and diverse models and perspectives 
of  the  workings  of  the  economy.  In  our  view,  this  framework  enables  a  wealth  of  information  to  be 
“digested” routinely without compromising the ultimate objective: to maintain a clear sense of direction. 
In order to give a structure to the diverse sources of information, a structure that is consistent with our 
view of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, we have organised our analytical framework into 
“two  pillars”.  These  consist  of  two  complementary  perspectives  on  the  determination  of  price 
developments.  
One perspective, which we refer to as the “economic analysis”, is grounded on the belief that price 
developments  over  the  short  to  medium  term  are  largely  influenced  by  the  interplay  of  supply  and 
demand in the goods, services and factor markets.  
As a means of cross-checking, we have equipped ourselves with another perspective, which we refer 
to  as  the  “monetary  analysis”  and  that  is  grounded  on  the  belief  that  medium  to  long-run  price 
developments can be attributed to the growth rate of the stock of money.  
Each  of  these  “pillars”  is,  in  turn,  characterised  by  a  rich  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  a  large 
amount of data. For example, within the “economic analysis” we monitor the developments in prices 
and unit costs, overall output, aggregate demand and its components, government finance accounts, 
capital and labour market conditions, exchange rates, financial markets, balance sheets of households 
and  firms,  etc.  The  ECB’s  “economic  analysis”  has  been  significantly  extended  and  enriched  over 
time. This is largely thanks to the progress made in the production of euro area general economic and 
financial  statistics  and  in  the  analytical  processing  of  such  information.  As  mentioned  above,  the 
inaugural  publication  of  integrated  financial  and  non-financial  quarterly  accounts  for  the  euro  area, 
hopefully in 2006, will be another milestone.  
The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  use  a  variety  of  models  for  macroeconomic  analysis  and 
forecasting. The macroeconomic projections by Eurosystem staff constitute an important input into the 
monetary policy decisions, because they are a way of organising a large amount of information and 
they  help  to  create  a  consistent  picture  of  possible  future  developments.  However,  the  economic 
projections cannot encompass or even reflect all the complexities, conditioning factors, nuances and 
the multi-dimensional nature of a comprehensive assessment of the risks to price stability on which 
monetary policy decisions need to be based. While the information synthesised from various indicators 
serves  as  an  important  input  into  the  decision-making  process,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
does not take decisions only on the basis of projections. The Governing Council’s “judgement” must 
eventually come into play in order to assess the likelihood of the alternative scenarios suggested by 
the economic analysis. This is particularly important when it is quite unclear how a certain situation will 
evolve, as is the case sometimes with sharp movements in asset prices.  
Related to this, attempts to base monetary policy decisions solely on inflation forecasts would involve 
significant limitations. Notably, they would entail an inefficient use of information, since every forecast, 
or  any  composite  index  of  indicators,  is  based  on  one  possible  scenario  and  one  combination  of 
assumptions. In the end, monetary policy requires judgement on the part of the policy-maker to assess 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 5
not only the plausibility of all possible scenarios, but also the nature of the shocks and the best policy 
reaction in order to deal with this uncertain environment. Just focusing on one or a few forecast figures 
would make it difficult for policy-makers to transmit the complexity of monetary policy deliberations to 
the public in a precise and transparent manner. 
Over  a  medium  to  long-term  horizon,  inflation  forecasts  based  on  statistical  analysis  become  very 
inaccurate. Yet, medium to long-run inflation expectations are crucial in guiding the consumption and 
investment decisions of private agents. In order not to lose sight of the low frequency developments 
that  may  influence  inflation  over  longer  horizons  than  are  used  in  the  forecasts,  the  ECB  has 
reinforced its analytical framework with a monetary perspective. This ‘pillar’ looks at price formation 
from  a  medium  to  long-term  standpoint  and  is  intended  to  purge  monetary  policy  from  the  risk  of 
becoming unduly short-sighted and overreacting to the latest economic news. By constantly reminding 
the central bank that in the long run prices and money stock increases are correlated, the monetary 
pillar is a standing support to the ECB’s commitment to price stability at all horizons that are relevant 
for economic decisions.  
Taking  decisions  and  evaluating  their  consequences  on  the  basis  not  only  of  the  shorter-term 
indications  from  the  analysis  of  economic  and  financial  conditions,  but  also  of  money  and  liquidity 
considerations, allows a central bank to see beyond the transient impact of the various shocks and to 
maintain a more steady policy course. Looking back over our first six years of operations, monetary 
analysis has helped to underpin the medium-term orientation of our monetary policy conduct.  
Allow me also to stress that the analysis of monetary indicators at the ESCB consists of an articulated 
process, whereby a detailed study of all the components and counterparts of M3 provides a detailed 
picture of the latest monetary developments, alongside the broad picture of the underlying trends.  
As I said, a world in which policy is conducted in a “data-rich environment” - to quote an article by Ben 
Bernanke2 - can be one in which both central bankers and other economic agents become captive to 
the latest macroeconomic indicator and may lose direction. In such a world, a central bank will only be 
successful in delivering price stability if it provides an anchor for the inflation expectations of the public 
and if it is as transparent as possible about its ultimate policy objective.  
For this reason, the ECB decided to be fully transparent about the numerical definition of its goal, price 
stability, that the Treaty on European Union assigned to it. As you know, in 1998, when taking up its 
monetary  policy  tasks,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  defined  price  stability  as  a  year-on-year 
increase in the euro area Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of below 2% and close to 2%.  
The definition of price stability not only has the advantage of helping to anchor inflation expectations 
and to enhance the transparency and accountability of the European Central Bank. It has also been 
very instrumental in preserving continuity during the transition from the national currencies to the euro. 
The  euro  was  given  the  same  definition  of  price  stability  as  the  one  attributed  to  the  most  credible 
national  currencies,  which  benefited  from  the  lowest  market  interest  rates  at  the  time.  As  a 
consequence,  from  day  one  onwards,  the  euro  was  given  the  best  yield  curve  available  in  the 
economies of the euro area. 
The  European  Central  Bank  has  played  a  leading  role  in  the  general  trend  towards  greater 
transparency and openness. It has in fact set standards of transparency in the practice of monetary 
policy. The ECB was the first major central bank to display its diagnosis immediately after its decisions 
and to hold regular press conferences after each of its monetary policy meetings. It is still the only one 
that does so. In those press conferences, we give a full and detailed explanation of our analysis and of 
the reasons underlying our policy decisions. In addition, the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin gives the public 
the full set of detailed assessments and data underlying our policy decisions only a few days after they 
are taken. 
To sum up, I trust that the success of the ECB and of the Eurosystem in firmly anchoring medium and 
long term inflation expectations at a level below 2% and close to 2% from day one of the existence of 
the euro is due to the careful gathering of all necessary conditions for such a prowess.  
                                                       
2   B Bernanke and J Boivin: “Monetary policy in a data-rich environment,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (2003). 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2004
I see at least six such necessary conditions: the institutional independence of the ECB; the clarity of its 
Treaty  mandate  -  price  stability;  the  accountability  vis  a  vis  public  opinion,  including  through  the 
hearings before the European Parliament; the comprehensive nature of its monetary policy concept, 
with  an  economic  and  a  monetary  pillar;  its  medium  term  perspective  and,  last  but  not  least,  its 
transparency. 
We  are  displaying  publicly  our  monetary  policy  concept.  Not  all  central  Banks  do  that.  We  are 
displaying  our  definition of  price stability.  Not  all  central  Banks  do  that.  We were  the  first  important 
central Bank, in January 1999, to publish in quasi real time after our decisions our diagnosis and the 
reasons for our action and to hold a press conference. Not all central banks do that, even today. We 
are  making  public  the  quarterly  projections  of  the  staffs  of  the  ECB  and  of  the  Eurosystem.  And  I 
profoundly trust that it is this substantial level of transparency which has also contributed to make the 
ECB’s policy decisions highly predictable for the market as academic research has documented. 
A  last  remark.  As  already  mentioned,  all  what  I  have  said  presupposes  that  data  are  reliable  and 
credible.  It  is  absolutely  imperative  that  figures  are  not  influenced  by  political  interference  and  by 
electoral cycles. The ECB’s Governing Council strongly encourages countries to tirelessly improve the 
professionalism  and  independence  of  the  relevant  institutions.  It  would  also  strongly  support  the 
European framework to be further enhanced with full capacity to check without restrictions facts and 
figures including through missions on the spot.  
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 67/2004 
 7
