Michael C Bonello: The Maltese lira  
Interview with Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, by The Malta Business 
Weekly, 9 December 2004.  
 I must first of all point out that decisions regarding the external value of the Maltese lira can only be 
taken by the Minister of Finance on the recommendation of the Central Bank of Malta and with the 
consent of the Prime Minister. Decisions on such a complex, technical issue can have far-reaching 
economic and social implications and are understandably not taken lightly. They must, for that same 
reason, be made on the basis of facts not supposition. 
Having said that, I must make it equally clear that at this point in time the Bank cannot responsibly 
make a recommendation in this sense for the simple reason that it has no conclusive evidence that 
such a change is warranted, still less that it would deliver the expected benefits. Nor is the Bank aware 
that anybody else has made a credible case for changing the value of the currency. 
The conclusions of the Bank’s study on the equilibrium exchange rate have been shared with several 
local and foreign experts, including the IMF mission that was in Malta last May. Subject to the caveat 
that the equilibrium exchange rate of a currency cannot be estimated very precisely, there is common 
agreement that the exchange rate of the Maltese lira does not appear to be significantly misaligned 
and that the reasons for the economy’s slow growth lie elsewhere and should be addressed directly. 
Indeed, I cannot detect an economic rationale for the sudden attention being given to the exchange 
rate. The exporting community, the sector most directly concerned, has not to my knowledge made a 
formal  proposal  through  the  FOI.  It  is  also  significant  that  a  change  in  the  exchange  rate  did  not 
feature among the 55 MCESD recommendations for the restoration of competitiveness. 
Devaluation  to  improve  competitiveness  does  not  work.  Unless  it  is  accompanied  by  a  cut  in  real 
wages,  it  serves  only  to  raise  inflation.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  experience  of  several  countries, 
including Malta’s after 1992.  
As  for  the  concept  of  a  “gradual  depreciation”,  which  has  not  been  clearly  defined,  the  nearest 
instrument known to economic theory is a crawling peg. Since this involves a change in the exchange 
rate  regime,  it  requires  an  announcement  that  the  currency  will  be  depreciated  at  given  intervals 
dictated  by  movements  in  some  anchor,  such  as  the  retail  price  index.  This  method  creates 
uncertainty  and  offers  speculators  a  one-way  bet.  Experience  has  indeed  shown  that  crawling  peg 
regimes have often ended in crisis. 
The lessons of recent economic history should not be ignored. Changes in the exchange rate should 
only be resorted to when everything else has failed. They should be a measure of last resort. Besides, 
they  only  produce  the  desired  results  if  they  are  accompanied  by  a  comprehensive  set  of 
complementary policies implemented in a controlled environment. 
Speculating about the exchange rate without producing conclusive proof that it is the root cause of the 
economy’s  difficulties  is,  therefore,  inappropriate  and  can  have  serious  repercussions.  The  national 
interest requires all of us to concentrate rather on the more immediate, and well documented, reasons 
for  the  economy’s  slow  growth.  I  have  elaborated  on  this  aspect  in  a  recent  interview  carried  by 
another local newspaper. 
   1/1 
