Jean-Claude Trichet: Press briefing on the ECB Convergence Report 
Opening remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the press 
briefing on the ECB Convergence Report, Frankfurt, 20 October 2004. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  welcome  to  this  special  press  briefing  on  the  publication  of  the  ECB’s 
Convergence Report 2004. 
Let me start by saying that only 15 years ago I could not have imagined that we would, in October 
2004, be presenting to you a report examining the economic and legal convergence of Sweden and 
ten  countries  from  central  and  eastern  Europe  and  the  Mediterranean.  At  that  time,  most  of  these 
countries  were  still  deprived  of  democracy  and  economic  freedom.  The  prospect  of  joining  the 
European Union  and eventually  adopting  a  single  European currency  was out  of  sight  for  the  most 
imaginative minds. 
But since 1 January 1999 the euro has been a reality, and since 1 May 2004 ten new countries are 
with us in the European Union. The rules of EU membership say that at least once every two years, or 
at the request of a Member State not participating in the euro area, a report needs to be prepared by 
the ECB and by the European Commission. Let me briefly recall the relevant Treaty Articles and the 
procedure laid down therein.  
According to Article 122 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, the two institutions must 
report to the Council on the progress made in the fulfilment by the Member States of their obligations 
regarding the achievement of Economic and Monetary Union, in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Article 121 (1). Article 121 (1) stipulates that these reports must include an examination of the 
compatibility between each Member State’s national legislation, including the statutes of its national 
central bank, and Articles 108 and 109 of the Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB. The reports must 
also examine the achievement of a high degree of sustainable convergence. This is to be done by 
reference to the fulfilment by each Member State of the criteria on prices, fiscal positions, exchange 
rates and long-term interest rates.  
Thereafter, the Treaty foresees that, after consulting the European Parliament and after discussion in 
the Council meeting in the composition of the Heads of State or Government, the Council must, acting 
by  a  qualified  majority  on  a  proposal  from  the  Commission,  decide  which  Member  States  with  a 
derogation  fulfil  the  necessary  conditions  to  adopt  the  euro  on  the  basis  of  the  criteria  set  out  in 
Article 121 (1).  
The publication of this report, which represents the common view of the General Council of the ECB, 
is the first step in this procedure, together with today’s publication of the Commission’s Convergence 
Report. More generally, it is an important milestone in the process that will ultimately lead to euro area 
enlargement  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro  in  those  EU  countries  that  still  have  national  currencies. 
However,  let  me  also  use  this  occasion  to  stress  again  that  there  is  no  pre-set  timetable  for  the 
enlargement of the euro area. In order to adopt the euro, non-participating EU Member States have to 
achieve a high degree of sustainable economic and legal convergence. 
Let me now make a few specific remarks about the report you just have received. The Member States 
examined  are  the  Czech  Republic,  Estonia,  Cyprus,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Hungary,  Malta,  Poland, 
Slovenia,  Slovakia  and  Sweden.  Two  other  Member  States,  namely  Denmark  and  the  United 
Kingdom,  have  a  special  status.  Convergence  Reports  only  have  to  be  provided  for  these  two 
countries if they so request. Since no such request has been made, they are not covered by this year’s 
Convergence Report. 
To ensure continuity and equal treatment, the ECB has examined the degree of sustainable economic 
convergence  and  compliance  with  the  statutory  requirements  for  the  independence  of  the  national 
central banks and their legal integration into the Eurosystem using the common analytical framework 
applied in previous ECB and EMI Convergence Reports. 
In more detail, the report builds on a number of principles set out in those previous reports. First, the 
criteria  are  applied  according  to  the  Treaty,  in  a  strict  manner,  to  ensure  that  only  those  Member 
States  having  economic  conditions  that  are  conducive  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  and  the 
viability of the euro area can participate in it. The convergence must not only be nominal, satisfactory 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
at a specific point in time, but also sustainable. Second, the convergence criteria constitute a coherent 
and  integrated  package,  and  they  must  all  be  satisfied.  There  is  no  hierarchy  of  criteria.  Third,  the 
criteria have to be met on the basis of current data. Fourth, the application of the criteria should be 
consistent, transparent and simple. 
Given that the economic convergence criteria must be achieved on a sustained basis, the available 
evidence is first reviewed from a backward-looking perspective, covering, in principle, the past eight 
years.  This  helps  to  better  determine  the  extent  to  which  current  achievements  are  the  result  of 
genuine structural adjustments. At the same time, due account must be taken of the fact that backdata 
for most of the new Member States may be heavily influenced by the transition these countries have 
been  passing  through.  Thereafter,  and  to  the  extent  appropriate,  a  forward-looking  perspective  is 
adopted. In this context, particular attention is drawn to the fact that the sustainability of favourable 
economic developments hinges critically on appropriate and lasting policy responses to existing and 
future challenges. 
Overall, it is emphasised that ensuring the sustainability of economic convergence depends both on 
the achievement of a sound starting position and on the policies pursued after adoption of the euro. 
As regards the examination of legal convergence, the report focuses on two areas: first, it assesses 
whether  national  legislation  ensures  the  effective  independence  of  a  national  central  bank.  The 
concept of independence - which is the cornerstone of effective monetary policy decision-making by 
the  Eurosystem/ESCB  -  is  assessed  by  reference  to  a  number  of  types  of  independence,  namely: 
functional,  institutional,  personal  and  financial  independence.  Second,  the  report  highlights  the 
provisions of national legislation that would in the ECB’s opinion prevent or hinder the integration of a 
national central bank into the Eurosystem. 
The  Convergence  Report  2004  is  an  important  record  of  the  degree  to which  these countries  have 
achieved  progress  with  economic  and  legal  convergence  and  flags  the  priority  areas  where  further 
efforts are needed before the euro can be adopted. 
Let me now give the floor to Mr Issing, who will present to you the main findings of our examination. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
