European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 2 December 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB. 
All  in  all,  the  short-term  outlook  for  inflation  remains  worrisome,  but  our  assessment  of  price 
developments over the medium term is unchanged. At the current juncture oil price developments are 
having a sizeable impact on consumer prices in the euro area, while there is no significant evidence 
that stronger underlying domestic inflationary pressures are building up. Accordingly, we have left the 
key ECB interest rates unchanged at their historically low levels. At the same time, we recognise the 
existence of upside risks to price stability over the medium term. Continued vigilance is of the essence 
with regard to those risks. 
I  shall  now  explain  our  assessment  in  more  detail,  turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis.  After  the 
positive developments in the first half of 2004, economic growth has moderated in the second half. In 
the third quarter of the year, real GDP growth is estimated to have been only 0.3% quarter on quarter, 
after  0.7%  and  0.5%  in  the  previous  two  quarters.  According  to  Eurostat,  the  contribution  of  net 
exports  turned  negative,  reflecting  in  particular  high  import  growth,  and  private  consumption  was 
subdued, probably dampened by higher oil prices. At the same time, investment growth increased and 
inventories  were  built  up.  The  available  survey  information  for  October  and  November  points  to 
ongoing growth in the fourth quarter, albeit at a more moderate pace than in the first half of this year. 
The  conditions  remain  in  place  for  economic  growth  to  proceed.  On  the  external  side,  while  global 
growth is showing some signs of moderation, it nonetheless is expected to remain robust. Euro area 
exports should continue to benefit from global demand conditions. On the domestic side, investment 
should  be  supported  further  by  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area,  improved 
earnings and greater corporate efficiency gained through business restructuring. Finally, scope exists 
for private consumption to strengthen, particularly if uncertainties surrounding the extent and pace of 
fiscal consolidation and structural reforms are reduced. 
Accordingly,  we  expect  a  gradual  recovery  in  euro  area  activity  over  the  next  two  years,  with 
somewhat  more moderate  growth rates  due  to  the  impact of  oil prices. This  is  also  reflected  in  the 
Eurosystem staff projections. Euro area real GDP growth is projected to be between 1.6% and 2.0% 
on average in 2004, between 1.4% and 2.4% in 2005 and between 1.7% and 2.7% in 2006. Available 
forecasts from international and private sector organisations convey a broadly similar picture. 
Downside risks to these projections stem in particular from potentially unfavourable developments in 
the  oil  market.  In  order  to  limit  such  risks,  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting  must  be 
avoided and fiscal authorities should refrain from taking measures which would prolong or distort the 
necessary adjustment process. Moreover, the degree of competition in the euro area energy sector is 
an important factor in allowing higher oil prices to be absorbed without significant distortions. Further 
progress in increasing competition in this sector would be highly beneficial. 
Turning  to  consumer  prices,  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.2%  in  November,  according  to  Eurostat’s 
flash estimate, down from 2.4% in October. Over the coming months, inflation rates of above 2% are 
likely to persist, and some temporary further increase from current levels cannot be excluded. Looking 
further ahead, however, the information available so far indicates that HICP inflation would fall below 
2% in the course of 2005 if no further adverse shocks occurred and it does not suggest that stronger 
underlying  inflationary  pressures  are  building  up  in  the  euro  area.  Wage  increases  have  remained 
contained  over  recent  quarters  and,  in  the  context  of  ongoing  moderate  growth  and  weak  labour 
markets,  this  trend  should  continue  in  the  future.  Producer  prices  are  rising,  but  this  remains 
concentrated on energy and intermediate goods, which should limit the pass-through. 
These views are also embodied in the Eurosystem staff projections. Average annual HICP inflation is 
projected to lie between 2.1% and 2.3% in 2004. As the impact of recent oil price increases and the 
effects of previous indirect tax and administered price rises gradually dissipate, annual HICP inflation 
is projected to be between 1.5% and 2.5% in 2005 and 1.0% and 2.2% in 2006. These projections are 
broadly consistent with forecasts recently released by international and private sector organisations. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 1
Several  upside  risks  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  Concerns  relate  in  particular  to  future  oil  price 
developments  and,  more generally,  to the  potential risk  of second-round  effects  in wage  and  price-
setting throughout the economy. Further developments in indirect taxes and administered prices also 
need to be monitored closely. 
Further insight into the outlook for price developments, at medium to longer-term horizons, is provided 
by  the  monetary  analysis.  The  latest  monetary  data  confirm  that  the  downward  trend  in  annual  M3 
growth observed from the middle of 2003 has not continued in recent months and has even reversed. 
Over the course of 2004, monetary dynamics have been driven by two opposing forces. On the one 
hand, the historically very low level of interest rates in the euro area has stimulated M3 dynamics, in 
particular demand for the most liquid components of M3 contained in the narrow aggregate M1. On the 
other  hand,  portfolio  allocation  behaviour  has  tended  to  normalise  over  the  past  year  following  the 
exceptionally strong preference for liquidity observed during the period of heightened economic and 
financial  uncertainty  between  2001  and  mid-2003.  However,  investors’  preference  for  liquid  assets 
seems to have remained greater than would typically be expected at the current stage of the economic 
cycle, possibly due to the fact that the economic and financial uncertainties in recent years have been 
relatively strong and protracted. 
The very low level of interest rates is also fuelling private sector demand for credit. In particular, the 
demand  for  loans  for  house  purchase  has  continued  to  be  robust,  supported  also  by  strong  house 
price  dynamics  in  several  euro  area  countries.  Growth  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has 
picked up further in recent months. 
As a result of the persistently high growth in M3 over the past few years, there remains substantially 
more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary economic growth. This could 
pose risks to price stability over the medium term. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  suggests  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  are 
contained, but a number of medium-term upside risks to price stability need to be monitored closely. 
Cross-checking with the monetary analysis supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to the 
materialisation  of  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  It  is  of  the  essence  to  avoid  any 
spillover from short-term consumer price developments to long-term inflation expectations. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  forthcoming  budgets  and  stability  programmes  should  send  strong  and 
confidence-building  signals,  namely  that  sound  public  finances  and  growth-friendly  structural 
adjustments in public finances are being pursued. Concerning the European institutional framework, 
the Stability and Growth Pact and the excessive deficit procedure are the key fiscal cornerstones of 
EMU. These must remain firm. The Pact and the excessive deficit procedure should be fully respected 
in  their  current  form,  while  their  implementation  could  be  improved,  in  particular  as  regards  the 
preventive arm of the Pact. 
Finally, let me support the calls expressed in the report of the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok to 
renew  the  impetus  in  the  Lisbon  process  and  to  sharpen  its  focus.  In  this  context,  we  restate  our 
strong support for all efforts on the part of governments, parliaments and social partners implementing 
the  reform  agenda  and  focusing  on  those  reforms  that  will  support  employment  growth,  foster 
investment and stimulate innovation and productivity. Progress in this direction will not only enhance 
the underlying growth potential of the euro area economy over the medium term but will also help to 
bolster consumer and business confidence over a shorter horizon. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2004
