Jaime Caruana: Basel II - emerging market perspectives 
Keynote remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  for  a  panel  discussion  on  “Basel  II  -  Emerging  Market 
Perspectives”, Bankers’ Conference 2004, New Delhi, 11 November 2004. 
 Thank  you,  for  your  kind  introduction  and  opening  thoughts  on  the  significance  of  the  new  capital 
framework in emerging market countries. I would like to thank as well the Indian Bankers Association 
and our host institution, Punjab National Bank, for inviting me to take part in your conference. 
It is an honour to be asked to share some of my thoughts on Basel II and its implications for a country 
such as India. I must confess that it is a still greater privilege for me to hear your thoughts directly on 
this new standard and the role it may play in a large, rapidly growing dynamic economy. A discussion 
on India adds the perspective of a country whose banking sector has been undergoing an important 
period  of  transition.  The  scale  of  that  transformation  is  evident  in  the  global  aspirations  that  Indian 
banking organisations are now pursuing, as the title of this conference suggests.  
I would like to continue our discussion of Basel II first by discussing briefly why the Committee felt that 
the international capital standard needed to be revised and how Basel II addresses the Committee’s 
goals for it. Then I would like to address some of the questions and issues about Basel II that banks 
and  supervisors  in  emerging  market  countries  have  shared  with  me.  After  that,  I  look  forward  to 
hearing the thoughts of my fellow panelists and those of others on what Basel II might mean for the 
Indian banking sector. 
 Why Basel II is necessary: an overview of the new capital framework 
Before we discuss how Basel II may affect banks in India, allow me to begin by addressing why the 
Basel Committee drafted Basel II. The Committee published the text of the new capital framework this 
past  June.  This  marked  the  culmination  of  nearly  six  years  of  difficult  work  for  supervisors  and  for 
banks.  Why  did  we  take  such  pains  to  revise  the  existing  capital  rules?  After  all,  the  1988  Basel 
Accord was a tremendous success in many ways.  
I think that several factors led us to conclude that a new approach was necessary. As you know, the 
1988  Accord  established  the  first  internationally  accepted  definition  and  measure  of  bank  capital.  It 
was adopted in over 100 countries. As a result, it became acknowledged as one of the benchmark 
measures of a bank’s financial health. 
While the simplicity of the 1988 Accord was an asset in promoting its acceptance, today its simplicity is 
quickly  becoming  a  liability  for  some  bankers  and  supervisors  alike.  Over  the  past  16  years,  the 
methodologies for measuring and managing risk have evolved in ways that the architects of the 1988 
Accord could not have anticipated.  
For one, advances in technology, telecommunications, and markets have changed the way that banks 
collect,  measure,  and  manage  their  risks.  Having  gained  experience  in  quantifying  exposures  to 
market risk, leading banks today are quantifying and using increasingly reliable estimates of the credit 
risk associated with particular borrowers. Evolution in markets has furthermore provided banks with 
more tools for managing and transferring credit risk, such as through securitisation transactions and 
credit derivatives. Likewise, many banks seek to quantify in a more reliable manner their exposures to 
operational risk, or the risk of losses stemming from failures in internal processes or systems or from 
damage caused by an external disruption.  
As risk management becomes more sophisticated, the simple and static rules of the 1988 Accord are 
becoming less relevant. Leading banks increasingly view the old rules as a burden, constraining their 
abilities to administer their businesses relative to the best information and practices available today. 
Supervisors, for our part, have less confidence in the 1988 Accord’s measures of risk for banks that 
engage in the most sophisticated forms of risk taking and risk mitigation.  
By the late 1990s, it became clear to banks and supervisors that we needed a new capital framework. 
But the Basel Committee sought more than just a reworking of the minimum requirements. We wanted 
instead to create incentives for the industry to enhance the state of the art in risk management. We 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
believe that improving risk management helps to increase the stability of the global financial system - a 
goal that would benefit not just banks, but more broadly businesses and consumers. 
To foster greater financial stability, the Basel Committee blended several policy approaches to replace 
the existing capital framework. Basel II consists of three mutually reinforcing pillars.  
The first pillar aligns the minimum capital requirements more closely to banks’ actual underlying risks. 
Many  banks  will  rely  on  external  measures  of  those  risks  to  determine  their  capital  requirements. 
These might include drawing on credit ratings issued by external rating agencies or on supervisors’ 
assessments  of  the  degree  of  operational  risk  inherent  in  various  businesses.  More  sophisticated 
institutions,  in  comparison,  may  qualify  to  rely  partly  on  their  own  measures  of  those  risks  when 
determining their capital requirements, an innovation that will help to create economic incentives for 
banks to improve those measures.  
The second pillar - supervisory review - allows supervisors to evaluate each bank’s assessments of its 
own risks and to determine whether those assessments seem reasonable. Ultimately each bank’s own 
management  is  responsible  for  assessing  and  responding  prudently  to  all  of  the  risks  that  a  bank 
faces, including those risks that might not be captured entirely in the first pillar. The second pillar will 
therefore foster a dialogue between banks and their supervisors on the nature of the risks that banks 
face and the measures they take to control them, including holding aside sufficient levels of capital. 
That dialogue creates great implicit incentives for management to undertake careful evaluations of the 
bank’s capital needs. 
Finally, the third pillar, market discipline, recognises the power of marketplace participants to motivate 
prudent  risk  management.  By  enhancing  transparency  in  banks’  financial  reporting,  the  third  pillar 
provides counterparties, investors, and other participants with greater insight into a bank’s risk profile; 
that  increases  their  ability  to  distinguish  and  reward  banks  that  are  well  managed,  while  penalising 
those that are not. 
One might say that Basel II seeks an “efficient frontier” of policy objectives through the three pillars. 
Each pillar provides something that the other two cannot. Each is essential to achieving our overall 
objective  of  financial  stability  -  an  objective  that  would  benefit  all  countries  in  all  stages  of 
development. 
Of  course,  some  of  the  advanced  approaches  offered  in  Basel  II  are  intended  for  large  and/or 
sophisticated  banking  organisations;  this  has  sometimes  led  bankers  and  supervisors  in  particular 
regions of the world to ask me whether Basel II is relevant to their situations. So I’d like to turn now to 
address some of the questions that I have heard frequently from bankers and supervisors especially in 
emerging market countries. 
Issues in emerging market countries 
Is Basel II appropriate for emerging market countries generally? 
Let me address the question that I just mentioned, namely whether Basel II is relevant to the banking 
system of an emerging market country.  
Let me begin by emphasising that I cannot answer the question of when or how any country should 
adopt  Basel  II.  Only  national  authorities  can  decide  when  to  adopt  Basel  II.  Members  of  the  Basel 
Committee  believe  that  it  is  beneficial  for  all  countries  to  move  in  the  direction  of  Basel  II,  but  the 
timing for its ultimate adoption should be determined by each country’s own circumstances, and not 
necessarily the timetable for Basel Committee members.  
At the same time, I should note that many bankers and supervisors from emerging market countries, 
including India, were very active in sharing their views and suggestions with the Committee to help 
make the Basel II framework relevant to banks in many different markets. Indeed, the Reserve Bank of 
India has played an important role in sharing the perspective of an emerging market country through 
its participation in the Basel Committee’s Core Principles Liaison Group. In addition, representatives of 
Indian banks shared their views and even data on how they would be affected by the new framework. I 
would  like  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  all  of  our  colleagues  in  India  who  contributed  to 
improving the quality and applicability of the new framework. 
Unlike the 1988 Accord, which was relatively simple to adopt, Basel II is admittedly more complex and 
demands more of banks and supervisors. Therefore, the Committee does not expect Basel II to be 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
adopted as widely and quickly as the 1988 Accord, at least at the outset. However, we expect and 
hope that the number of countries that adopt the new framework will grow over time. We also hope 
that they will do so only when they are ready. And when they are ready, we believe that they should 
adopt  the  options  and  approaches  that  are  most  appropriate  for  the  state  of  their  markets,  their 
banking systems, and their supervisory structures.  
Is Basel II appropriate for banks in emerging markets? 
A  second  question  I  hear  frequently  is  whether  Basel  II  is  even appropriate  for  banking systems  in 
emerging markets, which I would like to address now. 
In my view, the principles and vision of supervision in Basel II are valuable for supervisors and banks 
in  all  markets.  The  great  level  of  diversity  in  markets  and  in  financial  systems  worldwide  makes  it 
difficult - and perhaps even counterproductive - to try to specify a single rule that could be applied to 
all banks in all countries. Fortunately, Basel II’s menu approach provides supervisors and banks with 
options  that  make  its  basic  standards  more  readily  available  to  many  kinds  of  organisations  and 
economic circumstances. As I mentioned earlier as well, Basel II’s three-pillar approach provides an 
“efficient  frontier”  of  policy  objectives  that  are  relevant  to  banks  in  any  country  by  emphasising  the 
need for banks to assess their risks; the need for supervisors to evaluate those assessments; and the 
need for transparency to promote greater marketplace discipline. 
One specific concern that some have expressed about Basel II’s applicability in emerging markets is 
that  banks  with  more  basic  risk  management  systems  will  rely  on  external  credit  ratings  issued  by 
rating agencies under Basel II’s standardised approach to credit risk. In some emerging markets, there 
may  still  be  few,  if  any,  rated  companies.  The  Committee  has  been  mindful  of  this  concern.  If 
supervisors  are  uncomfortable  with  the  use  of  external  ratings  in  their  countries,  they  may  opt  to 
weight all corporate claims at 100%, while sovereigns and banks can be risk weighted according to the 
risk scores of export credit agencies. This eliminates the dependence on ratings issued by external 
credit agencies. 
Indeed,  our  discussions  with  colleagues  and  counterparts  from  countries  outside  the  Committee, 
including  India,  as  I  mentioned,  have  been  instrumental  in  addressing  other concerns  in  the  capital 
framework. Thanks to our consultations, we have endeavoured to address several other broad issues 
in  the  new  framework,  including  the  document’s  apparent  complexity  and  the  consistency  of  its 
application internationally, which I will set out now. 
Complexity 
One inevitable by-product of designing a comprehensive three-pillar framework with a range of options 
for  different  circumstances  is  increased  complexity.  The  members  of  the  Basel  Committee  certainly 
recognise that it is far easier to enforce a simple rule than a complicated one. However, the balance 
that  we  seek  is  between simplicity  and  risk  sensitivity:  indeed,  the  banking  industry  has  been  quite 
clear in saying that we should not blindly pursue simple solutions if they would result in unnecessarily 
conservative  estimates  of  capital  requirements.  Achieving  a  balance  between  simplicity  and  risk 
sensitivity  is  particularly  difficult  in  an  industry  like  banking,  where  a  culture  of  constant  innovation 
makes it a tall order for regulators to develop simple rules that fit all banking products and services in 
all their permutations. Paraphrasing Einstein, we might say that a good capital framework should be as 
simple as possible, but not simpler. 
So while Basel II is admittedly a more complicated document than the 1988 Accord, I would suggest 
that much of its apparent complexity stems from the diversity existing in real world. The text provides 
multiple  options  in  part  because  some  banks  and  supervisors  thought  that  a  “blanket  rule”  would 
unfairly  burden  them.  By  providing  a  range  of  options,  we  are  better  able  to  fit  the  regulatory 
framework to each bank’s risk profile, rather than the other way around.  
Similarly, some of the complexity in Basel II stems from the details we provide to promote a more level 
playing  field.  Many  bankers  and  supervisors  asked  the  Committee  to  provide  greater  details  where 
they thought a danger existed for differences in interpretation to arise across jurisdictions.  
Nonetheless, we have worked hard over the past years to clarify the rules, to simplify those thought to 
be the most complex, and to provide options for those wishing to use a simpler approach. In fact, as 
the Basel Committee demonstrated in an annex to the third consultative paper, supervisors can select 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
options that would result in a very simple set of rules that can be specified in just 12 pages of text. 
That is approximately half the length of the original 1988 Accord.  
The “simplified standardised approach”, as we call it, is intended to be useful for those countries that 
do  not wish  to  adopt  all  of  the  options available under  the new  framework.  The  trade-off,  however, 
reflects  the  fact  that  the  policy  balance  at  stake  is  between  simplicity  and  risk-sensitivity;  if  one 
chooses  simpler  rules,  the  cost  is  less  sensitivity  to  risk  and  hence  greater  conservatism  in  capital 
requirements.   
Competition and consistency of application 
Another  broad  concern  that  the  Committee  has  worked  to  address  is  Basel  II’s  impact  on  global 
competition.  In  particular,  some  have  asked  whether  banks  that  choose  Basel  II’s  advanced 
approaches  will  enjoy  benefits  over  those  that  choose  simpler  approaches.  Others  have  wondered 
whether banks that remain on the 1988 Accord for some time will be disadvantaged.  
To respond to these concerns, we should understand that adopting an advanced approach does not 
automatically reduce a bank’s capital requirements. Basel II is intended to align capital requirements 
more closely to risk. Furthermore, some national supervisors may set higher capital requirements than 
implied  by  Basel  I,  perhaps  even  higher  than  those  implied  by  Basel  II,  depending  on  the  risk 
environment. 
For those banks that do experience reductions in capital as a result of Basel II, some observers have 
questioned whether the lower requirements might provide certain advantages and make it easier for 
those banks to acquire other banks that do not share in the same benefits. History suggests that this 
particular concern may be unfounded. In a paper published this past February by the Federal Reserve, 
researchers  reported  that  they  did  not  find  convincing  evidence  that  past  changes  in  capital 
requirements have had a substantial impact on mergers between banks.  
The  issue  of  competition  between  banks  has  also  come  up  in  the  context  of  competition  between 
countries.  Here,  we  should  remember  that  Basel  II  is  intended  to  help  ensure  that  international 
competition in banking markets is driven by the strengths of each bank, rather than by differences in 
each country’s rules. 
One way that the Committee has sought to promote a consistent application of the new framework is 
by providing banks and supervisors with detailed requirements where necessary. As I have already 
mentioned, these details may add to the appearance of length and complexity in Basel II, but that is a 
small price to pay for greater consistency and a more level playing field. 
However,  given  the  need  to  have  a  framework  which  can  be  adapted  to  a  wide  range  of 
circumstances,  cooperation  among  supervisors  is  clearly  the  most  important  tool  in  achieving  an 
appropriate  level  of  consistency.  The  Committee  has  established  a  working  group  of  supervisors, 
called the Accord Implementation Group, or “AIG,” that shares information on implementation efforts 
among Basel Committee member countries. The AIG works with other supervisors as well, including 
through  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group,  a  group  of  supervisors  from  many  other  countries  that 
shares views and exchanges information. By promoting the sharing of information on practical issues, 
the AIG’s discussions will help to foster greater consistency in the implementation and application of 
the new framework across countries.  
Conclusion 
I  now  look  forward  to  hearing  some  additional  perspectives  from  our  panellists  on  Basel  II  and 
especially their thoughts on its implications for the Indian banking sector. As I have stressed in my 
remarks, Basel II is intended to reinforce our focus on risk and to encourage all of us to improve our 
skills  in measuring  and  managing  those  risks.  In  one  sense,  then,  Basel  II  might  be considered  an 
effort  to  re-invigorate  the  risk  management  culture  in  the  banking  sector.  I  believe  that  Basel  II 
provides banks with the incentives necessary to encourage them to improve their risk management 
systems and processes. At the same time, the new capital framework will help to ensure that capital 
supervision continues to serve as a cornerstone to safety and soundness in the banking system. Both 
results will help to make banks more resilient, less sensitive to the ups and downs of the business 
cycle, and better able to serve as a source of credit and growth for businesses and consumers. Those 
benefits are worthy of our continued hard work. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2004
