Caleb M Fundanga: The role and operations of the Bank of Zambia  
Closing remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the end of the Bank of 
Zambia lecture series to members of the University of Zambia Business and Economics Association 
(UNZABECA), Lusaka, 24 November 2004. 
 issuance of currency;  
acts as banker to the Government;  
banker to commercial banks; 
management of a country’s foreign exchange reserves;  
lender of last resort;  
management of public debt. Although some central banks do not carry such responsibilities;  
collection and interpretation of statistics, in particular, financial and monetary statistics; and  
implementation of monetary and financial systems policies.  
Chairperson 
Bank of Zambia Directors  
Members of UNZABECA  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen  
As we come to the end of the series of lectures presented by the Bank of Zambia, it is my sincere 
hope that UNZABECA members have now gained a better understanding and appreciation of central 
banking, in general, and the role and operations of the Bank of Zambia, in particular.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  it  has  been  amply  explained  during  the  course  of  the  Lecture  Series,  I 
would  also  like  to  reiterate  that  a  central  bank  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  monetary  and  financial 
operations of any country. Through these Lectures, you have learned that the primary responsibility of 
a central bank includes, among others:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Through these Lecture Series, which have successfully ended today, it has been highlighted that the 
central bank, like the rest of the economy, adapts to changes in the market environment. In the case of 
the Bank of Zambia, prior to 1991, the Bank had numerous roles, including the promotion of economic 
growth  through  the  provision  of  credit  to  critical  sectors  such  as  agriculture,  manufacturing,  mining, 
etc, as well as issuance of export guarantees to exporters. As expected, the multiplicity of functions 
led to conflict of interest. For instance, on one hand, the Bank was expected to control the growth of 
money supply while, on the other hand, it was required to inject money into the system through the 
provision of credit to the selected sectors.  
The introduction of economic reforms by the Government beginning the end of 1991 therefore brought 
about  enormous  challenges  for  the  Bank  of  Zambia.  To  meet  the  new  challenges,  the  Bank’s 
operations needed to be more focused. In this respect, the Bank of Zambia Act was amended in 1996 
to reflect the changed nature of the operating environment. By amending the Act, the Bank’s primary 
role  was  solely  “to  formulate  and  implement  monetary  and  supervisory  policies  that  will  ensure  the 
maintenance of price and financial system stability”.  
This was  deliberate, as experience world-over  has shown  that  you  can  only  achieve sustained  and 
high economic growth in an economic environment characterised by low and stable inflation. Thus, by 
working to ensure price stability as well as maintenance of a safe, sound and efficient financial sector, 
the Bank is contributing to the achievement of sustainable economic growth and, ultimately, poverty 
reduction.  
In  a  nutshell,  following  the  amendment  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  Act  in  1996,  the  Bank’s  main 
responsibilities  comprise  price  and  financial  system  stability.  The  Bank  ensures  financial  system 
stability  by  licensing,  supervising  and  regulating  the  activities  of  banks  and  non-bank  financial 
institutions so as to promote the safe, sound and efficient operations and development of the financial 
system.  
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  trust  that,  as  members  of  UNZABECA,  you  have  actively  participated  in 
these series of lectures and expanded your knowledge of the functions of the Bank of Zambia. On our 
part  as  Bank  of  Zambia,  we  strongly  encourage  investment  in  education,  which  has  been 
demonstrated by the sponsorship of these Lectures. In this regard, I wish to take this opportunity to 
call upon other institutions to support our university by either sponsoring a series of lectures, like the 
Bank of Zambia has done, or rendering any financial assistance. As many of you may be aware, most 
of the companies in Zambia have benefited, in one way or the other, from the services offered by our 
universities. As for the Bank of Zambia, most of its management members of staff, including myself, 
are graduates of this university and were members of UNZABECA.  
Therefore, as a token of their appreciation to UNZABECA, they have made a generous donation in the 
sum of K9.5 million. This donation, I hope, will go a long way in supporting UNZABECA programmes. 
However,  may  I  caution  you  to  manage  these  funds  prudently  and  ensure  that  they  are  applied 
towards the attainment of the intended UNZABECA objectives. Please, do not be wasteful now that 
UNZABECA coffers are liquid!  
In conclusion, as Patron of UNZABECA, I look forward to being involved in UNZABECA activities. In 
this  regard,  I  undertake  to  promote  your  activities,  at  any  slightest  opportunity,  to  other  institutions, 
which would benefit from your services. 
With these few remarks, it is now my honour and privilege to declare the Bank of Zambia UNZABECA 
Lecture Series officially closed.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
