Timothy F Geithner: Changes in the structure of the US financial system and 
implications for systemic risk 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, to the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference: Systemic Financial Crises - 
Resolving Large Bank Insolvencies, Chicago, 1 October 2004. 
 My compliments to Michael Moskow for putting together this conference and for bringing together this 
formidable group of talent on systemic banking crises. 
There are those who regard this type of enterprise - that of strengthening the regime for managing 
financial failures - as misdirected. Some think focusing on bank resolution is like devoting resources to 
redesigning the morgue rather than improving the hospital. Some think that by preparing to deal with 
crises you make them more likely. I think the wiser judgment is the contrary. In this area at least, if you 
want peace or stability, it’s better to prepare for war or instability. 
I  think  this  is  particularly  important  for  us  in  the  United  States.  Although  we  have  a  rich  history  of 
banking crises in our past, and have watched other countries confront such crises more recently, it’s 
been some time since we’ve experienced the prospect or the reality of a systemically significant bank 
failure in this country. It is important that knowledge among practitioners of this art of bank resolution 
does not fade with time and is not dulled by the comfort of the relative stability and financial resilience 
we have been fortunate enough to enjoy over the past decade and more. 
I want to reflect tonight on the changes in the structure of the U.S. financial system of the last 20 years 
or  so,  and  what  implications  these  have  for  the  nature  of  systemic  risk.  For  those  of  us  who  are 
responsible for thinking about the overall stability of the financial system, the questions we face are, of 
course,  broader  than  the  potential  insolvency  of  a  large  bank  and  the  most  appropriate  resolution 
methodology. They include not just how to make the system better able to withstand the failure of a 
major bank or financial enterprise built around a bank, but also how to better withstand the failure of a 
major non-bank financial intermediary or a systemic liquidity crisis that may or may not arise from a 
solvency problem at a large supervised financial institution. 
The central bank of the United States was legislated into existence in the wake of the banking crises of 
the  early  20th  century.  And  the  framework  that  evolved  in  the  decades  that  followed  was  directed 
specifically at dealing with the special risks posed to banks and by banks to the economy as a whole. 
Changing market structure 
Let me highlight a few of the changes in the financial structure that are germane to the mandate of the 
Federal Reserve. They are: 
• 
The  greater  systemic  importance  of  a  smaller  number  of  large  bank-centered  financial 
institutions; 
The greater role played by non-bank financial institutions; 
The growth of the GSEs; 
Greater operational demands on the core of the clearing and settlement structure; 
An increase in the complexity of risk management and compliance challenges; and 
The extent of global financial integration. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These are not all that new, and not all are unique to the United States, but taken together they are 
significant. 
Most conspicuously, we have seen the emergence of a small number of very large, complex, bank-
centered financial institutions that now account for a substantial share of the assets and liabilities of 
the U.S. banking system. The top five domestic bank holding companies now hold about 45 percent of 
banking assets, almost twice the share as they did 20 years ago. 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 1
The  earnings  capacity  of  these  very  large  banking  institutions,  the  absolute  size  of  their  capital 
cushions,  and  the  diversity  of  their  activities,  geographic  and  functional,  should  make  them  less 
vulnerable to specific shocks and better able to absorb larger shocks than has been true in the past. In 
other words, the core of the U.S. banking system should be more stable in the face of a broader range 
and greater magnitude of shocks. However, the increased size and scope of these entities necessarily 
exposes them to a wider array of potential shocks and risks and means that the failure of one of them 
could  have  a  broader  impact  than  in  the  past  and  be  considerably  more  difficult  to  resolve.  The 
implications of such a failure would almost certainly fall outside of the range of experience captured in 
conventional models. 
At  the  same  time,  despite  their  size  and  scale,  banks  now  account  for  a  smaller  share  of  financial 
intermediation in the United States than was true in the past. Depository institutions now hold about 
one fifth of all assets held by financial institutions, or less than half of what they did in 1984. This crude 
comparison  understates  the  importance  of  banks  in  the  credit  origination  process  and  wholesale 
financial  markets,  but  the  broad  picture  it  paints  of  the  increased  role  of  non-bank  financial 
intermediaries is still noteworthy. To put it differently, financial intermediaries that are not subject to 
consolidated risk-based capital frameworks and the full complement of supervisory constraints applied 
to banks and bank holding companies, now account for most of the assets of financial institutions in 
the United States. 
There has also been substantial convergence in the types of financial transactions bank-centered and 
non-bank affiliated financial intermediaries perform. This translates into a more competitive and more 
innovative financial system, one that is more flexible and resilient, with weakness in one part of the 
system more likely to be offset by a capacity for expansion elsewhere. And, because their overall risk 
profiles are likely to differ from banks, the greater importance of non-bank financial intermediaries, and 
of  the  capital  markets  more  generally,  offsets  some  of  the  potential  concern  associated  with 
consolidation in the banking system. 
Within  the  universe  of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries,  there  are  other  material  changes  worth 
noting. Let me highlight three. First, the role of the major investment banks in the United States as 
market  makers  and  providers  of  liquidity  in  a  broad  range  of  foreign  exchange,  securities,  and 
derivatives markets has continued to grow over the past decade, as has the international importance 
of these firms. These institutions are now key participants in the domestic and international clearance 
and settlement processes associated with these activities. 
Second, a sustained period of rapid growth in the major mortgage GSEs has left us with two very large 
financial institutions, whose balance sheets and associated off-balance sheet positions today account 
for a much larger share of the U.S. mortgage market than was the case a decade ago. This means 
that the credit and market risks associated with the home mortgage business in the U.S. are now in 
some respects more concentrated. It means that the actions taken by the GSEs to manage interest 
rate risk can have a substantial impact on interest rate volatility. And, it means that the exposures of 
major  banks  and  investment  banks  to  these  GSEs  is  larger  than  in  the  past,  measured  relative  to 
capital, and large relative to other major counterparties. 
Together,  these  changes  mean  there  are  a  larger  number  of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries 
operating  outside  the  supervisory  safety  and  soundness  framework  established  for  banking 
organizations,  that  are  sufficiently  large  or  integral  to  the  financial  system  that  their  failure  or 
anticipated  failure  could  have  major  implications  for  the  functioning  of  the  markets  in  which  they 
operate and their financial institution counterparties. 
And  third,  hedge  funds  now  play  a  more  substantial  role  in  the  U.S.  financial  system.  They  are  a 
significant  source  of  liquidity  in  some  markets.  They  play  an  important  role  in  making  our  financial 
markets more efficient. And they are likely in some circumstances to help markets equilibrate more 
quickly  in  conditions  of  stress,  as  was  the  case  in  the  summer  of  2003,  when  they  helped  meet  a 
substantial increase in mortgage-related hedging demand from banks and the GSEs. Assets managed 
by hedge funds have grown very rapidly, more than doubling since 1998 to current estimates in the 
range of one trillion dollars. Gross credit exposure and potential future credit exposure to hedge funds 
as a group are probably larger today relative to the capital of banks and investment banks, although 
also likely more diversified. Overall leverage seems lower relative to 1998, and may not look that high 
relative to banks and investment banks, but leverage is hard to measure and the quality of the data is 
not  very  good.  While  hedge  funds  are  large  enough  to  provide  meaningful  efficiency  and  liquidity 
benefits to some key markets, they are also large enough that the failure of a major hedge fund or 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2004
number  of  funds  could  have  a  significant  impact  directly  and  indirectly  on  the  major  banks  and 
investment banks in the United States. 
Within  the  clearance  and  settlement  infrastructure,  economies  of  scale  have  led  to  high  levels  of 
concentration  in  some  areas.  Two  institutions  together  now  handle  the  vast  majority  of  clearing 
business  for  U.S.  government  securities  and  the  associated  triparty  repo  market  in  which  over 
$1 trillion turns over twice each day. The dramatic increase in the volume of transactions handled by 
the core parts of the payments infrastructure places substantially greater demands on the operations 
of  those  institutions.  Moreover,  many  of  the  major  payment  and  settlement  utilities  operate  across 
national  boundaries,  raising  complicated  questions  for  the  appropriate  allocation  of  oversight 
responsibility. 
Alongside these changes in the relative size of institutions and in market structure, financial innovation 
has  led  to  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  complexity  of  the  risk  management  challenge.  The  frontier  of 
financial  innovation  inevitably  advances  somewhat  ahead  of  improvements  in  the  risk  management 
and clearing infrastructure. The models used to assess risk in the more novel areas of finance are, by 
definition, less grounded in experience and less valuable in anticipating how prices and correlations 
change  in  conditions  of  stress.  Consensus  on  the  appropriate  accounting  treatment  is  less  well 
established. With the dramatic increase in the scope of operations of the major financial institutions, 
the challenge of pulling together an integrated risk management framework that captures exposures 
across the entirety of the firm is much greater. 
The potential for conflicts of interest and opportunities for fraud are greater, placing significant burdens 
on internal compliance regimes. The changes in regulation and technology that have increased the 
opportunities for risk transfer mean that more risk may end up in parts of the financial system where 
supervision and disclosure is weaker and in parts of the economy less well able to manage it. 
And finally, we have seen substantial growth in the integration of national financial systems. Indeed, a 
number  of  foreign  and  foreign-owned  banking  organizations  are  among  the  largest  financial 
institutions  in  the  U.S.,  with  operations  here  that  run  into  the  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars,  and  in 
some  cases  representing  the  majority  of  their  global  assets.  The  major  U.S.  banks  and  investment 
banks  are  more  global  in the  scope  of their  operations,  and  their  affiliates  are  a  major  presence  in 
many of the countries in which they operate, in some cases with a larger share of financial activity than 
they have in the U.S. market. Payments and clearing arrangements are increasingly transnational in 
scope. But, the legal and supervisory frameworks for financial activity are still national, and are likely to 
remain  so  for  the  foreseeable  future.  And  despite  the  development  of  a  much  more  intensive  and 
extensive network of cooperation among supervisory and regulatory and enforcement authorities, and 
movement toward an ever-higher standard of convergence in key elements of the regulatory structure 
across jurisdictions, the regime is inevitably uneven, with different standards across jurisdictions and 
therefore continuing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. 
Implications 
These  broad  developments  alter  the  hierarchy  of  systemic  concerns  for  the  U.S.  authorities.  The 
greater  systemic  importance  of  a  smaller  number  of  large  bank-centered  financial  institutions,  the 
greater role played by non-bank financial institutions, the growth in the GSEs, the greater operational 
demands on the more concentrated core of the clearance and settlement infrastructure, the dramatic 
increase in the complexity of the risk management and compliance challenge, and the extent of global 
financial integration - these developments change the nature of the potential sources of stress to the 
financial system. They change how stress is transmitted. And they change the impact of tools we use 
to mitigate risk ex ante and to contain the broader financial and macroeconomic fall-out of financial 
distress. 
These  developments  can  have  both  positive  and  negative  impacts.  In  many  respects,  they  help  to 
reduce  risk.  In  some  ways,  they  increase  risk.  On  balance  the  positive  aspects  dominate  the  less 
positive. Shocks may act more quickly, but they can be more easily diffused and absorbed. Institutions 
and  markets  seem  better  positioned  to  handle  a  substantial  degree  of  stress.  Shocks  may  be  less 
likely to result in the type of trend amplifying, self-reinforcing dynamic for sustained periods of time that 
can threaten the stability of the financial system. 
But  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  that  we  do  not  know  a  lot  about  the  underlying  dynamics  of 
financial  crises  in  the  context  of  the  evolving  financial  system  I  have  described.  It  is  also  worth 
reflecting on the fact that the favorable judgment of U.S. financial resilience at present is rooted in a 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 3
period of lower overall volatility in macroeconomic outcomes, with lower inflation and less variability in 
inflation,  and  shorter  and  shallower  recessions.  Financial  innovation  has  brought  about  a  dramatic 
increase  in  the  opportunities  for  diversification  and  risk  transfer  and  in  the  sophistication  of  risk 
management,  but  it  is  unlikely  to  have  brought  an  end  to  the  periodic  tendency  of  markets  to 
experience waves of mania and panic. The systemically significant financial institutions are larger and 
stronger than in the past, but they are not invulnerable, and the impact of a failure would be greater. 
And it would be imprudent to expect that the lower overall magnitude of recent macroeconomic shocks 
that has contributed to lower volatility in growth and inflation outcomes will be with us indefinitely. 
What  are  the  implications  of  these  changes  for  how  we  think  about  managing  systemic  risk  in  the 
United States? Let me touch on five broad areas, though these cover only part of the landscape of the 
financial stability agenda. 
First,  it  is  important  that  the standards  applied  to  the  largest  financial  institutions at  the core  of  our 
financial  system  are  calibrated  to  reflect  their  systemic  relevance.  Relative  to  the  standards 
appropriate  for  a  smaller  financial  institution  with  a similar  risk  profile,  capital  should  be  targeted  to 
achieve a greater proportional ability to absorb shocks and thereby attain a lower ex ante probability of 
failure.  This  makes  it  important  that  management  of  these  large  firms  maintain  an  ample  capital 
cushion  over  and  above  the  high  regulatory  thresholds.  Similarly,  the  funding  and  liquidity 
management  framework  needs  to  provide  a  larger  buffer  against potential  shocks.  The  internal  risk 
management regime - for credit and market risk, operational risk, compliance risk - needs to meet a 
more  exacting  standard.  The  requirements  for  operational  resilience  for  technology  systems  are 
necessarily more demanding. Because of the broader implications of a failure for the financial system 
and  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  supervisory  framework  for  the  largest  systemically  significant 
banking organizations, as well as the firms themselves, needs to produce a higher level of financial 
soundness than might be indicated by measures of economic capital or expected by shareholders and 
creditors of the institution. 
This is important for banks and financial institutions built around banks because of their access to the 
safety net and their special role in the payments system. Our approach at the Fed seeks to achieve 
this  outcome  for  the  major  institutions  for  which  we  are  the  consolidated  supervisor.  But  the  basic 
argument  for  applying  exacting  standards  for  risk  based  capital,  for  liquidity  management,  and  for 
operational  resilience  applies  to  a  broader  range  of  supervised  and  regulated  financial  institutions 
whose operations pose significant systemic implications for the financial system. 
This is particularly compelling in the case of the major GSEs, where the regulatory framework, capital 
regime  and  sophistication  of  the  internal  risk  management  framework  need  to  be  upgraded  to  a 
standard more commensurate with their risk profile and the risks they present to the system. 
It is as compelling in the case of the institutions - a number of them specialized financial utilities - that 
make  up  the  core  of  the  payments  infrastructure.  Here,  because  of  their  overall  importance  to  the 
functioning  of  our  financial  system,  we  are  working  to  encourage  improvement  in  operational 
resilience, to ensure they meet the recently updated international standards for risk management and 
internal financial resources, and to strengthen the oversight framework. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  SEC  has  itself  outlined  a  framework  that  would  provide  a  form  of 
consolidated supervision of the major investment banks with a risk-based capital framework based on 
Basel II. It’s not clear at this point how the SEC’s regime will work in practice, but it seems to offer the 
prospect  of  some  evolution  in  the  regulatory  framework  for  investment  banks  in  the  direction  of 
convergence with those that apply to bank holding companies. That is, the proposed new CSE regime 
will  add  a  consolidated  approach  to  risk  based  capital  and  an  intensified  focus  on  the  risk 
management  regime  to  the  traditional  SEC  focus  on  enforcement  of  laws  directed  at  investor 
protection and market integrity. 
A second point is that it is important that those who run financial institutions calibrate the strength of 
the internal risk management architecture to the more complicated nature of the risks they confront. 
Even with the major improvements in capital, earnings capacity, and in the sophistication of the risk 
management  framework,  there  remain  many  aspects  of  the  changing  financial  environment  which 
pose ongoing challenges for management. 
The degree of concentration at the core of the financial system means that financial institutions have 
to  think  more  carefully  about  the  implications  of  the  failure  of  a  major  counterparty  or  clearing 
organization. The increase in the combined weight of the highly leveraged financial institutions as a 
group highlights the importance of both strong counterparty risk management disciplines in managing 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2004
direct credit exposure, and understanding the impact a disorderly exit would have on other positions 
held by the firm. The uncertainty about how markets respond in conditions of acute stress - uncertainty 
in  terms  of  how  correlations  behave,  how  much  liquidity  will  be  available,  the  risk  profile  of 
counterparties,  etc.,  combined  with  the  inherent  uncertainty  about  the  probability  of  a  seemingly 
remote  event,  and  the scale  of  losses associated  with  such  an  event,  all  argue  for  a  more  prudent 
cushion against risk than would be necessary in a less complex and more certain state of the world. 
Third,  our  approach  to  financial  stability  relies  a  lot  on  market  discipline  and,  as  a  result,  depends 
significantly on the quality of accounting and public disclosure. We see some progress in the extent to 
which firms provide a clear picture of their underlying risk profiles, but there is room for improvement. 
Accounting  standards  have  notably  struggled  with  the  challenges  of  incorporating  innovations  in 
financial instruments, especially when those instruments are used to offset the risks inherent in more 
traditional  activities  whose  fluctuations  in  value  have  not  typically  been  recorded  in  earnings  or  in 
balance  sheet  valuations.  It  is  hard  to  see  how  we  can  be  comfortable  that  we  have  achieved  a 
reasonable resting place on these issues. In the long run, it is critical for the cause of market discipline 
that  accounting  and  disclosure  of  financial  instruments  be  consistent  with  the  ongoing  direction  of 
innovation in risk management. 
And  finally,  the  broad  changes  in  market  structure  place  a  much  higher  premium  on  cooperation 
among supervisors, market regulators, and central banks, both nationally and internationally. 
Unlike other countries who have moved to integrate supervisory responsibility for banks, investment 
banks,  and  insurance  companies,  the  U.S.  has  preserved  a  model  with  multiple  bank  supervisory 
agencies and separate functional regulation of entities that are banks, securities firms, and insurance 
companies. And unlike those that have separated supervisory authority from the monetary policy and 
lender of last resort functions, the U.S. has kept them integrated within the central bank. Across the 
major economies, therefore, we face somewhat different cooperation challenges within our markets. 
We believe the U.S. model has worked quite well, and these differences in the design of the overall 
supervisory framework and its relationship to the central bank are likely to persist. But we share an 
important  interest  in  working  together  across  borders  to  help  ensure  that  we  have  a  framework  for 
cooperation that matches the increased integration of national financial markets. This is important for 
the supervision of international banks as well as for other global financial institutions. It is important for 
the payment and settlement infrastructure. And it is important for how we operate together in crisis. 
The  efforts  of  the  Basel  banking  supervisors  are  particularly  important  in  this  context.  While  their 
efforts have long emphasized the value of international supervisory cooperation, the improved Basel II 
framework raises the bar even further, putting the need for supervisory coordination squarely on the 
table if Basel II is to be implemented effectively for a global bank. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasizing  the  obvious  importance  of  the  quality  of  macroeconomic  policy 
management  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  It  probably  is  possible  for  a  country  with  an 
exceptionally virtuous fiscal and monetary policy framework to experience a systemic financial crisis. 
But most financial crises involve a shock whose origins lie in the realm of macroeconomic policy error, 
often  magnified  by  the  toxic  combination  of  poorly  designed  financial  deregulation  and  an  overly 
generous  financial  safety  net.  Probably  the  most  important  contribution  policy  makers  can  make  to 
financial  stability  is  to  avoid  large  monetary  policy  mistakes  or  sustained  fiscal  and  external 
imbalances  that  increase  the  risk  of  large  macroeconomic  shocks,  and  to  try  to  ensure  that  policy 
reacts with sufficient speed and force in the face of those shocks we are unable to avoid. 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 5
