Jean-Claude Trichet: Key issues for monetary policy - an ECB view 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the National 
Association of Business Economics, Philadelphia, 5 October 2004. 
 Mrs President, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to share some thoughts on monetary policy issues with members of the National 
Association of Business Economics gathered here in Philadelphia for their 46th Annual Meeting.  
Only six years ago Europe engaged in a grand enterprise of institutional design that irreversibly tied 
together  the  monetary  destiny  of  eleven,  then  twelve,  nations.  The  European  single  currency,  the 
euro, has in the meantime become a visible token of Europeans’ drive towards unification. Historically, 
currencies  have  been  rightly  regarded  as  one  of  the  fundamental  components  of  sovereignty.  The 
Euro is a very powerful symbol of the European identity. I guess the rest of the world sees the euro not 
only  as  Europe’s  single  currency,  but  also  as  a  symbol  of  Europeans’  strong  determination  to  plan 
their future and to realise their dreams. 
Taking  issue  with  this  historical  transition  to  the  European  single  currency,  I  intend  to  focus  my 
remarks on the challenges presented by the creation of the euro and the execution of monetary policy 
in  a  rapidly  changing  world:  a  world  in  which  high-speed  structural  change  -  whether  spurred  by 
spontaneous economic forces or institutional evolution - may put tested economic models at risk and 
defy policy-makers’ searches for well-trusted policy recipes. 
Although  in  my  remarks  I  will  take  a  European  perspective,  at  the  end  of  my  considerations  I  will 
attempt to draw a comparison between the monetary policy concept adopted by the European Central 
Bank (the ECB) and the one adopted by the US Federal Reserve System. 
Central banks and uncertainty 
The ECB, like all central banks, is faced with several dimensions of uncertainty. The economy is often 
hit  by  disturbances  that  are  difficult  to  identify  in  real  time.  Even  when  policy-makers  are  able  to 
correctly  assess  the  source  and  the  nature  of  a  disturbance  affecting  the  economy,  tracking  its 
propagation  profile  and  working  out  its  final  impact  on  the  key  variables  of  interest  is  a 
highly-demanding task.  
Econometric theory has spent decades devising sophisticated tools to isolate different types of shocks 
hitting  the  economy.  But  inference  is  often  non-robust  across  various  alternative  identification 
schemes.  As  a  consequence,  central  bankers  are  given  little  guidance  by  theory  in  their  daily 
endeavour to filter out noisy data.  
The  task  of  policy-makers  is  further  complicated  if  they  suspect  that  cyclical  movements  are 
compounded by an ongoing change in the deep structure of the economy. For one thing, structural 
changes  amplify  the  identification  problem.  It  becomes  more  difficult  to  ascertain  whether  new 
developments  are  going  to  be  reversed  and  eventually  vanish,  or  will  become  ingrained  in  the 
underlying economic mechanism for many years to come. But more importantly, if a structural change 
is  truly  under  way,  macroeconomic  relationships  derived  from  empirical  regularities  and  historical 
averages are bound to loose significance. A new set of relationships would need to be estimated and 
tested. But serious diagnostics for structural stability rarely give definitive answers, and re-estimation 
requires sufficiently extended spans of data that simply do not yet exist.  
Structural changes over recent years 
The past decade, on both sides of the Atlantic, has not been kind to policymakers’ aspirations to a 
comfortably stable set of structural relations usable for policy analysis. At the very least, the second 
half of the 1990s and the early years of this century have sent us stark reminders that the economic 
structure  does  not  hold  still  for  long.  Our  recent  experience  in  coping  with  economic  changes  has 
provided more than one stress test of the macroeconomic models that are in use in our institutions.  
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
Let me mention some sources of structural change that are specific to Europe. The setting up of a true 
single  market  out  of  the  various  economies  member  of  the  European  Union  is  a  very  ambitious 
endeavour, which has no historical precedent and is triggering large scale structural changes in the 
European economy. 
Fully part of these bold transformations are reforms in the labour and goods markets. These reforms 
aim to reduce distortions induced by regulation, strengthening the euro area’s competitive position and 
its resilience to shocks. This ongoing process to create a single economic entity that would itself be 
flexible - thus improving the potential for the economic structure to self-correct - is likely to bring about 
notable changes in macroeconomic relationships based on past observations.  
One recent additional source of structural change in Europe lies with the enlargement of the European 
Union that took place in May 2004. The European Union has witnessed its greatest ever enlargement 
with  the  accession  of  ten  new  countries,  mainly  from  eastern  and  southern  Europe.  The  ten  new 
Member States will eventually adopt the euro, when the time is right, namely after nominal and real 
convergence  is  performed,  affecting  in  turn  the  euro  area  aggregate  through  a  change  in  trade 
patterns, capital and labour flows and a higher level of competition. 
Enlargement  has  already  provided  new  opportunities  for  trade  and  investment.  These  effects  are 
visible in a high degree of economic integration between the new and the old Member States. Trade 
integration  is  already  visible  in  the  share  of  these  ten  countries  in  the  previous  15  Member  States’ 
exports and imports, which stands at around 12-13 % - an increase of some 50% since 1995. Capital 
integration has also increased dramatically over recent years, as the share of the new Member States 
in the old Member States’ total FDI outflows amounts to around 12 %. But both economic theory and 
empirical  records  lead  us  to  believe  that  more  is  to  come.  Lower  trade  costs  and  an  increase  in 
competition associated with the enlargement of the European Single Market can have a significantly 
positive  impact  on  growth  in  the  European  economy  as  a  whole,  as  recently  found  by  several 
economic studies. 
It should nonetheless be recognised that Europe and its institutions are not new to having to cope with 
rapid change. The introduction of the single currency, the euro, has been a defining experience which 
has trained policymakers and the citizens of Europe alike to be careful planners and skilled managers 
of uncertain circumstances.  
Ambitions were undoubtedly high. The measure of success that Europeans had set themselves was 
not easy to match or to even come close to. It was absolutely key to the political feasibility of the whole 
project that the new currency was seen to preserve the same attributes of solidity and credibility as the 
most credible of all the currencies it was replacing.  
The aim of creating a currency that could meet the highest standards was for a long time seen to be at 
odds with perceptions and beliefs at the time. World investors and market participants - who determine 
hierarchies of credibility and trust, as well as interest rate levels - had been lukewarm and hesitant 
vis-à-vis our project for most of the 1990s. Until the end of 1997 they seemed convinced that the future 
single currency would display the average - not the best - characteristics of the currencies that it was 
designed to replace. Notwithstanding the strict legal requirements set out in the Treaty for joining the 
new  single  currency  -  which  I  will  come  back  to  in  a  minute  -  many  observers  and  investors  had 
considered it impossible that the new single currency would deliver from day one on its promise to 
perform in a similar way to the best-performing constituent national currencies.  
Gradually, from the end of 1997, investors, savers and market participants in Europe and throughout 
the world changed radically the way they viewed the transition. All along the yield curve - from three 
months, the five-year and ten-year benchmarks, to the 30-year segment - the future euro area market 
interest rates became aligned with the lowest market rates available denominated in the most credible 
currencies. 
On 4 January 1999, the first working day after the euro’s launch, Europe’s financial markets showed 
that  the  transition  to  the  euro  had  been  an  ostensible  success.  The  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the 
Maastricht Treaty had been fully vindicated, along with the promise made to Europe’s people and its 
impact on the financial markets. The euro area’s 300 million inhabitants benefited immediately from 
the best yield curve, possible financial environment. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
The conditions for success 
No doubt, a great deal of the success had a solid foundation. On the one hand, national governments 
were solemnly committed to respecting a number of clear and transparent convergence criteria before 
they could qualify to adopt the euro. These criteria ensured a level of quality in the management of 
public  finances  and  -  more  broadly  speaking  -  a  fair  pace  of  economic  and  monetary  convergence 
among the economies that were to unify into a single currency area. 
On the other hand, the Treaty which had established the European Community had laid down in stone 
the fact that monetary policy would be conducted with the aim of maintaining price stability and that 
the  new  central  bank  would  be  fully  independent.  These  provisions  were  designed  to  ensure  the 
long-lasting credibility of the euro.  
I will now try to expand on these institutional requirements more analytically.  
Price stability objective for monetary policy 
First,  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Union  assigned  the  ECB  the  primary  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability.  It  was  particularly  important  that  this  key  objective  was  clear  and 
unambiguous, since for the national central banks with the most credible currencies and lowest market 
interest rates, price stability was enshrined by national law as their own primary objective. In any case, 
far from being a novel aspect of the European institutional system, as it is sometimes claimed, price 
stability is defined as central banks’ primary responsibility in almost all industrialised, emerging and 
transition economies, with a particular emphasis being attributed to this notion in all economies that 
have adopted “direct inflation targeting”. I recognize that the United States has chosen to present its 
objective of monetary policy in a different format. But, as I will argue in a while, I do not believe that the 
US approach differs fundamentally from the concept we have adopted. 
Central bank independence
Second,  the  Treaty  made  the  ECB  fully  independent.  Economic  research  has  shown  that  central 
bank’s independence from other institutions and pressure groups is crucial in ensuring its credibility, 
and therefore in creating the conditions for inflation expectations firmly anchored upon the announced 
definition of price stability. The importance of independence for sheltering the decision-making body of 
a central bank from all forms of interference has proven key in securing the trust of the public and in 
anchoring inflation expectations in the long run. 
As a counterpart to its independence, and to foster and maintain a broad constituency for stability and 
monetary  prudence  in  Europe,  the  ECB  was  made  accountable  to  the  European  people.  This 
requirement is met in particular through the regular and frequent appearances - at least five per year - 
of  the  ECB’s  President  and  members  of  the  Executive  Board  before  the  European  Parliament. 
Accountability is not just a vital democratic requirement, it is also crucial in ensuring that the central 
bank operates according to the provisions set out by the Treaty. Furthermore, it creates and maintains 
a  line  of  trust  between  the  central  bank  and  its public;  this  trust  is  also  enhanced by  a  transparent 
communication, an issue which I will also come back to. By comparing actual euro area inflation with 
the stated objective of price stability, European citizens provide a powerful incentive to policy-makers. 
In  political  democracies,  which  are  also  vivid  opinion  democracies  an  independent  institution  is 
ultimately responsible vis à vis the public at large. 
Fiscal governance
Third, monetary policy is supported by clear rules on fiscal governance. European citizens took a bold 
step in creating a single currency in an economic area without a genuine political federation or federal 
government.  In  order  to  make  up  for  the  lack  of  federal  government  and  budget,  the  Treaty 
establishing the Economic and Monetary Union has introduced rules to prohibit monetary financing of 
fiscal deficits and to discourage free-riding among national governments. In addition, a framework was 
set up to ensure sound fiscal positions in individual countries. Fiscal rules like those enshrined in the 
Maastricht Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact are essential in any single currency area as key 
for the economic rationale and consistency of the economic and monetary union.  
BIS Review 56/2004 
 3
The ECB’s monetary policy concept 
Although  these  institutional  requirements  were  necessary  to  ensure  the  credibility  of  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  and  of  the  single currency  itself,  I  contend  that they  were  not  sufficient alone.  Our 
challenge  was  that  the  euro  had  to  benefit  from  the  highest  levels  of  credibility  and  trust  available 
within  the  future  euro  area,  since  this  was  vital  to  European  growth  and  job  creation.  To  meet  this 
challenge, the ECB designed a specific monetary policy strategy. In November 1998, before the single 
currency  came  into  existence  on  1  January  1999,  the  ECB  defined  the  following  four  fundamental 
characteristics of this strategy. 
Quantitative definition of price stability 
First,  the  ECB  provided  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  -  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of below 2% over the medium term. We further clarified that in 
the  pursuit  of  price  stability  the  ECB  aims  at  inflation  rates  below  but close  to  2%.  This provides  a 
sufficient  safety  margin  against  the  risk  of  deflation.  These  announcements  had  not  only  the 
advantage  of  anchoring 
transparency  and 
accountability,  but  were  also  instrumental  in  preserving  continuity  at  the  time  of  transition  from  the 
previous  national  currencies  to  the  euro:  the  euro  area  was  given  the  very  same  definition  of  price 
stability adopted implicitly or explicitly by the most credible national currencies. A different definition of 
price stability would have immediately led to higher inflationary expectations, therefore higher market 
interest  rates  all  along  the  yield  curve,  and  to  additional  substantial  risk  premia  to  protect  against 
higher uncertainty over future inflation.  
inflation  expectations  and  enhancing 
the  ECB’s 
Medium-term orientation 
Second, the ECB has adopted a medium-term orientation, thereby preserving monetary policy from 
short-termism.  Constantly  faced  with  economic  news,  a  central  bank  risks  being  swamped  by  the 
latest indicator and by its conjectures concerning markets’ likely reaction to the latest indicator. This 
can  gradually  steer  monetary  policy  away  from  its  foremost  role  of  providing  a  firm  medium-term 
anchor for the economy.  
Instrumental  in  this  steady-hand  framework  is  our  notion  that  the  appropriate  horizon  for  monetary 
policy  is  the  “medium  term”.  In  this  respect,  the  time  horizon  over  which  price  stability  has  to  be 
re-established  needs  to  be  tailored  to  the  circumstances  prevailing  in  the  economy.  Sometimes, 
notably if there is a suspicion that asset prices are moving up or down substantially, it pays to look 
very far ahead, beyond the average lag of monetary transmission. In other cases, the economy may 
need  to  return  to  price  stability  within  a  shorter  horizon.  In  general,  the  horizon  should  depend  on 
whether  the  shocks  are  temporary  or  permanent,  whether  they  emerged  on  the  supply  or  demand 
side,  whether  they  are  domestic  or  external,  on  their  potential  for  becoming  entrenched  in  pricing 
decisions  and  on  their  implications  for  the  fragility  of  the  financial  system.  In  all  events,  the  central 
bank  has  to  preserve  its  credibility,  thus  ensuring  that  expectations  remain  consistent  with  the 
declared policy objective.  
Comprehensiveness of the analytical framework 
Third, the ECB opted for a comprehensive analytical framework. A central bank, in its daily operations, 
has to filter an enormous amount of information. It routinely seeks to identify the state of the economy 
as new data become available and to evaluate their implications for risks to price stability. As I tried to 
argue above, this is a highly demanding exercise, because shocks do not come about with labels and 
the economy is potentially always subjected to structural changes. As a consequence, it is clear for all 
central  banks  that  no  simple  rules  linking  policy  to  one  or  two  privileged  indicators  can  replace  an 
accurate examination of economic developments in all their decisions and forecasts.  
From the beginning, the ECB felt the need to endow itself with a conceptual framework that could help 
it sort through the wealth of conflicting statistics and organise the various pieces into a reliable road 
map  for  internal  analysis  and  communication  with  the  public.  This  called  for  the  adoption  of  a 
framework  that  concentrated  more  on  picturing  the  economy  as  a  large,  complex  and  permanently 
evolving system rather than on trying to condense this complexity into simple summary statistics and 
models.  
4 
 BIS Review 56/2004
As a result, our monthly economic analysis is as comprehensive as possible. It is not constrained by 
equations, systems of equations or mechanisms based on a simplified representation of reality. The 
ECB’s Governing Council reserves the right to include any piece of information, statistic or analysis 
that it considers relevant. This desire for comprehensiveness in our economic analysis is common with 
that of the US Federal Reserve.  
A constituent element of this encompassing framework for processing information - and an ongoing 
reminder  of  the  complexity  of  reality  -  is  our  “binocular”  perspective  over  the  economy,  namely  the 
cross-checking  of  the  economic  analysis  with  a  monetary  analysis  based  on  the  evolution  of  the 
monetary aggregates. This policy framework, which came to be known as the “two-pillar approach”, 
allows the notion of a diversified analysis to be conveyed and, in our view, ensures that no information 
is lost in the assessment of risks to price stability.  
An important rationale behind the two-pillar approach relates to the difference in the time perspectives 
relevant  for  analysing  price  developments  and  for  forming  private  inflation  expectations.  Empirical 
analysis has shown that the inflation process can be broadly decomposed into two components. One 
is associated with the interplay between demand and cost factors at a high frequency. The other is 
connected to more drawn-out and persistent trends. The latter component demonstrates an empirical 
association with the trend growth of money on a long-term basis.  
The short to medium-term “economic analysis” - with its focus on real activity and financial conditions - 
is well-equipped to study shorter-term deviations of inflation from its long-term trend. However, it often 
fails  to  track  the  mechanisms  by  which  monetary  factors  are  responsible  for  such  trends  over 
extended horizons. As a consequence, a monetary policy framework exclusively centred on such an 
analysis would leave a ‘loose end’ in the formation of expectations, to the extent that it would offer no 
anchor to anticipations of price developments as the horizon lengthens.  
Despite the fact that the ECB had a specific arithmetic definition of price stability, it deliberately chose 
not to mould its own monetary policy strategy as one of “inflation targeting.” To be sure, the concept of 
“inflation targeting” is not always a clearly defined concept. However, if it is understood as a framework 
that makes macroeconomic forecasts the statistical input feeding the policy-making process, then we 
would consider it too narrow a description of what monetary policy should look at.  
A  central  bank  needs  to  maintain  appropriate  flexibility  in  the  way  it  responds  to  shocks,  taking 
decisions which are robust across a set of different plausible scenarios for the future. In this respect, it 
has  been  increasingly  recognised  that  a  central  bank  that  focuses  on  inflation  forecasts  at  around 
two-year  horizons  would  not  be  able  to  appropriately  take  into  account  the  formation  of  financial 
imbalances,  as  they  generally  exert  effects  on  price  developments  at  longer  horizons.  Given  the 
substantial  uncertainty  over  the  sustainability  of  asset-price  developments  in  particular,  it  may  be 
advisable to set interest rates with a time-frame extending well beyond conventional forecast horizons.  
However,  the  mere  extension  of  the  time  horizon  for  inflation  targeting  may  still  fail  to  adequately 
guard against the detrimental effect that large asset-price swings could exert on price stability. The 
Japanese experience of the 1980s shows that it may take many years before asset-price movements 
can affect consumer-price inflation to any great extent. 
Our  monetary  analysis,  with  its  focus  on  money  and  credit  developments,  can  be  valuable  in  such 
situations.  As  it  has  been  extensively  documented  in  several  recent  economic  studies,  asset-price 
booms  and  busts  -  especially  the  ones  that  have  led  to  the  worst  macroeconomic  and  financial 
imbalances  -  have  generally  been  accompanied  by  excessive  money  and  credit  growth.  Thus,  a 
monetary  policy  that  ensures  that  money  and  credit  do  not  grow  unchecked  may  also  help,  as  a 
side-effect, to reduce the likelihood of those abnormally large asset-price swings, with their medium 
and long term adverse consequences on price stability.  
Transparency 
The final principle that we have adhered to since the ECB was established is the importance of open 
and  transparent  communication  with  investors,  savers,  market  participants  and  the  public  at  large. 
This is a prerequisite for appropriate accountability and enhances the markets’ understanding of how 
the  central  bank  conducts  its  monetary  policy,  thereby  enhancing  substantially  policy  effectiveness. 
We  are  transparent  in  displaying  our  monetary  policy  two  pillars  concept.  We  are  transparent  in 
publishing our arithmetic definition of price stability. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 5
Communication  with  the  public  and  the  markets  has  also  been  facilitated  by  the  fact  that  our 
assessment of the economic situation and the risks to price stability are published regularly and that 
monetary  policy  decisions  are  explained  in  a  press  conference  held  after  each  monthly  meeting  in 
which  monetary  policy  is  discussed.  In  this  respect  we  have  been  bold.  In  1999,  central  banking 
communication, with only very few exceptions, involved presenting the bank’s diagnosis by publishing 
the minutes with a delay of five or six weeks. The ECB was one of the first central banks to give a 
real-time detailed analysis and assessment and to organise regular press conferences.  
Our  commitment  to  transparency  has  been  effective  in  making  the  ECB  highly  predictable  in  its 
decisions  and  actions.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  combination  of  the  display  of  our  monetary  policy 
concept  and  of  our  definition  of  price  stability  together  with  a  candid  real  time  explanation  of  our 
successive diagnostic makes us at the highest level of predictability according to research.  
The comparison of two central banks 
Let  me  finally  explain  how  I  see  our European  monetary  policy  concept  in comparison with  the  US 
Federal Reserve monetary policy concept. I will not dwell on what is from time to time presented as 
the  major  difference,  namely  the  legal  objective  assigned  to  the  central  bank.  The  US  legislator 
mentions  the  objectives  of  price  stability,  growth  and  job  creation.  My  understanding  is  that  the 
Congress  does  not  mean  that  the  central  bank  can  choose  between  two  contradictory  objectives, 
namely  price  stability  and  growth!  Rather  I  understand  it  is  assuming  that  these  objectives  are  not 
contradictory but complementary - price stability being a necessary condition for sustainable growth 
and  job  creation:  the  central  bank  is  called  upon  to  deliver  price  stability  and  to  be  credible  in  the 
medium  and  long  term  delivery  of  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  maximizing  sustainable 
growth.  By  the  way  empirical  studies  have  convincingly  established  that  a  central  bank  enjoying  a 
large  degree  of  credibility  can  deliver  price  stability  efficiently  thereby  maximising  long  term 
sustainable growth and minimizing output volatility. This is what the Federal Reserve stresses when it 
says frequently that price stability is a condition for a sustainable high level of growth. This is for the 
same reason that an overwhelming majority of central banks in the world have price stability as their 
primary objective, whether they have adopted a monetary policy concept close to the ECB or whether 
they have adopted an “inflation targeting” concept. 
As you see, my understanding is that, conceptually, we are much closer than is sometimes underlined. 
On top of that I see two major similarities:  
First, both the ECB and the Fed place strong emphasis on the transparency of the decision-making 
process,  on  the  transparency  of  the  analysis  made  by  the  responsible  decision-making  body,  on 
explaining  in  real  time  the  economic  assessment  to  the  public  and  market  participants,  and  on 
accountability  vis-à-vis  the  respective  parliaments.  And  I  am  called  upon  the  European  Parliament 
exactly as frequently as the President of the Federal Reserve Board is invited on the Hill. 
Second, and it is perhaps a decisive common feature of our monetary policy concepts, both the ECB 
and the Fed try to be as comprehensive as possible in their analyses. Neither the Fed nor the ECB 
base their decisions on the mechanical result of a system of equations or a simple policy rule. We both 
believe  that  we  need  all  pertinent  information,  modelling  and  forecasts,  as  well  as  judgements 
enlightened by the collegial wisdom and experience of the decision-making body. 
To  be  complete,  I  also  see  two  differences,  which may  explain why,  despite  our strong  similarities, 
observers  sometimes  argue  that  the  ECB  and  the  Fed  have  adopted  different  monetary  policy 
concepts. 
First, we have made public our precise quantitative definition of price stability whereas the Fed has not 
done it so far. Given its long track record, the Fed may be in a different position than other central 
banks. It is not for me to judge. Let me only point out the reasons for the ECB’s position. Providing a 
definition  of  price  stability  fosters  transparency:  everybody  knows  precisely  what  we  are  aiming  at. 
This is beneficial for meaningful accountability: the public can judge whether or to what extent we are 
achieving our goals in comparison with the yardstick we have set ourselves. This is also beneficial for 
medium and long-term credibility: inflationary expectations can find an anchor more easily. 
The  second  difference  with  the  Federal  Reserve  as  I  touched  upon  previously,  is  the  explicit 
cross-checking,  from  a  medium  to  long-term  perspective,  of  our  economic  analysis  with  a  detailed 
monetary  analysis.  We  see  three  advantages  to  this  approach.  First,  it  reflects  that  inflation  is 
ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon,  a  notion  very  widely  acknowledged  by  central  bankers  and 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2004
academics. Second, by preventing abnormal abundance or the drying-up of liquidity, it may, at least to 
some  extent,  prevent  abnormal  boom-bust  episodes  in  asset  prices.  Third,  and  perhaps  most 
importantly,  it  helps  better  anchor  medium  to  long-term  inflationary  expectations,  which  is  of  vital 
importance for all central banks and all the more important for the ECB which could not rely on a long 
track record.  
Having said that, I understand that trends in money demand have not been as stable in the United 
States as they have been in the euro area. This may partly explain the differences in our approaches. 
All in all, it seems to me that our similarities are more important than our differences. Above all, there 
is no simple escape for a central bank from a rigorous analysis of the shocks hitting the economy and 
the  underlying  changes  affecting  the  economic  structure.  Similarly  to  the  Fed,  we  believe  that  the 
central bank needs realism and pragmatism in its assessment of the rapidly changing financial and 
economic environment. Policy decisions must ultimately be based on a judgement and must be clearly 
explained  to  the  public  in  a  transparent  manner.  Since  its  beginning  the  ECB  has  striven  to  score 
highly on each of these points and will continue to do so in the face of the challenges that lay ahead. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 7
