Yves Mersch: The international role of the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  a  financial  seminar, 
Hong Kong, 11 November 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since its inception, the euro’s international role has grown in a gradual but steady way. At the outset I 
would like to recall the Eurosystem’s policy position vis-à-vis the internationalisation of the euro. The 
Governing Council of the ECB sees the internationalisation of the euro as a market-driven process. 
Nevertheless, we analyse developments closely, as we are keen to know how the euro is used and by 
whom.  Thus,  I  will  first  review  the  main  developments  in  more  detail.  Then,  I  will  turn  to  the 
Eurosystem’s  policy  stance  towards  the  international  role  of  the  euro.  I  will  conclude  by  shortly 
highlighting the Eurosystem’s stance on reserve management services. 
The gradual development of the international role of the euro 
In order to consider the main developments in the international use of the euro for the last 5 years, I 
will distinguish the varied use of the euro outside the euro area, by public authorities on the one hand 
and private agents on the other. 
Let me start with public authorities. There are about 50 countries with an exchange rate regime linked 
to  the  euro,  including  those  EU  Member  States  that  have  not  yet  joined  the  euro  area.  Non-EU 
countries that use the euro as an anchor currency are mainly located in the EU’s neighbouring regions 
or are countries that have established special institutional arrangements with the EU or some of the 
EU  Member  States.  In  most  of  these  countries,  the  euro  is  also  the  main  or  the  sole  intervention 
currency  used  by  the  authorities  to  stabilise  the  exchange  rates  of  their  respective  currencies. 
Additionally, in these countries euro-denominated assets account for a substantial share of the foreign 
exchange reserves held by the respective authorities.  
The  role  of  the  euro  as  an  anchor  currency  in  third  countries  outside  the  euro  area  has  remained 
stable  overall.  Changes  in  exchange  rate  regimes  involving  the  euro  mainly  involved  the  new  EU 
Member States, as three of them joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism II end-June 2004. The global 
reserve  build-up  continued  at  a  rapid  pace,  with  Japan  and  other  emerging  Asian  economies 
accounting for the largest share in the total increase. Benefiting from the appreciation against other 
international currencies, the share of the euro in official foreign exchange reserves has continued to 
increase gradually, from 19.3% in 2002 to 19.7% in 2003. As an intervention currency, the euro was 
predominantly used in euro area neighbouring countries. 
Turning to private users, the internationalisation of the euro has been most visible when it comes to 
the role of the euro as an international financing currency. In 2003, the share of the euro in the stock 
of international issues amounts to more than 30%. A significant share of euro-denominated securities 
have  been  targeted  at,  and  purchased  by,  euro  area  investors.  In  using  the  euro  as  an  issuance 
currency,  financial  institutions  and  corporations,  mainly  from  mature  economies  (USA,  UK),  have 
taken  advantage  of  the  greater  size  and  liquidity  provided  by  the  increasingly  integrated  euro-
denominated bond markets. 
With regard to the share of the euro in foreign exchange transactions preliminary results from the 2004 
BIS triennial survey, point to a notable increase in activity in foreign exchange trading. Based on these 
preliminary  results,  the  euro  was  the  second  most  actively  traded  currency  in  foreign  exchange 
markets worldwide, and accounted for 37% of foreign exchange transactions, broadly the same as in 
2001. Globally, the euro continued to be traded predominantly against the US dollar, as 76% of total 
worldwide foreign exchange activity involving the euro was with the US dollar. 
To  sum  up,  the  euro  has  been  firmly  and  credibly  established  as  the  world’s  second  international 
currency  during  the  first  five  years  of  Monetary  Union,  and  its  gradually  increased  use  in  several 
market segments highlights the degree of confidence non-euro area residents have in the euro.  
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
The ECB and the international role of the euro  
This brings me to the stance adopted by the Eurosystem on the international role of its currency. I will 
start  by  emphasising  a  key  characteristic  of  the  international  use  of  any  currency:  there  is  no 
“sovereign”  power  that  can  enforce  its  use.  This  is  why  the  international  use  of  a  currency  is,  in 
essence,  a  market-driven  process.  The  main  economic  factors  underpinning  the  internationalisation 
are: 
1. 
Domestic  stability,  that  is  a  low  inflation  rate,  making  the  currency  attractive  as  a  store  of 
value;  
A high degree of openness to international trade and finance. This is a key determinant for 
the currency’s use as a medium of exchange and a unit of account; and  
A developed financial system with deep and liquid markets offering participants a wide range 
of services and products in terms of borrowing, investing and hedging.  
2. 
3. 
Against  this  background,  the  Eurosystem  takes  a  neutral  stance  on  the  internationalisation  of  its 
currency.  This  means  that  we  neither  hinder  nor actively  promote  the  development  of  this role.  For 
example,  decisions  taken  by  non-euro  area  authorities  to  use  the  euro  as  an  anchor,  reserve  or 
intervention  currency  have  to  be  fully  seen  as  unilateral  measures.  They  do  not  involve  any 
commitment on the part of the Eurosystem. 
This rule knows only one exception: the Exchange Rate Mechanism II. 
With  regard  to  this  stance,  it  has  of  course  to  be  noted  that  the  Eurosystem  contributes  to  the 
international role of the euro in indirect ways. Price stability is a key precondition for the development 
of  the  international  role  of  a  currency.  Thus,  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB 
contributes to the euro’s potential for expanding its international role. 
The  Eurosystem  has  also  been  a  strong  supporter  of  financial  market  integration  in  the  EU.  The 
introduction of the euro itself has undoubtedly led to a deeper and more integrated financial market. 
The evidence strongly suggests that this has supported the development of the international role of 
the  euro.  And  when  we  refer  to  the  fact  that  potential  gains  from  monetary  union  will  only  be  fully 
realised when European financial integration is fully achieved, this also applies to the euro’s use as an 
international financing and investment currency. 
Let me stress that by being neutral we are not indifferent to the international role of the euro. Indeed, 
we pay special attention to the international use of our currency and provide regular information to the 
public on related developments in the international financial arena, for example the recent build-up in 
foreign exchange reserves.  
The Eurosystem’s reserve management services 
This leads me to say a few words on the Eurosystem’s reserve management services. We have seen 
that  the  euro  has  firmly  established  its  role  as  an  important  reserve  currency,  supported  by  its 
gradually  increasing  use  at  an  international  level.  The  Eurosystem  has  therefore  developed  a  new 
framework  that  specifically  addresses  the  type  of  services  required  to  support  the  management  of 
euro-denominated  reserve  portfolios.  The  new  framework  builds  on  the  well-established  reserve 
management services infrastructures already in place at certain Eurosystem central banks. Consistent 
with the manner in which reserve management services have been provided over the years, the new 
‘standardized  or  harmonized’  framework  continues  to  be  based  on  the  core  principles  of  financial 
security, legal security and confidentiality. 
This basis allows central bank customers to comprehensively manage their euro-denominated reserve 
assets in a safe, confidential and reliable environment. 
The services themselves are provided by certain national central banks of the Eurosystem, identified 
as “Eurosystem service providers”, among which the Luxembourg Central Bank. These providers have 
committed  to  offering  the  complete  set  of  reserve  management  services  falling  under  the  new 
framework.  Eurosystem  service  providers  and  the  other  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  may  also 
offer specific reserve management services on an individual basis. 
The  Eurosystem’s  services  are  tailor-made  to  address  the  special  needs  and  concerns  of  those 
institutions that operate in the same area of central banking activities as the Eurosystem itself. The 
services  offered  under  the  new  framework,  as  well  as  other  non-standardised  and  non-harmonised 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
services offered by those central banks with extended know-how in professional asset management, 
among  which  the  Luxembourg  central  bank,  help  this  core  group  of  customers  to  manage  their 
euro-denominated reserve assets more effectively and with greater flexibility and will thus accompany 
the deepening of financial markets in Europe and the expanding role of the EU currency. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
