Goh Chok Tong: Building on our reputation and reaching for new horizons 
Address by Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at MAS Staff Seminar, Singapore, 30 November 2004. 
 Introduction: a central bank of excellence 
I.  
I am happy to address the MAS Staff Seminar, especially as this is the first time I am speaking to all of 
you. In the few months I have been Chairman, I have met many of you and been briefed on the work 
of MAS. I am impressed by the professionalism, dedication and dynamism of our officers. We have a 
good team here at MAS.  
MAS has played, and continues to play, a vital role in Singapore’s development. Through its conduct 
of monetary policy, MAS has helped to ensure a sound macro-economic environment, so critical to our 
economic competitiveness,  stability  and  success. MAS’  supervisory  and  developmental  efforts  have 
also  contributed  immensely  to  the  growth,  dynamism  and  resilience  of  the  financial  sector.  Our 
financial sector employs 5% of the workforce but accounts for about 12% of GDP. 
MAS has earned a reputation as a central bank of excellence. We are well respected as a regulator for 
our technical skills, credibility and integrity. We must build on this and reach for new horizons. This is 
the only way to ensure that Singapore stays ahead of the competition. Today, I would like to focus on 
the key strategic thrusts for MAS over the next five years. 
The changing geopolitical landscape 
II.  
In conducting monetary policy, in supervising financial institutions and in developing Singapore as a 
financial centre, MAS must be keenly aware of the larger geopolitical picture. International events and 
politics  play  a  big  part  in  the  economic  prospects  of  our  region,  including  Singapore.  Let  me  first 
sketch for you the geopolitical situation. 
Though  there  are  many  uncertainties  and  serious  challenges,  international  relations  are  essentially 
stable. The US is unrivalled as the pre-eminent global power. As terrorism is a serious threat to the 
American homeland, the global fight against terror will remain President Bush’s overriding priority. He 
will  have  to  find  a  way  to  stabilise  the  situation  in  Iraq,  hold  elections  and  hand  over  the  task  of 
rebuilding Iraq to the Iraqis. He will want to rebuild ties with Europe. On the economic front, President 
Bush will try to keep the US economy humming, while managing the growing trade and fiscal deficits 
and weakening dollar. 
In  Asia,  both  China  and  India  are  on  the  rise. They  will  exert  an  increasing  influence  on  global 
economic developments and trade and capital flows.  
China is now the location of choice for a wide range of manufacturing activities. It produces goods so 
cheaply  that  even  Bangladesh  complained  about  it.  When  I  was  in  Bangladesh  recently,  they 
complained that Chinese textiles were edging out their own textiles in Bangladesh. But China is not a 
sweatshop for cheap, shoddy consumer goods. MNCs and Chinese companies produce high-quality 
goods there for the international market. However, China’s rapid growth also presents major domestic 
challenges. The Chinese leadership understands well the dangers of overheating in the economy and 
has  been  applying  the  brakes  to  bring  about  a  soft  landing.  In  addition,  China  has  to  grapple  with 
capital account liberalisation and financial system reforms. 
India,  too,  is  rising  but  along  a  different  path.  It  is  rapidly  becoming  a  powerhouse  for  “soft” 
infrastructure businesses such as software development, business process outsourcing and creative 
industries.  India,  too,  has its  own  set  of  challenges,  particularly  in  the  areas of  fiscal and structural 
reforms.  But  the  Congress-led  coalition  Government,  under  Prime  Minister  Manmohan  Singh,  is 
committed to the path of reform and liberalisation.  
Japan  appears  to  be  shaking  off  a  decade  of  sluggish  growth. Its  recovery  is  due  to  the  effects  of 
many years of structural reform and strong external demand. But not everyone is convinced that this 
recovery is self-sustaining. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
In ASEAN, peaceful elections and leadership transitions have taken place in the Philippines, Malaysia 
and Indonesia. In Singapore, too, we have a new Prime Minister and several new Ministers. The new 
leaders  in  ASEAN  will  have  the  opportunity  to  address  economic  and  security  challenges  together, 
hopefully in a bold, creative and pragmatic manner. 
The  rise  of  China  and  India  presents  both  opportunities  and  challenges  for  ASEAN.  To  seize  the 
opportunities  and  meet  the  challenges,  these  new  leaders  must  work  with  their  other  colleagues  to 
speed  up  the  integration  of  the  ASEAN  economies.  When  I  met  a  group  of  Japanese  industrialists 
recently, they lamented that the target date of 2020 to achieve the ASEAN Economic Community was 
too  far  away.  They  urged  ASEAN  to  integrate  aster  into  one  single  market  so  that  it  would  be  an 
attractive destination for Japanese investments besides China. 
Terrorism  and  regional  security  are  major  problem  areas.  The  fight  against  terror  will  continue  for 
many  years.  Victory  can  only  be  achieved  through  a  sustained  and  united  global  effort.  The  most 
important dimension of the fight is the ideological one - between mainstream Islam and the extremist 
elements. If the extremists are not defeated in this intra-Islam ideological fight, there will be a constant 
supply of terrorists out to create terror and chaos. 
Tensions have heightened in the Taiwan Straits and the Korean Peninsula. While Taiwan’s economy 
is  becoming  increasingly  intertwined  with  China’s,  politically,  Taiwan  appears  to  be  taking  steps  to 
move permanently away from China. The risk of a miscalculation leading to military conflict is high in 
the next few years. The consequences of such a war will make the war in Iraq look like a skirmish. 
Asia will be in turmoil. Its development will be set back for many years. 
North Korea is another potential trouble spot. Fortunately, whatever their differences, the key players 
share a common interest in the peaceful containment of the issue.  
Five-year strategic plan 
III. 
What does this mean for us in MAS? It means we have to anticipate events and plan for uncertainties. 
It means we have to be proactive, not just react to events after they have taken place. This is what the 
work-plan is about - planning our work over the next five years, in the context of likely scenarios.  
I believe, barring a war in Asia which all countries must work hard to prevent, we can be optimistic 
about our future. Singapore is situated at the heart of a dynamic Asia. Our economy has undergone 
major restructuring over the past few years. It has regained its competitiveness. We are expanding our 
economic space and have shown that we can manage change as a people. There is no reason why 
Singapore should not continue to do well. 
The MAS Strategic Planning Exercise has yielded three inter-linked and mutually reinforcing priorities 
for the next five years. These are not new goals. They are priorities. Let me elaborate on them and the 
key strategies to support them. 
Strengthening our position as a leading financial centre in Asia 
Our first priority is to strengthen Singapore’s position as a leading financial centre in Asia. We will work 
closely with the financial industry to enlarge our investor base, build greater liquidity and depth in our 
financial markets, and expand our reach beyond traditional markets. 
To succeed, the industry needs to attract talented and dynamic professionals from a broad range of 
disciplines  and  experiences.  I  am  pleased  that  the  industry  has  established  the  Financial  Industry 
Competency Standards Committee to develop internationally-aligned competency benchmarks for the 
whole financial sector. This will guide industry efforts towards deepening and broadening our talent 
pool so that it is on par with those in other leading financial centres. 
Fund management and private banking activities build up the investor base for our financial centre. 
The  wealth  management  business  has  grown  rapidly  and  prospects  are  bright.  Strong  economic 
growth in Asia has led to an accumulation of wealth in both the government and private sectors. To 
capture a share of this growing Asian wealth, our financial institutions must offer products and services 
that  meet  global  standards. On  our  part,  MAS  will  continue  to  promote  a  conducive  regulatory 
environment and provide appropriate incentives to support the growth of new areas such as alternative 
investments, structured products, trust services and philanthropy advisory services. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
MAS will also work with other government agencies to develop a holistic “Best Home” environment for 
qualified  high  net  worth  individuals.  We  have  just  devised  a  permanent  residency  scheme  for 
individuals who place at least S$5 million with MAS-registered financial institutions. We hope this will 
boost total assets under management and attract high net worth individuals and their families to take 
up residency here. 
We  must  also  develop  a  solid  domestic  investor  base.  In  1999,  MAS  and  GIC  announced  plans  to 
place out a total of S$35 billion in foreign assets for management by private sector fund managers. 
The  initiative  has  attracted  many  international  fund  management  companies  to  set  up  offices  in 
Singapore  and  has  catalysed  the  growth  of  total  assets  under  management.  Some  firms  have 
established their regional headquarters here. These companies have helped to broaden the range of 
products here beyond plain vanilla equity mutual fund products and develop more sophisticated skills 
and expertise. 
MAS has decided to place out an additional S$5 billion to external fund managers. The funds will be 
invested  in  Asian  equity  and  fixed  income  markets.  This recognises  the  investment  opportunities  in 
Asia and will also help to anchor and grow specialist skills in Asian investments in our financial centre. 
This will be on top of what GIC recently announced it will place out for external management. 
Liquidity and depth in Singapore’s treasury and capital markets is another critical success factor for 
our  financial  centre.  Singapore  can  serve  global  issuers  and  investors  as  the  gateway  to  ASEAN 
markets. We want to promote the ASEAN region as an asset class for capital markets investments. 
We will work with key players, including the Singapore Exchange (SGX), to forge regional exchange 
linkages,  integrate  market  infrastructure,  harmonise  regulatory  frameworks  and  promote  regional 
electronic bond trading. 
SGX already has a link with the Australian Stock Exchange and is in discussions with Bursa Malaysia 
and  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange.  The  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  agreed  at  their  meeting  in  April  to 
explore  alliances  and  linkages  among  ASEAN  securities  markets  to  facilitate  access  to  these  less 
mature  markets  by  international  investors.  A  Linkages  Task  Force,  chaired  by  MAS,  will  make  its 
recommendations next year. 
In the treasury market, we have maintained our position as the world’s fourth largest forex trading hub 
after London, New York and Tokyo. We continue to rank as the second largest over-the-counter (OTC) 
derivatives  hub  in  Asia  after  Japan.  We  will  build  on  these  strengths  and  deepen  our  markets  by 
developing the structured finance market. The asset securitisation market has already taken off, with 
structured  products  accounting  for  more  than  half  of  the  Singapore  dollar  debt  market.  This  will  be 
further  boosted  when  Singapore’s  first  loan  securitisation  programme  for  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises is launched. 
ASEAN  will  continue  to  be  an  important  market.  We  should  build  closer  ties  with  some  of  the  fast 
emerging ASEAN economies. For example, we have made a proposal to Vietnam to connect our two 
economies, including our financial markets, so as to reap the benefits of synergy. Vietnam is receptive. 
We are approaching this at a pace which Vietnam is comfortable with. 
Besides ASEAN, we should also position ourselves to play a bigger role in other growing regions. I am 
pleased to note that our local players have embraced globalisation to capitalise on opportunities in the 
region  and  beyond.  In  response  to  increased  competition,  our  local  banks  have  consolidated  and 
expanded  abroad.  They  remain  profitable,  sound  and  well-capitalised,  and  are  becoming  regionally 
competitive. 
China,  India  and  the  Middle  East  offer  rich  opportunities  for  both  wealth  management  and  capital 
markets  activities.  Singapore  can  play  a  useful  intermediary  role  to  serve  the  needs  of  Chinese 
companies seeking funding and expansion overseas. SGX has taken the lead and attracted more than 
50 Chinese companies to list in Singapore. Over 1,000 Chinese companies have set up offices here to 
tap opportunities in the region. We must continue to sharpen our competitive advantages to draw more 
Chinese companies to use Singapore’s financial services. 
We are close to concluding the Comprehensive Economic Co-operation Agreement (CECA) with India. 
This will reinforce the trend of Indian financial institutions and companies using Singapore as a base 
for expansion overseas, and allow Singapore-based financial institutions to benefit from India’s growth. 
We saw our first Indian listing this year. Banks such as ICICI Bank and State Bank of India are also 
serving  the  large  non-resident  Indian  community  and  facilitating  their  fund  raising  activities  from 
Singapore. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
The  Middle  East  has  a  combined  GDP  that  exceeds  ASEAN’s.  Post  9/11,  the  Middle  East  is 
increasingly looking towards Asia in order to reduce its dependency on the West. There is a window of 
opportunity for us to play a bridging role. Singapore will host the inaugural meeting of the Asia-Middle 
East  Dialogue  (AMED)  in  June  next  year.  To  expand  our  economic  space  and  strengthen  political 
relations, I have visited several countries in the Middle East and will visit more next year. MAS should 
continue to work with other government agencies to deepen our engagement with the Middle East.  
The market estimates that of the US$1.3 trillion in Middle East private wealth invested overseas, less 
than 10% is invested in Asia. Some US$100 billion or more could flow into regional markets to tap 
diversification benefits. This presents an opportunity for the asset management companies and capital 
markets  industries  here  to  develop  investment  funds  and  structured  products,  including  Islamic 
financial products, to manage a portion of this wealth. 
Maintaining excellence in a riskier environment 
Our  second  priority  is  maintaining  excellence  in  our  core  central  banking  functions  in  a  riskier 
environment. In recent years, the external environment has become more volatile and complex. At the 
same time, our economy has been undergoing significant structural adjustments. We must ensure that 
the formulation and conduct of monetary policy continue to be robust and flexible. 
We  will  further  strengthen  our  monetary  policy  formulation  process  by  enhancing  our  forecasting, 
surveillance  and  research  capabilities.  We  intend  to  reinforce  our  macro-econometric  model  by 
introducing new features that will enable us to better assess the impact of risks on key sectors and 
relationships in the economy. 
In the area of surveillance, we have started an intensive industry consultation process as part of our 
exchange rate policy review. We will continue to fine-tune this process. To enhance our understanding 
of  the  economy,  we  are  constructing  a  flow-of-funds  framework  to  get  a  better  understanding  of 
financial flows across different sectors of the economy. 
Changes and increased volatility in financial markets also pose challenges for the implementation of 
monetary  policy.  Singapore  dollar  capital  markets  have  grown  enormously  over  the  last  five  years. 
Foreign participation has gone up. More foreign investors are likely to participate in our markets when 
Singapore Government  Securities  are included  in  the World  Government  Bond  Index  next  January. 
Our market surveillance must broaden as the mix of market participants becomes more diverse. As 
the volume of trade in Singapore dollar securities increases, our management of the Singapore dollar 
will become more challenging. We must constantly review and improve our intervention strategies and 
our communication with the market. 
We must also continue to strengthen our regulatory and supervisory framework, in line with changes in 
the industry and evolving risk issues. As our local players go regional and expand their activities, we 
must take our approach to consolidated and integrated supervision to the next level. We will enhance 
our framework for supervising local banks’ securities and asset management operations overseas, as 
well as fine-tune the framework for the integrated supervision of banks engaging in capital markets 
and insurance activities. In addition, we have to co-operate more closely with other regulators in order 
to adequately supervise the institutions operating in our markets. As more financial institutions turn to 
outsourcing, we will review the need to supervise companies providing significant outsourcing services 
to our institutions. 
With  the  convergence  in  product  offerings  by  different  types  of  financial  institutions,  we  need  to 
harmonise  our  regulatory  requirements  and  supervisory  practices  to  prevent  arbitrage.  We  are 
currently  developing  a  common  risk  assessment  framework  for  banks,  insurance  companies  and 
capital markets intermediaries. 
To complement our oversight functions, we are putting in place basic safety nets for depositors and 
policy  holders,  as  well  as  working  towards  the  further  empowerment  of  consumers.  Disclosure 
requirements are currently in place but the presentation of information is often less than satisfactory. 
As  more  complex  investment  products  emerge,  this  situation  will  become  untenable.  We  will  work 
towards refining existing disclosure requirements. Consumer education efforts will also be stepped up. 
Feedback obtained from the national financial literacy survey to be launched early next year will help 
us to tailor our consumer education programmes. 
To  help  consumers  resolve  disputes  with  their  financial  institutions  promptly  and  affordably,  we  are 
facilitating the setup of a one-stop Financial Industry Disputes Resolution Centre, or FIDReC. It will 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2004
serve consumers across different sectors and ensure consistency in processes. We have also recently 
announced that we will publish details of market conduct regulatory actions where it is in the public 
interest to do so. This will further enhance market discipline. 
Leveraging and building on our reputation 
The  third  priority  for  MAS  is  to  leverage  and  build  on  our  reputation.  Singapore  has  acquired  an 
international  reputation  for  its  strong  macro-economic  performance,  its  robust  and  vibrant  financial 
system and its high standards of regulation and supervision. This reputation has accorded us some 
influence in the international financial community. This influence has in turn helped us to expand our 
economic  space  by  opening  doors  to  strategic  partnerships  and  removing  market  access  barriers. 
With influence, we have been able to keep abreast of key developments and ensure that our views are 
heard and heeded. 
To leverage and build on our reputation, MAS must continue to deepen existing relationships and build 
new ones. We must engage in active dialogue with our external counterparts, as well as play an active 
role  in  regional  and  international  co-operation.  Our  efforts  in  key  regional  fora  like  ASEAN  and  the 
Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP) will help to accelerate the pace of 
liberalisation and integration of the region’s financial markets. This will benefit the entire region. 
In  the  international  arena,  MAS  must  continue  to  play  an  active  role  in  promoting  sound 
macro-economic  policies  and  a  stable  global  financial  system.  We  are  already  engaged  in  and 
contributing  to  many  diverse  fora,  covering  areas  like  monetary  policy,  regulation  and  supervision, 
financial stability, corporate governance, anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing. As a 
good  global  citizen,  Singapore  will  continue  to  work  with  like-minded  jurisdictions  to  keep  the 
international financial system stable and safe. 
Singapore fully supports all international and regional collaborative efforts to fight terrorism and cross-
border  crime.  We  will  work  with  other  countries  to  establish  a  reciprocal  basis  for  co-operation  in 
fighting crime like money laundering and terrorism. But in co-operating with others, we must uphold 
certain principles. This is also an integral part of preserving our reputation. Our co-operation will be 
provided  within  a  structured  framework,  in  accordance  with  our  domestic  laws  and  with  adequate 
safeguards  to  prevent  abuse.  For  example,  we  will  not  entertain  attempts  at  fishing  for  banking 
information  and  other  spurious  requests.  As  with  all  major  international  financial  centres,  customer 
confidentiality is a cardinal principle of our financial sector. It will only be lifted by a Singapore court 
order  and  only  if  the  safeguards  set  out  in  the  Mutual  Assistance  in  Criminal  Matters  Act  are  met. 
These provisions do not shield criminal activities. Singapore will continue to participate actively in the 
fight against crime, money laundering and terrorist financing.  
Going forward, we will work to deepen the sharing of knowledge and practices with jurisdictions that 
approach us for assistance through training programmes. We believe that we can make contributions 
on economic and financial issues, particularly those pertaining to the region. For instance, our unique 
monetary policy framework has proved to be sufficiently robust and flexible to cope with shocks in the 
external environment. We are keen to share our experience through research papers, policy dialogues 
and  seminars  with  developing  countries  which  are  experimenting  with  intermediate  exchange  rate 
regimes. 
Conclusion 
IV.  
Let me conclude. I have outlined our priorities for the next five years. Our emphasis is on action. We 
must translate the seminar findings and conclusions into a set of practical initiatives and implement 
them. We must be prepared to take calculated risks and adapt as we go along. This will require not 
just hard work and dedication, but also a spirit of openness, inquiry and enterprise. I am confident that 
together we can achieve our goals for MAS and Singapore. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 5
