Su Ning: Fostering modern credit culture in China 
Speech  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  International 
Conference on “Public Policy for Credit Reporting System”, Beijing, 28 September 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  attend  the  International  Conference  on  “Public  Policy  for  Credit  Reporting 
System: Strengthening Dialogue and Cooperation between the Government and the Private Sector”. 
Credit  reporting  system  is  essential  to  the  modern  financial  system  and  plays  a  significant  role  in 
financial  and  economic  development.  In  the  recent  20  years,  credit  reporting  system  has  received 
increased attention from the government and the private sector of all countries. This conference jointly 
sponsored  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  conforms  to  the  needs  of 
development  of  the  credit  reporting  system  in  the  world.  The  conference  will  not  only  enable 
participating countries to share the experience and lessons in their respective development but also 
strengthen dialogue and cooperation between the government and the private sector. I’d like to take 
this opportunity to talk briefly about evolution of credit culture in China. 
Over thousands of years, the brilliant culture of the Chinese people has nurtured the rich literature on 
credit  culture.  The  Confucian  school  attached  great  importance  to  the  values  of  credit  culture.  For 
example, The Analects of Confucius stated in one chapter, if the common people lose confidence in 
the government, then the state will have no foundation for its existence. In another chapter, it wrote, if 
the government advocates credibility, it will gain confidence from the common people. The Analects of 
Confucius has touched on the credit culture in many other parts, e.g. the saying of “If a person has no 
credibility, then he will not be appointed for posts”, and that of “A person shall insist on keeping his 
word and seeing his actions through to the end”, etc. 
With  the  social  and  economic  development,  China’s  credit  culture  has  been  confronted  with 
unprecedented challenges. They are mainly reflected in two aspects. First, the foundation of China’s 
traditional credit culture lies in the mutual trust between individuals through contacts. Ethics and the 
close relationship between individuals form the foundation of China’s traditional credit culture. Such 
credit culture only meets the needs of economic activities within limited scope, and could no longer 
meet the needs when the scope for economic transactions has widened from a small community to the 
whole country or even the whole world. Second, before the introduction of reform and opening policy, 
the production and transaction activities of enterprises and the banking credit business are under the 
planned  economy.  The  sole  ownership  by  the  state  blurred  the  relationships  of  interest  by  different 
participants  of  transactions,  which  not  only  weakened  China’s  traditional  credit  culture,  but  also 
influenced the evolvement of China’s traditional credit culture to the modern credit culture. Therefore, 
establishing China’s modern credit culture in line with the development of socialist market economy is 
of urgent necessity as the reform and opening policy is steadily promoted. 
The main difference between “modern credit culture” and “China’s traditional credit culture” lies in its 
unique  social,  institutional,  professional  and  commercial  features.  Credit  is  hence  no  longer  solely 
based  on  the  assessment  of  individuals  of  the  borrower  who  they  know  personally  but  also  on 
assessment of others that the borrower has no direct contact at all, is no longer solely based on ethics 
but also on legal and institutional rules, is no longer solely based on information obtained from face-to-
face  contacts  but  also  on  the  analysis  and  judgment  of  a  specialized  third-party,  and  no  longer  is 
limited to the use of borrower and lender, but also acquires the nature of public goods. These features 
of modern credit culture develop it into a huge industry and hence have a far-reaching impact on the 
social and economic life. 
The Chinese government is fully aware of the importance of establishment of China’s modern credit 
culture. The Third Plenum of the 16th Central Committee of CPC has put forward clearly that “efforts 
shall  be  made  to  establish  and  improve  the  social  credit  system,  in  a  bid  to  form  the  social  credit 
system  supported  by  ethics,  based  on  property  rights  and  safeguarded  by  laws,  which  constitutes 
necessary conditions for constructing the modern market system” and that “efforts shall also be made 
to speed up construction of the corporate and personal credit service system in accordance with the 
direction  of  improving  laws  and  rules,  operating  by  franchise,  commercial  management  and 
specialized  services.”  Corporate  and  personal  credit  is  the  foundation  and  core  for  social  credit. 
Premier Wen Jiabao has emphasized on several occasions that efforts shall be made to speed up the 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 1
construction of unified national basic database for corporate and personal credit reporting, to step up 
credit  reporting  legislation,  to  promote  development  of  credit  reporting  sector,  to  actively  develop 
specialized  credit  reporting  agencies,  to  open  the  credit  reporting  market  step  by  step  by  setting 
priorities,  to  establish  gradually  the  system  of  punishment  against  default  on  credit,  to  standardize 
operation  of  credit  reporting  agencies  and  to  strengthen  supervision  and  management  of  the  credit 
reporting  market.  In  2003,  with  the  approval  of  the  State  Council  the  PBC  established  the  Credit 
reporting Bureau, responsible for planning, management and publicity of the national credit reporting 
industry for loans. The PBC is now making great efforts in upgrading and standardizing China’s credit 
reporting industry. 
The PBC has been well aware of the importance of construction of modern credit culture. In 1997, the 
PBC  began  preparation  for  setting  up  the  credit  registration  and  consulting  system  and  formed  the 
unified national credit registration and consulting system at end-2002. By end-June 2004, the system 
has had entries of 4.2 million borrowing entities with RMB loans close to RMB14 trillion and accounting 
for 82.3 percent of total RMB loans by financial institutions in the same period. The system covers all 
existing lending institutions in China. In recent years, this system has become an instrumental tool for 
lending institutions in preventing financial risks, lowering credit costs and enhancing loan efficiency. 
On July 1, 2000, under the active involvement and support of the PBC, Shanghai Municipality took the 
lead  in  the  pilot  implementation  of  united  personal  credit  reporting  system.  More  than  one  million 
residents  in Shanghai  had  their  personal credit  reporting  recorded  in  the system,  the  first  of similar 
events  in  China.  Recently,  the  PBC  has  sped  up  construction  of  the  central  basic  credit  reporting 
system.  The  system  will  form  a  national  enquiry  network  of  basic  credit  reporting  based  on  the 
experience of the pilot implementation in Shanghai and “the credit registration and consulting system 
by  banks”  that  has  been  put  into  operation.  The  system  will  first  and  foremost  provide  service  for 
banks in enquiry of credit reporting, and will gradually open according to laws to other qualified credit 
reporting agencies and other institutions with legal purpose of access. 
To  meet  the  requirements  of  development  of  China’s  market  economy,  China’s  system  of  credit 
reporting agencies shall, in general, be composed of a small number of big and basic credit reporting 
agencies possessing national basic credit reporting and a number of regional and specialized credit 
reporting agencies providing value-added services and with distinct features. The system will integrate 
resources, share information and arouse proper competition in the link of credit data gathering. It will 
also turn on distinct characteristics and bring about equitable competition in terms of credit rating and 
survey and consultancy  etc.  There will thus  form  a  multi-level  and  multi-directional system of  credit 
reporting agencies that not only makes full use of various resources and brings into play the economy 
of scale but also satisfies different needs for credit reporting. 
The healthy development of credit reporting market is impossible without effective supervision by the 
government.  Supervision  by  the  government  is  the  important  guarantee  for  enforcement  of  credit 
reporting  laws  and  rules,  for  protecting  personal  benefits  of  consumers,  for  promoting  healthy 
development of credit reporting industry and for safeguarding national economic information security 
and  social  stability.  In  the  preliminary  stage  of  the  credit  reporting  industry,  supervision  by  the 
government might be quite strong. With improvement of credit reporting laws and rules and the credit 
reporting market, the industry will be oriented toward combining supervision by the government with 
self-discipline of the industry itself. 
The  publicity  and  education  of  credit  culture  is  also  important  means  of  cultivating  credit  reporting 
market.  The  extensive  publicity  of  modern  credit  culture  calls  for  the  concerted  efforts  of  the 
government,  units  and  individuals.  The  purpose  of  publicity  and  education  is  that  enterprises  and 
individuals will understand the importance of credit reporting, use credit reporting in a correct manner 
and participate actively in credit culture. In the course of cultivating China’s modern credit culture, the 
PBC  has  been  fully  aware  of  the  import  of  strengthening  publicity  and  education  among  the  public 
including lending institutions and is now strengthening its works on this aspect. 
Finally, I’d like to emphasize the importance of legislation for the credit reporting industry. The modern 
credit culture should be based on the legal safeguard. Legislation of the credit reporting industry lays 
the foundation for construction of the social credit system as well as the modern credit culture. Only 
through  legal  rules  will  it  be  possible  to  ensure  healthy  and  sustained  development  of  the  credit 
reporting industry, and will China’s long-lived traditional credit culture develop and evolve into modern 
credit culture. 
While we are speeding up construction of the social credit system, China has the honor to be the host 
country  for  “The  Fourth  Global  Conference  of  Personal  Credit  reporting”  and  the  International 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2004
Conference of “Public Policy for the Credit Reporting System: Strengthening Public-Private Dialogue 
and Partnership”. We believe that the convening of the two meetings will sure promote construction of 
China’s credit system, and also contribute to the development of credit reporting industry in the world. 
Wish a complete success of this conference! Wish all participants a pleasant stay in Beijing! 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 3
