Eva Srejber: The power of transparency for macroeconomic discipline 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 10th International 
Financial Economic Forum, Vienna, 11 November 2004.  
 The  crisis  encountered  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  put  the  new  enlarged  Europe  at  a 
crossroads: either we get our act together and produce better checks and balances in our institutions 
or we are going to move down a path of looser fiscal policy and tighter monetary policy. 
Both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  need  the  other  to  be  predictable:  a  government  needs  the 
predictability of a transparent and consistent monetary policy to know how to conduct fiscal policy, and 
of course no monetary policy will be sustainable if poor fiscal policies lead to a rapid accumulation of 
debt.  This  is  what  Sweden  witnessed  in  the  1980s  and  the  1990s.  In  the  1980s  we  had  an 
unsustainable  mix  of  fixed  exchange  rates  and  lax  fiscal  policy,  which  led  to  high  inflation  and 
eventually to a crisis that landed us with an even higher mountain of debt. When the regime collapsed 
in  1992  we  introduced  a  target  for  inflation  of  two  per  cent,  which  today  is  hailed  as  a  success. 
However,  the  real  breakthrough  for  the  new  regime  was  in  the  mid  1990s  when  a  forceful 
implementation of fiscal consolidation, supported by a broad political majority in parliament, made the 
whole macroeconomic set-up credible. It was then that inflation expectations among the public finally 
trended down to the target of 2 per cent, and that interest rate spreads against Germany were reduced 
to fractions of a percentage point. This fiscal tightening could in turn be based on the predictability of 
the new monetary regime that would eventually allow less severe monetary policies.  
This interaction is rather well understood, if not always acted upon, at the national level. But on the 
European level there is a twist, as the single monetary policy is now matched by a multitude of fiscal 
policies. The risk that is often discussed is that the ECB would in the end have to bail out a single 
fiscally undisciplined country from unsustainable debt. But as the Stability Pact crisis has shown, the 
more immediate problem might be more prosaic than a cataclysmic debt crisis: the problem might be a 
bias  towards  fiscal  laxity  that  has  to  be  counterbalanced  by  tighter  monetary  policy  -  hence  a  bad 
policy mix. 
With a single monetary policy the effect of fiscal stimulus in one country will be diluted in the whole 
area  and  will  therefore  by  definition  meet  with  less  of  a  monetary  policy  response  than  it  would  if 
monetary  policy  had  been  national.  Furthermore  the  nature  of  the  political  set-up  makes  it  more 
difficult  for  the  ECB  to  comment  on  individual  national  budgets.  This  means  there  will  be  a  strong 
temptation to “free ride” by expanding the budget at the expense of fellow European nations. But the 
dilemma goes further - given that it is rational for others to expand their budgets it becomes rational for 
your own country to do so too - even if your instinct is not to “free ride”. Otherwise you might rationally 
expect to end up among the small minority that does not expand and at the same time still have the 
tighter  monetary  policy  that  results  from  everyone  else  expanding.  This  is  the  classic  “prisoner’s 
dilemma” from game theory.  
The conclusion is that it is necessary to have rules for fiscal policy that limit deficits and debt when 
monetary policy is united and fiscal policy divided, and that these rules need to be followed. But the 
conclusion  is  also  that  the  pressure  to  over-expand  is  as  strong  during  an  upturn  as  during  a 
downturn. In fact this is what we have seen in the euro zone during the heyday of the late 1990s - a 
much too expansionary fiscal stance in some euro zone countries, which led to tighter monetary policy 
and thus an incentive for others to weaken fiscal discipline. The euro zone then started the downturn 
with large deficits, considering the earlier boom, instead of surpluses. What the Pact then required, a 
180-degree turnaround in fiscal policy to a tighter stance, reinforcing the downturn, was considered by 
some as stupid. In fact it was the lack of savings during the boom that was stupid. Thus, we would 
need  rules  not  only  like  the  Stability  Pact,  for  a  maximum  deficit  in  a  downturn,  but  equally  some 
forceful rule for fiscal rectitude in good times. Those rules are difficult to state as clearly as the 3 per 
cent limit, but one way ahead could be to define annual targets for actual net lending based on the 
predicted output gap. 
But  why  didn’t  we  see  these  problems from  the  beginning?  Perhaps  because we  were  fortunate  to 
have  something  that  can  work  as  a  temporary  replacement  for  rules:  clear  objectives,  strong 
leadership and the market as a quickly reacting judge. This existed not so long ago in Europe. The 
objective was to join the euro zone and achieve the convergence criteria. The leadership was provided 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
by Germany both in terms of its economic size and its example of fiscal discipline. Now the objective 
of  joining  the  euro  has  been  achieved,  and,  in  addition,  Germany  has  lost  its  leading  role  and  the 
markets react less to fiscal laxity. 
Instead  of  leadership  towards  clear  objectives  we  have  recently  seen  the  opposite  -  the  political 
exploitation of the gap between the national and European level. The requirements of the Pact are 
blamed  on  heartless  “accountants  in  Brussels”,  and  when  a  majority  puts  narrow  national  political 
interests first the agreed rules become moot - “peer pressure” becomes “peer protection”. Incorrect 
facts  are  more  or  less  deliberately  sent  to  the  Commission  ahead  of  sensitive  elections.  In  fact,  a 
recent study by the ECB shows that the closer a country comes to an excessive deficit, the more likely 
it is that the forecast the government presents officially will later turn out to be wrong. There is a strong 
bias towards unrealistic optimism once a country’s deficit approaches 3 per cent of GDP. 
Let  me  say  something  in  this  respect  about  the  new  member  states.  It  is  all  too  apparent  that  the 
collapse  of  Germany’s  leading  role  in  fiscal  discipline  has  also  set  a  bad  example  for  some  of  the 
larger new member states. Given that public finances have deteriorated so much in Poland, Hungary 
and the Czech Republic during the first years of this century it is fortunate both for themselves and for 
the euro zone that these countries have postponed joining ERM II and the attempt to rapidly adopt the 
euro.  Had  they  tried  and  locked  their  currencies  within  ERM  II  they  may  well  have  stayed  in  that 
position  for  a  long  time,  becoming  in  the  meantime  targets  for  speculation  -  as  their  poor  public 
finances  would  have  lent  little  credibility  to  their  overall  economic  policy.  This  was  Sweden’s 
experience with the combination of a currency peg and deteriorating public finances in 1991-1992. But 
now there is another danger. Given that the target of imminent euro adoption is gone, and the large 
euro zone nations do not provide real leadership on fiscal soundness, there is less incentive for some 
of  the  new  member  states  to  stick  to  the  consolidation  of  their  public  finances  from  today’s  deficits 
above 5 per cent of GDP. The consolidation plans are already too dependent on a continued upturn. 
Whether in the old or new member states, there is an additional problem, as we are entering a period 
of  intensifying  structural  changes.  Old  industrial  patterns  in  Europe  are  being  changed  when 
confronted with both the boost to productivity from IT, as partly realised since the late 1990s in the US, 
and  globalisation  and  enlargement,  all  of  which  supports  this  process.  These  trends  will  eventually 
help productivity and growth in Europe to start to catch up with the US again. But in the short term the 
structural  changes  will  lead  to  higher  frictional  unemployment  as  old  industries  are  more  rapidly 
replaced  by  new  ones.  In  addition,  the  recent  downturn  never  led  to  a  dramatic  increase  in 
unemployment or decrease in employment in the euro area; hence, the upturn is probably also less 
likely to lead to rapid job creation. Both factors create new incentives for fiscal policy to focus more on 
short-term job creation schemes and less on long-term fiscal soundness. So from this perspective, too, 
the hope that the recovery alone will “fix” the European deficit problem might be too optimistic.  
And the new member states are not much different in this respect. They have experienced a decade of 
incredible structural change, and yet more is ahead. Furthermore the new member states have great 
infrastructure needs and, coupled with high unemployment, there will be continued pressure for fiscal 
expansion, even in a cyclical upturn. 
So what is the solution? Let me first note an interesting development: since 1999 the average fiscal 
deficit in the euro area has been 1.6 per cent of GDP while the average surplus of the three old out-
countries (the UK, Denmark and Sweden) has been 0.5 per cent of GDP. 
Some  Euro-sceptics  will  of  course  attribute  this  difference  to  monetary  union  itself  but  I  think  the 
difference  is  that  all  three  out-countries  have  been  forced  to  find  new  ways  of  building  a  strong 
national macroeconomic framework based on clearly stated goals and a transparent evaluation of how 
these goals are to be met, in addition to the common EU rules. The part that has been much in focus 
has been the monetary policy regime - in Sweden and the UK, inflation targeting with a specific target 
for inflation and regular and transparent inflation forecasts has worked well. But inflation targeting, or 
for that matter Denmark’s euro peg, would never have been as successful had fiscal policy not been 
reformed in parallel, with clear rules and budgetary ceilings in all three out-countries, which put the 
problems squarely in the sight of the public. In fact those euro zone countries that have some sort of 
national transparent targets and evaluation of fiscal policy, such as Finland, have managed to retain 
some order in their public finances.  
The power of targets and transparency is that the public, with the help of comments from analysts in 
the media, can evaluate clearly how the government is doing in relation to a long-term norm. The idea 
of being on or off target is quite easy to grasp, and if the process is transparent, experts and the public 
alike will  learn  to  trust  the  figures.  In  this  area  most  countries still  have  a  lot  to  do.  It  is  a  pity  that 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
government  accounts,  which  affect  everyone  in  a  compulsory  way,  are  less  transparent,  less  well 
audited and less understood as the accounts of companies listed on the stock exchange, which only 
affect very few people and at their own risk. 
Sweden has a target of a 2 per cent surplus for the public sector over the business cycle, a figure that 
includes pension savings and that, given an ageing population, is in fact akin to targeting a balanced 
budget over the cycle. This target is present in the debate of every budget. The National Institute of 
Economic  Research  comments  on  the  target  and  helps  the  public  to  understand  it.  This  keeps  the 
government accountable not only in the normal political sense but also in relation to the targets agreed 
upon. The political debate is in a sense being taught to keep the long term in view. The public then 
knows  from  the  national  debate  that  fiscal  discipline  is  good  for  the  country  and  if  “accountants” or 
other nations in Brussels criticise your budget policies, there is a greater chance of the criticism being 
interpreted as a help towards fiscal soundness. The Swedish trade unions, for example, are among 
the most vocal defenders of our budget target. 
However, the framework might still not be strong enough - the 2 per cent over-the-cycle target has 
been slipping somewhat out of view given that the government, as I mentioned, is focusing more on 
the short term recently. Sweden would perhaps need an even more formal external fiscal evaluation. 
This leads to an important conclusion for the Pact. Perhaps the solution to regain credibility is neither 
to water down the Pact, nor to impose even stricter rules centrally. The solution is perhaps to build 
from below - to complement the European level with national frameworks in the respective European 
nations so that they come to internalise the need to balance their budget over the cycle and to ensure 
that  the  same  transparency  exists  on  the  fiscal  side  as  on  the  monetary  side.  While  pressure  from 
fellow  finance  ministers  has  apparently  not  worked  well  enough,  the  present  attempts  at  national 
processes with transparent targets have a better track record. 
Why  not  have  all  EU  countries  commit  themselves  to  establishing  independent  bodies  with  the 
responsibility of enhancing transparency by conducting independent forecasts of the countries’ deficits 
and providing recommendations on a regular basis? They would have only an advisory role and their 
authority would stem from impartiality and expertise. The subject of their recommendations would be 
the overall fiscal stance - neither the specifics nor indeed the political orientation of fiscal policy. The 
Excessive Deficit Protocol (EDP) states that member states shall ensure that national procedures in 
the budgetary area enable them to meet their obligations. It would therefore be in the spirit of the EDP 
to have EU countries commit themselves to establishing these kinds of bodies. 
At  the  very  least,  these  independent  bodies  would  be  able  to  make  more  reliable  and  unbiased 
forecasts as a basis for EU recommendations. Such an arrangement would avoid having unreliable 
deficit figures before elections, only to “discover” the real state of accounts after the vote - such as has 
been the case in Portugal, France, Germany, and most spectacularly in Greece recently. By having a 
similar  role  as  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  in  the  US,  the  bodies  would  ensure  a  reliable  and 
unbiased “reality check” in times of fiscal profligacy. 
At  best  the  advisory  bodies  would  create  a  continuous  national  dialogue  with  warnings  and 
recommendations  to  politicians  that  would  boost  transparency  and  put  long-term  fiscal  goals  at  the 
heart  of  the  debate  -  a  reinforced  version  of  the  process  that  has  helped  Denmark,  the  UK  and 
Sweden to improve fiscal soundness. 
The experience of central banks is that transparency and goals help form expectations and behaviour, 
enlisting  the  public  in  the  struggle  for  macroeconomic  soundness.  After  a  while,  the  discipline  that 
initially seemed practically unattainable becomes almost natural. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
