Lucas Papademos: The euro after five years - assessing its performance and 
global role 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of 
the 
13th International Monetary Symposium, “The euro: five years on - Implications for Asia”, organised by 
the  Institute  for  International  Monetary  Affairs  and  the  Delegation  of  the  European  Commission  in 
Japan, Tokyo, 12 November 2004. 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
 Introduction 
I. 
The organisers of this prestigious international monetary symposium have invited me to be the first 
speaker this afternoon. This puts me in the privileged position to open the discussion and, in this way, 
to set the scene and the tone. I am delighted to be here, among such highly esteemed speakers, at 
this  event  to  mark  five  years  of  the  euro.  Five  successful  years.  Of  course,  “success  has  many 
fathers”, as the saying goes. But as the central bank issuing the euro, the European Central Bank has 
a particularly close “parental” relationship and responsibility. And that parental feeling, in fact, applies 
to the Eurosystem, which comprises both the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area.  
The particular focus of our symposium today is on the implications of the euro for Asia. But before we 
look at the future implications of the euro, I thought it would be part of our “parental duty” to also look 
back  on  how  the  euro  has  developed,  to  take  stock  and  put  together  a  kind  of  scorecard  of  the 
performance of the single European currency: in what fields does the euro deserve straight “As”? And 
where would further efforts be needed to get to the top of the class? In the second part of my talk, I will 
address issues related to the international role of the euro. 
The euro’s scorecard after five years 
II.  
Looking back on the period since the introduction of the euro in 1999, I will simply let the facts speak 
for themselves: during the first five years of the existence of our new currency, the average rate of 
inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  been  precisely  2%  which  is  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price 
stability. Even though inflation has occasionally risen above the 2% ceiling - as has been the case in 
recent  months  -  this  was  a  consequence  of  a  number  of  shocks  of  various  types,  the  most  recent 
being the oil price shock. As the ECB’s monetary policy strategy has a clear medium-term orientation, 
our response to supply shocks and euro area-specific shocks has been measured. What should be 
emphasised, however, is that in these first years of the euro’s existence, inflation expectations have 
remained firmly anchored to a rate close to, or less than, 2%, as can be inferred from the yields of 
index-linked long-term bonds. Clearly, the markets and the public have confidence in the euro and in 
the ability and determination of the ECB to maintain price stability. 
Today, this record sounds like a simple statement of fact. But for a central banker, it represents a great 
accomplishment and an indispensable asset for monetary policy-making - credibility. It is often said 
that credibility is easy to lose and nearly impossible to regain. The ECB, as a new central bank without 
a track record, had to gain it in the first place. Back in 1999, many observers expected that the quality 
of the new currency, in terms of the stability of its purchasing power or the associated prevailing level 
of market interest rates, particularly at the long end of the yield curve, would be something like the 
average quality of its legacy currencies. What we have witnessed instead is convergence towards the 
best performer. The euro area today is a zone of monetary stability, and interest rates are at levels last 
seen more the five decades ago. All of this provides very favourable conditions for economic growth. 
That these conditions have, unfortunately, not proved sufficient to support a high rate of sustainable 
growth is due to the constraining influence of other, non-monetary, factors. 
Another factor underpinning the confidence of the European public in their new currency is the quality 
and integrity of euro banknotes and coins as well as the smoothness with which they were introduced. 
The “cash changeover” , by now almost three years ago, was a very complex operation involving an 
unprecedented logistical effort. Some 15 billion euro banknotes and 50 billion coins were prepared, 
produced and distributed, so that on 1 January 2002, over 300 million European citizens could hold 
the euro in their hands. Thanks to the thorough preparation by central banks, financial institutions and 
the private sector, the launch went very smoothly; the chaos predicted by some commentators never 
materialised. And European citizens welcomed the new currency with an unexpected enthusiasm. 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 1
in 
All in all, I would say, the euro deserves straight “As” in fundamental areas, and more notably, as a 
stable and trusted currency. However, I do not wish to deny and conceal that there have been also 
some areas where things could have been done better, or where improvements can - and should - be 
made. 
For example, we have to acknowledge that the cash changeover did have some undesirable effects 
on  prices,  in  connection  with  their  conversion  from  national  denominations  into  euro.  The  irritation 
caused  by  some  disproportionate  price  increases,  especially  in  parts  of  the  service  industry,  in  a 
number of euro area countries, gained a lot of unfavourable publicity. Even though our statistics show 
that the cash changeover had a rather small one-off impact on inflation of around 0.1% to 0.3% on 
average  across  the  euro  area,  people  had  the  impression  that  inflation  was  much  higher  than  the 
recorded  change  in  the  consumer  price  level.  This  gap  between  “perceived”  inflation  and  actual 
inflation has gradually got smaller, though at a puzzlingly slow pace. 
We  should  not  forget  either  that  the  introduction  of  the  single  European  currency  represented  a 
fundamental  regime  shift  which  clearly  required  certain  adjustments 
the  way  monetary 
policy-makers  communicate  with  markets  and  the  public.  In  1999,  the  ECB  was  a  new,  unknown 
central bank; it had no history of decision-making. Its two-pillar monetary policy strategy was a novelty 
in the world of central banking; its economic environment was, and is, a heterogeneous, multi-country 
economy, and its political setting unlike anything we know from the nation-state. It is therefore hardly 
surprising that communicating the ECB’s monetary policy has been a real challenge which has meant 
for all of us - the Eurosystem at the sending end, and the markets and the public at the receiving end - 
a  process  of  learning  and  adapting.  It  also  took  some  time  for  the  markets  to  fully  understand  our 
monetary  policy  strategy,  that  is,  the  conceptual  framework  on  the  basis  of  which  the  Governing 
Council  assesses  the  economic  outlook  and  the  risks  to  price  stability,  takes  decisions  about  the 
appropriate monetary policy stance, and explains these decisions to the markets and the public. By 
now,  the  understanding  of  our  strategy  has  greatly  improved,  and  the  recent  evaluation  and 
clarification of the strategy has certainly helped to this end. The ECB today ranks as one of the most 
open, transparent and predictable central banks in the world, and we continually seek to improve our 
communication. 
Overall, a lot has been achieved on this front, but improvements can still be made in other areas. For 
instance, much more progress remains to be made in respect of the integration of European financial 
markets. As economic theory would predict, the single currency has eliminated exchange rate risk and 
lowered  transaction  costs.  This  has  indeed  significantly  reduced  borrowing  costs  in  the  euro  area. 
Deeper, broader and more liquid continent-wide financial markets have emerged, which have reduced 
liquidity  risk  premia,  improved  access  to  external  finance  and  cut  financing  costs.  Thanks  to  the 
credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy, the euro area’s low inflation environment has reduced inflation 
risk  premia,  and  interest  rates  have  remained  lower  and  more  stable  across  the  maturity  spectrum 
than would otherwise have been the case. All very positive indeed, I would say, but not quite “top of 
the class”. If we take the deep, liquid and unified US financial markets as a benchmark, the euro area 
clearly  still  has  some  way  to  go,  especially  as  regards  the  integration  of  equity  markets,  the 
establishment  of  common  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks,  and  the  consolidation  of  the  banking 
sector.  
So, if we add it all up and look at the euro’s scorecard after five years, I would say the result looks 
quite  impressive.  However,  having  extolled  the  successes  of  the  euro  “at  home”,  I  do  not  want  to 
create the impression that Europeans have a particular penchant for navel-gazing and that Europe is 
“obsessed  with  its  own  internal  dynamics.”  So  now  I  will  turn  to  the  global  impact  of  the  euro,  and 
notably its international role, a very fitting subject for this international symposium. 
The international role of the euro 
III.  
Back in 1998, before the launch of the euro, some policy-makers and economists predicted that the 
euro  would  quickly  develop  into  an  international  currency.  The  new  single  currency  zone  would 
represent the world’s largest trading area and an economy with a combined gross domestic product of 
some €7 trillion. And the euro’s legacy currencies, notably the Deutsche Mark, had already established 
a certain international status. Some expected - or even hoped - that the international role of the euro 
would rival that of the US dollar. I should add that among central bankers, we always refused to frame 
the discussion in such terms.  
2 
 BIS Review 67/2004
Five years on, where do we stand? The international role of a currency is a complex phenomenon, so 
let me first look at the international private use of the euro, that is, its use by international borrowers, 
investors and traders. Afterwards, I will consider the international official use of the euro, that is, its use 
as an intervention, reserve and anchor currency. I will conclude with a few observations on the use of 
the euro as a parallel currency in some countries in Europe.  
The international private use of the euro 
III.1.  
The euro is today the second most widely used currency internationally, in capital markets, in foreign 
exchange market trading and in international trade. In international capital markets, our data for early 
2004  show  that  the  share  of  the  euro  in  international  debt  securities  gradually  increased  to  around 
31%,  compared  with  a  share  of  less  than  20%  for  the  legacy  currencies  prior  to  the  launch  of  the 
euro.1 By comparison, the share of the US dollar has decreased slightly (from 47% in 1999 to 44% in 
2004), and that of the Japanese yen has also declined (from 17% in 1999 to 9% in 2004).  
What  is  particularly  noteworthy  is  that  the  euro,  both  as  an  international  financing  and  investment 
currency, has a strong regional focus. An analysis of the geographical breakdown of the outstanding 
stock of euro-denominated international debt securities shows that European countries near the euro 
area account for the largest share of issues of these securities. Moreover, the increase in the use of 
the euro as an investment and financing currency, relative to other currencies, has also been highest 
among  residents  of  countries  neighbouring  the  euro  area.  By  contrast,  borrowers  in  Asia,  Latin 
America and the Middle East have continued to issue only a small fraction of their international bonds 
in euro.  
Holdings  of  euro-denominated  debt  securities are  very  small  in portfolios  held  in  the United  States. 
They are also small in Asia, but growing. It is in the countries neighbouring the euro area, such as the 
UK, Switzerland and non-euro area Nordic countries that such holdings are particularly high. The City 
of  London  is  one  of  the  main  financial  centres  using  the  euro  and  corporations  often  use 
London-based specialised intermediaries to issue euro-denominated bonds outside the euro area.  
A third feature of the role of the euro in international capital markets is that it is partly driven by the 
euro area residents themselves, as investors (both retail investors and banks) from the euro area have 
bought  a  significant  share  of  euro-denominated  bonds  issued  in  international  markets.  This  is 
especially the case in international debt markets. Likewise, a significant share of euro-denominated 
financial  activity  in  the  City  of  London  originates  from  euro  area-owned  banks.  These  hold  around 
40% of euro-denominated assets of UK-resident banks. 
Let us now take a closer look at the foreign exchange markets. The euro is today the second most 
actively  traded  currency  in  foreign  exchange  markets  worldwide,  accounting  for  37%  of  foreign 
exchange transactions.2 This share has remained stable over the past couple of years. Globally, the 
euro has continued to be traded predominantly against the US dollar, as more than three-quarters of 
total worldwide foreign exchange activity involving the euro has been with the US dollar.  
Finally,  the  euro  is  an  important  invoicing  or  settlement  currency  in  international  trade,  which  is  a 
natural consequence of the euro area being the world’s biggest trading bloc. Our data show that in 
most  euro  area  countries,  the  use  of  the  euro  seems  to  be  more  widespread  for  exports  than  for 
imports, and, in particular, for the exports of goods more than for the exports of services. Interestingly, 
we now have some indications that the euro is also being increasingly used in the international trade 
of EU countries that have not yet adopted the euro as their own national currency, even when trading 
with third countries. We derive this conclusion from data for most of the new Member States and the 
candidate countries3, where, in the course of 2003, the share of the euro as an invoicing or settlement 
                                                      
1   Data is provided for the “narrow” concept of international issuance of debt securities (ie, bonds and notes, as well as money 
market  instruments),  which  is  defined  as  issuance  in  a  currency  different  from  the  currency  of  the  country  in  which  the 
borrower resides. 
2   Data  from  the  BIS  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and  Derivatives  Market  Activity,  conducted  in 
April 2004.  Similar  evidence  can  be  derived  from  foreign  exchange  trades  settled  via  the  Continuous  Linked 
Settlement (CLS) where in 2003 and 2004 the euro accounted for around 44% of all settlements, a slight decline compared 
to the 2002/2003 when the euro share stood at roughly 48%. 
3   Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania, Turkey. 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 3
currency in international trade increased markedly, and more so than the growth in their trade with the 
euro area. 
The international official use of the euro  
III.2.  
What is the international official use of the euro, that is, its use by government authorities and central 
banks  as  an  anchor,  reserve  and  intervention  currency?  Before  answering  the  question,  I  should 
emphasise that the functions of anchor, reserve and intervention currency are intricately intertwined. 
Under a floating exchange rate regime, foreign exchange market interventions are infrequent, as they 
are mainly conducted to calm disorderly market conditions. By contrast, countries operating any form 
of  exchange  rate  peg  and  managed  float  intervene  regularly  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  respective 
exchange rate is consistent with the chosen regime. In conducting such interventions, they prefer to 
use the anchor currency which then also serves as their main reserve currency. 
Today, roughly 50 countries use the euro as an anchor or reference currency in their exchange rate 
policies. While the composition of this group of countries has changed somewhat in recent years, the 
total number of countries has been stable. Indeed, the use of the euro in third countries’ exchange rate 
regimes has a strong geographical and institutional underpinning, with many of these countries being 
close to the euro area, including most non-euro area EU member states, or having special institutional 
arrangements with the European Union, like the candidate countries, potential candidate countries and 
the countries of the CFA Franc Zone in West Africa. Overall, most of these countries are located in 
eastern and south-eastern Europe, in the Mediterranean and the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa. 
With regard to the use of the euro as a reserve currency, you are probably all aware that the relevant 
data  are  extremely  difficult  to  obtain.  What  we  do  know  is  that  from  1999  to  2003,  global  foreign 
exchange reserves rose by more than USD 1.3 trillion to about USD 3 trillion. By far the largest share 
of this increase is attributable to reserve accumulation in a few countries in Asia as well as in Japan, 
Russia and Mexico. These are countries which conduct an exchange rate policy which is either de jure 
or de facto oriented towards the US dollar. From this development, it could be inferred that most of the 
reserve  accumulation  probably  pertained  to  the  US  dollar.  Against  this  background,  and  bearing  in 
mind that most countries near the euro area are small in economic and financial terms (compared with 
Asian  and  Latin  American  countries),  it  is  no  great  surprise  that  the  euro’s  share  in  global  foreign 
exchange  reserves  is  still  rather  small,  although  it  has  risen  gradually  from  roughly  15%  to  almost 
20%. Available evidence suggests that several central banks of the new EU Member States, candidate 
and potential candidate countries intervene in foreign exchange markets mainly by using the euro as 
intervention currency.  
My final remark in this overview of the facts and figures relates to one specific international use of the 
euro:  in  certain  countries  neighbouring  the  euro  area,  the  euro  is  used  in  parallel  alongside  the 
national currency, as a means of exchange, unit of account and store of value in people’s everyday 
transactions. In the past, we could only estimate the amount and geographical dispersion of the euro’s 
legacy currencies, notably the Deutsche Mark, in those countries. The cash changeover provided an 
excellent  opportunity  to  bring  out  into  the  daylight  the  large  amounts  of  Deutsche  Mark  that  were 
stashed  away  under  mattresses  in  these  countries  and  that  had  to  be  exchanged  into  euro  at  the 
beginning of 2002. Net shipments of euro cash by euro area banks point to an outstanding stock of 
euro cash in non-euro area countries of at least €46 billion in mid-2004. In addition, euro-denominated 
deposits in a number of countries neighbouring the euro area increased substantially in the wake of 
the  cash  changeover,  when  households  transformed  a  large  part  of  their  euro  legacy-currency 
holdings into euro-denominated deposits in the respective banking systems.  
This  analysis  of  developments  over  the  past  five  years  leads  us  to  the  following  three  main 
conclusions: first, the international role of the euro has increased significantly, though rather gradually; 
second, it is based on a strong regional focus, notably on the regions near the euro area; and third, it 
was  driven  by  substantial  demand  from  euro  area  investors  for  euro-denominated  bonds  issued  by 
non-euro area residents.  
The outlook for the international role of the euro 
III.3. 
This is where we stand after five years. What are the prospects for the international role of the euro? 
The internationalisation of a currency is a very gradual process, characterised by considerable inertia. 
For example, in foreign exchange markets, this inertia is caused by “dynamic economies of scale”  and 
“network externalities”. These processes tend to transform an existing situation into a permanent one, 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2004
as  any  shift  from  the  use  of  one  currency  to  another  would  require  a  significant  shock.  A  further 
relevant example in this context is provided by the invoicing of commodities.  
The internationalisation of the euro, like that of any other currency, is largely a market-driven process. 
Whether or not the euro is used outside the euro area for financing, investment or invoicing purposes 
is a matter of economic agents’ preferences. The Eurosystem’s policy is to neither support nor hinder 
the international use of the euro. This should not be interpreted as a policy of “benign neglect”, for the 
ECB  can  contribute  to  the  euro’s  internationalisation  in  various  ways:  first  and  foremost,  by 
maintaining price stability in the euro area and safeguarding its internal purchasing power. And we are 
also promoting financial market integration in Europe and the development of deep, liquid and efficient 
markets that support the internationalisation of our currency. 
Even  though  the  international  use  of  the  euro  has  no  specific  implications  and  does  not  pose  any 
challenges for monetary policy, the ECB, as the issuing central bank, closely analyses developments 
in this area. As I explained, despite the difficulty in obtaining the necessary data, the ECB continually 
monitors and analyses the role of the euro in international debt markets, foreign exchange markets, 
international trade and in third countries, taking account of both its official and private use. The results 
of this analysis are published regularly and are received with great interest, not only by scholars but 
also by the EU Finance Ministers and the European Parliament. 
Conclusion 
IV.  
Five years after its introduction, the euro is a solid, stable currency in which the markets and the public 
have confidence. And not just in Europe, but also globally - as the widespread international use of the 
euro clearly demonstrates. The euro is a success. When I said at the beginning that I felt privileged to 
be the first speaker and set the tone, this is what I had in mind. I know that subsequent speakers are 
likely  to  address  issues  which  point  to  some  major  challenges  facing  the  euro  area  economy, 
challenges  that  must  be  effectively  tackled  to  improve  its  performance  and  growth  potential.  In 
confronting those challenges, the accomplishments of the euro in its first five years will undoubtedly 
prove to be great assets. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 5
