Joseph Yam: Central bank authority, accountability, transparency and 
effectiveness 
Closing remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the BIS 
Meeting of the Central Bank Governance Network, Hong Kong, 18-19 November 2004. 
 Braver people than myself have, earlier this morning, attempted to distil the multiple discussions that 
have taken place over the last day and a half. And they have all had the advantage of actually having 
attended the discussions. I shall not attempt to imitate them - though I should add that I have been 
keeping myself closely informed of your deliberations through the enjoyable discussions I have had 
with many of you in the margins. By all accounts, this has been an extremely fruitful meeting. 
Let me instead try to capture some of the themes and preoccupations which have figured prominently 
in discussions about central bank governance, and which will, I have no doubt, provide the impetus for 
further discussions within this network. 
These discussions tend to revolve around four interlocking and overlapping areas of concern: 
1. 
2. 
the sources of authority for central banks; 
the  process  of  accountability  within  central  banks,  and,  beyond  them,  to  the  larger  body 
politic; 
the role and challenges of transparency; and 
the methods for achieving effectiveness in our operations through proper organisation and 
planning. 
3. 
4. 
The issue of authority for central banks begins, in all cases, with the law, and includes the obvious 
questions of what kind of law is suitable for a particular central bank; how you change a law that is no 
longer  suitable;  and  what  is  the  optimal  timing  and  strategy  for  changing  the  law.  But,  as  your 
discussions have stressed, there is more to this than the mere word of the law. An interesting aspect 
of the sharing of experience here has been the extent to which central banks have worked with - and 
sometimes around - laws that have become inadequate to the needs of modern central banking. As I 
mentioned in my opening remarks, in the case of the HKMA it has been a question of working without 
the law, since Hong Kong has no formal central bank law, and we rely on just a few lines of a single 
statute  for  our  authority.  A  further  point  that  has  been  made  strongly  is  the  need  to  base  the 
legitimacy, the credibility of a central bank on something more than just statutes and regulations. 
This brings into play the question of accountability, through both formal and informal channels. I know 
that a great deal of your discussion has focused on the role, composition and responsibilities of the 
board. More broadly, there has been equal emphasis on how we account to the wider public. Both 
processes  throw  up  a  peculiar,  and  quite  perplexing  challenge:  how  to  present  our  work  and 
achievements  in  terms  that  are comprehensible and  acceptable  to  the  many  non-specialists  on  our 
boards,  and  to  the  multitude  of  non-specialists  among  the  general  public.  Because  of  the  business 
background  of  many  board  members,  and  because  of  the  natural  human  desire  for  clarity  and 
simplicity,  this  increasingly  boils  down  to  a  quest  for  setting  down  specific,  quantifiable  targets  by 
which  our  performance  can  be  measured.  This  presents  enormous  difficulties,  even  in  policy  areas 
that  might  seem  easily  amenable  to  quantification.  And  the  challenges  become  still  more  complex 
when performance is linked to pay. 
The same problems of clarity and simplicity arise in the operation of transparency, an issue closely 
linked to accountability, and something which has, I believe, suffused all of the discussions these last 
few  days.  There  has  been  a  shift  in  the  approach  to  this  subject  in  recent  years,  from  a  broad 
assumption of confidentiality, except where exceptions can be justified, to something approaching the 
opposite:  transparency  and  openness  in  all  things  except  where  market  or  commercial  sensitivity, 
personal privacy or the public interest require otherwise. This is a healthy development. But it is also 
something that has been forced on many of us by financial or political crisis - through the sudden and 
often  painful  realisation  that  our  actions  have  been  inadequately  explained,  misrepresented  and 
misunderstood.  Central  banks  have  been  quick  to  learn  from  these  episodes.  Communications 
strategies are now seen as a crucial part of central bank activity, and no just as icing on the cake. The 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
emphasis  now  is  increasingly  on  forging  links,  building  bridges  and  storing  up  political  capital  and 
public goodwill that will help us deal better with the next crisis.  
Similar observations might be made on the subject of the effectiveness of central banks - surely the 
result that we all strive for. Radical changes in our functions, progress in technology, and the process 
of accountability have all dictated cuts in staffing and resources, and various forms of streamlining and 
re-engineering. Much of this can be healthy and refreshing. But we should also be mindful of the need 
for flexibility, for some reserve capacity to deal with sudden and unexpected events. This is why the 
increasing focus on strategic planning and risk management, reflected in your discussions this week, 
is welcome. There is, of course, much still to be done on these subjects. 
I  understand  that  the  discussions  over  the  past  few  days  have  been  lively  and,  at  times,  quite 
passionate. There is, I think, one main reason for this - and it is the same reason why this meeting has 
attracted such an excellent attendance. Central bank governance is a field in which great change is 
taking place. A number of drivers are forcing this change. They include the quest for efficiency and 
greater  effectiveness;  the  lessons  learned  from  crises;  political  pressure  -  and  its  converse  political 
opportunity; and what has from time to time been referred to as “fashion” but which I think can be more 
generously described as best practice. 
We have heard many times these last few days the familiar disclaimer that there is no “one model that 
fits  all”.  Many  of  you  have  stressed  the  uniqueness  of  your  governance  arrangements  only  to  be 
reminded subsequently that these are arrangements familiar to one, two or even several other central 
banks. The modesty and diffidence with which experiences have been described is, of course, to be 
expected among central bankers. But there is, I think, a very pleasing mismatch between this and the 
enthusiasm  with  which  all  of  us  have  been  drinking  up  information  about  each  other.  This 
demonstrates that the BIS network is far more than an academic exercise. It also reflects an important 
truth:  that,  although  our  economic  and  political  environments  may  differ  widely,  although  we  may 
pursue  different  policies  and  follow  different  legal  structures,  we  all  face  a  number  of  constants. 
Finance, money and banking behave in very similar ways no matter where we find ourselves, the more 
so with globalisation and liberalisation of markets. Politicians and the media the world over have the 
same  qualities  and  the  same  vices.  And  so  for  that  matter  do  central  bankers.  The  human  factor, 
which is at the root of all of our discussion on governance, is universal. 
For this reason, while we must continue to work on the principle that “no single model fits all”, there is 
much that we can learn from each other, and this process of fruitful exchange will, I am sure, continue 
long into the future. I congratulate all of you on the excellent discussions you have had, and the BIS 
for organising such a productive meeting. And I wish you all a very pleasant time in your well-earned 
relaxation this afternoon. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
