David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 21 October 2004.  
 Today, we released our October Monetary Policy Report. The Report reviews economic and financial 
trends in the context of Canada’s inflation-control strategy. 
The Canadian economy has grown faster than was projected in last April’s Monetary Policy Report 
and  the  July  Update,  largely  because  of  a  surge  in  exports.  It  is  now  operating  near  its  production 
capacity and continues to adjust to global economic developments. 
The  Bank’s  base-case  projection  for  the  period  to  the  end  of  2006  calls  for  aggregate  demand  for 
Canadian  goods  and  services  to  expand,  on  average,  at  about  the  same  rate  as  potential  output. 
Given  the  effects  of  higher  oil  prices  and  the  past  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  the  Bank 
projects economic growth to be slightly less than 3 per cent in 2005, and slightly more than 3 per cent 
in 2006. 
With  the  economy  expected  to  remain  near  its  production  capacity  throughout  this  period,  core 
inflation  is  projected  to  move  back  up  to  the  2  per  cent  target  by  the  end  of  2005.  Given  the  path 
suggested by futures prices for crude oil, the Bank expects total CPI inflation will rise to the top of the 
1 to 3 per cent target range in the first half of 2005, before falling slightly below core inflation in early 
2006. 
Against this background, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate to 2.5 per cent on 19 October. 
The  base-case  projection  assumes  further  reduction  of  monetary  stimulus  over  time,  to  keep  the 
economy  near  its  production  potential  and  to  achieve  the  inflation  target.  The  pace  of  interest  rate 
increases  will  depend  on  the  Bank’s  continuing  assessment  of  the  prospects  for  factors  that  affect 
pressures on capacity and, hence, inflation.  
There  are  significant  risks  and  uncertainties  around  this  base-case  projection,  related  to  the 
adjustment to changes in the global economy, including changes in commodity prices and exchange 
rates. The risks surrounding global economic prospects relate primarily to the evolution of oil prices, 
the pace of expansion in China, the way in which current account imbalances in the United States and 
East Asia will be resolved, and geopolitical developments. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
