Süreyya Serdengeçti: Falling inflation 
Opening remarks by Mr Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
for  the  conference  on  "Real  Sector  and  Financial  Sector  in  the  Environment  of  Falling  Inflation", 
organised by the Banks Association of Turkey, Ankara, 28 September, 2004, and given at the Monthly 
Meeting of Ankara Chamber of Commerce, Ankara, 29 September 2004. 
 Dear Guests, 
In my speech today, I would like to dwell on the “environment of “falling inflation”, its main impacts on 
economy both in other countries and Turkey and finally, the significance of maintaining price stability 
for Turkey’s economy. 
The  achievements  obtained  on  the  inflation  front  in  the  last  three  years  under  the  current  program 
allow us to speak about falling inflation environment and permanent price stability. 
Now, let me briefly review the point we have reached in the fight against inflation: CPI inflation, which 
was  68.5  percent  at  the  end  of  2001,  remained  below  the  targets  set  in  2002  and  2003  and 
fortunately, it realized as 18.4 percent at the end of 2003. In 2001-2003 period, the total decline in 
inflation exceeded 50 points. 
In  August,  CPI  inflation  fell  to  10  percent  thanks  to  the  stability  program,  which  was  determinedly 
carried out in 2004, and the tight monetary and fiscal policies implemented within the framework of this 
program. Looking at the CPI inflation today, I do not see any serious problem that would prevent us 
from reaching the 12 percent-CPI inflation target for 2004. 
However, despite the success attained in reducing inflation, I would like to underline the fact that we 
have  not  reached  our  final  target  yet.  Turkey  is  one  of  the  very  few  countries  where  double-digit 
inflation  prevails.  As  I  have  mentioned  repeatedly  both  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  disinflation 
program and the point we reached today, our final target is to achieve and maintain price stability. 
Now let me emphasize once more what price stability stands for. 
The well-known definition of price stability relates to the currently low inflation rate in one hand, and 
the  expectation  of  economic  agents  that  the  ongoing  decline  in  inflation  will  continue  in  the  future. 
Such  an  inflation  rate  is  so  low  that  people  do  not  need  to  take  it  into  account  in  their  investment, 
consumption and saving decisions. 
At the point we have reached in inflation, it is clear that our economy is surviving from chronic inflation. 
However, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we have not fully  maintained the price 
stability that I have just mentioned, and our economy is still in a “falling inflation” period. 
Honorable guests, 
The point we reached in the fight against inflation is remarkable. Both the dynamics of inflation and 
economy go through changes along with the transition from chronic inflation to falling inflation process. 
Looking at the countries, which experienced a similar process that Turkey went through, it is clear that 
the falling inflation period differs from the environments where chronic inflation had previously existed 
or  price  stability  is  maintained  afterwards.  The  falling  inflation  process  is  a  transition  period. 
Therefore, the features of the targeted price stability environment and the former high-inflation period 
can appear together. This can be explained by the fact that some sectors and economic agents can 
adapt  themselves  to  the  process  relatively  fast,  while  some  sectors,  failing  to  adapt  to  the  new 
environment, take on different expectations and perception of risk factors shaped in the framework of 
their former habits. 
Let me elaborate this point as it is of great importance with regard to the achievement of price stability. 
In relatively fragile economic environments such as Turkish economy, where price stability has not yet 
been  fully  maintained  and  current  policies  have  not  gained  credibility,  some  economic  agents  may 
take the exchange rate, monetary aggregates, interest rates and similar aggregates as reference while 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
making their decisions. Therefore, as you will agree with me, expectations and risk perceptions in the 
economy will change according to the size of the referenced aggregate. 
In  this  period,  some  of  the  economic  agents  that  I  have  mentioned  are  negatively  affected  by  the 
referenced aggregates, which are adopted in accordance with the former habits that contradict with 
economic realities. Moreover, these economic agents tend to put the blame on the falling inflation for 
the worsening of their situation. These economic agents that fail to harmonize with this new process 
are the ones who resist the most to the fight against inflation. This adaptation problem also prevents 
these economic agents from seeing the advantages offered by price stability. 
In  this  context,  the  most  important  development  in  fight  against  inflation  is  that  credibility  of  current 
policies have improved, whereas the inflation target has increasingly become a more credible nominal 
anchor for a majority of the economic agents in Turkey. In other words, the inflation target was taken 
as  a  reference  more  extensively.  Further  developments  will  facilitate  the  adaptation  of  economy  to 
changing dynamics and support maintenance of the price stability as well. 
Distinguished guests, 
Before discussing the effects of the falling inflation on economy, let me elaborate the importance of 
price stability for economies. 
As  we  all  know,  the  primary  objective  of  economic  policies  is  to  provide  sustainable  growth  and  to 
increase employment throughout the country. The role of monetary policies has been misunderstood 
for a long time. This wrong assumption is that the increase in inflation and growth are parallel to each 
other and growth rates can be accelerated by loosening the monetary policy. Frankly speaking, in the 
framework  of  early  economics  literature,  this  assumption  can  only  be  verified  in  the  short  term,  in 
countries where inflation rates are low and there is no credibility gap in monetary policies. 
However,  the  models  developed  and  long-term  analysis  made  after  1980s  revealed  that  the  loose 
monetary policy under high inflation conditions could only end up raising the inflation rate and growth 
would slow down due to uncertainties arising from inflation. 
We  very  well  know  from  our  own  high  inflation  experiences  in  the  past  three  decades  and  other 
countries’  experiences  that  average  growth  slows  down  when  inflation  climbs  and  average  growth 
accelerates when inflation falls. The high growth rates we achieved in the past three years, which were 
marked by the stability program, is a good evidence of this generalization. Attaining price stability is a 
prerequisite for achieving sustainable growth. 
For this very reason, today, the primary objective of the Central Bank is to achieve and maintain price 
stability, which makes the biggest contribution to sustainable growth and increase in employment. 
Distinguished participants, 
In this part of my speech, I would like to dwell on the three pillars of the change observed in inflation 
dynamics under falling inflation process. 
The first significant change observed in economies under falling inflation conditions is the decline in 
interest  rates.  If  enough  credibility  has  been  established  in  the  falling  inflation  process,  significant 
decline is observed both in nominal and real interest rates and this process does not only lead to rise 
in expenditures but also in investments. 
Within this framework, a more detailed examination of the struggle against inflation process in Turkey 
reveals that decline in inflation also helped mitigate the fluctuations in inflation and this means less 
uncertainty and less volatility in economy. While decreased uncertainty brings along decline first in risk 
premium  and  then  in  nominal  as  well  as  real  interest  rates,  it  decreases  borrowing  costs  from  the 
consumers’ point of view, and opportunity cost of investments from the producers’ view point. 
At this point, I would like to draw your attention to a risk factor in which the decline in borrowing costs 
has a significant role. Under chronic inflation conditions, consumers tend to renew durable goods such 
as automobiles, white goods and alike less frequently. However, when a certain point is attained in the 
process  of  reducing  inflation,  the  consumers  start  purchasing  their  postponed  needs.  Demand  for 
durable goods that the consumers defer to purchase tends to increase rapidly in the face of decline in 
inflation and fall in the borrowing costs. The recovery in demand is not yet at a level that could create 
an  inflationary  effect  since  it  is  coupled  with  a  rise  in  productivity.  Provided  this  demand  does  not 
assume  a  permanent  nature  and  lasting  economic  stability  is  attained,  it  is  expected  that  such 
fluctuations will become less frequent and less intense, but still, it should be monitored very closely. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2004
Meanwhile, there is another point that I would like to emphasize. Similar to other country experiences, 
in Turkey as well, the positive effects of falling inflation on investments are retarded relative to other 
effects such as rise in consumption. That is because it takes time for the firms to be convinced that the 
downward  trend  in  inflation  will  continue  and  will  be  permanent  and  to  make  decisions  for  new 
investments. Therefore, under falling inflation conditions, it is natural for the firms to tend not to make 
as much investments as they actually can. 
In Turkey, despite the economic recovery has a history of three years, investments have just started to 
increase  in  the  last  few  months.  This  is  an  outcome  of  the  fact  that  confidence  has  recently  been 
established that decline in inflation and achievements in inflationary expectations as well as stability 
established in economy will be lasting. 
Consequently, while increase in investment demand is an outcome of the falling inflation, sustainability 
of this increase depends on attaining price stability. 
Distinguished guests, 
The  second  change  that  came  along  with  the  decline  in  inflation  is  that  as  a  result  of  the  ease  in 
uncertainties,  economic  agents  were  able  to  foresee  longer  periods  and  financial  intermediation 
activities became more active. 
Within this framework, when we look back to the chronic inflation period, we regret to see that high 
inflation has led to chronic budget deficits and very high interest rates; caused deterioration in wealth 
transfer mechanism and forced banking sector to finance the public deficits. In this period, the financial 
sector has become very vulnerable and edged away from its main duty of financing production. 
Today, we are happy to see that enhanced competition and economic stability following the decline in 
inflation  and  ease  of  the  impact  of  inflation-oriented  uncertainties  on  financial  markets,  financial 
intermediation mechanism has started to operate more efficiently. Moreover, serious steps are being 
taken towards establishment of banking sector-real sector relationship. The ratio of total credits to total 
deposits, which has been on the rise since 2003, is a clear indicator of this process. 
However, let me draw your attention to one point. It is clear that, in order to maintain financial stability 
in the current environment of relative economic stability, the relationship between banking sector and 
the real sector needs to be developed not only towards credit utilization, but also with respect to risk 
evaluation.  The  progress  of  risk  management  in  the  banking  sector  will  ensure  that  the  companies 
have  sounder  financial  structures,  that  they  develop  more  transparent  financial  tables  and  adopt 
modern management style. To express it more openly, the progress of modern risk management in 
both the financial as well as the corporate sectors will prevent developments that may arise out of the 
imbalance  between  assets  and  liabilities,  stemming  from  different  perceptions  in  the  process  of 
transition to price stability, and jeopardize financial stability. 
Esteemed participants, 
In  terms  of  the  structural  transformation  programs,  financial  sector,  owing  to  its  significance,  is  the 
sector that is most and fastest affected from the process, as well as being the leading sector in terms 
of supporting the process. Accordingly, further steps need to be taken in this sector in the process of 
falling inflation. 
Dear audience, 
The third factor I will be conveying to you today within the context of the effects of falling inflation on 
the economy is that, together with falling and foreseeable inflation, prices resume their signaling task 
in the economy and thus their roles as indicators in the allocation of resources. 
Departing from the example of Turkey, as we all know from the past experience of chronic inflation, 
consumers used to be inclined to make less price and quality controls, and attach less significance to 
diversity in their choices of goods. Producers on the other hand, used to set their profit margins freely 
to a large extent, paying little attention to their pricing, the costs and productivity. They also showed 
little interest in making investments for increasing the diversity of their products by adding them new 
ones. As a result of this structure, the quality of production declined in time, global competitiveness of 
our country weakened and integration with the world economy was delayed. 
Nevertheless, with the absolute as well as the relative prices resuming their signaling task following 
the decline in inflation, the behavior patterns of producers and consumers in Turkey began to change. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 3
At present, producers are in a position to differentiate, to a large extent, whether the increase in prices 
is  attributable  to  inflation  or  to  an  increase  in  demand,  and  can  take  their  decisions  with  regard  to 
increasing production, making investments, etc., within this framework. They now give importance to 
cost control and productivity increase while determining the profit margins in their pricing policies. 
Similarly,  consumers  have  also  begun  to  actively  participate  in  the  pricing  process,  using  the 
advantage of a more competitive environment. 
At this point, I wish to emphasize two issues I deem significant. The first one of these has to do with 
inflation falling at a slower pace compared to other sectors, also due to pricing behavior directed to 
increasing  the  profit  margins,  at  those  sectors  where  demand  is  relatively  rigid  and  competitive 
structure  relatively  weak.  This  situation,  also  expressed  as  rigidity  in  inflation,  by  way  of  causing 
differentiation  in  relative  prices,  forms  an  obstacle  to  prices  to  carry  on  their  task  of  conveying 
information properly. The rigidity in inflation recently observed in Turkey, in sectors such as education, 
rental  services  and  hospital  services,  with  prices  falling  at  a  slower  pace  for  the  services  group 
compared  to  the  commodities  group,  is  an  example  of  this.  It  is  crucial  that  measures  to  increase 
competitiveness in these sectors are taken promptly in order to eliminate this distorted structure and 
also in terms of the risk it constitutes to the inflation target in future. 
A second point in connection with this is that; it is inevitable that in time, together with healthier price 
signals, the resources of our economy will shift to firms and sectors with higher productivity, as was 
the case in other countries. The firms and sectors that had benefited from the consumption and pricing 
habits of the inflationary environment, but could not work efficiently, will be leaving their places, in this 
process, to more competitive firms and sectors with higher productivity. 
Dear audience, 
At  this  point,  I  wish  to  mention  an  issue,  regarding  the  changes  in  the  pricing  policy  of  producers, 
extremely  significant  in  terms  of  its  effect  on  the  future  course  of  inflation.  This  is  the  process  of 
exchange rate affecting inflation, known also as the pass-through effect. The effect of exchange rate 
on inflation in Turkey is weakening day-by-day, due to the changing pricing patterns of producers as a 
result  of  the  decline  in  inflation.  As  observed  especially  in  the  recent  period,  the  impact  of  the 
movements in exchange rate on inflation began to materialize less than expected, and also at a lower 
level and in a more lagged fashion compared to the past chronic inflation period. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  pass-through  effect  of  exchange  rate  movements  on  prices  has  been 
weakening worldwide, in environments where price stability has been ensured thanks to highly reliable 
monetary policies, attributable to the facts that pricing in domestic currency is widespread, and owing 
to low and stable inflation, losses of value in the domestic currency are perceived as temporary and 
firms resort to price adjustments less frequently. 
At  this  point  I  would  like  to  clarify  one  issue  on  the  exchange  rate  policy  of  the  Central  Bank.  The 
Central Bank has no policy towards keeping the Turkish lira overvalued. As always mentioned from 
the  beginning  of  the  implementation  of  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  exchange  rates  are 
determined under the supply and demand conditions in the market. In case of excessive volatility in 
both directions, the Central Bank intervenes or if there is an excess foreign exchange supply Central 
Bank holds FX buying auctions to increase foreign exchange reserves. So we should keep in mind 
that  in  the  current  design  of  the  monetary  policy,  with  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  level  of 
foreign exchange rates is determined according to the developments in economy, exogenous shocks, 
expectations and volatility in risk premium as a result of all these. 
Dear participants, 
I would like to briefly mention what the economy of our country can gain if the main goal, which is price 
stability, is accomplished after the disinflation process. 
First of all, securing price stability will make permanent all that we have gained in the process of the 
falling inflation. When price stability is achieved, macroeconomic stability will sustain and efficiency in 
the economy will increase. You should remember that by attaining price stability, a precondition for 
sustained growth and increase in employment would be fulfilled. 
As a result of all these macro economic gains, economic units will no longer take into consideration an 
uncertainty  like  inflation  both  in  their  investment  and  consumption  decisions.  They  will  be  able  to 
forecast for the long term and plan more securely. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2004
Since  economic  units  can  forecast  better  while  making  decisions,  in  this  stable  environment  labor 
market  will  work  better,  and  people  will  be  able  to  find  more  permanent  jobs.  In  a  continuous 
inflationary environment, growth also has ups and downs and in the period of growth for the unskilled 
labor  force,  which  is  very  common  in  our  country,  it  takes  a  lot  of  time  to  find  a  job  and  in  the 
contraction period loses the job very easily and quickly. 
Stable environment achieved with the falling inflation will accelerate the inflow of foreign capital and 
our competitiveness edge in the international markets will increase. 
I would like to highlight one more matter in light of the above-mentioned issues. Inflation is not a fact 
that  declines  all  by  itself.  It  falls  if  decisive  and  correct  policies  are  applied  and  low  inflation  and 
permanent price stability can be continuous if only these policies are carried on.  
We should not forget that inflation was not only the most important problem of our country for years 
but also kept us from seeing the existing problems in the society and in the economy. Attaining price 
stability  will  repair  the  damage  of  the  economy  caused  by  high  inflation  and  will  help  us  see  other 
unnoticed problems hiding behind inflation. The key to erasing the traces of past period high inflation 
and to solving other problems of our country is structural reforms. 
Today, the process of erasing these traces begins with operation of dropping six zeroes from Turkish 
lira. I would like to underline that an important issue here. In some countries that had dropped zeroes 
from their currencies this operation was conducted as a part of the disinflation policies. However, in 
our country it is the consequence of the successful implementation of the stability program that has 
already reduced inflation considerably. 
Within this framework, YTL to be issued as of January 1st, 2005, depicts both the decline in inflation 
and our determination to achieve price stability. 
Before I finish, I wish to repeat a remark I made two years ago at the start of the fight against inflation. 
“Above all, people deserve to live in an environment where price stability is achieved.” 
Thank you for listening. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 5
