M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Maintaining stability with a nuanced approach  
Speech by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Stock Exchange of 
Thailand, Bangkok, 20 September 2004. 
 Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me begin by thanking the Stock Exchange of Thailand for inviting me here to speak today. 
You  have  already  heard  from  our  Minister  of  Finance  a  comprehensive  framework  for  sustainable 
growth  in  the  next  five  years,  with  an  integrated  set  of  targets  for  various  sectors  and  various 
dimensions of the economy. This is a welcome initiative and an important policy development. 
The Bank of Thailand’s role is to ensure economic and financial stability in order to support continued 
growth  of  the  economy.  From  our  experience,  monetary  policy  alone  is  not  enough  to  achieve 
desirable  stability.  WE  need  to  involve  ourselves  in  two  other  areas,  i.e.  to  guard  against  possible 
build-ups of financial imbalances and to further strengthen the financial sector. 
First of all, I will begin with our assessment of the current economic conditions to assure you that, in 
spite of the greater risks and challenges that have emerged this year, Thailand’s growth momentum 
continues to remain firm, with economic and financial stability intact. 
Key challenges have included increased external pressure from higher oil prices, rising global interest 
rates, and the potential impact of a slowdown of the Chinese economy. 
We have also faced several challenges at home, which include two episodes of the avian flu and a 
decline in consumer and investor sentiment linked to the situation in the South. But despite these risks 
and challenges, the Thai economy has managed quite well under the circumstances. 
The latest data showed real GDP to have grown by an impressive 6.4 percent for the first half of this 
year, reflecting the resiliency of our economy, which is still growing at a respectable rate, in spite of 
many negative external developments. 
Favourable conditions for the export of goods and services have allowed a continued surplus of our 
current account. This has been accompanied by corresponding reductions in external debt which fell 
from  the  peak  of  112  billion  US  dollars  in  June  1997  to  50  billion  US  dollars  in  June  of  this  year. 
Meanwhile, international reserves of 44 billion US dollars in August also provide a level of protection 
that  should  help  the  economy  comfortably  absorb external  shocks.  It was mainly  an  account  of  the 
strength of this external position that Thailand’s credit rating was upgraded by Standard and Poor’s 
last month. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At this time, the high price of oil is probably the most important external risk to the economy. However, 
this risk poses varying implications for economic growth and stability. 
Our macroeconomic forecasting model shows that the impact of higher oil price on economic growth is 
likely to be less pronounced compared to its impact on inflation and economic stability. This can be 
attributed to the fact that the economy still has substantial momentum to support growth. Exports and 
private investment, in particular, are expected to grow on the back of continued global recovery, a high 
level  of  capacity  utilization,  and  conducive  financial  conditions  supported  by  a  turnaround  in  credit 
extension of the banking sector. 
Moreover,  the  economy  is  now  in  a  much  better  position  to  weather  external  shocks,  thanks  to  an 
improved external position and the strength of domestic demand. In addition, the Government’s much 
improved fiscal position should allow the economy to adjust to higher oil prices without interrupting the 
growth momentum. It is, therefore, our view that the risks to growth from the higher oil prices should 
be manageable. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
On the other hand, the impact of the higher oil prices on economic stability is expected to be more 
pronounced. Latest data on headline inflation continue to show signs of price acceleration. 
In August, Thailand’s headline inflation therefore rose by 3.1 percent year-on-year, while core inflation 
rose by 0.7 percent year-on-year. With a narrowing of the output gap and reported tightening in some 
segments of the labour market, we believe that there is considerable pent-up price pressure building 
up  in  the  system  that  could  eventually  translate  into  higher  consumer  prices.  Our  inflation  forecast 
points to a higher probability of rising domestic inflation going forward. 
Thus,  with  growth  momentum  remaining  firm  but  with  prospects  for  higher  inflation,  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee saw less need to keep interest rates at low levels. The committee was of the view 
that  monetary  policy  should  be  more  focused  on  economic  stability,  with  the  adjustment  being 
gradually paced. This was the rationale behind the increase in the policy rate in August. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Adjustments in the financial markets following the policy rate increase have been orderly. There has 
been an across the board increase in short-term money market rates as well as a rise in bond yields. 
But given present excess liquidity in the system, there will be some time lag before the corresponding 
adjustments in deposit and lending rates take place. 
Going forward, especially as the economy’s expansion gains further momentum, monetary policy will 
need  to  maintain  economic  stability  and  to  ensure  that  inflation  is  kept  within  the  target.  lt  is  our 
intention to do whatever necessary to keep inflation in check and to ensure a continuation of economic 
stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Besides monetary policy, we have also taken measures to safeguard the economy against possible 
buildups of financial imbalances at the sectoral level. We have learned from the 1997 financial crisis 
that  overshooting  asset  prices  could  pose  a  major  risk  to  the  economy.  Therefore,  to  maintain 
economic  arid  financial  stability,  we  need  to  be  vigilant  in  spotting  potential  financial  imbalances, 
particularly in the real estate and household sectors. 
At this time, although monthly value of land transactions has risen back to the previous peak level in 
1996 and bank credits extended to real estate developers has picked up, we feel that there is no sign 
of overheating in this sector yet. Latest land prices have increased only by 14 percent on average, 
while housing prices for low- and medium-income families rose by less than 10 percent over that of 
last  year.  Nonetheless,  it  is  important  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  developments  in  the  real  estate 
sector,  by  making  sure  that  bank  lending  to  this  sector  is  prudent.  And  for  our  part,  there  is  now 
greater  willingness  to  use  the  necessary  prudential  measures  to  discourage  or  forestall  any 
undesirable development. 
Financial institutions are now required to report all real estate loans exceeding 100 million baht. Any 
real  estate  lending  that  is  deemed  too  risky  would  require  immediate  additional  provisioning.  This 
should  help  ensure  that  growth  of  the  real  sector  is  driven  by  quality  growth  with  least  amount  of 
bubbles, and that policy is proactive enough to prevent a reoccurrence of the real estate bubble prior 
to the 1997 crisis. To improve our ability to monitor this sector, we have developed a housing price 
index in cooperation with a number of agencies including the Government Housing Bank. This housing 
price  data  will  be  important  for  assessing  the  underlying  conditions  in  the  housing  market,  and  will 
allow us to monitor any concentrations of risk before they develop in this sector. 
As  for  households,  despite  a  reported  rise  in  household  debt  by  the  National  Statistical  Office,  the 
current level of household debt in Thailand is still much lower than average levels of both industrial 
and  regional  economies.  While  the  Thai  household  debt  to  GDP  ratio  stands  at  33  percent,  the 
corresponding  figures  for  Australia,  Singapore  and  South  Korea  are  84,  85,  and  63  percent 
respectively. If we look at the components of household debt, we see that mortgage loans increased 
by a reasonable rate of 15 percent, while we see an increase of over 30 percent in credit cards loans. 
Therefore, as a precaution, the Bank of Thailand has implemented a number of prudential measures 
to curb possible build-up of imbalances in the credit card loans. In November 2002, we have raised the 
minimum income levels for credit card qualification. And later on in April 2004 we have raised the rate 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
of minimum monthly payments from 5 percent to 10 percent. These proactive measures so far have 
yielded desirable and positive results. 
Let me now move to the financial sector 
Stability of Thailand’s financial system, in particular the banking sector, has improved remarkably in 
the past few years. The 1997 crisis has weakened our financial system. Commercial banks’ returns on 
assets were  persistently  negative,  and  NPLs stood at  a  record  high  level.  Since  2001,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand has tackled these problems in two steps. First, we aimed to make these financial institutions 
healthy  and  profitable  so  as  they  could  resume  their  normal  function  of  financial  intermediaries.  In 
2001, the Bank of Thailand issued a few measures and guidelines to enhance banks’ profitability; for 
example,  the  reduction  of  provision  requirement  for  a  normal  loan  which  is  not  NPL  to  a  more 
reasonable level and the classification of NPLs by account was introduced to replace NPLs by name. 
More important, banks were persuaded to change from the old practice of competing for deposits with 
higher  interests  which  resulted  in  lowering  the  cost  to  support  banks’  profits.  Moreover,  banks  also 
have made substantial progress on productivity and risk management, with restructured work process 
that has significantly brought down operating costs. As a result, return on assets has improved from 
negative in 2001 to 0.7 percent in 2003 and the annualized rate of 1.5 percent for the first half of this 
year. 
At  the  same  time,  good  progress  has  been  made  in  NPL  reduction.  The  proportion  of  outstanding 
NPLs to total loans has reduced from 24.5 percent in 2000 to 12.4 percent at the end of 2003 due to 
various efforts put to restructure NPLs. 
Now,  with  improved  balance  sheets  and  more  stable  financial  standing  of  all  banks,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand has moved into the second step; and that is to improve the quality of banks’ businesses and 
management. 
The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  recently  tightened  provisioning  rules  for  NPLs.  Up  to  now,  for  NPLs 
outstanding more than 1 year, banks have been required to provide for 100 percent of the amount of 
loan net of collateral. We will, from the end of this year, require incremental provisioning for remaining 
amount of loan for NPLs outstanding for more than 2 years. By this new rule, if an NPL still remains 
outstanding for more than 4 years, provisioning for the entire value of the loan must be set aside. By 
that time, banks’ balance sheets will be very prudent. 
More important is the introduction of more prudent criteria to classify NPLs of banks. On top of the 
record of non-payment, the Bank of Thailand auditors have, since the beginning of 2003, looked at the 
“ability to repay” based on the potential cash flow as well. All these prudential measures are designed 
not only to strengthen the Thai financial system, but also to increase its credibility. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To  sum  up,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  taken  several  measures  to  ensure  monetary  and  financial 
stability. The Thai economy has proven to be resilient. This year, despite the many recent challenges, 
the  economy  has  been  able  to  adjust  well  to  shocks,  owing  importantly  to  the  strong  underlying 
fundamentals und a continued growth momentum. 
Going forward, as economic recovery continues, we need to be alert and be vigilant on the possible 
risks to economic stability, especially the risk on inflation. To this extent, our recent reorientation of 
monetary policy stance will serve towards ensuring the needed safeguard of economic stability, whilst 
not detracting from the underlying growth potential. 
And  because  in  an  economic  cycle  upturn,  risk  of  imbalances  building  up  in  some  sectors  of  the 
economy may emerge. Even though there is no current sign of imbalances or bubbles, the Bank of 
Thailand  will  need  to  be  alert  and  be  vigilant  in  looking  out  for  signs  of  imbalances  to  prevent 
economic  instability  at  an  early  stage.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  made  significant  progress  in 
strengthening  our  financial  institutions.  This  progress  has  now  allowed  us  to  move  forward  to  the 
phase of upgrading the efficiency and continued adoption of evolving international standards, which in 
turn,  will  serve  to  enhance  financial  system  competitiveness,  stability,  und  credibility  in  the  period 
ahead. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 3
