Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building a progressive Islamic banking sector - charting the 
way forward  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Seminar on 10-Year 
Master Plan for Islamic Financial Services Industry, “Building a Progressive Islamic Banking Sector - 
Charting the Way Forward”, Putrajaya, 22 June 2005. 
 "The Islamic financial services industry is now at the threshold of its next stage of development. This 
decade  has  seen  significant  progress  being  achieved.  Islamic  finance  has  now  gained  wide 
acceptance  as  a  form  of  financial  intermediation.  The  sustainability  of  this  progress,  however, 
demands  due  attention  to  the  future  -  to  look  beyond  the  near  term,  and  to  take  a  longer-term 
perspective into the needs of the future and to evolve an Islamic financial system that will best serve 
these needs. An essential part of this process is the clarity of the vision and the objectives that are to 
be achieved. This provides the starting point for the formulation of a Master Plan which defines the 
blueprint for the future development of Islamic finance. While envisioning the future will provide the 
strategic focus and the common goal to be achieved, of greater importance will be the actions that 
need to be taken to make it happen."  
Your Excellencies 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
I am most honoured to be invited to speak at this Seminar on the Ten-Year Master Plan for the Islamic 
financial  services  industry  organized  by  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  and  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board to discuss the key issues and considerations in the formulation of a master plan for the 
development of Islamic banking and finance. Our goals are to develop an efficient, progressive and 
comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  that  is able  to  contribute  to  the  overall  growth process  and 
development.  In  this  first  session  on  the  banking  sector,  the  focus  of  my  address  will  be  on  the 
blueprint for building a progressive Islamic banking sector. This will include a discussion of the building 
blocks that are necessary to provide the foundations on which subsequent enhancements can be built. 
I  will  also  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  Malaysia's  experience  in  formulating  a  ten-year 
Financial Sector Master Plan which was launched in 2001, and our experience in the implementation 
of the Plan, in particular, for the development of the Islamic banking sector. 
The need for a Master Plan 
Islamic finance is now taking on a new dimension to meet the changing requirements of consumers 
and  businesses;  to  participate  in  a  more  liberalized  and  globalised  environment  and  to  become 
increasingly more internationally integrated. The financial system is also operating in an era of change. 
Indeed,  the  national  and  international  financial  landscape  is  being  shaped  by  powerful  forces  of 
change,  creating  an  environment  of  increased  uncertainty.  However,  with  clarity  of  vision  on  the 
ultimate goals that the financial system aims to achieve, we can, by our actions and initiatives taken 
today, help realize our vision of the future.  
The Master Plan in essence provides a common vision, and template for countries in developing the 
Islamic financial services industry. The vision and desired objective will to a large extent depend on 
the desired aspirations for the economy, expected the role of the financial sector in the economy, the 
stage  of  development  of  the  economy  and  the  financial  sector  and  the  degree  of  international 
integration with the rest of the world.  
The Master Plan will also serve as a key reference document to guide countries in charting an orderly 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  broad  strategies  and  action  plans,  with  the 
necessary milestones that need to be pursued over the medium to long term to develop an Islamic 
financial system can then be identified. Within the defined parameters, countries have distinct options 
in determining the best course of action to achieve the envisaged country vision. Experiences of other 
member countries can be compiled to serve as references. 
It needs to be recognized however, while the Plan provides the strategic direction, the implementation 
needs to be managed with flexibility. The approach for the implementation of the action plans outlined 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
in a Master Plan needs to be done in an iterative manner, taking into account the potential for change 
that may occur in both the domestic and external environment. 
The Master Plan will also identify the building blocks of the various parts of the financial sector that 
need to be put in place to provide the foundation on which further progress can be built. The Financial 
Master  Plan  thus  provides  the  sequencing  of  priorities  and  identifies  the  key  financial  infrastructure 
that needs to be put in place before advancing forward. In some areas, the implementation can be 
simultaneous,  while  in  others  a  more  direct  route  can  be  taken  to  enable  a  more  rapid  pace  of 
development. 
In designing and formulating the Master Plan, consideration needs to be given to the diversity of the 
member countries of the IDB. The member countries are at various stages of economic development, 
facing  different  economic  and  financial  challenges,  and  with  different  development  priorities.  The 
Master Plan aims to highlight the approaches, templates and building blocks that can be adopted at 
the  different  stages  in  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system.  A  phased-
approach would provide the Master Plan with the flexibility to take into account the different stages of 
economic  development  of  respective  countries.  While  the  starting  points  may  differ,  countries  may 
adapt the approaches to their requirements and that is commensurate with their stage of development. 
The  Master  Plan  would  allow  countries  the  option  to  evolve  the  financial  system  sequentially,  or 
alternatively  the  option  to  accelerate  the  process  of  development  by  providing  countries  the 
opportunity to develop the institutions and supporting infrastructure simultaneously.  
Significance of banking system 
At  the  outset,  due  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  promoting  the  development  of  a  comprehensive 
Islamic financial system, involving the development of the key structural components of the system, 
comprising the Islamic banking industry, the takaful industry, the non-bank financial institutions, and 
the Islamic interbank and capital markets. The comprehensiveness of the system will allow for a more 
balanced  allocation  of  financial  and  economic  resources  within  an  economy  and  ensure  greater 
diversification of risks within the Islamic financial system. This enhances the resilience and robustness 
of the Islamic financial system to withstand financial shocks and contributes to the overall stability of 
the Islamic financial system. The respective components of the Islamic financial system are also highly 
integrated and inter-dependent. A more diversified Islamic financial infrastructure will contribute to the 
more efficient functioning of the overall financial system.  
Given its roles in the intermediation process and payments system, the Islamic banking system will 
continue  to  be  at  the  core  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  A  well  functioning  and  efficient  banking 
system  is  vital  for  achieving  robust  economic  performance.  As  financial  intermediaries,  banks  are 
entrusted  to  safeguard  their  deposits  and  preserve  the  efficiency  in  the  manner  the  funds  are 
mobilised,  while  vigilantly  channeling  these  savings  to  productive  investments.  Given  these 
responsibilities, the banking institutions therefore need to play their role effectively and efficiently to 
contribute  to  the  overall  stability  of  the  financial  system,  and  the  growth  and  development  of  the 
economy.  
Visioning for the Islamic banking system 
In charting the future development of the Islamic banking system, due consideration would therefore 
need to be given to the role of the banking system in the economy. The ultimate goal is to enhance 
wealth  creation,  and  promote  sustainable  and  balanced  economic  growth.  The  vision  is, 
therefore,  to  develop  a  progressive  and  robust  Islamic  banking  and  financial  system,  rooted  in  the 
Islamic core values and principles, that best serves the needs of our economies.  
By  indicating  the  destination  in  the  journey,  to  developing  the  Islamic  banking  industry,  the  Master 
Plan would provide a road map to drive convergence towards the common vision among countries in 
the development of an Islamic financial system. While collective efforts can be directed to achieve this 
common  vision,  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  the  stage  of  development  of  the  respective 
economies. In particular, the expected role that the banking system needs to fulfill can be identified 
accordingly.  This  could  range  from  the  development  of  an  Islamic  banking  system  to  efficiently 
intermediate funds in the economy, to having in place a sophisticated Islamic banking and financial 
system that is internationally integrated and that is in itself, an engine of growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
Pre-requisites of the Islamic banking system 
The  development  of  a  vibrant  and  dynamic  Islamic banking system  that  has a  meaningful  role  in  a 
nation's  future  economic  and  social  development  requires  well-defined  strategies  that  focus  on  two 
main  areas,  building  institutional  capacity  and  the  development  of  the  supporting  financial 
infrastructure. Allow me to highlight the key areas of the strategies. 
The  first  task  is  to  identify  the  nature  of  Islamic  banking  system  that  is  appropriate  for  the 
country - whether to ultimately adopt a dual banking system where Islamic banks and conventional 
banks offering Islamic banking products operate in parallel with the conventional banking system, or 
alternatively to adopt a single banking system that fully accords the Shariah injunctions where all the 
banks are Islamic.  
Second,  measures  need  to  be  in  place  to  ensure  that  the  Islamic  banks  are  well-capitalised  and 
resilient.  For  Islamic  banks  that  are  already  in  existence,  clear  criteria  need  to  be  specified  on  the 
minimum capital size that would enable them to be significant players in the market, be able to gain 
from  economies  of  scale,  have  a  diversified  earnings  base  and  stronger  market  presence.  Such 
minimum  size  can  either  be  achieved  through  organic  growth  or  merger  with  a  partner  bank  which 
would  bring  about  the  desired  outcome  in  a  shorter  period  of  time.  Incentives  can  be  provided  to 
induce the banks to consolidate while guidelines on minimum capital size can be imposed to ensure 
that the banks either merge or undergo a recapitalisation exercise. In the case of countries that are 
just embarking on the introduction of Islamic banks, this could be achieved by the issue of new Islamic 
banking licences.  
Third, for countries that have a dual banking system, where conventional banks are allowed to offer 
Islamic banking products, there must be adequate firewalls to ensure absolute separation of banking 
operations  to  avoid  co-mingling  between  the  Islamic  and  conventional  funds.  This  is  to  ensure  the 
integrity of Islamic banking operations and the sanctity of Islamic funds. The firewalls would need to 
include  separate  capital  funds,  cheque  clearing  systems,  clearing  accounts  with  the  Central  Bank, 
settlement accounts and reporting systems.  
Fourth, regardless of the choice of system, it is important that the stakeholders of the institutions play 
their  role  effectively  and  efficiently  to  generate  improvements  in  the  entity.  Of  importance,  is  strong 
leadership  in  the  management  team  that  has  a  firm  commitment  toward  performance  and  capacity 
enhancements. In addition, investments in the requisite talent and skills is essential to spearhead the 
development of Islamic financial products. 
Fifth, is the need to put in place a comprehensive legal infrastructure. Enactment of an Islamic banking 
law  is  an  important  part  of  this  process.  For  conventional  banks  offering  Islamic  banking  products, 
amendments to the existing banking legislation may be necessary to allow such banks to undertake 
trade-related  activities  and  other  multi-faceted  functions.  The  investment  policy  of  the  Government 
may need to be reviewed to provide for the issue of Islamic investment instruments to facilitate the 
liquidity operations of such banking institutions. In addition, a legal fraternity that is competent in both 
Shariah and civil laws is also important. Finally, in a dual banking system, the tax legislation should 
accord neutrality in treatment between Islamic and conventional banking products.  
Sixth, the development of a comprehensive Shariah framework is a fundamental part of the process. 
Each institution offering Islamic products will need to establish a Shariah advisory committee to ensure 
that all Islamic transactions, products and operations are Shariah-compliant. Shariah decisions need 
to be made transparent to promote greater understanding and the acceptance of such decisions. 
Seventh,  the  importance  of  a  robust  and  effective  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  cannot  be 
over-emphasised. While the financial regulation and supervision of Islamic banking institutions would 
be similar, the areas such as capital adequacy, the liquidity framework have to take into account the 
unique risk characteristics of the Islamic banking models that accord the Shariah requirements. Sound 
corporate  governance,  transparency,  accountability,  disclosure,  market  discipline,  risk  management 
and consumer protection are common issues that need to be addressed. In a dual banking system, it 
is important that opportunities for regulatory arbitrage in banking practices should be eliminated.  
Eighth,  research  and  development  is  important  to  incorporate  core  Islamic  values  into  banking 
products  and  business  models.  Research  and  development,  and  leveraging  on  the  advances  in 
information  and  communication  technology  are  also  critical  in  ensuring  performance  and  a  more 
equitable distribution of profits and wealth among all stakeholders. In addition, robust financial models 
that  leverage  on  the  advances  in  information  technology  can  be  used  to  enhance  product 
development and risk management.  
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
Ninth,  the  development  of  the  financial  market  infrastructure  is  equally  important  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of Islamic banking. The Islamic interbank and foreign exchange markets are integral to 
the efficient functioning of the Islamic banking system. They facilitate the liquidity operations of Islamic 
banks and promote financial stability. In addition, they serve as an important transmission channel for 
the implementation of monetary policy as well as the central bank's role as lender of last resort. The 
creation of a well-developed Islamic capital market is also important as it provides the users of capital 
with  an  alternative  and  cost-efficient  source  of  longer-term  financing,  and  accords  investors  with  a 
wider range of financial instruments to suit their different risk profiles. And at the core of any financial 
system lies an efficient and robust payment system for the clearing and settlement of payments. Other 
financial infrastructure that provides support to the development of the Islamic banking sector includes 
the  mortgage  corporation  to  undertake  the  securitisation  of  house  financing,  a  credit  guarantee 
corporation to provide guarantee schemes to the SME industry, and a rating agency to rate the Islamic 
financial  instruments  and  a  deposit  insurance  scheme  to  provide  the  necessary  safety  net  for 
depositors should also be developed. In addition, the auditing, tax and legal firms must have the right 
talents to provide their services to the Islamic financial institutions. These ancillary institutions must 
have the ability to provide their services that are in accordance with the Shariah principles.  
Tenth, consumer education and awareness about Islamic banking is critical to its success and future 
development. A consumer education programme needs to be developed to enhance public awareness 
of the features of Islamic banking products and services.  
Translating the action plan into reality  
The appropriate Islamic banking system for a country would be largely based on the national agenda 
of  the  respective  countries,  the  objectives  that  the  system  hopes  to  achieve  and  the  available 
resources.  For  the  adoption  of  a  dual  banking  system,  the  conventional  banks  have  the  option  of 
offering Islamic banking products on a window basis or via full-fledged Islamic branches or an Islamic 
subsidiary. Conventional bank may also be converted to operate as an Islamic bank. Alternatively, the 
Islamic banking system may only comprise Islamic banks newly created to operate in parallel with the 
conventional banking system.  
In addition, the government can upgrade existing Islamic savings institutions to Islamic banks; license 
foreign Islamic banks as a consortium or on joint venture with local banks; or a combination of these 
options  to  achieve  its  objective.  Alternatively,  a  country  may  wish  to  adopt  a  system-wide  Islamic 
banking and finance, a single banking system that fully accords the Shariah framework. 
Allow  me  to  take  the  opportunity  to  present  the  Malaysian  experience.  The  development  of  Islamic 
banking has transitioned through four distinct phases. The first phase involved the establishment of 
Islamic financial institutions. In the second phase, conventional banks with the appropriate firewalls in 
place  were  permitted  to  offer  Islamic  financial  products  and  services.  As  this  window  operations 
achieved a critical mass, the option to transform these operations into Islamic subsidiaries represents 
the third phase of development. And finally as capacities were enhanced, liberalisation allowed for the 
international  integration  of  our  domestic  Islamic  banking  system  in  the  fourth  phase  of  the 
development. 
The first phase of development of Islamic finance in Malaysia started in 1969 with the establishment of 
an Islamic savings institution known as the Pilgrim Fund Board, or Tabung Haji, as the first Islamic 
financial institution in Malaysia. Its objective is to mobilise savings of Muslims intending to perform the 
pilgrimage and to channel the funds to permissible investments according to the Shariah principles. As 
awareness  of  Islamic  finance  increased,  a  full-fledged  Islamic  bank  was  established  in  1983  when 
Bank Islam, the first Islamic bank was established under the Islamic Banking Act. 
The  Government  Investment  Act  was  also  enacted  in  1983  to  allow  for  government  investment 
certificates to be issued to facilitate the Bank's liquidity operations. As part of the long term objective of 
developing  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  operating  side-by-side  with  the  conventional 
banking system, a year after the establishment of Bank Islam, a takaful or Islamic insurance company 
was established under the Takaful Act to provide the coverage for Islamic financing.  
In  the  second  phase  of  the  development  of  Islamic  banking,  conventional  banking  institutions  were 
permitted to offer Islamic banking products and services on a window basis to leverage on the existing 
infrastructure,  including  staff  and  branch  network,  and  achieve  wider  market  and  cost  optimisation. 
This landmark policy was undertaken ten years after the establishment of the full Islamic bank to allow 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2005
for its greater outreach. The window operations opened the door for the existing conventional banks to 
participate in the Islamic banking market for both the Muslim and non-Muslim communities. 
Under  a  pilot  programme,  three  conventional  banks  were  initially  allowed  to  offer  Islamic  banking 
products and services. Then in early 1994, together  with the establishment of the Islamic interbank 
market, a dual banking system was created. The interbank market is integral to the smooth functioning 
of the Islamic banking system, and became the first of such models. Concurrently, firewalls between 
the  conventional  and  Islamic  funds  were  put  in  place,  which  included  separation  of  capital  funds, 
cheque  clearing  system,  clearing  account  with  the  central  bank,  settlement  account  and  reporting 
system. They were also required to establish Islamic banking units to be headed by a senior banker, 
create an Islamic banking fund with a minimum allocation, and appoint at least a Shariah consultant to 
advise on the day-to-day operations of the Islamic banking division. In the ensuing years, additional 
rules  and  regulations  were  made  to  strengthen  such  operations.  Eventually,  more  players  were 
granted  approval  to  offer  Islamic  financial  products  and  services.  The  move  enhanced  further  the 
vibrancy of the Islamic interbank market.  
The efficiency of the Islamic interbank market is enhanced by the Real Time Gross Settlement System 
(RENTAS)  and  the  Fully Automated  System  for Tendering (FAST).  RENTAS facilitates  larger  value 
interbank  funds  transfers  and  scriptless  securities  while  FAST  facilitates  the  tendering  process  for 
Islamic  securities  including  government  securities,  commercial  papers  and  private  debt  securities. 
Funds are raised to finance long-term infrastructure and development projects through the issuance of 
Islamic private debt securities.  
Recognising  the  importance  of  the  capital  market,  Malaysia  initiated  the  development  of  a  private 
Islamic financial securities market in the early nineties, about six years after the establishment of the 
Islamic  bank,  with  the  issuance  of  the  first  Islamic  financial  instrument.  Subsequently,  more 
instruments  were  issued  and  these  created  an  investment  environment  conducive  for  investors, 
including banks. The introduction of the Islamic capital market has reduced the over-dependence on 
the Islamic banking system for long-term financing and allows Islamic banking institutions to diversify 
part of the risks emanating from asset and liability mismatches. The existence of the Islamic capital 
market plays an important role in reducing a potential source of financial vulnerabilities and enhances 
the robustness and resilience of the Islamic financial system, leading to greater financial stability. 
A significant development in the domestic Islamic financial market was the recent issuance of ringgit-
denominated  Islamic  debt  securities  by  two  multilateral  financial  institutions.  This  has  heightened 
confidence in the Malaysian Islamic financial market. The issuance was made possible following the 
liberalisation to the foreign exchange administration rules to facilitate multilateral development banks, 
multilateral financial institutions and multinational corporations to raise ringgit-denominated bonds in 
the Malaysian capital market. 
The Islamic banking system is currently represented by 30 Islamic banking institutions, comprising four 
Islamic banks and 26 conventional banking institutions, that is, eight commercial banks, four foreign 
banks, three finance companies, four merchant banks and seven discount houses. The ability of the 
Islamic  banking  institutions  to  arrange  and  offer  products  with  attractive  and  innovative  features  at 
competitive  prices  vis-a-viz  conventional  banking  products,  has  appealed  to  both  Muslim  and  non-
Muslim  customers,  reflecting  the  effectiveness  and  competitiveness  of  Islamic  finance  as  a  form  of 
financial intermediation. The extensive distribution network of Islamic banking institutions, comprising 
152 full-fledged Islamic banking branches and 2,065 Islamic banking counters, is also supported by an 
efficient and secure payment system. 
The other institutions which have been established to ensure that the Islamic financial system remain 
sustainable and robust include the external credit rating agencies such as the Rating Agency Malaysia 
and  Malaysian  Rating  Corporation  Berhad,  three  more  takaful  players,  five  development  financial 
institutions that offer Islamic financial products including a cooperative bank that has fully converted to 
operating as a full fledged Islamic financial institution and a national mortgage corporation, Cagamas 
Berhad, all of which offer Islamic financial products. 
Malaysia  has  also  adopted  legal  reform,  self-regulation  and  measures  to  encourage  market-based 
regulation.  New  measures  have  been  introduced  to further  improve  the  level  of  governance  among 
banking  institutions.  In  the  case  of  Malaysia,  the  High  Court  of  Malaysia  has  dedicated  high  court 
judges  to  preside  over  litigation  on  matters  relating  to  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  To  undertake a 
holistic legal review, the Central Bank of Malaysia has set up a Law Review Committee to review the 
common law-based domestic legislations to assimilate the Shariah principles. The aim is to remove 
any legal impediments and ensure the unhindered and efficient functioning of the Islamic banking and 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 5
financial system. The Central Bank Act has also been amended to provide for the establishment of a 
Shariah  Advisory  Council  at  the  Central  Bank  as  the  sole  authority  and  reference  on  all  Shariah 
matters pertaining to Islamic banking and finance. 
The Islamic financial system today has emerged as an important component of the overall Malaysian 
financial  system  that  contributes  to  the  growth  and  development  of  the  Malaysian  economy.  Since 
2000, the domestic Islamic banking industry has been growing at an average rate of 18% per annum 
in terms of assets. As at end-2004, total assets of the Islamic banking sector increased to RM94.6 
billion, accounting for 10.5% of the total assets in the banking system. The market share of Islamic 
deposits and financing also increased to 11.2% and 11.3% respectively.  
As  the  domestic  Islamic  banking  industry  progresses  into  a  more  advanced  stage  of  development, 
significant  developments  are  shaping 
infrastructure.  The 
developments  in  the  pipe-line  include  the  unique  set  of  prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory 
standards for Islamic banking operations by the Islamic Financial Services Board, tailor-made set of 
accounting standards for Islamic financial business by the Malaysian Accounting Standards Board and 
introduction of the Deposit Insurance Scheme in Malaysia. 
Having achieved the critical mass, Bank Negara Malaysia conducted a review in 2003 of the existing 
'window' institutional structure of the banks to prepare an enabling structure that can assimilate future 
developments  in  the  Islamic  financial  regulatory  infrastructure  over  the  longer  term  and  thus 
strengthen  the  prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime.  This  represents  the  third  phase  in  the 
development  of  Islamic  banking  in  Malaysia.  The  new  institutional  structure  known  as  'Islamic 
subsidiary' was introduced in 2004. It is envisaged that greater strategic focus and resources as well 
as  higher  autonomy  and  governance  will  be  accorded  to  the  Islamic  banks.  To-date,  two  Islamic 
subsidiaries of two banking groups have been set up. 
financial  regulatory 
industry's 
the 
Integrating with international financial system 
Another significant milestone in the progress of Islamic banking and finance in the Malaysian banking 
system  in  its  two  decades  of  development  is  the  issuance  of  three  new  Islamic  bank  licences  to 
Islamic financial institutions from the Middle East. The new entrants with distinctive capabilities and 
strengths will have the opportunity to bridge the two regions, participate in the growing Islamic banking 
industry as well as tap new markets in Malaysia and in the region, and promote healthy competition 
thereby contributing to elevate the industry to new levels of dynamism. In addition, up to 49% foreign 
interest is permitted in the Islamic subsidiaries. This represents the fourth phase of development of our 
Islamic banking sector. The pace of the integration process of Islamic finance with the international 
financial system is dependent on the steps to enhance the robustness and resilience of the domestic 
Islamic financial system. It will promote increased competitiveness, resilience and sustainability of the 
Islamic financial system as a form of financial intermediation. The integration would greatly contribute 
towards facilitating greater cross border flows in terms of increased trade and investment transactions; 
thereby,  strengthening  the  global  economic  and  financial  inter-linkages.  As  this  international 
integration  process  intensifies,  it  will  facilitate  greater  mobilisation  and  channelling  of  resources 
between countries to productive investments; hence, raising the prospects for more balanced global 
growth  and  shared  prosperity  among  the  Ummah.  This  would  also  allow  for  more  diversification  of 
risks to achieve global stability.  
We  are  witnessing  the  beginning  of  this  process  through  greater  presence  of  Islamic  banks  in  the 
markets  of  other  Muslim  and  non-Muslim  countries  as  well  as  ability  to  raise  funds  in  each  others' 
financial markets, particularly by traditional multilateral institutions. Subscription and trading of Islamic 
financial  instruments  by  conventional  financial  institutions  is  already  commonplace,  which  is 
undertaken using the existing systems for trading, the existing international exchanges for listing and 
the existing clearing houses for settlement purposes.  
An  important  initiative  in  the  development  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  architecture  is  the 
establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) in 2002. It was established to promulgate 
the international regulatory and supervisory standards for Islamic financial institutions worldwide aimed 
at  achieving  harmonisation  of  Islamic  banking  practices,  fostering  best  practices  and  securing 
soundness  and  stability  in  Islamic  finance.  Another  initiative  to  accelerate  the  integration  of  Islamic 
finance  was  the  setting  up  of  the  International  Islamic  Financial  Market  or  IIFM  in  2002.  The  IIFM 
provides the environment to link all the financial centres around the world that participate in Islamic 
finance, thereby encouraging active participation by both Islamic and non-Islamic financial institutions 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2005
in the secondary market for Islamic financial instruments. As the volume increases, it would strengthen 
the inter-linkages and integration amongst the Islamic financial centres. 
While having a Master Plan will provide a shared vision and a common goal, it needs to be recognised 
that the evolution of an Islamic financial system with all its component parts cannot be achieved within 
a short period of time. Having the medium and longer term goals outlined however, provides a basis to 
ensure the short term initiatives will be consistent and coherent with the long term objective. In other 
words, the construction of the building blocks must move in the right direction. As part of the process, 
each Islamic banking institution needs to formulate its own strategic plans and short-term action plans 
within this longer term perspective. With the foundations built and the plans in place, the future is by 
no means secure. It is only with the combined efforts and perseverance of all the stakeholders that the 
vision  that  is  being  envisaged  for  the  future  development  of  Islamic  finance  can  yield  the  desired 
results. InsyaAllah'. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 7
