Stanley Fischer: Overview of Israel’s economy  
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Knesset  Finance 
Committee, Jerusalem, 30 May 2005.  
 Chair of the Finance Committee M.K. Yakov Litzman, Members of Knesset, honored guests. 
I am very grateful for the invitation I received from the Chair to come and speak to you. As Governor of 
the  Bank  of  Israel,  I  attach  great  importance  to  this  dialogue  between  the  Bank  and  the  Knesset 
Finance  Committee.  In  fact,  after  almost  a  month  in  my  new  role,  I  am  pleased  that  my  first 
appearance in public since the inauguration ceremony at the President's Residence should be before 
you. 
I would like to note at the outset that Israel's economy has important achievements to its credit, and 
although there is much still to do, we are already benefiting from the economic infrastructure that has 
been, and is still being, constructed. 
Israel's  economy  is  currently  enjoying  the  benefits  of  economic  and  financial  stability.  This  can  be 
seen in a number of areas: 
First, inflation in Israel has for quite a long time been within the long term price-stability target range 
set by the government of between 1 percent and 3 percent a year. Moreover, inflation expectations 
and the forecasts by various experts reflect the assessment that looking a year ahead, inflation will 
remain within the price-stability target range. 
Second, the interest rate is very low, perhaps its lowest level since the establishment of the State. This 
is all the more notable alongside the reality of long-term price stability. In this context I would like to 
say  to  you  that  the  fact  that  the  economy  succeeded  not  only  in  achieving  price  stability  but  in 
maintaining it along with low interest is an important reflection of the credibility that monetary policy 
has acquired over time - and it is essential that we maintain this credibility. 
I would also like to mention that all this occurred against the background of the process that began 
almost a year ago of the US Federal Reserve raising the dollar interest rate. This process is expected 
to persist, but till now it has not affected the financial situation in Israel. 
Third,  the  NIS/$  and  the  NIS/currency–basket  exchange  rates  have  been  very  stable,  and  this  has 
occurred without Bank of Israel intervention since 1997, but just through market forces. The volatility of 
the NIS exchange-rate against the dollar is lower than that of many other currencies. Thus last year, 
for example, the standard deviation of the NIS against the dollar was about 4 percent, those of the 
euro and the pound sterling were both about 10 percent vis-a-vis the dollar, and of the Mexican peso, 
about  7  percent.  These  are  just  some  examples  to  illustrate  the  situation  of  the  currencies  of  most 
advanced and emerging economies vis-a-vis the dollar. 
This stability is vital for us: without it, it is very difficult to achieve long-term growth. This is especially 
the case in the era of globalization, with real competition for international investment, a competition in 
which  it  is  important  to  succeed.  And  indeed,  Israel's  economy  benefited  from  an  inflow  of  foreign 
investment that totaled some $ 5 billion in just the first four months of 2005, not far below the total of 
about $ 6.5 billion in the whole of 2004. Such inflows are of a magnitude larger than those to many 
other markets. 
Growth is the most important issue - not simply growth, but sustained growth. Without it we cannot 
ensure a rise in the standard of living and in the welfare of the population. Nevertheless, it must be 
borne in mind that economic growth in Israel is affected also by international economic developments, 
and  here  it  should  be  noted  that  currently  there  is  uncertainty  regarding  the  growth  of  the  global 
economy.  On  the  positive  side,  data  relating  to  the  Japanese  economy  in  the  first  quarter  of  2005 
indicate a very rapid growth rate of about 5 percent in annual terms, but at the same time growth in 
Europe was very weak and the OECD cut its forecast growth for the eurozone to only 1.2 percent for 
2005. Hence, the picture that emerges is rather unclear, showing no definite pattern. 
Data relating to Israel's economic growth in the first quarter of 2005, 2.9 percent, suggested a certain 
slowing of economic activity. Other data, however, point in the opposite direction. Most important are 
the  data  in  the  Labour  Force  Survey  indicating  a  significant  improvement  in  2005:I:  unemployment 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
continued  to  drop,  going  down  from  9.8  percent  to  9.1  percent,  and  there  was  an  improvement  in 
employment - the number of employees rose by 33,000, with a significant increase in the number of 
full-time  employees,  and with  the  business  sector  absorbing  about  two-thirds  of  the  increase  in  the 
number of employees. High-tech exports rose markedly in April 2005; although there was a slowdown 
in the rise in private consumption, it is still at a very high level following its increase in 2004; tourist 
entries  continue  to  rise  gradually;  and  the  composite  state-of-the-economy  index  for  the  first  few 
months of the year was retroactively revised upwards last week by the Bank of Israel. 
Hence, the picture that emerges regarding economic activity in the first few months of the year does 
not justify changing the Bank of Israel's forecast of 4 percent growth for 2005. 
This  situation  of  a  growing  economy  with  economic  and  financial  stability  did  not  come  about  by 
chance. It is the result of a correct macroeconomic policy, in particular of monetary policy that focuses 
on stability, and without jeopardizing it, helps growth, combined with fiscal policy that operates within 
the framework of long-term fiscal discipline alongside structural reforms that support growth. 
As far as fiscal policy is concerned, I am in favor of the Ministry of Finance program to reduce taxes; 
care must be taken to ensure that during its implementation special attention is paid to the welfare 
aspects of the program, and that the government debt and its high share in GDP continue along their 
downward path. 
I would like to turn now to two important issues facing us, and which the Finance Committee will also 
have to deal with: the recommendations of the Bachar Committee, and the Bank of Israel Law. 
With regard to the Bachar Committee, I would like to make it perfectly clear that I support the proposed 
reform  of  the  capital  market  along  the  lines  recommended  by  the  Committee.  The  high  degree  of 
concentration in the capital market has an adverse effect on economic growth and efficiency. It is very 
difficult  to  pursue  a  policy  of  economic  reforms  without  dealing  with  this  issue  in  a  thorough  and 
comprehensive manner. The proposals of the Bachar Committee offer a good solution to the problems 
of concentration afflicting Israel's capital market. Most of the credit market is in the hands of the banks, 
and  although  nonbank  credit  has  been  expanding  recently,  the  rate  at  which  this  is  happening  still 
leaves the bulk of credit within the banking system. There are certain detailed aspects of the reform 
that are still being addressed. But the question to be asked is whether after the reform the situation in 
the  capital  market  will  be  better  than  before.  If  the  answer  is  "yes,"  then  we  must  go  ahead  and 
implement it. In this case my answer is a definite "yes." 
The second vital issue, and to the Bank of Israel this is the first issue, is the Bank of Israel Law. I 
would like to state at the outset that despite the fact that the Bank has been operating for 50 years 
under the same antiquated Law, it does a very good job. 
So why is a new law needed? 
Someone actually advised me that it is not worth my while to push for a new Bank of Israel Law. "Why 
not?" I asked. To which he answered, "Because currently you have all the power. You basically make 
all the decisions alone - on the interest rate and even on which of the various objectives specified in 
the Law you choose to concentrate." 
Honorable  Members  of  Knesset,  the  Bank  of  Israel  Law  is  not  at  all  about  how  much  power  the 
Governor  yields,  or  if  it  suits  him  to  make  decisions  alone.  The  Bank  of  Israel  Law  is  about 
constructing a mechanism that will strengthen the central bank and its ability to act for the good of the 
economy and the state. The existing Law is inappropriate for a modern central bank. It is true that for 
many years the Bank of Israel has had an ordered, professional decision-making process in which the 
relevant departments and professional parties are involved, which helped my predecessors to make 
decisions. Nevertheless, under the current Law the final authority and responsibility for decisions rests 
with the Governor alone. And that is not the optimal situation. 
Since the Bank of Israel was established 50 years ago, the attitude towards central banks - both world 
wide  and  in  Israel  -  has  undergone  fundamental  changes,  regarding  their  objectives,  their 
decision-making processes, the instruments they need to have at their disposal, and their obligations 
towards the government, parliament and the public. 
What, then, is required from the new law? 
First, a clear definition of the objectives of the central bank must be specified. It is important that we 
adopt  the  concept  accepted  throughout  the  world,  and  define  the  achievement  of  price  stability  - 
according  to  a  target  set  by  the  government  -  as  the  major  goal.  In  addition,  the  Bank  should  also 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
support the orderly activity of the financial system. At the same time it is important to specify that the 
Bank  should  support  other  objectives,  such  as  growth  and  employment,  as  long  as  these  do  not 
undermine price stability. 
Second,  the  Bank  must  be  given  independence  to  employ  the  instruments  needed  to  achieve  its 
purposes, according to its professional judgment. This is obvious. 
Third, an ordered decision-making framework should be established, i.e., a monetary committee that 
will decide on monetary issues, and an administrative council that will decide on or authorize decisions 
on  such  issues  as  the  Bank's  budget  and  employees'  salaries.  Such  systems  will  on  the  one  hand 
ensure  the  Bank's  independence  in  making  decisions,  and on  the  other  will constitute  an  important 
control  mechanism.  This  is  necessary  because  independence  must  always  be  accompanied  by 
responsibility and appropriate checks and balances. 
Fourth,  a  proper  system  of  reporting  and  transparency  should  be  established  -  reporting  to  the 
government, the Knesset and the public. 
I am currently working together with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance on the Bank of 
Israel  Law  in  an  atmosphere  of  mutual  understanding  regarding  the  importance  of  concluding  this 
matter quickly. I hope that in the next few months a proposal for a new Bank of Israel Law will be laid 
before the Knesset, and with your valuable help we will at last celebrate the successful conclusion of 
this important process. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 3
