Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
23 May 2005. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  Membres  de  la  Commission  Economique  et 
Monétaire, je me réjouis de paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui et de poursuivre ainsi notre 
dialogue régulier. Vous connaissez le rôle important que jouent nos rencontres trimestrielles dans le 
contexte de la responsabilité de la Banque Centrale Européenne vis-à-vis nos citoyens, responsabilité 
à  laquelle,  comme  vous  le  savez,  la  BCE  attache  beaucoup  d’importance.  Je  commencerai  mon 
discours  avec  une  évaluation  de  la  situation  économique  et  monétaire.  Aus  Anlass  des  unlängst 
erfolgten  Beitrittes  von  drei  neuen  Mitgliedstaaten  zum  Wechselkursmechanismus  II  möchte  ich 
sodann auch kurz zu diesem Thema Stellung nehmen. 
Economic and monetary developments 
Recent  data  confirm  that  some  of  the  downward  risks  to  economic  growth  identified  in  the  past,  in 
particular  those  related  to  persistently  high  oil  prices,  have  partially  materialised  over  the  last  few 
months. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP rose by 0.5% quarter on quarter in the first 
quarter  of  2005.  While  this  compares  favourably  with  the  0.2%  increase  observed  in  the  previous 
quarter, the apparent improvement largely reflects technical factors related to working day adjustments 
to  the  data.  Taking  those  factors  into  account,  the  recent  available  indicators  of  economic  activity 
suggest that the modest growth observed in the second half of 2004 will continue in the first half of 
2005, with no clear signs as yet of a broadening or strengthening of the growth dynamic.  
Looking  further  ahead,  investment  is  expected  to  continue  to  benefit  from  robust  earnings, 
improvements in business efficiency and very favourable financing conditions. On the external side, 
euro  area  exports  should  continue  to  benefit  from  global  economic  growth.  Accordingly,  we  expect 
continued,  relatively  moderate  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  2005  and  2006.  This  picture  is 
broadly in line with available forecasts from international and private sector organisations. 
The outlook for economic activity continues, however, to be surrounded by relatively high uncertainty. 
On  the  domestic  side,  uncertainties  relate  in  particular  to  the  evolution  of  private  consumption  in 
relation  with  consumer  confidence.  On  the  external  side,  persistently  high  oil  prices  and  continued 
global imbalances pose downside risks to growth. With regard to those global imbalances, let me note 
that I fully trust that they can be progressively alleviated only by embarking actively on the homework 
that has to be done in all G-7/G-3 economies, in particular by correcting the lack of savings in the US 
and implementing structural reforms in Europe. 
Let me add that the ECB is also of the view – and I have signed myself the G-7 communiqués since 
the  meeting  in  Boca  Raton,  at  the  beginning  of  last  year,  that  are  stressing  this  point  –  that  the 
currencies  of  a  number  of  Asian  emerging  countries  are  undervalued  against  major  international 
currencies, in particular the euro and the dollar. This is the case of the Chinese currency, but not only 
of the Chinese currency.  
Turning to price developments in the euro area, according to Eurostat, annual HICP inflation was 2.1% 
in  April,  unchanged  from  the  previous  two  months.  Over  the  coming  months,  annual  HICP  inflation 
rates  are  likely  to  remain  around  current  levels,  partly  reflecting  upward  pressure  on  energy  prices 
stemming  from  oil  price  increases.  As  regards  the  labour  market,  wage  increases  have  remained 
contained  over  recent  quarters  and,  in  the  context  of  moderate  economic  growth  and  weak  labour 
markets,  this  trend  should  continue  for  the  time  being.  Overall,  we  continue  to  see  no  significant 
evidence  of  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  building  up  in  the  euro  area.  This  picture  is 
broadly in line with forecasts recently released by international and private sector organisations. 
However,  there  continue  to  be  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  these  risks 
warrant  continued  vigilance.  Risks  are  associated  mainly  with  oil  price  developments  and  potential 
second-round effects stemming from wage and price-setting behaviour. In this respect, responsibility 
on the part of social partners remains very important. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
Our monetary analysis also calls for vigilance regarding upside risks to price stability over the medium 
to longer term. After moderating in the first half of 2004, monetary and credit growth remain strong, 
reflecting the stimulative effect on monetary dynamics of the historically very low level of interest rates 
in the euro area. As monetary dynamics over the past year have mainly been driven by developments 
in  the  most  liquid  components  of  M3,  this  continues  to  signal  upside  risks  to  price  stability  in  the 
medium to longer term. Moreover, strong monetary and credit growth – in particular the marked growth 
observed in loans for house purchase – require careful monitoring. 
In the context of relatively contained underlying inflationary pressures, the ECB has left its key interest 
rates  unchanged  since  June  2003.  The  low  level  of  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  has  provided 
significant and continued support to the economic recovery. At the same time, upside risks to price 
stability need to be monitored closely. Cross-checking with the indications from the monetary analysis 
supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to those risks. 
Monetary policy and heterogeneity  
I would like to make some remarks on inflation and growth disparities in the euro area and how they 
may be relevant for the conduct of monetary policy. 
Inflation dispersion in the euro area declined throughout the 1990s. Since the introduction of the euro 
it  has  broadly  stabilised  at  a  low  level  similar  to  those  observed  in  other  long-standing  monetary 
unions, such as the United States. Over the same period, the dispersion in real economic growth has 
been  in  line  with  its  historical  values.  Although  dispersion  has  increased  somewhat  in  the  last  few 
quarters, particularly as regards the four largest euro area economies, it does not appear exceptional 
from a historical perspective. 
Differentials in growth and inflation across regions and sectors are a standard feature of vast currency 
areas around the world. They are a natural product of the continuous readjustment of relative prices 
and quantities in a market economy.  
At the same time, the persistence of differentials across the euro area is a matter that needs to be 
addressed.  To  some  extent,  this  is  a  reflection  of  deep-seated  structural  inefficiencies,  such  as 
nominal  and  real  rigidities  in  labour  and  product  markets.  Such  structural  differences  call  for 
appropriate national policies with a view to achieving a higher degree of flexibility and adaptability in 
the institutions and market structures of all economies.  
In line with its mandate, as laid down in the Treaty, the ECB focuses on maintaining price stability in 
the euro area as a whole. The ECB’s internal work, analysis and assessment of economic information, 
its policy discussions and its deliberations are directed at achieving its primary objective for the entire 
currency union. While limiting inflation and growth differentials cannot form an objective for the ECB’s 
monetary  policy,  it  is  necessary  for  the  ECB  to  assess  the  underlying  causes  of  such  differentials. 
Monitoring  national  and  sectoral  developments  is key  to  understanding  the  underlying  trends  in  the 
euro  area  as  a  whole  with  a  view  to  formulating  the  most  appropriate  monetary  policy  response. 
Consequently, the ECB regularly reviews and analyses all relevant information relating to the various 
sectors  and  countries  of  the  euro  area.  In  this  respect,  particular  attention  must  be  given  by 
responsible authorities to the evolution of competitiveness indicators, in particular of unit labour costs 
in  the  various  national  economies.  These  indicators  are  key  in  a  single  currency  area  where 
realignments are excluded by definition.  
The ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability, its high degree of credibility and its focus on the 
achievement  of  its  primary  objective  have  enabled  it  to  control  inflation  and  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations in the euro area at a very low level in all countries of the euro area. This has resulted in 
low  interest  rates  and  extremely  favourable  financing  conditions  to  the  benefit  of  all  euro  area 
economies.  Moreover,  by  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  increasing  transparency,  monetary 
policy contributes to the adjustment of relative prices and facilitates the role of such prices in guiding 
the allocation of resources across countries and sectors. This is the best contribution that monetary 
policy can make to economic welfare and the achievement of high levels of activity and employment in 
our economies. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
Fiscal policies and the Stability and Growth Pact 
Let  me  now  turn  to  fiscal  policies.  While  a  few  countries  succeed  in  maintaining  sound  budgetary 
positions,  developments  in  many  euro  area  Member  States  remain  disappointing.  Unless  additional 
measures are taken, it is looking increasingly unlikely that those countries will reduce their deficits this 
year  below  the  reference  value  of  3%  of  GDP  or  prevent  them  from  exceeding  that  level.  In  the 
meantime, the indebtedness of euro area governments as a percentage of GDP has again increased.  
It is therefore essential that consolidation be given the highest priority in the countries concerned and 
that the reformed Stability and Growth Pact be implemented in a strict and timely manner to ensure a 
rapid return to sound budgetary positions. This is primarily in the interests of the countries themselves, 
especially  in  view  of  the  increasing  pressure  being  placed  on  government  budgets  by  ageing 
populations. 
Lisbon Strategy 
I would also like to take this opportunity to stress again the need to implement structural reforms in 
Europe. These reforms should be aimed at realising a more dynamic and competitive economy with 
flexible  labour,  product  and  financial  markets,  allowing  for  a  more  rapid  adjustment  of  production 
factors to a constantly changing environment. We are faced with the unavoidable challenges arising 
from an ongoing deepening in the global division of labour, a fast process of technological change and 
the ageing of the European population. The appropriate response is to create the conditions which will 
allow both firms and workers to deal with these challenges in the most effective and efficient manner, 
thereby ensuring a high level of output growth and job creation in the longer run.  
The  recent  relaunch  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy  at  the  spring  European  Council  meeting  has  rightly 
refocused policy priorities on the drivers of growth and employment. This needs a strong commitment 
to well-designed and comprehensive structural reforms, the benefits of which are efficiently explained 
to the public opinion. By undertaking the measures and convincing the public in this way Europe will 
succeed  in  both  improving  the  economic  outlook  and  sustaining  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of 
European citizens. 
The Exchange Rate Mechanism II 
A little more than a year has now elapsed since ten new Member States joined the European Union, 
and their economic integration has been progressing at an impressive pace for a number of years. A 
number  of  these  countries  have  also  advanced  significantly  in  terms  of  monetary  integration.  With 
effect from 2 May 2005 Cyprus, Latvia and Malta joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II), 
bringing  the  number  of  countries  participating  in  ERM II  to  seven.  Indeed,  Estonia,  Lithuania  and 
Slovenia had already decided – in June of last year – to join Denmark in ERM II. The inclusion of the 
new currencies in the mechanism has proceeded in a very smooth and orderly manner. 
With their entry into ERM II, these countries have linked their currencies to the euro as a preparatory 
step towards the ultimate adoption of the single currency. Being members of ERM II will help them to 
orient their policies towards stability. Indeed, as was stressed in the 1997 Amsterdam Resolution of 
the European Council on ERM II, the mechanism has been designed as a reference for the conduct of 
sound  economic  policies  in  general  and  monetary  policy  in  particular.  Thus,  the  mechanism  should 
also contribute to the achievement of sustainable convergence.  
However,  membership  of  ERM  II  will  not  automatically  yield  sound  policies.  Rather,  successful  and 
smooth participation in the mechanism requires significant commitments of the part of its members. 
Although the precise nature of these commitments depends on the specific situations in the various 
participating countries,  I would  like  to  stress  in  this context  the  importance of  pursuing  sound  fiscal 
policies and a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy,  as  well as measures  to  enhance  the  flexibility  and 
adaptability of the economy. The pursuit of such policies within the ERM II framework will not only be 
of direct benefit to the Member States concerned, but will also help to ensure the smooth functioning 
of the system as a whole.  
In conclusion, membership of ERM II for a period of at least two years and without severe tensions 
prior to the convergence examination is a crucial element on the road to the adoption of the euro. This 
is  not  only  a  phase  which  tests  Member  States’  eligibility  to  adopt  the  euro,  but  also  serves  those 
Member States’ own best interests. I should like to add that each individual Member State’s date of 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
entry and period of participation in the mechanism depends on its specific situation. The ECB as well 
as  the  Commission  will  continue  to  carefully  monitor  exchange  rate  developments  within  ERM II, 
together  with  the  other  convergence  criteria,  and  will  present  their  conclusions  in  the  Convergence 
Reports, in line with the provisions of the Treaty. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
