M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: The strengths and weaknesses of the Thai financial 
system 
Address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Annual Dinner 
organised by the Thai Bankers Association, Bangkok, 18 February 2005. 
 Distinguished members of the 
Thai Bankers Association 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thirty years ago, when I first started to work at a commercial bank, I well remembered that every year 
there would be an evening of informal gathering among top management of commercial banks and the 
Bank of Thailand. The event provided an occasion for us to get together after one full year of hard 
work. The gathering is not one where supervisors meet the regulated. It is a gathering of people in the 
financial sector, bonded in fellowship, for they have shared the fruits of their success and their labour. 
It is therefore natural that in a gathering such as this, the central bank Governor who has been given 
the  leadership  role  to  steer  the  herd,  would  use  the  occasion  to  discuss  the  future  direction  of  our 
financial system, including the strength and weaknesses, and prospects for improvement. 
I once had an opportunity to join such an event when Dr. Snoh Unakul was Governor of the Bank of 
Thailand. I still hold fond memories of that event till this day. 
I am very pleased that the Thai Bankers Association has once again revived this noble tradition. And, 
wearing the headmask of a central bank Governor, I will avail myself of this forum to share with you 
some  thoughts  and  suggestions  coming  from  one  who  has  followed  and  spearheaded  the 
developments of our financial system. I will be frank and candid in my remarks. I will share with you 
my perspectives on the strength and weaknesses, which we all have a responsibility to overcome. 
First of all, I would like to express my sincere thanks to all the bankers for the wonderful cooperation 
we have been receiving these past few years. Since I assumed office, I received your cooperation on 
the sale of 300 billion baht in government bonds to finance the historical losses of the FIDF. It was 
probably the biggest launch ever and one that received tremendous success. 
And  in  response  to  the  Tsunami  tragedy,  which  affected  the  6  provinces  in  the  South,  commercial 
banks threw their support by extending loans at concessionary rates to those who were affected in the 
areas. So far, more than 43 billion baht have been approved. In addition, commercial banks have also 
reduced the interest burden on the customers affected by the outbreak of violence in the 3 southern 
border provinces. The banking community has willingly stepped in to help without undue regard for 
their balance sheet. 
On business operations, commercial banks have given their full cooperation in the setting up of the 
nationwide Banknote Operations Centres, which enabled the completion of the new system within a 
short period of 1 year. Other than that you have also rendered your support to the Data Management 
System (DMS), a large and important project that is currently making progress and will significantly 
reduce the burden of reporting and eliminating duplication and the wasteful use of resources. 
Lastly, I wish to thank you for your commitment and cooperation to develop the Interbank Transaction 
Management  and  Exchange  System  (ITMX),  which  is  an  important  infrastructure  of  our  modern 
payment system. The system provides a standard linkage to serve customers and to support interbank 
transactions  such  as  E-clearing.  This  will  boost  the  efficiency  of  the  payment  system  in  line  with 
international  best  practices.  More  importantly,  it  is  a  significant  move  from  a  government-owned 
payment  system  to  a  privately  run  system  owned  and  operated  by  all  commercial  banks.  This 
development, in turn, will provide a basis for the system to respond more efficiently to the changing 
environment and where commercial banks can set appropriate fees consistent with their costs. 
I  am  truly  delighted  to  see  such  cooperation  being  worked  out  in  the  spirit  of  fair  and  collective 
responsibility, which will help enhance the efficiency and stability of our financial system. 
Distinguished members 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
It  is  well  recognized  today  that  the  Thai  economy  is  on  the  recovery  path  after  years  of  sluggish 
performance. Economic indicators point to firm and clear signs of improvement, albeit not to the extent 
of skyrocketing performance, but one of continuous recovery at a steady pace. The credit standing of 
our country has also improved where reputable credit rating agency such as Moody's has upgraded 
Thailand's sovereign rating from Baa3 to Baa1; whilst S& P, from BBB to BBB+. 
I  have  to  especially  congratulate  financial  institutions,  especially  on  your  last  year  financial 
performances. Banking sector operations was more profitable than the previous year as reflected in 
the average Return on Asset (ROA) of 1.33% for the industry. Such an achievement is no doubt the 
product of your hard work and perseverance. 
I  recall,  back  in  2001,  when  I  assumed  office,  I  was  disheartened  by  the  earnings  results  of  the 
banking system. In the year 2000, the banking system incurred losses of more than one hundred 
billion  baht  (-106.49  billion  baht)  or  an  average  ROA  of  negative  1.7%  of  total  assets.  The  first 
question that came to my mind was to return the banking industry to profitability or else the system 
would not survive. 
You may recall that at the end of year 2001, we had a discussion at the BOT. Following that meeting, 
banks started to gradually reduce the deposit rate and stop competing for deposit through high deposit 
rates. These were important steps that helped reduce banks costs and gradually turn in profits. 
You should take pride in the way we have overcome the tough times following the economic crisis. We 
started  with  the  massive  bank  recapitalization  at  very  high  costs;  we  dealt  with  tough  debt 
restructurings  in  amount  and  volume  unknown  in  Thai  history;  we  moved  to  reduce  costs  by  re-
engineering our work process and downsizing our work force; we improved services to find alternative 
source  of  income,  we  ceased  to  compete  for  deposit  through  offering  high  interest  rate;  and  we 
succeeded in recapitalizating for the second round at lower costs than the initial round. These events 
combined to show up in better carving results and the potential to grow profitably. Today, I can say 
with confidence that our banking industry no longer has a weak spot that would pose systemic risk on 
the economy. 
Although  many  analysts still  considered  the  NPLs  number  high,  in  my  view,  the  current  situation  is 
much better. Banks have been putting a lot of efforts to solve the NPLs problem. Recently NPLs of the 
banking  system  came  down  to  11.03 %.  A  closer  look  at  the  remaining  NPLs  of 576.8  billion  baht, 
shows that 84.6 billion baht are loans which have been restructured and awaiting the signing of the 
agreement or the fulfillment of the 3 months obligation after which they will be reclassified as normal 
loans. Another 241.6 billion baht is awaiting foreclosure and will eventually become the assets of the 
banks. The Government is planning to amend the Asset Management Company (AMC), to enable the 
AMC to buy these NPLs from commercial banks at a fair value. Meanwhile, the remaining 250.6 billion 
baht are under the restructuring process of banks. I trust that with your efforts the 250.6 billion baht 
can  be  brought  down  to  less  than  100,000  million  baht  or  to  2%  of  total  loan  portfolios  in  the  year 
2006. By that time we will be able to announce to the world that our banking system is as strong and 
competitive as any leading institutions in the region. 
Other than the challenges of the resolution of NPLs, the Bank of Thailand has also entrusted upon you 
the responsibility to develop our financial system in line with the international best practices, namely 
the  adoption  of  the  Basel  II  framework.  The  Basel  II  emphasizes  the  adequacy  of  capital  in 
accordance with the underlying risks. Its main objective is to build confidence of international investors 
and to ensure that Thai commercial banks can increase their access to and compete in a level playing 
field  in  international  capital  markets.  I  recognize  that  working  towards  the  adoption  of  the  Basel  II 
framework  has  been  burdensome,  complicated,  and  difficult,  but,  once  we  have  pointed  out  its 
benefits, every bank has been very forthcoming to meet this new international standard. I would like to 
record our thanks and appreciation for your positive response on this issue. 
In addition to moving towards such guidelines, an important element to achieve sound banking with 
public acceptance, both domestically and internationally, is to have "Ethical Management", a term I 
prefer  to  the  term  "Good  Governance".  This  is  where  Board  members  and  senior  management  of 
banks have a duty to play role models to others. 
Banking  failures  in  the  past  have  often  been  associated  with  unethical  mismanagement  through 
lending to related parties, lending to affiliated companies or those of families and friends, or lending to 
inconspicuous  groups  upon  request  of influential powers.  In some  cases, senior  management  have 
also benefited from return favours in the forms of share ownership in the debtor company. The board 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
of  directors  of  the  bank  has  a  duty  to  prevent  these  abuses.  This  must  start  from  the  process  of 
selection of bank management who must have high moral grounds and integrity. 
I do not wish to use the term "professional" because I have seen many professionals who have taken 
advantage  of  their  organizations.  I  would  like  to  see  banks  select  competent  management  of  high 
moral standing and integrity to manage the institution. 
The  board  of  directors  must  also  conduct  themselves  as  role  model  by  exercising  restraint  and 
minimizing their exposure to potential conflicts of interest. They must not give special treatment to their 
relatives and friends, which could potentially lead to losses to the bank. The board of directors must 
provide  the  leadership  and  protection  to  the  management  when  faced  with  request  from  influential 
powers. 
Thai society places virtue on kindness; people in influential position are often approached for special 
help and favours. Often time such requests are being entertained without prejudice and without the 
knowledge  that  such  actions  can  result  in  the  bank's  financial  losses  later  on.  The  duty  of  the 
management  is  to  exercise  diligence  and  care  in  considering  such  requests.  If  the  loan  application 
meets  the  bank's  criteria,  the  bank  could  extend  the  loans  as  the  case  with  ordinary  customers. 
Otherwise,  management  should  make  an  effort  to  explain  the  case  to  the  influential  party.  Such 
communication will avoid problems and promote mutual understanding. I have done this before when I 
was working at the EXIM Bank and the requesting party also understood our point. 
In general commerce or businesses, the practice of giving special favours or treatment to influential 
people from time to time through special discounts or complimentary offers do not pose unnecessary 
risk. But in the business of financial institutions, the losses that ensue are far too great and may lead 
to the collapse of the financial institutions or the financial system at large. Therefore, it is imperative 
that  board  members  exercise  great  care  and  prudence.  In  some  instances,  board  members  might 
consider it a minor issue, but as a board member, one cannot afford to undermine one's integrity and 
reputation. It board members overlook small matters, then management may take the opportunity to 
do the same but this time with bigger cases, and other finance officers may also do the same until the 
practice becomes widespread and pose a risk to the bank. 
Board members should therefore recognize the critical importance of their office. Board members of 
banks are not merely board members of a company. They are board members of a financial institution 
that  is  part  of  the  financial  system  of  the  country.  Their  responsibility  is  far-reaching.  The  bank  is 
responsible  for  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources  or  the  scarce  public  savings  for  investment  in 
economically viable projects to enhance the country's potential growth and development. The board 
should  ensure  adequate  oversight  on  the  allocation  of  funds  to  unproductive  projects.  This  is 
especially so if the board member is the board of a bank which is owned by the slate. 
More important than their oversight role on management, the Board member must not put themselves 
in  a  position  that  would  compromise  their  integrity  by  accommodating  the  requests  of  friends  and 
families,  or  by  cultivating  the  favours  of  influential  powers.  If  board  members  are  in  it  themselves, 
there is not stopping others from doing the same. 
Unethical  behaviour  in  the  management  of  a  bank,  also  touches  on  issues  other  than  lending 
activities, there is also the issue of excessive expenses. Here the management of some banks has 
been  practicing  without  undue  regard  for  what  I  would  call  decent  practices.  If  left  unchecked,  this 
practice could be widespread throughout the bank and ultimately affect bank's cost and profitability. 
Here too, the board must also exercise oversight to safeguard the interests of the organization. 
To  do  this  effectively,  the  boards  must  exercise  restraint  not  to  reap  undue  benefits  from  the  bank 
even in small matters. For if board members are tempted by the benefits from the institutions, they 
would immediately undermine their authority to manage their subordinates. 
Let me give an example of what I see as taking undue benefits. Lately, I noticed that the remuneration 
of  Board  members  in  some  banks  have  been  set  at  a  unreasonably  high  level.  Some  banks  pay 
meeting allowances at a relatively fair rate and pay no bonus (which seems appropriate). Some banks 
pay relatively less meeting allowances but also pay fixed bonus for the heavy responsibilities (which is 
still  considered  acceptable).  Some  banks  both  pay  high  meeting  allowances  and  high  bonus.  And, 
interestingly the bonus is also paid out at a flexible rate based on yearly profit, which is inherently risky 
as a scheme of compensation payment. 
The point here is that if the remuneration of board members varies with the profits of the bank, then 
this could create a disincentive for board members to exercise their oversight responsibility to ensure 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 3
the prudence and soundness of the bank through adequate provisioning, or prevent management from 
undertaking excessive risks for greater prospects of profits. Typically, a bank that runs its operations in 
a normal course of business without special efforts is already expected to generate returns on their 
business  or  normal  profits.  If  the  entire  profit  is  taken  as  base  to  calculate  bonus  for  their  board 
members, would that seem fair to the institution? Furthermore, how would board members explain to 
their employees that the basis of computation of their bonus is the individual employees' salary, while 
that used for board members are calculated based on total profits? 
I am bringing up this topic today with no intention of being disrespectful to the many senior board of 
directors of our financial community. I merely noticed the rapid escalation of certain benefits of board 
members of some banks rising to the point of "excessive". My only concern is that such practices may 
be brought up by your subordinates, which may undermine your authorities to lead, and to supervise a 
business that is so vital to the financial system of the country. 
However, I do not intend to issue guidelines on this matter. But, I believe that what has been brought 
up today will lead to significant improvements at your own initiatives. There is a saying from Venerable 
Phra  Dhammapitaka  (a  highly  respected  venerable,  the  master  of  "Buddhist  Economics")  that  "the 
righteous path for a business is one which it does right for its customers, its employees, its social and 
environment, its shareholders, its owners and itself”. I subscribe to this principle that an honourable 
executive is one who does what is right for his employees, his organization (by not excessively taking 
benefits from the organization), and for himself (by not reducing the benefits he deserves to receive 
from the organization). 
In conclusion, I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to the Thai Bankers Association and all 
its members for bringing back this traditional gathering. I truly hope that my frank and candid remarks 
will not lead to cancellation of next year's event!! 
I would like to emphasize that I have no ill intentions other than to see our financial system progress 
and develop with a sound management and ethical standard. There is a deeper meaning to this than 
the  sense  of  "Good  Governance"  of  the  Western  world.  Above  all,  the  country  would  then  have  a 
financial system that is sound and robust for years to come. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2005
