John Hurley: The monetary and financial environment in the euro area 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
to the ACI Ireland, Dublin, 11 April 2005. 
 Introduction 
First, let me say how pleased I am to have the opportunity to speak to you tonight. The ACI plays an 
important  role  in  bringing  together  participants  in  financial  markets  and  in  actively  promoting  the 
education and professional development of its members.  
I  would  like  to  begin  tonight  by  talking  about  euro  area  monetary  policy  and  the  factors  which  are 
shaping the current environment. I will then talk briefly about monetary policy implementation. Finally, I 
will devote some time to the important topic of financial integration in Europe. 
The economic background 
Beginning with monetary policy, a key feature of both the euro area and global economies in recent 
years  has  been  the  unusually  high  degree  of  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  which  has 
accompanied  economic  recovery.  As  a  result,  particularly  in  the  euro  area,  growth  has  ebbed  and 
flowed and the recovery has not evolved in the smooth and sustained fashion that would be normal for 
this stage of the economic cycle.  
While the recovery of economic activity in the euro area which started in 2003, continued in 2004, it 
was a year of two quite different halves. Relatively strong growth in the first-half of 2004 was followed 
by a slowdown in activity in the second-half. This reflected both the impact of higher oil prices and 
exchange rate developments. Thus, while growth of 1.8 per cent was recorded in 2004, the highest 
rate since 2000, the euro area economy lost some momentum during the second-half of the year. 
While a somewhat similar pattern was also observed in the wider international economy, the global 
growth performance has been a good deal more impressive than that of the euro area over the past 
18 months. Last year the global economy grew by 5 per cent, its fastest rate of growth in almost three 
decades; this was two and one-half times the rate of growth of the euro area. Driven by the strength of 
economic  activity  in  the  US  and  Asia,  the  global economy  grew rapidly  in  the  four quarters  to  mid-
2004.  The  strength  of  global  growth  during  this  period  was  supported  by  favourable  financial 
conditions  and  stimulative  macroeconomic  policies  in  many  countries.  In  the  US,  growth  acquired 
considerable momentum from the sizeable fiscal and monetary policy stimulus which had been put in 
place  earlier.  In  addition,  supportive  wealth  effects  from  equity  and  housing  markets  also  helped 
propel growth. The improvement in the global economic environment during this time was not solely 
confined to the US. Growth accelerated sharply in China and East Asia, where it was supported by the 
strong rebound in global trade flows and a revival in domestic demand.  
Since the middle of 2004, global growth momentum has slowed somewhat, though this has not been 
uniform.  For  most  countries,  with  the  exception  of  the  US,  growth  moderated  in  the  second-half  of 
2004, as the dampening impact of the rise in oil prices was felt. By and large, however, the slowdown 
has  been  modest  and,  so  far,  the  global  economy  has  weathered  the  earlier  rises  in  oil  prices 
reasonably well.  
The pick-up in growth in the euro area between mid-2003 and mid-2004, while much less vigorous 
than in the other major regions, benefited significantly from the strength of global growth. Over this 
period,  the  recovery  was  largely  driven  by  export  growth,  with  the  contribution  of  final  domestic 
demand  being  relatively  modest.  However,  there  were  significant  differences  across  countries. 
Domestic demand grew strongly in France and Spain, while remaining weak in Germany and Italy. In 
the aggregate, euro area domestic demand growth failed to generate much momentum. This reflected 
slow wage and employment growth and also continuing uncertainty regarding the implementation of 
structural  reforms,  which  dampened  confidence  and  held  back  consumption.  The  moderation  of 
growth  in  the  second-half  of  2004  was  largely  the  result  of  a  marked  decline  in  the  external 
contribution,  which  was  only  partially  compensated  for  by  higher  domestic  demand.  Slower  global 
growth and the lagged impact on competitiveness of the ongoing appreciation of the euro undercut 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 1
export growth, while rising oil prices also took their toll. As a result, growth in the second-half of 2004 
was a good deal weaker than in the first-half. 
Inflation developments 
Mainly reflecting the modest nature of the economic recovery, inflationary pressures have remained 
subdued in the euro area. HICP inflation averaged 2.1 per cent in 2004, unchanged from 2003. While 
higher  oil  prices  and  further  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  exerted  upward 
pressure  on  inflation,  this was  offset  by  ongoing  exchange  rate  appreciation  and  sluggish domestic 
demand.  
Despite the large rise in energy prices there have been no signs of 'second round effects'. There has 
been very little evidence of pass through from higher input prices to final goods, while the continued 
softness of labour markets has meant that wage growth has been moderate. Against this background, 
inflation  and  inflationary  pressures  have  been  relatively  subdued  and  inflation  expectations  have 
remained benign. In this environment, the Governing Council has kept interest rates unchanged at the 
exceptionally  low  levels prevailing  since  June 2003.  Thus,  euro area  interest rates  remain at  levels 
equivalent to post-World War II lows.  
The  current  euro  area  monetary  policy  environment  The  current  monetary  policy  environment  is 
complex, clouded with a number of domestic and international uncertainties. The euro area recovery 
has clearly lagged that of most of the other major economies, and the future strengthening of growth 
still remains a gradually emerging prospect rather than a current reality. While inflation and inflation 
expectations remain well grounded and we don't see any immediate threats, there are some upside 
risks  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  medium-term.  The  uncertainties  surrounding  the 
outlook relate in particular to the future evolution of euro area domestic demand, particularly consumer 
spending,  the  risks  stemming  from  higher  oil  prices,  the  potential  for  volatility  in  foreign  exchange 
markets  and  the  potential  impact  of  high  levels  of  liquidity.  Framing  monetary  policy  in  such  an 
environment is challenging.  
With regard to the economic outlook, the central scenario remains for moderate growth to gradually 
unfold,  though  the  pace  and  timing  of  any  pick-up  is  subject  to  much  uncertainty.  The  normal 
sequence  of  recovery  tends  to  run,  first,  from  a  pick-up  in  export  growth,  then  to  a  recovery  in 
investment and, finally, on to a strengthening of consumer spending. The recovery in export growth 
was largely seen in the period between mid-2003 and mid-2004. More recently, we have seen some 
small  improvement  in  investment  spending,  though  it  remains  sub-par  when  compared  to  earlier 
cycles.  This  would  appear  to  reflect  the  fact  that  strong  profit  growth  has  been  used  more  to 
restructure  balance sheets  than  to boost  investment.  The  main  disappointment,  however,  has  been 
the  performance  of  consumer  spending.  There  is  no  doubt  that  there  has  been  much  to  hold 
consumption back. Employment and wage growth have been modest. Persistently high and volatile oil 
prices have had a dampening influence. In addition, the level of saving has remained high, reflecting 
ongoing  concerns,  not  only  in  relation  to  labour  markets,  but  also  about  longer-term  prospects  for 
health-care and pension systems.  
Nevertheless, there are a number of positive factors. Real short-term and long-term interest rates are 
very low, making financing conditions favourable. The recovery in corporate profits should eventually 
stimulate  both  higher  investment  growth  and  a  recovery  in  employment,  which  should  underpin 
domestic demand. In addition, the continued strength of the global economy should help offset some 
of the drag resulting from the strengthening of the euro.  
More  recently,  the  signals  with  regard  to  the  outlook  for  growth  have  been  mixed.  While  data  for 
January was generally favourable, data since then has been less supportive. Confidence surveys and 
activity data have generally weakened again, against the background of the renewed sharp rise in oil 
prices. This is not encouraging and does not suggest that growth is likely to strengthen in the near 
term. However, more information from both surveys and hard data is required before firm conclusions 
can be drawn.  
This most recent episode is the latest instance in which high and volatile oil prices have raised risks. 
Not only do high and rising oil prices threaten to slow growth, they also raise the risk of higher inflation, 
and  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that  second-round  effects  on  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour  are 
avoided. The impact of higher oil prices on growth and inflation will depend on the scale of oil price 
increases,  its  persistence,  the  economy's  dependence  on  oil  and  second  round  effects  on  inflation. 
There is much uncertainty about the scale of the impact on growth and inflation and estimates vary 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2005
widely. On balance, the evidence tends to suggest that the effects of oil price shocks have become 
milder over time. Indeed, with regard to the inflationary impact of rising oil prices, it is notable that euro 
area inflation has been broadly stable in recent years. For example, despite a more than two and one-
half fold increase in oil prices from around $20 per barrel in early 2002, the headline rate of inflation 
has remained in a fairly narrow range - 1.6 to 2.5 per cent - over the same period, while the core rate 
of inflation has remained close to 2 per cent for most of the time, until recently when it has fallen. With 
regard  to  economic  activity,  while  the  impact  of  oil  prices  has  become  more  muted  over  time,  it 
nevertheless  remains  significant.  All  major  economic  downturns  over  the  past  three  decades  have 
been  associated  with  oil  price  shocks,  though  not  all  oil  price  shocks  have  led  to  downturns. 
Furthermore,  a  new  and  somewhat  worrying  feature  of  current  oil  markets  relates  to  the  rise  in 
long-term futures prices, suggesting that higher oil prices may be here for some time.  
Oil prices are not the only external factor complicating the outlook. There are also the risks posed by 
widening  global  current  account  imbalances,  which  show  no  signs  of  abating.  At  the  same  time, 
movements  in  exchange  rates  have  come  to  be  linked  with  the  evolution  of  imbalances.  Given  the 
relative fixity of some Asian currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar, from time to time, this has led to sharp 
upward movements in the value of the euro. The strengthening of the exchange rate has acted to slow 
activity  and  the  potential  for  further  volatility  in  foreign  exchange  markets  remains  an  important 
downside risk to growth. The position of the Governing Council on the issue of the exchange rate is 
very clear - sharp upward moves are unwelcome and undesirable for economic growth.  
There are also risks from within. In particular, reflecting the stimulative effect of low interest rates on 
the monetary aggregates, we have seen persistently strong growth in money and credit. This points to 
potential risks to price stability in the medium to long-term. We are mindful of these risks but we are 
also mindful that, as yet, there is no evidence that strong growth in liquidity is affecting the general 
level of spending. 
At some point in time, it will be necessary to begin to remove the accommodative stance of monetary 
policy. For the moment, however, the view of the Governing Council is that interest rates are at a level 
which is consistent with the maintenance of price stability. While there are risks to the outlook for both 
growth  and  inflation,  the  central  scenario  is  still  for  ongoing  moderate  growth  with  underlying 
inflationary pressures remaining contained. In taking interest rate decisions it is always a question of 
weighing up opposing factors and reaching a decision consistent with the medium-term goal of price 
stability.  I  can  assure  you  that  the  Governing  Council  remains  vigilant  and  will  continue  to  watch 
developments closely in coming months.  
Monetary policy implementation  
Turning now to implementation, the Central Bank has played and continues to play a full part in the 
Eurosystem's  monetary  policy  implementation  process.  At  the  operational  level,  Central  Bank  staff 
carry out the Eurosystem's regular money market management operations with Dublin based banks. 
Reflecting the importance of Dublin as an international financial centre, the banking system in Ireland 
has  a  disproportionately  high  share  of  Eurosystem  operations;  for  example,  the  normal  level  of 
outstanding lending by the Bank is in excess of EUR18 billion.  
At a strategic level, the Bank has had a full input into the evolution of the monetary policy framework, 
both  when  the  Eurosystem  operational  framework  was  being  designed  and  when  it  was  amended, 
most recently in March 2004. The revisions of last year came into effect following a public consultation, 
in which Irish institutions were among the most prominent in the number and comprehensiveness of 
their responses. The new arrangements involved a change in the timing of the reserve maintenance 
period and shortening the maturity of the Main Refinancing Operations from two weeks to one week. 
The  intention  of  these  two  revisions  was  to  eliminate  the  effects  of  expectations  of  interest  rate 
changes on bidding behaviour. The ECB also enhanced its communications with market participants 
and  increased  transparency  by  publishing  a  benchmark  allotment  for  each  Main  Refinancing 
Operation. The benchmark allotment is the amount that allows for neutral liquidity conditions and the 
market can now compare the actual allotment with this benchmark amount.  
The  implementation  of  the  recent  changes  went  smoothly  and  counterparties  quickly  adapted  their 
bidding behaviour to the increased allotment amounts in the weekly operations. A favourable outcome 
has been an overall stabilisation of the spread between the overnight rate and the minimum bid rate 
during the reserve maintenance period. Another, almost inevitable, consequence of the changes has 
been the increased incidence of liquidity imbalances at the end of the reserve maintenance period, 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 3
which has been reflected in increased volatility in the overnight rate on the last day of the period. The 
ECB has responded with more frequent fine-tuning operations and it recently consulted with market 
participants,  via  its  Money  Market  Contact  Group,  on  other  possible  approaches  that  might  help  to 
reduce volatility.  
The Eurosystem institutional set-up, involving centralised decision-making on monetary policy issues 
and decentralised implementation of policy presents special challenges in the area of communication. 
Such  arrangements  demand  that  the  Eurosystem keeps  in  touch  with  local  market  participants  and 
opinion. I would like to outline a few examples of how this achieved. Local market views are collected 
by  the  Bank  and  provided  to  the  ECB  on  a  daily  basis.  Together  with  the  views  of  the  rest  of  the 
euro-area market, these play a part in the ECB's management of the euro-area money market. We in 
the Bank also conduct annual money market surveys and periodic bond market studies, which feed 
into  wider  euro-area  market  studies  and  these  in  turn  are  published  by  the  ECB.  Another 
communication forum is the Dublin Markets Contact Group. This group of banks, representative of the 
local market, meets under the auspices of the Bank's Financial Market Department. We use this forum 
to provide feedback from similar groups established at Eurosystem level while local issues that arise in 
the Dublin market are fed back to the ECB. At a more informal level, communication is facilitated by 
frequent contact between Bank staff and market participants and I would encourage you to contact the 
Central Bank with your views on any notable market developments.  
The variety and type of assets acceptable as eligible collateral in Eurosystem credit operations is also 
currently  under  review  by  the  Eurosystem.  Following  a  public  consultation  process  the  Governing 
Council decided, in May of last year, to replace the current two-tier collateral system with a single list 
of collateral. This move, which will take place on a gradual basis, aims to reduce the diversity of the 
assets  currently  eligible  as  Tier-Two,  thereby  enhancing  the  transparency  of  the  overall  collateral 
framework. The first step towards establishing the Single List comes into force at the end of May and 
involves the inclusion of euro-denominated assets from issuers in major markets outside the European 
Economic  Area  (for  example,  euro  bonds  of  US  issuers)  and  the  phasing  out  over  time  of  some 
Tier-Two collateral, for example equities. As a second step, the Governing Council has approved, in 
principle,  the  inclusion  in  the  Single  List  of  bank  loans  from  all  euro-area  countries  and 
mortgage-backed promissory notes which were specially developed for Irish market conditions. I am 
particularly pleased at the retention of mortgage-backed promissory notes as this represents a positive 
result of a great deal of work undertaken by the Bank's representatives at Eurosystem level.  
In terms of market functioning, we particularly welcome the ACI initiative that is aimed at integrating 
the short-term securities markets across the euro-area. Supported by the ECB, this should soon see 
the issuance of short-term securities under the imprimatur of the ACI STEP committee. Along with a 
small  number  of  other  euro-area  national  central  banks,  the  Bank  will  contribute  to  the  process  of 
granting the STEP label, in our case for assets originating in Ireland and in some other jurisdictions.  
EU financial integration 
Turning  now  to  EU  Financial  integration.  The  EU  policy  framework  for  achieving  greater  financial 
integration is through regulation, supervision and financial infrastructure. In relation to regulation and 
supervision, while the single market was established in 1992, it was only in 1999, with the drafting of 
the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  (FSAP)  ,  that  a  concerted  effort  was  made  to  break  down  the 
barriers to the provision of pan-European financial services. The Plan has led to the adoption of almost 
42  Community  measures  which  cover  banking,  securities,  asset  management,  insurance  and 
pensions, clearing and settlement and many other cross-cutting issues. The impact of the FSAP on 
financial markets will, however, take time to manifest itself fully, and the focus now is on consistent 
enforcement and implementation across the Union.  
There  are  a  several  reasons  why  the  Bank,  and  the  SCAB,  want  to  see  more  integrated  EURO 
financial  markets.  These  include  better  and  more  efficient  allocation  of  risk  and  capital,  the  smooth 
operation  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  and  of  payment  systems,  and  greater 
overall financial stability.  
The financial system plays a fundamental role in the transmission of monetary policy, and integrated 
European  financial  markets  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the  euro  area's  monetary  policy.  This  is 
particularly  relevant  in  the  wholesale  money  and  bond  markets  in  which  the  EBB  and  the  Bank, 
through the SCAB, are involved. Financial market integration should also contribute to greater financial 
stability, since a larger and more diversified financial system is better able to absorb economic shocks. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2005
A robust framework for securities clearing and settlement - the plumbing of the financial system - is 
also needed. This infrastructure lies at the core of all financial markets and is indispensable for their 
proper functioning. There are a number of private and public-sector initiatives under way to promote 
the integration, efficiency, and security of the European securities infrastructure. One such important 
initiative is the development of the "Standards for Securities Clearing and Settlement in the European 
Union". These standards have been drawn up jointly by the SCAB and the Committee of European 
Securities Regulators (CESAR).  
In the context of financial integration, the TARGET system that commenced operations on the first day 
of Monetary Union was a major initiative and it has proved to be very successful. It was created by 
interconnecting  the  then-15  national  real-time  gross  settlement  (RAGS)  systems  and  the  EBB 
payment mechanism. 
TARGET  was  created  to  provide  a  safe,  efficient  and  reliable  mechanism  for  the  settlement  of 
cross-border large value payments in euro and to serve the needs of Euro system monetary policy. 
The  system  settles  payments  in  real  time  with  immediate  finality  in  central  bank  money,  thus 
eliminating  settlement  risk  between  participants.  It  is  uniquely  wide  in  its  coverage,  with  almost 
1,100 direct  participants  and  more  than  48,000  banks  -  including  branches  and  subsidiaries  - 
accessible through the system. Last year, an average of more than 267,000 payments with a value of 
EUR1.7 trillion were transferred through TARGET per business day. This makes TARGET - alongside 
the Fed wire system in the United States - one of the two largest wholesale payment systems in the 
world. 
In  December  2004,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  EBB  approved  the  building  of  a  TARGET  Single 
Shared Platform to replace the current decentralised structure. This new system will achieve a higher 
level of efficiency and improved security, through a harmonised structure based on a single technical 
platform. It will also provide a harmonised service level ensuring a level playing field for banks across 
Europe. This will be supported by a single price structure for domestic and cross-border payments. 
TARGET will offer new functionalities that will enable banks to achieve better integration of their euro 
liquidity  management.  The  existing  business  relationship  and  contacts  between  National  Central 
Banks  and  their  banking  communities  will  continue  on  the  same  basis  as  at  present.  Work  on  the 
building  of  the  new  system  is  currently  underway  and  it  is  scheduled  to  commence  operations  in 
January 2007. 
to 
is  essential 
financial  system 
Concluding remarks 
In  conclusion,  a  well-integrated 
the  smooth  and  effective 
implementation of monetary policy. While the technical and operational challenges to implementing a 
single monetary policy across twelve countries have been considerable, these have been successfully 
met. The Euro system approach has been to ensure that the financial infrastructure, and, in particular, 
the payment, clearing and settlement systems have operated in an efficient and integrated fashion. 
The  dynamic  and  changing  nature  of  markets  means  that  these  systems  are  continuing  to  be 
enhanced, with functionalities being improved to meet evolving needs.  
As  regards monetary  policy,  the  current  environment  is complex,  with  a  number of  uncertainties,  in 
particular, high oil prices, still persisting. There are risks to the outlook for both growth and inflation; 
however,  the  central  scenario  is  still  for  ongoing  moderate  growth  with  underlying  inflationary 
pressures remaining contained. The Governing Council remains vigilant and we will continue to watch 
developments closely in coming months.  
BIS Review 25/2005 
 5
