Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the  hearing  before  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  of  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 23 May 2005.  
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
The
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The statement is based, among other things, on 
Norges  Bank’s  Annual  Report  for  2004,  Inflation  Report  1/2005  and  the  assessments  published  after  the  monetary  policy 
meeting of the Executive Board on 20 April. 
 I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Storting for again inviting me to appear before this 
Committee on behalf of Norges Bank in order to report and answer questions on monetary policy in 
connection  with  the  Storting’s  deliberations  on  the  Government’s  Credit  Report.  The  introductory 
statement is based on the Bank’s Annual Report, but is also updated based on the Executive Board’s 
assessments for the period to the preceding monetary policy meeting.  
Flexible inflation targeting 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  This  is  the  most  important 
contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the long term.  
The  inflation  target  provides  enterprises  and  households  with  an  anchor  for  future  inflation 
expectations.  When  there  is  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to 
stabilising developments in output and employment.  
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime so that variability in inflation and variability in 
output and employment are given weight when we set the interest rate. Monetary policy influences the 
economy  with  long  and  variable  lags.  Norges  Bank  sets  the  interest  rate  with  a  view  to  stabilising 
inflation at the target within a reasonable time horizon, normally 1-3 years. The relevant horizon will 
depend on disturbances to which the economy is exposed and how they affect the path for inflation 
and the real economy ahead.  
We  have  increased  the  transparency  surrounding  the  basis  for  monetary  policy  decisions  in  recent 
years.  Norges  Bank’s  statements  following  its  monetary  policy  meetings,  press  conferences,  the 
Inflation Report and speeches provide an account of economic developments that are of importance to 
the Executive Board’s assessments and interest rate decisions. All publications are available on our 
website.  Underlying  each  interest  rate  decision  is  a  monetary  policy  strategy  drawn  up  by  the 
Executive Board every four months. The strategy is published directly after it has been approved and 
at the start of the relevant strategy period.  
Developments in inflation in 2004 and the first months of 2005 
Between December 2002 and March 2004, the key rate was reduced by a total of 5.25 percentage 
points. The interest rate has since remained at 1.75 per cent. The interest rate decline can be ascribed 
to a number of factors. In late autumn 2002, inflation started to fall. The inflation projections were also 
revised  down.  New  information  gradually  emerged  about  the  outlook  for  other  countries  and  the 
Norwegian economy, indicating that inflation might be very low.  
Inflation  fell  markedly  from  summer  2003,  and  continued  to  fall  up  to  spring  2004.  Consumer  price 
inflation  has  subsequently  edged  up,  albeit  slowly.  Low  international  interest  rates  and  favourable 
terms-of-trade  developments  for  Norway  have  curbed  the  effects  of low  interest  rates  on  the  krone 
exchange  rate.  Higher  imports  from  low-cost  countries,  competition  and  more  efficient  Norwegian 
production and trading processes have also kept inflation low. One year ago, underlying inflation was 
close to zero. In April 2005, the year-on-year rise in consumer price inflation adjusted for tax changes 
and excluding energy products was 0.8 per cent. The rise in prices for domestically produced goods 
and services has been higher and has picked up over the past year.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
Adjusted  for  the  direct  effects  of  the  decline  in  interest  rates  on  house  rents  and  lower  rates  for 
day-care places, the rise in prices was 1.0 per cent in April. Alternative measures of inflation also show 
that underlying inflation has edged up.  
Background for the deviations from the inflation target in 2004 and the first months of 2005 
Prices for imported consumer goods continued to fall through 2004, but at a slower pace than in the 
previous year. A weaker krone in 2003 contributed to a deceleration in the fall in prices for clothing and 
footwear and the decline in prices for audiovisual equipment moderated. The decline has accelerated 
in the first months of this year, however. The wide variations in prices for some imported consumer 
goods, in particular footwear and clothing, can have an unexpected impact on consumer price figures 
from one month to the next.  
In 2004, the fall in prices for some services made a strong contribution to keeping inflation low. The fall 
in  airfares  and  prices  for  telecom  services  was  particularly  pronounced.  Intensified  competition  in 
these industries has probably reduced operating margins and driven up productivity. In recent months, 
airfares have picked up again.  
In  addition,  the  rise  in  food  prices  was  very  subdued  in  2004.  New  entrants  may  have  increased 
competition in this industry. These prices have also edged up recently.  
Low inflation in the Nordic countries 
Inflation has also declined in the other Nordic countries and is relatively low. Common factors have 
been increased efficiency in distributive trades and service industries and the low rate of increase in 
prices for imported consumer goods. In highly open economies such as the Nordic countries, we may 
have  to  expect  somewhat  wider  variations  in  inflation  than  other  countries.  Euro-area  inflation  has 
remained at a higher level even though developments in activity are weak in the euro area.  
Stable inflation expectations 
Experience may indicate that inflation expectations remain stable even if inflation varies somewhat as 
long  as  the  interest  rate  is  used  actively  to  moderate  variations.  Monetary  policy  cannot  fine-tune 
economic  developments,  but  it  can  avoid  the  largest  effects  when  the  economy  is  exposed  to 
disturbances.  
Stable  inflation  expectations  can  also  have  a  stabilising  effect  on  exchange  rate  expectations,  but 
growth  in  public  expenditure  and  prices  for  Norwegian  exports  goods  also  have  an  influence  on 
exchange rate expectations.  
Surveys  conducted  by  TNS  Gallup  show  that  inflation  expectations  two  and  five  years  ahead  have 
remained virtually unchanged over the past year. A selection of economists expect annual inflation to 
be about 2½ per cent five years ahead and somewhat lower two years ahead.  
Norges Bank has sought to counter a fall in inflation expectations. Through the first half of 2004, we 
stated:  
“With  the  current  low  level  of  inflation,  it  is  appropriate  to  be  particularly  vigilant  as  regards 
developments in consumer prices.”1  
At the monetary policy meetings between September and November, the Executive Board stated that 
“particular weight must be given to factors that may delay an increase in inflation.”2  
Inflation picked up towards the end of the last year. When we became more confident that inflation 
would  not  continue  to  fall,  but  appeared  instead  to  be  picking  up,  we  refrained  from  repeating  this 
statement.  
                                                      
1   See  Norges  Bank  press  releases  of  21  April  and  26  May.  The  press  releases  following  the  monetary  policy  meeting  of 
17 December 2003, 28 January, 11 March and 1 July 2004 included similar formulations. 
2   See Norges Bank press releases of 22 September and 3 November. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2005
Output and employment 
After slowing around the beginning of 2003, growth in the Norwegian economy picked up markedly 
through 2004. The recovery has been broad-based. The easing of monetary policy contributed to a 
sharp  rise  in  private  consumption  and  housing  investment.  Activity  has  picked  up  considerably  in 
service  industries  and  the  construction  sector.  High  petroleum  investment,  the  global  economic 
recovery,  a  weaker  krone  and  lower  wage  growth  contributed  to  boosting  activity  in  manufacturing 
industry. Profitability has improved for mainland enterprises.  
Mainland  fixed  investment  has  also  gradually  increased.  Thus,  it  may  appear  that  growth  in  the 
Norwegian economy has become more self-driven.  
Even with a pronounced upswing in output, the increase in the number employed has been limited so 
far  in  this  cyclical  upturn.  Measured  in  terms  of  the  number  of  person-hours  worked,  however, 
employment growth was high last year. Registered unemployment has shown a small decline over the 
past year. Productivity probably increased more than normally in some industries in the early phase of 
the recovery. A marked fall in sickness absence may have reduced the need for new employees.  
Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy has increased, notwithstanding the decline in sickness 
absence  and  efficiency  gains  in  the  business  sector.  The  output  gap  is  a  measure  of  capacity 
utilisation  in  the  economy.  We  interpret  a  positive  output  gap  to  mean  that  output  and  capacity 
utilisation are higher than the level consistent with stable inflation over time.  
High domestic interest rates in 2002 and fiscal policy management contributed to substantially lower 
cost inflation in the private and public sectors over the past two years. Monetary policy easing through 
2003  and  the  beginning  of  2004,  and  low  interest rates  in  2004 brought capacity  utilisation  up  to  a 
normal level. The Norwegian economy seems to have experienced a fairly soft landing after a period 
of weak cyclical developments in the international economy and high domestic wage and cost inflation.  
There are nevertheless some clouds on the horizon.  
In spite of solid growth in the US economy last year and in the first quarter of this year and continued 
expansion in China, developments in the euro area are sluggish – unemployment remains high and 
consumer confidence is falling.  
There are substantial trade and balance-of-payments imbalances in the world economy. The deficit in 
the US is matched by surpluses in other countries, particularly in Asia.  
Strong  demand  in  the  US  has  underpinned  growth  in  the  world  economy.  Increased  imbalances 
generate uncertainty as to economic developments in many countries. Moreover, high oil prices may 
curb international growth.  
Communication and implementation of monetary policy 
Interest  rate  developments  in  other  countries  have  been  an  important  factor  behind  interest-rate 
setting  in  Norway.  Weak  growth  in  the  world  economy  in  autumn  2002  and  into  2003  led  to  lower 
international  interest  rates,  which  remained  low  for  a  considerably  longer  period  than  expected,  as 
illustrated by actual and expected interest rate developments in the US. Combined with developments 
in international equity markets and the risk of lower oil supplies, this contributed to a strong krone in 
2002. As we reduced interest rates, the krone depreciated considerably. The weakening of the krone 
came to a halt in winter 2004. Again we started seeing signs of a stronger krone. At the same time, 
inflation  remained  low.  We  therefore  placed  emphasis  on  interest  rate  developments  in  other 
countries, and in May 2004 Norges Bank thus stated:  
“The  inflation  outlook  in  Norway  implies  that  Norway  should  not  be  the  frontrunner  when  other 
countries increase interest rates.”3  
At the monetary policy meetings between September 2004 and February 2005, after key rates had 
been raised in several other counties, the formulation was changed to the following:”that we should lag 
behind other countries in adjusting interest rates to a more normal level.”4 
                                                      
3   See Norges Bank press release of 26 May 2004. 
4   See press releases following the monetary policy meetings in the period between 22 September and 2 February 2005. 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 3
In February, we no longer used this formulation. The background for this is that central banks in other 
countries such as the US, Canada, UK, Australia, New Zealand and Switzerland had raised their key 
rates. Our closest neighbouring countries – Sweden and the euro-area countries – and Japan have 
left their key rates unchanged. On average, the key rates among our trading partners have increased 
by 0.3 percentage point during this business cycle.  
After reducing the key rate to 1.75 per cent, we indicated that the uncertainty associated with previous 
monetary  policy  easing  and  the  unusually  low  interest  rate  implied  that  we  should  be cautious with 
regard to further interest rate reductions. At the same time, the prospect of continued low inflation for a 
period ahead implied that wide deviations from projected economic developments would be required 
before the interest rate should be increased. Economic developments in the latter half of 2004 were 
broadly in line with expectations. The interest rate was left unchanged in line with our statements. We 
gradually experienced that the monetary policy easing was effective. The uncertainty diminished.  
The krone exchange rate 
The first signs of the effects of the interest rate cuts appeared in the foreign exchange market. The 
interest rate differential against other countries narrowed. It became more attractive to borrow and less 
profitable to invest in the Norwegian krone. The movement in the krone exchange rate was reversed 
and the krone depreciated through 2003 and into 2004. The depreciation of the krone contributed to 
restraining the fall in prices for imported goods. The effect occurred gradually.  
Higher prices for oil and gas and other exports goods - an improvement in the terms of trade - have 
increased Norway’s disposable income. This may fuel expectations of higher demand for goods and 
services  in  financial  markets  and  lead  to  a  deterioration  in  competitiveness  in  the  bid  for  economic 
resources.  
If we look far enough ahead, however, we will be able to cover a smaller share of our imports using 
current petroleum revenues and drawings on the Petroleum Fund. Competitiveness will then have to 
be improved.5 
In March 2004, the nominal krone exchange rate was at its weakest level since summer 2001.6 Since 
spring 2004, the krone has appreciated. The appreciation of the krone through 2004 was undesirable 
because  it  delayed  the  pick-up  in  inflation.  It  also  came  as  somewhat  unexpected.  The  krone  was 
partly influenced by persistenly low international interest rates. In retrospect, it would also appear that 
high prices for oil and gas and other export goods have contributed to a fairly strong krone.  
Higher oil prices entail higher current-account surpluses and higher income for oil companies and the 
state.  Oil  companies’  additional  income  and  surpluses  will  largely  be  channelled  abroad.  The 
additional  petroleum  revenues  accruing  to  the  state  will  essentially  be  invested  abroad  through  the 
Government  Petroleum  Fund.  The  capital  outflows  through  the  oil  companies  and  the  Government 
Petroleum Fund contribute both to keeping down the value of the krone and to stabilising it.  
Even though surpluses deriving from petroleum activity are largely invested abroad, more oil money 
has been put into circulation in the Norwegian economy than earlier. Petroleum investment show a 
pronounced increase this year. Moreover, government petroleum revenue spending has increased in 
recent years. There are indications that the oil cash flows into the Norwegian economy may diminish in 
the period ahead.  
Developments  in  the  nominal  and  real  exchange  rate  over  the  past  year  probably  reflect  an 
improvement in the terms of trade and an increase in oil cash flows into the Norwegian economy.  
After  several  expensive  wage  settlements  -  and  a  short  period  of  a  strong  krone  -  had  weakened 
profitability in the Norwegian business sector, a depreciation of the krone and more moderate wage 
agreements contributed to restraining the decline in activity and employment. However, costs in the 
business sector remain high and competitiveness remains measured by relative labour costs are still 
fairly weak. It is now close to 5 per cent weaker than the average for the period 1970-2004 and about 
                                                      
5   See Akram, Q.F (2003) ”Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway”, Norwegian Journal of Economics, no. 2, p. 89-112, 
and "Oil wealth and real exchange rates: The FEER for Norway ”. Working Paper No. 2004/16, Norges Bank, by the same 
author. 
6   As measured by the import-weighted index I-44. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2005
15  per  cent  weaker  than  in  the  mid-1990s.  Manufacturing  industry  is  nevertheless  faring  well  at 
present thanks to favourable prices and market conditions.  
Low real interest rate 
The  easing  of  monetary  policy  has  resulted  in  low  real  interest  rates.  Short-term  real  interest  rates 
have fallen by close to 4 percentage points since the end of 2002.  
It would seem that it is not only changes in the real interest rate that have an influence, but also its 
level.  Between  December 2002  and  March  2004,  the  interest rate  has  moved  from a  high  to  a  low 
level. The real interest rate is now lower than a real interest rate that implies balance in the economy 
in the long term – the neutral real interest rate. A real interest rate that is lower than the neutral rate 
will stimulate activity and fuel pressures in the economy even after the effects of the interest rate fall 
have been exhausted. Calculations may indicate, on an uncertain basis, that the neutral real interest 
rate for Norway is between 2½ and 3½ per cent. It has probably fallen somewhat in recent years.  
Real post-tax mortgage rates and deposit rates at banks are also very low. Household debt is higher 
than household deposits in Norway.  
The fall in interest rates pushed up house prices. Higher housing wealth provides increased borrowing 
opportunities that are used. Household debt has risen by around 11-12 per cent over the past year. 
Household  debt  is  now  more  than  one  and  a  half  times  as  high  as  disposable  income.  The 
accumulation of debt partly reflects structural adaptation over time to a deregulated credit market and 
partly low interest rates. The higher debt burden has made households more vulnerable. A gradual 
normalisation  of  the  interest  rate  will  probably  contribute  to  curbing  the  rise  in  house  prices  and 
gradually bring down debt accumulation.  
Conclusion 
Two and a half years after we started to lower interest rates it would appear that inflation is moving up, 
albeit slowly. Inflation is low, but the indices are also influenced by temporary and erratic disturbances. 
Mainland fixed investment has also shown a gradual increase. In its monetary policy assessments in 
the previous Inflation Report, the Executive Board indicated that growth in the Norwegian economy 
has  become  more  self-driven.  Capacity  utilisation  is  close  to  normal  and  rising.  Moreover,  the 
Executive Board has also highlighted several sources of uncertainty such as the considerable trade 
and balance-of payments imbalances in the world economy.  
BIS Review 38/2005 
 5
