Hans Georg Fabritius: The Euro-Arab economic dialogue 
Keynote speech by Dr Hans Georg Fabritius, a Member of the Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the International Arab Banking Summit 2005 - “The Euro-Arab Economic Dialogue”, Frankfurt/Main, 
23 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  an  honour  and  a  pleasure  to  speak  today  at  the  International  Arab  Banking  Summit  here  in 
Frankfurt.  
I  strongly  welcome  the  organisers’  intention  of  enhancing  future  cooperation  prospects  between 
Europe and the Arab World. 
Both regions are indeed engaged in a strategic economic partnership, which of course has a lot to do 
with the fact that Europe, like other developed economies, is oil-dependent.  
Over the course of time trade relations between Europe and the Arab World have clearly intensified. 
For instance, German exports to the region increased by more than 10% last year. Although this is 
broadly in line with overall export growth in Germany, the strong increase occurred against broadly 
unfavourable exchange rate developments, given that the currencies of most Arab countries move in 
parallel with the US dollar.  
Like trade in general, these developments have been to the benefit of both regions. A telling story of 
these  mutual  advantages  is  the  fact  that  for  Europe  in  general,  and  for  Germany  in  particular,  the 
dampening effects of the recent oil price shocks have been eased by a faster recycling of oil revenues 
in the oil producing countries.  
This was made possible by increased foreign demand for European products in Arab countries. As 
imports from Europe play a much more important role for oil producing countries than imports from the 
United  States,  an  oil  price  increase  under  unchanged  trade  structures  leads  to  a  demand  shift  in 
favour of Europe. To a certain degree, this is cushioning the adverse energy price effect. 
Against this background closer trade links between Europe and the Arab world are highly welcome. 
This  deserves  our  special  attention  for  another  reason:  intensified  trade  relations  also  lead  to  a 
strengthening  of  financial  relations.  Therefore,  I  appreciate  conferences  like  the  one  today  and 
consider them an eminent effort to improve mutual understanding of the beneficial economic effects of 
further cooperation. 
Although  this  example  alone  might  suffice  to  steer  us  away  from  the  one-sided  view  that  the  Arab 
economy is nothing more than an oil producing sector, it is undoubtedly worthwhile to take a closer 
look at the economic developments in the Arab world. 
As I understand from the programme, the aim of today’s conference is just that – to take a closer look 
at these economic developments. I do not intend to deliver a broad based assessment of economic 
developments  in  the  Arab  economies  but  rather  as  an  economist  I  will  stick  to  the  principle  of 
comparative advantage and as a central banker I will concentrate on the issue of monetary integration. 
It is an issue that plays an important role in the current policy agenda in many countries on the Arab 
peninsula. 
And it is an issue where I can draw on our own European experiences to exemplify the terms on which 
a European-Arab dialogue can be established. 
The regional monetary integration initiative is, in my view, a quite astonishing development that does 
not get the attention it deserves. In fact, in economic terms, it is the second most important monetary 
integration initiative in the world economy.  
With its plan to introduce a monetary union in 2010 the economies of the Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC) endeavour on a project that is surpassed only by the European monetary integration.  
This development is of interest to Germany and Europe for a number of reasons. Firstly, the six GCC 
member countries Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are by 
far the most important trading partners for Germany in the Arab World, accounting for nearly 55% of 
German exports to the Arab region in 2004. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
Secondly,  the  debate  about  the  benefits  of  monetary  integration  and  the  attempt  to  build  regional 
currency blocks has become much more attractive since the successful launch of the single monetary 
policy in Europe. So Europe’s experiences after over six years of the common currency might be of 
interest to those economies currently endeavouring into closer monetary and financial integration. 
This, of course, is not to say that the example of the euro area can and should be uncritically carried 
over to other regions with different economic structure, cultural background and political systems. 
Nevertheless, there are distinct pre-conditions necessary for the functioning of a currency union that 
are common to each and every project of closer monetary cooperation – even though the recognition 
of  the  empirical  truth  that  a  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  is  not  doing  justice  to  the  many  projects  of 
regional economic and monetary cooperation throughout the globe.1  
Thirdly, in that context the proper functioning of EMU has been questioned in some camps over recent 
weeks. In cases where this might have created some irritations in other parts of the world which are 
less  familiar  with  what  is  going  on  in  EMU  some  brief  comments  are  necessary  to  put  things  in  a 
proper perspective. 
Please let me start with the latter point. Without any doubt, one of the major institutional changes in 
the international financial system in the last couple of years has been the move to European Monetary 
Union. The introduction of a common currency and common monetary policy among then eleven, now 
twelve,  of  the  major  industrialised  countries  of  the  world  has  been  an  economic  endeavour 
unprecedented in economic history. 
It certainly marks the most significant step in the process of European integration. 
Currently, it seems to be a widely held belief that in the aftermath of the latest developments the tide is 
out for future significant integration steps.  
But we all should keep in mind that from a broader historical perspective, European integration has 
never been a smooth, straight road towards closer cooperation. Instead, periods of ambitious progress 
were followed by periods of setbacks. 
So,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  undeniably  difficult  current  situation  for  future  European 
integration  is  itself creating  the seeds  for renewed  initiatives  and integration  efforts.  At  least,  this  is 
what history in Europe teaches us. 
But one thing is crystal clear. The visible tensions about the European constitution and the financing of 
the European Union by no means hamper the proper functioning of EMU. It is becoming more and 
more  necessary  to  re-emphasise  this  point  since  some  observers  have  argued  to  the  contrary  and 
doubted the sustainability of the current institutional framework for common monetary policy.  
However, this line of argument simply neglects the empirical facts.  
The Eurosystem’s common monetary policy has delivered price stability and also well anchored long-
term inflation expectations at a level consistent with the definition of price stability.  
The achievements of the single European monetary policy is deeply rooted in a few characteristics. 
Among those, a clear objective and the supranational perspective in the decision-making process are 
key. In my eyes, these defining elements are central not only to the European project but also for other 
possible monetary integration efforts. 
Well anchored, low inflation expectations have allowed us to deliver price stability under historically 
low nominal interest rates. This result is advantageous to all member countries involved in EMU. It has 
promoted  economic  welfare  for  countries  with  a  formerly  less  pronounced  stability  culture  and  the 
elimination of intra-EMU exchange rate volatility has benefited all member states with both improved 
trade links and a deeper and more liquid financial market. 
Just to remind us of the facts, even conservative estimates of the trade inducing effect of EMU lie in a 
range of around 10% of trade volumes or equivalent to roughly 1% of euro area GDP. 
Moreover, the functioning of EMU is clearly visible in the growing international role of the euro. The 
euro’s  role  as  a  reserve  and  invoicing  currency  and  its  relevance  as  an  issuing  currency  on  the 
                                                      
1  The  ECB  provides  a  useful  survey  of  the  multitude  of  approaches  to  regional  economic  cooperation  in  the  world  economy 
(ECB Monthly Bulletin 10/2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
international  bond  market  is  confirming  this  judgment.  It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the 
internationalisation  of  the  euro  reflects  a  market  driven  process  and  is  no  goal  of  the  common 
monetary policy. Thus, the acceptance of the euro in international markets is even more reassuring.  
Despite these overall achievements, some have recently cast their doubts on the future of monetary 
integration in Europe in the face of heterogeneous developments at the level of member states.  
And  here  I  can  only  repeat  myself.  This  line  of  argument  neglects  the  basic  empirical  facts.  The 
divergence in national inflation rates and output growth rates has not increased with EMU. Nominal 
convergence  has  not  lead  to  real  divergence  and  the  heterogeneity  within  EMU  is  by  no  means 
significantly larger than in a well-established monetary union, ie the United States. 
And it should be borne in mind – and this is one of the important lessons for countries engaging in a 
monetary  union  –  that  there  are  several  national  adjustment  mechanisms  to  deal  with  idiosyncratic 
developments in a monetary union. These range from labour mobility, to flexible prices and wages to 
intra-union shifts in competitiveness.  
Arguably,  the  most  favourable  condition  for  a  monetary  union  would  be  a  far  reaching  structural 
homogeneity of participating countries. But some instances of heterogeneity can realistically never be 
dismissed,  and  should  not  be.  Otherwise  the  fruits  of  specialisation,  comparative  advantages  and 
interregional risk-sharing cannot be earned in full. Thus, what is of the essence is that the member 
states forming a monetary union have a clear awareness of the “rules of the game”. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
with  regard  to  the  important  GCC  initiative,  these  issues  are  highly  relevant.  Currently,  due  to  oil 
production there is a high degree of structural similarity between the GCC economies. But differences 
in  the  amount  of  oil  reserves  will  mean  that  economic  heterogeneity  will  certainly  increase  in  the 
future. 
The  structural  homogeneity  of  GCC  countries  has  been  accompanied  by  significant  monetary 
convergence. Widely unnoticed these countries have managed intra-regional exchange rate stability, 
low inflation rates and co-moving interest rates in a narrow range. 
Fiscal convergence seems to lack behind the developments at the monetary frontier. And here, too, 
EMU  experience  shows  the  necessity  to  agree  on  a  common  framework  for  the  conduct  of  fiscal 
policies. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
one  characteristic  feature  of  the  Arab  world  is  the  low  degree  of  regional  trade  links.  Intra-regional 
trade accounts for only 8% of the total trade of Middle Eastern and Northern African countries.2 This 
differs markedly with Europe.  
In the light of these figures one might feel tempted to ask why, on a conference like this, I am devoting 
so  much  attention  to  regional  integration  efforts.  The  reason  is  –  and  once  again  I  refer  to  the 
European experience – that regional cooperation does not imply increased intra-regional trade at the 
cost of less trade with countries outside the region. 
EMU  has  not  resulted  in  so-called  trade  divergence  effects.  In  other  words,  developing  a  closer 
regional integration in the Arab world seems to be an important prerequisite to strengthen economic 
links between Arab countries and Europe, too. 
These  will  include  product  as  well  as  financial  markets.  It  will  have  consequences  for  the  banking 
business and it will shape the way in which the future economic dialogue between Europe and the 
Arab world is framed. 
Looking over the programme of this conference all these topics will be discussed in greater detail in 
the  various  workshop  sessions  and  plenary  rounds.  I  am  confident  that  the  broad  programme 
framework will mean that the conference results will meet everyone’s expectations. 
The  current  global  economic  conditions  are  well  suited  to  enhance  economic  cooperation  between 
Europe  and  the  Arab  world.  Under  the  surface  of  oil  market  developments,  which  absorb  so  much 
                                                      
2 Regional and monetary integration in the member states of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), forthcoming ECB Occasional 
Paper. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 3
public attention in Europe, when it comes to economic debates about the partnership between Europe 
and the Arab world there are interesting ongoing developments in Arab countries which, in my view, 
do not get the attention they rightly deserve. 
Economic  cooperation  in  a  region  where  economic  fortune  has  all  too  often  been  hampered  by 
regional  tensions  and  conflicts  should  be  a  central  concern  for  all  of  us  in  Europe.  I  am  glad  that 
conferences  like  today’s  are  shaping  our  understanding  of  the  vital  importance  of  economic 
partnerships between both regions. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2005
