Rafael Buenaventura: New Year message 2005 
Speech  by  Mr  Rafael  Buenaventura,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines), at the Annual Reception for the Banking Community, Manila, 18 January 2005. 
 A warm welcome to all!  
Let me begin by thanking all of you for joining us tonight at this traditional annual reception to officially 
welcome 2005.  
But more than your presence tonight, we thank you for your full cooperation and support in working 
with  us  to  keep  our  economy  steadily  moving  forward,  to  preserve  overall  confidence,  and  to 
steadfastly implement reforms.  
The  year  2004  was  again  another  very  challenging  year  for  the  banking  community,  being  a 
presidential election year with all the uncertainty that usually surrounds such a major political event. 
We  also  bore  witness  in  the  second  half  to  a  sharp  increase  in  oil  prices  that  inevitably  had  major 
impact on the whole economy.  
But  in  spite  of  all  these,  the  economy  still  turned  in  a  very  respectable  outcome.  GDP  growth  is 
estimated at 6.2 percent. Headline inflation has picked up to around 7.9 percent in December 2004, 
due mainly to the feed through from energy price adjustments and other supply side shocks, but more 
broad-based inflationary pressures were held in check. Our accumulation of international reserves, at 
$16.1 billion at end-December 2004, was at the high end of our expectations. The peso exchange rate 
finished firmly at P56.267 and has been appreciating since then.  
Undoubtedly, record remittance inflows that will definitely exceed P8 billion for the whole of 2004 has 
once  again  shored  up  our  economy.  Commendable  outcomes  were  also  contributed  by  our  export 
sector.  On  the  domestic  front,  healthy  consumer  demand  helped  keep  the  economic  momentum 
going.  
In the financial system, the reform agenda relentlessly forged ahead undeterred by all the potential 
distractions.  
The long overdue asset cleanup finally got going under the SPV law. As of end 2004 about P26 billion 
was  already done  and  another  P54  billion  was  firmly  in  the  pipeline  or  a  total  of  P80  billion  so  far. 
Assuming these transactions would all be completed in due course, we can look forward to a lowering 
of the NPL ratio to less than 10 percent by end-2005 from the current 13-14 percent level, given 2005 
economic growth projection.  
Still, the improving NPL outlook would still be more than double than the pre-1997 crisis ratio of less 
than 5 percent. This underscores the enormity of the remaining clean-up task ahead.  
The  incentives  under  the  SPV  Law  expire  on  April  8,  2005.  There  isn’t  much  time  left.  There  is  a 
possibility of an extension on the basis of strong representations being made by the banking industry. 
As  a  practical  matter,  the  BSP  will  not  object  to  an  extension,  but  candidly  speaking,  we  will  have 
serious  concerns  over  an  overly  long  extension  that  will  only  likely  weaken  the  resolve  to  face  the 
music. Another year should be reasonable. If this results in another P100 billion in transactions, then 
we can see the NPL ratio going down further to around 7.5 percent in 2005.  
Whatever extension is given by Congress, all our banks that still carry large NPAs in their portfolio are 
well advised to bite the bullet soonest and clean up their balance sheets. Don’t do it because the BSP 
says so. Do it because it is primarily in your interest to do so. Going forward, that burden can only 
become  heavier  especially  as  regulations  evolve  to  force  fair  valuation  of  all  financial  assets  in  the 
context  of  migration  to  IAS  in  reckoning  accounts.  The  implementation  of  Basle  II  will  also  lead  to 
heavier risk weighting on NPAs.  
In general, the prudential standards on the banking system will continue to keep rising as we seek 
closer alignment with international standards. We have already announced that banks should be IAS 
compliant  by  end-2005.  We  really  have  no  choice  on  this.  Our  ratings  cannot  afford  it.  We  have 
likewise defined the roadmap to make the banking system compliant with Basle II by 2007. Given the 
complexity and deep impact of these changes, it is necessary to begin preparations right away.  
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
The ultimate success of the banking reform agenda depends to a very large extent on Congressional 
action  to  amend  the  BSP  Charter  primarily  to  strengthen  the  institutional  arrangements  for  banking 
supervision.  This  especially  pertains  to  providing  better  legal  protection  to  BSP  personnel  in  the 
course of the performance of their official duties. Other countries protect their regulators which make 
them more effective. Hopefully, the necessary legislation will be finally delivered this year.  
We are also keenly advocating the enactment of a law that will enable us to establish a strong credit 
information bureau that will anchor a comprehensive credit information system. The benefits of this are 
enormous  in  providing  wider  credit  access  especially  to  small  borrowers,  in  lowering  the  cost  of 
borrowing of responsible borrowers, and in reducing the credit risk exposure of the banking system.  
You  are  also  aware  that  we  have  been  trying  to  leverage  the  fruits  of  banking  reform  with  a 
complementary effort to develop the domestic capital market. Clearly, given the dominant role of the 
banking system in our financial system, our banks will need to play a major role. Here the challenge is 
the  willingness  to  reform  market  practices  to  achieve  greater  transparency,  efficiency,  and  investor 
protection. We need our banks and other major market players to be willing to sacrifice the acceptable 
but mediocre status quo for something that is better for the economy in the long run. Even now our 
commitment  and  resolve  is  being  tested  as  we  endeavor  to  stamp  out  long-standing  market 
malpractices. Rating agencies have criticized us on some practices that we are now trying to correct. 
These practices have also prevented us from developing a deeper capital market.  
The complexity of the financial reform agenda has required the financial regulators to cooperate more 
closely.  Last  year,  we  took  an  important  step  in  this  direction.  In  partnership  with  the  SEC,  the 
Insurance Commission, and PDIC, we formed the Financial Sector Forum (FSF) last July. The FSF 
has  steadily  gained  momentum  and  we  are  now  working  on  a  full  agenda  to  harmonize  our 
supervisory  and  regulatory  efforts,  to  strengthen  information  exchange  and  to  promote  better 
consumer protection. We expect the FSF to hit its full stride this year.  
Even as we have strived to forge an efficient and modern financial system, the access of the poor to 
the financial system has been our constant special priority. And indeed, the success of microfinance 
has been a pride and joy of the BSP. By the way, we are observing this year the International Year of 
Microcredit under the leadership of the United Nations. We look forward to further strengthening our 
commitment to sustainable microfinance.  
In less than six months, there will be a changing of the guard at BSP as the majority of the Monetary 
Board and I complete our full six year term.  
The famous Manila Bay sunset beckons. But we are not yet quite ready to follow its inviting siren call.  
The challenge of upholding financial stability is a never ending one. Rest assured that we will pursue 
the necessary reforms to the very last day we are in office before we gladly yield the drivers seat to 
our successors.  
Let me end by thanking the BAP and its enlightened leadership for working with us to implement many 
essential but often times painful reforms.  
A happy new year to all!  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
