Alan Greenspan: Adam Smith 
Remarks  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Adam Smith Memorial Lecture, Kirkcaldy, Scotland, 6 February 2005. 
 Kirkcaldy - the birthplace, in 1723, of Adam Smith and, by extension, of modern economics - is also, of 
course, where your Chancellor of the Exchequer was reared. I am led to ponder to what extent the 
Chancellor's  renowned  economic  and  financial  skills  are  the  result  of  exposure  to  the  subliminal 
intellect-enhancing emanations of this area. 
 In the broad sweep of history, it is ideas that matter. Indeed, the world is ruled by little else. As John 
Maynard Keynes famously observed: "Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from 
intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who 
hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back."1 
Emperors and armies come and go; but unless they leave new ideas in their wake, they are of passing 
historic consequence.  
The  short  list  of  intellectuals  who  have  materially  advanced  the  betterment  of  civilization 
unquestionably includes Adam Smith. He is a towering contributor to the development of the modern 
world. In his Wealth of Nations, Smith reached far beyond the insights of his predecessors to frame a 
global view of how market economies, just then emerging, worked. In so doing, he supported changes 
in societal organization that were to measurably enhance world standards of living.  
For most of recorded history, people appear to have acquiesced in, and in some ways embraced, a 
society that was static and predictable. A young twelfth-century vassal could look forward to tilling the 
same plot of his landlord's soil until disease, famine, natural disaster, or violence ended his life. And 
that end often came quickly. Life expectancy at birth was, on average, twenty-five years, the same as 
it had been for the previous thousand years. Moreover, the vassal could fully expect that his children 
and doubtless their children, in turn, would till the same plot. Perhaps such a programmed life had a 
certain security, established by a rigid social and legal hierarchy that left little to individual enterprise. 
To  be  sure,  improved  agricultural  techniques  and  the  expansion  of  trade  beyond  the  largely 
self-sufficient feudal manor increased the division of labor and raised living standards and populations, 
but growth in both was glacial. In the fifteenth century, the great mass of people were engaged in the 
same productive practices as those of their forebears many generations earlier. 
Smith lived at a time when market forces were beginning to erode the rigidities of the remaining feudal 
and medieval practices and the mercantilism that followed them. Influenced by the ideas and events of 
the Reformation, which helped undermine the concept of the divine right of kings, a view of individuals 
acting  independently  of  ecclesiastic  and  state  restraint  emerged  in  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth 
century. For the first time, modern notions of political and economic freedom began to gain traction. 
Those ideas, associated with the Age of Enlightenment, especially in England, Scotland, and France, 
gave  rise  to  a  vision  of  a  society  in  which  individuals  guided  by  reason  were  free  to  choose  their 
destinies unshackled from repressive restrictions and custom.  
What we now know as the rule of law - namely protection of the rights of individuals and their property 
- widened, encouraging people to increase their efforts to produce, trade, and innovate. A whole new 
system  of  enterprise  began  to  develop,  which,  though  it  seemed  bewildering  in  its  complexity  and 
consequences,  appeared  nonetheless  to  possess  a  degree  of  stability  as  if  guided  by  an  "invisible 
hand."  The  French  Physiocrats,  among  others,  struggled  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  to 
develop  rudimentary  principles  to  untangle  that  conundrum.  Those  principles  were  an  attempt  to 
explain  how  an  economy  governed  by  a  calculable  regularity  -  that  is,  natural  law  and,  as 
characterized by the Physiocrat Vincent de Tournay, "Laissez-faire, laissez-passer" - would function. 
The  Physiocrats'  influence,  however,  waned  rapidly  along  with  the  influence  of  other  political 
economists as evidence grew that their models were, at best, incomplete. 
                                                      
1   J.M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, 1936, p. 383. 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 1
It was left to Adam Smith to identify the more-general set of principles that brought conceptual clarity 
to the seeming chaos of market transactions. In 1776, Smith produced one of the great achievements 
in human intellectual history: An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Most of 
Smith's free-market paradigm remains applicable to this day. 
Smith  was  doubtless  inspired  by  the  Physiocrats,  as  well  as  by  his  friend  David  Hume,  his  mentor 
Francis Hutcheson, and other participants in the Enlightenment. Early political economists had made 
impressive contributions, many of them anticipating parts of Smith's global view. But Smith reached 
beyond  his  predecessors  and  subjected  market  processes  to  a  far  more  formidable  intellectual 
analysis.  One  hears  a  good  deal  of  Franz  Joseph  Haydn  in  the  string  quartets  and  symphonies  of 
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart; yet to my ear, at least, Mozart rose to a plateau beyond anything Haydn 
and his contemporaries were able to reach. So, too, in his sphere, did Smith. 
He concluded that, to enhance the wealth of a nation, every man, consistent with the law, should be 
"free to pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry and capital into competition 
with those of ... other ... men."2 "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, 
that  we  expect  our  dinner,  but  from  their  regard  to  their  own  interest."3  The  individual  is  driven  by 
private gain but is "led by an invisible hand" to promote the public good, "which was no part of his 
intention."4 This last insight is all the more extraordinary in that, for much of human history, acting in 
one's self-interest - indeed, seeking to accumulate wealth - had been perceived as unseemly and was, 
in some instances, illegal. 
In the opening paragraphs of the Wealth of Nations, Smith recognized the crucial role played by the 
expansion of labor productivity in improving welfare when he cited "the skill, dexterity, and judgment 
with which labor is generally applied" as one of the essential determinants of a nation's standard of 
living. "Whatever be the soil, climate, or extent of territory of any particular nation, the abundance or 
scantiness of its annual supply must in that particular situation, depend upon ... the productive powers 
of labor."5 More than two centuries of economic thought have added little to those insights. 
Smith,  on  remarkably  little  formal  empirical  evidence,  drew  broad  inferences  about  the  nature  of 
commercial organization and institutions that led to a set of principles that would profoundly influence 
and alter a significant segment of the civilized world of that time. Economies based on those principles 
first created levels of sustenance adequate to enable the population to grow and later - far later - to 
create material conditions of living that fostered an increase in life expectancy. The latter development 
opened up the possibility that individuals could establish long-term personal goals, a possibility that 
was remote to all but a sliver of earlier generations. 
*** 
Smith's ideas fell on fertile ground and within a very few decades verged on conventional wisdom. The 
ancient political power of the landed gentry, the major beneficiaries of the older order, was giving way 
to a new class of merchants and manufacturers that was a product of the Industrial Revolution, which 
had begun a quarter-century earlier. Pressures were building in Britain and elsewhere to break down 
mercantilist restrictions. But with Smith, the emerging elite found their voice and sanction. 
Smith's sanction, however, was directed to the freedom of markets and trade, not to the new business 
elite, many of whose business practices Smith severely deprecated. He concluded that the competitive 
force unleashed by individuals in pursuit of their rational self-interest induces each person to do better. 
Such competitive interaction, by encouraging specialization and division of labor, increases economic 
growth. 
Smith's essentially benevolent views of the workings of competition counteracted pressures for market 
regulation  of  the  evident  excesses  of  the  factory  system  that  had  begun  early  in  the  eighteenth 
century.  Those  excesses  were  decried  a  century  later  by  the  poet  William  Blake  as  "...  the  dark 
Satanic mills" that by then characterized much of industrial England. 
                                                       
2   Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 1776, p. 687. 
3  
4  
5  
Ibid., p. 26-27. 
Ibid., p. 456. 
Ibid., p. 10. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2005
Perhaps  if  the  Wealth  of  Nations  had  never  been  written,  the  Industrial  Revolution  would  still  have 
proceeded into the nineteenth century at an impressive pace. But without Smith's demonstration of the 
inherent stability and growth of what we now term free-market capitalism, the remarkable advance of 
material  well-being  for  whole  nations  might  well  have  been  quashed.  Pressures  conceivably  could 
have  emerged  to  strengthen  mercantilistic  regulations  in  response  to  the  stresses  created  by 
competition and to the all-too-evident ills of industrialization. 
 Smith  was  the  first  in  a  line  of  political  economists  whom  we  now  identify  as  the  classical  school. 
Foremost  of  his  followers  was  David  Ricardo,  a  stockbroker,  parliamentarian,  and  skilled  essayist. 
Ricardo's major work, The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, published in 1817, offered a 
rigorous, though less optimistic, analysis of the structure of a system of wholly free commerce. 
Under  the  political  onslaught  of  a  rising  industrialist  class  intellectually  supported  by  the  classical 
school, mercantilism was gradually dismantled, and economic freedom spread widely. This process 
reached  its  apex  with  the  repeal  of  Britain's  Corn  Laws  in  1846.  The  acceptance  of  classical 
economics  was,  by  then,  broad  enough  to  prompt  reorganization  of  commercial  life  in  most  of  the 
civilized world. 
 Adam Smith died in 1790, well before his extraordinary impact could have been assessed. But Ricardo 
lived until 1823, and John Stuart Mill, another member of the school, lived until 1873. Would they and 
the other early followers of Smith find the current economic landscape at all familiar? 
In one sense, not likely. Among the developed countries, famine is now virtually nonexistent. Thomas 
Robert Malthus's penetrating analysis at the end of the eighteenth century of the limits of subsistence, 
to which many of the classical school subscribed, proved wrong. 
Malthus built his pessimistic vision on a notion that the long-evident forces of stagnation would persist: 
A human population with a propensity to grow geometrically would be thwarted by limits to growth in 
the means of subsistence. Having observed crop yields that had changed only marginally for millennia, 
Malthus could not have foreseen the dramatic increase in agricultural yields. In the United States, for 
example, corn yields - or should I say maize yields - rose from 25 bushels per acre in the early 1800s 
to 160 by 2004. 
Moreover,  those  living  in  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  could  not  have  imagined  that  life 
expectancy in developed countries two centuries later would rise on average to more than twice that 
which  they  experienced.  That  increase  directly  and  indirectly  resulted  largely  from  the  almost 
twentyfold increase in average real per capita gross domestic product gained since 1820, according to 
estimates of Angus Maddison, the economic historian. From this expanding output, society has been 
able to devote more resources to nutrition, sanitation, and health care. 
And  yet,  regrettably,  much  of  today's  developing  world  would  appear  familiar  to  our  forebears. 
Pestilence is present in the form of AIDS, and as a consequence, life expectancy in much of Africa is 
not much different from what it was in most of the world two centuries ago. Significant parts of the 
world still experience periodic famine. 
Although workers in developed and many emerging nations have witnessed an extraordinary rise in 
living  standards,  some  shadow  of  worker  angst  of  the  earlier  period  remains.  Today's  vast 
technological advances and the labor turnover associated with it have not sparked the violence of the 
early nineteenth-century Luddites, but they are nonetheless associated with significant job insecurity. 
Finally, classical economists, who battled the rear guard of mercantilism in their days, would certainly 
recognize the assault on their paradigm in the anti-capitalist, anti-free-trade rhetoric currently prevalent 
in some contemporary discourse. 
 Yet, with all of today's economic shortcomings, there can be little doubt that the Industrial Revolution 
and the emergence of free-market capitalism have brought civilization to a material level that could not 
have  been  imagined  two  centuries  ago.  The  late  eighteenth  century,  when  the  dramatic  rise  in 
standards of living and in population began after millennia of virtual stagnation, was one of the seminal 
turning points of history. 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 3
With few exceptions, that advance has carried forward to this day. Average global real per capita GDP 
has risen 1.2 percent annually since 1820, enough to double standards of living every fifty-eight years. 
In the same period, world population has increased sixfold. In the previous two millennia average per 
capita  incomes  barely  exceeded  levels  required  to  support,  at  minimum  subsistence,  a  marginally 
noticeable rise in population. 
 Today, Adam Smith's insights still resonate as they did after the publication of the Wealth of Nations. 
However,  during  the  intervening  generations  the  esteem  in  which  Smith's  contributions  were  held 
waxed and waned with the acceptance of free-market capitalism. 
After  its  initial  acceptance  in  the  late  eighteenth  century,  the  new  economic  order  soon  attracted 
criticism. The Industrial Revolution brought "the dark Satanic mills" and all the squalor associated with 
them. To be sure, life for a significant part of the population at the margin of subsistence during the 
early days of the Industrial Revolution was misery. But it was life. A half-century earlier, many of those 
miserable souls would have died as infants or children. Nonetheless, within decades of the emergence 
of  the  new  order  the  visible  misery  and  the  evident  wretched  struggle  for  subsistence  inspired 
competing visions of economic organization. 
Robert Owen, a successful British factory owner, in a challenge to Smith, averred that unrestrained 
laissez-faire  by  its  nature  would  lead  to  poverty  and  disease.  He  led  a  school  of  so-called  Utopian 
Socialists  who  advocated,  in  Owen's  phrase,  "villages  of  cooperation."  In  1826,  he  set  up  such  a 
community in the United States, which he named New Harmony. Ironically, communal strife brought 
the New Harmony experiment to collapse within two years. Many saw the initiative as opposed to the 
laws of human nature, a component of natural law. 
But Owen's charismatic devotion to his cause continued to draw large followings among those barely 
able  to  eke  out  subsistence  in  an  appalling  working  environment.  The  elevation  to  a  more  civilized 
state of work was still a century in the future. 
Karl  Marx  was  dismissive  of  Owen  and  his  utopian  followers.  Indeed,  Marx  was  attracted  to  the 
intellectual  rigor  of  Smith  and  Ricardo,  who  to  his  mind,  up  to  a  point,  accurately  described  the 
evolution  of  capitalism.  As  we  all  know,  Marx  viewed  capitalism  as  a  transition  to  the  inevitable 
emergence of communism. 
Unlike  Marx,  the  Fabian  socialists  who  emerged  in  the  last  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century 
advocated  evolution  rather  than  revolution  to  a  more  collectivized  economy.  Indeed,  many  of  the 
restraints on laissez-faire advanced by the Fabians and other reformers were eventually enacted into 
law. 
However,  throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  notwithstanding  widespread  criticism  of  market 
capitalism, standards of living continued to increase, propelling the world's population to more than 1-
1/2  billion  by  1900.  The  major  advances  in  life  expectancy  by  the  early  twentieth  century  were 
attributable largely to efforts to ensure a clean water supply, the result of the increased capital stock 
associated with rising affluence. 
 In the nineteenth century, criticism of capitalism emphasized abuses of business practice. Aside from 
Marxist views of the exploitation of workers by capitalists, monopoly was seen by many as a natural 
consequence of unfettered capitalism. Even earlier, Smith had weighed in with his oft-quoted insight 
that  "people  of  the  same  trade  seldom  meet  together,  even  for  merriment  and  diversion,  but  the 
conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices."6 
Yet standards of living of the average worker moved inexorably higher, serving through most of the 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as an effective political buffer to the widespread emergence 
of  socialism.  Because  agriculture  so  dominated  the  world's  economies  at  that  time,  the  industrial 
recessions, which appeared from time to time, did not provoke a severe enough political response to 
alter the capitalistic order. 
                                                      
6I 
Ibid., p. 10. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2005
The writings of Jean Baptiste Say, an early nineteenth-century follower of Smith, were significant in 
this  regard.  He  postulated  that  supply  creates  its  own  demand  and  concluded  that  marked 
contractions in economic activity would, with time, be unwound.7 The widespread acceptance of Say's 
Law  and  the  associated  confidence  in  the  self-stabilizing  property  of  a  market-based  price  system 
were dominant factors inhibiting government intervention in periods of economic distress, especially 
during the latter part of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. 
But the Great Depression of the 1930s subjected the optimistic conclusions of classical economics, 
especially Say's Law, to a much broader assault. As the economic stagnation of the 1930s dragged 
on, the critical notion that capitalism was self-correcting fell into disrepute. 
The  marked  increase  in  government  intervention  into  markets,  in  effect  a  partial  reversion  to 
mercantilism,  was  perhaps  an  inevitable  response  to  the  distress  of  the  Great  Depression.  At  the 
same time, the notions of Marx gained influence in the West, perhaps because the repressions of the 
Soviet Union, the major avowed practitioner of Marx, were not well known before World War II. 
But cracks in the facade of economic management by government emerged early in the post-World 
War II years, and those cracks were to widen as time passed. Britain's heavily controlled economy, a 
carryover from the war, was under persistent stress as it encountered one crisis after another in the 
early  postwar  decades.  In  the  United  States,  unbalanced  macroeconomic  policies  led  to  a  gradual 
uptrend in the rate of inflation in the 1960s. The imposition of wage and price controls to deal with 
rising inflation in the 1970s proved ineffective and unworkable. The notion that the centrally planned 
Soviet  economy  was  catching  up  with  the  West  was,  by  the  early  1980s,  increasingly  viewed  as 
dubious, though the view was not fully discredited until the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 exposed 
the economic ruin behind the Iron Curtain. 
The  East-West  divisions  following  World  War  II  engendered  an  unintended  four-decade-long 
experiment in comparative economic systems - Smith versus Marx, so to speak. The results, evident 
with  the  dismantling  of  the  Iron  Curtain,  were  unequivocally  in  favor  of  market  economies.  The 
consequences  were  far-reaching.  The  long-standing  debate  between  the  virtues  of  economies 
organized around free markets and those governed by central planning came to an end. There was no 
eulogy for central planning; it just ceased to be mentioned, leaving the principles of Adam Smith and 
his  followers,  revised  only  in  the  details,  as  the  seemingly  sole  remaining  effective  paradigm  for 
economic organization. A large majority of developing nations quietly shifted to more market-oriented 
economies. 
But even earlier in the postwar decades, distortions induced by regulation were viewed as more and 
more  disturbing  in  the  developed  world.  Starting  in  the  1970s,  American  Presidents,  supported  by 
bipartisan  majorities  in  the  Congress,  deregulated  large  segments  of  America's  transportation, 
communications, energy, and financial services industries. Similar initiatives were advanced in Britain 
and  elsewhere.  The  stated  purpose  was  to  enhance  competition,  which  following  Adam  Smith  was 
increasingly seen as a significant spur to the growth of productivity and standards of living. The slow, 
but  persistent,  lowering  of  barriers  to  cross-border  trade  and  finance  assisted  in  the  dismantling  of 
economic rigidities. 
By  the  1980s,  the  success  of  that  strategy  in  the  United  States  confirmed  the  earlier  views  that  a 
loosening of regulatory restraint on business would improve the flexibility of our economies. Flexibility 
implies  a  faster  response  to  shocks,  a  correspondingly  greater  ability  to  absorb  their  downside 
consequences, and a quicker recovery in their aftermath. Enhanced flexibility has the advantage of 
enabling market economies to adjust automatically and not having to rest on policymakers' initiatives, 
which often come too late or are misguided. Such views, which echo Jean Baptiste Say in some ways, 
clearly  have  been  paramount  in  a  renewed  twenty-first  century  appreciation  of  Adam  Smith's 
contributions. 
 Classical  economics,  especially  as  refined  and  formalized  by  Ricardo  and  Alfred  Marshall, 
emphasized competition in the marketplace among economic participants governed by rational self-
interest.8  The  value  preferences  of  these  participants  would  be  revealed  by  their  actions  in  that 
                                                      
7   J.B. Say, Traité d'économie politique, 1803.  
8   A. Marshall, Principles of Economics, 1890.  
BIS Review 8/2005 
 5
marketplace.  But  the  ultimate  source  of  value  preference  was  assumed  to  be  outside  the  scope  of 
economics. 
Adam Smith's purview was broader: He sought in his Theory of Moral Sentiments, published nearly 
two decades before the Wealth of Nations, to delve into the roots of human motivation and interaction. 
He  concluded  that  human  sympathy,  by  fostering  the  institutions  supporting  human  civil  interaction 
and life, was a major contributor to societal cohesion. 
To guide their own lives, people also exhibit a seeming inborn sense of right and wrong, presumably 
tested  by  the  laws  of  nature.  Those  sentiments  fashion  each  person's  value  preferences  and  their 
intensity.  Rational  thought,  in  Smith's  thesis,  apparently  emerges  only  in  the  contemplation  and 
initiation of those actions that will make manifest the innate propensities. 
Over the past two centuries, scholars have examined these issues extensively, but our knowledge of 
the source of inbred value preference remains importantly shaped by the debates that engaged the 
Enlightenment.  The  vast  majority  of  economic  decisions  today  fit  those  earlier  presumptions  of 
individuals  acting  more  or  less  in  their  rational  self-interest.  Were  it  otherwise,  economic  variables 
would fluctuate more than we observe in markets at most times. Indeed, without the presumption of 
rational  self-interest,  the  supply  and  demand  curves  of  classical  economics  might  not  intersect, 
eliminating  the  possibility  of  market-determined  prices.  For  example,  one  could  hardly  imagine  that 
today's awesome array of international transactions would produce the relative economic stability that 
we experience daily if they were not led by some international version of Smith's invisible hand. 
The inference is not that people always act rationally in commercial transactions. The periodic bubbles 
in  product  and  financial  markets  prove  otherwise.  But,  by  and  large,  the  description  of  economic 
process that Smith developed, and others have since extended, does appear to adequately describe 
today's determinants of world commerce and the wealth of nations. 
 A notable aspect of economics as a major discipline is its emergence largely on British soil. Smith, 
Ricardo,  Mill,  Marshall,  and  Keynes  developed  and  extended  classical  economics.  Even  Marx 
constructed  much  of  his  revolutionary  thesis  in  London.  The  incredible  insights  of  a  handful  of 
intellectuals of the Enlightenment - especially the Scottish Enlightenment, with Smith and Hume toiling 
in the environs of Kirkcaldy - created the modern vision of people free to choose and to act according 
to their individual self-interest. As a consequence, today we enjoy material benefits and longevity that 
Smith's generation could not have remotely imagined. We owe them, especially Adam Smith, a debt of 
gratitude that can never be repaid. 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2005
