Ishrat Husain: Pakistan’s economic turnaround - an untold story  
Article  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  reproduced  from  the  Pakistan 
Supplement Global Agenda, World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2005, Davos, January 2005. 
 Pakistan has come a long way since 1998/99 crisis when the country was on the brink of default and 
international reserves had been depleted, economic growth was anaemic, debt ratios were alarmingly 
high, confidence of the investor community was at its lowest ebb and credibility among international 
financial institutions was eroded. 
In a critical and fragile regional and domestic environment with constant threats to security, (as a result 
of playing a key role as frontline state in the war against terrorism), a prolonged and severe drought 
and high oil prices Pakistan has made an impressive economic turnaround within a short period of five 
years. 
Economic growth rate has reached solid 6 percent plus, inflation has been contained to 5 percent or 
so, exchange rate has been stabilized, fiscal deficit has been drastically reduced, domestic interest 
rates  have  declined  dramatically,  international  reserves  have  jumped  twelve  times  their  2000  level, 
debt ratios have fallen significantly and investment is booming. Pakistan’s creditworthiness has been 
upgraded to B+ by S&P. It is one of the few developing countries that has graduated from a successful 
completion of an IMF program to directly accessing international financial markets. 
How  has  this  remarkable  turnaround  taken  place?  Amidst  the  hot  news  of  Al-Qaeda,  Osama  bin 
Laden,  assassination  attempts  on  President  Musharraf,  nuclear  proliferation  by  Dr.  Abdul  Qadeer 
Khan  and  tension  with  India,  the  story  of  Pakistan’s  economic  achievement  remains  confined  to  a 
small segment of informed observers around the World. 
This  turnaround  has  not  occurred  all  of  a  sudden  but  is  the  outcome  of  deliberate  and  carefully 
designed program of economic reforms undertaken over last five years, some of them still ongoing. 
The comprehensive strategy announced by President Musharraf in December 1999 consisted of four 
key elements: 
(a) 
Restoration  of  macroeconomic  stability  and  Pakistan’s  relationship  with  the  international 
financial institutions. 
Structural reforms to remove distortions. 
Improving economic governance and reviving key institutions. 
Poverty alleviation through targeted interventions and social safety nets. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
The  interconnection  between  economic  growth,  poverty  reduction,  structural  reforms  and  improved 
governance is fairly strong in the case of Pakistan. Macroeconomic stability and the consequent rapid 
economic  growth  help  reduce  poverty  in  conjunction  with  investment  in  social  sectors,  targeted 
interventions and social safety nets. Structural reforms are needed to strengthen the underpinning of 
macroeconomic  policies  and  to  remove  microeconomic  distortions  affecting  key  sectors  of  the 
economy  thus  paving  the  way  for  accelerating  economic  growth.  Improved  governance  affects  the 
quality  of  growth  by  allowing  realization  of  higher  returns  on  investment  and  is  also  conducive  to 
poverty reduction through better delivery of social services to the poor. Poverty reduction, as we know 
by now, can be achieved with rapid economic growth, structural reforms and improved governance. 
Macroeconomic stability 
Macroeconomic stability has been achieved through reduction in fiscal deficit, acquiring a surplus on 
the current account balance of payments, lowering of inflation, and a transformation of external debt 
profile.  These  have  been  brought  about  partially  through  the  support  of  international  financial 
institutions  and  the  Paris  Club  bilateral  creditors  which  significantly  eased  the  external  payments 
position that had been a major and consistent risk to the economy since 1998. 
Fiscal  deficit  was  reduced  by  pursuing  a  combination  of  four  set  of  policy  measures  (i)  mobilizing 
additional tax revenues (ii) reducing subsidies to public enterprises and corporations and (iii) bringing 
about a significant decline in debt servicing payments and (iv) containing defence expenditures. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
Monetary  policy  was  kept  reasonably  tight  during  the  first  two  years  with  money  supply  growth  at 
about  9  percent.  Expansion  in  private  sector  credit,  in  the  subsequent  years,  did  not  put  much 
pressure as the government borrowing was limited to a manageable level. As the monetary conditions 
improved the interest rate came down gradually to a single digit and demand for credit by the private 
businesses picked up resulting in higher capacity utilization in manufacturing and increased industrial 
production. 
External  debt  management  focused  on  (a)  reprofiling  of  the  stock  of  official  bilateral  debt,  (b) 
substituting  concessional  loans  for  non-concessional  from  international  financial  institutions,  (c) 
pre-paying expensive loans and (d) liquidating short term liabilities. Debt ratio was thus reduced from 
100 percent of GDP to 60 percent in five years time. 
Trade  policy  in  Pakistan  has  been  categorized  by  the  World  Bank  as  one  of  the  least  restrictive  in 
S. Asia along with Sri Lanka and this policy has gradually provided incentives to exporters to increase 
their market share in the global markets. Exchange rate policy was pursued to maintain stability in the 
foreign exchange markets while at the same time keeping the competitiveness of Pakistani exports 
intact.  Large  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  played  an  important  role  in  stabilizing  the  exchange 
rate. 
Structural reforms 
Tax reform 
Tax  reforms  have  attempted  to  widen  the  tax  base,  strengthen  tax  administration,  promote 
self-assessment, eliminate whitener schemes, reduce multiplicity of taxes and tackle the culture of tax 
evasion and corruption. A new Income Tax Ordinance has been introduced in 2001, which allows for 
universal self-assessment, uniform tax rates, removal of non-adjustable withholding taxes, 
elimination of exemptions and detailed audit. Moreover, the tax survey and documentation drive during 
1999-2000 has allowed the CBR to bring in additional income tax payers and new sales tax payers in 
the tax net. It has also profiled 600,000 tax payers which will help enhance the effectiveness of tax 
assessment, and help detect tax evasion and under-reporting. 
Tariff reforms 
Pakistan made significant efforts in liberalizing its trade regime during the 1990s. The maximum tariff 
rate  has  declined  from  225  percent  in  1990-1  to  25  percent;  the  average  tariff  rate  stands  at  just 
11 percent compared to 65 percent a decade ago. The number of duty slabs has also been reduced to 
four. 
Quantitative import restrictions have already been eliminated except those relating to security, health, 
public morals, religious and cultural concerns. The number of statutory orders that exempted certain 
industries from import duties have been phased out by June 2004 and import duties on 4,000 items 
were  reduced.  These  measures  have  brought  down  effective  rate  of  protection,  eliminated  the 
anti-export bias and promoted competitive and efficient industries. 
A  number  of  laws  have  also  been  promulgated  to  bring  the  trade  regime  in  conformity  with  World 
Trade Organization regulations. These include antidumping and countervailing measures intellectual 
property rights. 
Privatization 
Public  sector  corporations  have  been  a  constant  source  of  burden  on  the  budget  as  well  as 
quasi-fiscal accounts. As much as one-third of the fiscal deficit could be directly attributed to the losses 
of public corporations. In addition, nationalized commercial banks had been carrying a large burden of 
these corporations. A new law was promulgated under which privatization can take place. This step 
was  necessary  to  ensure  transparency,  provide  an  institutional  and  legal  framework,  avoid 
unnecessary delays and litigations, and outline the process through which the transactions are to be 
carried out. 
Three major banks along with several other key public sector units have already been sold to strategic 
investors  in  the  private  sector.  Shares  of  large  companies  such  as  Oil  and  Gas  Development 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
Company Ltd. and Pakistan Petroleum Ltd have been divested through public offerings. Plans to sell 
the Pakistan Telecommunications Co. Ltd (PTCL) and Pakistan State Oil (PSO) - the two giants - are 
under implementation. 
Deregulation 
As Pakistan has embarked on the process of creating competitive markets and eliminating direct or 
implicit consumer and producer subsidies, a number of steps have been taken to deregulate prices 
and trading in various sectors. The most far-reaching reform has taken place in the oil and gas sector. 
Imports and pricing of petroleum products have been deregulated and the private sector is now free to 
import  and  fix  prices.  An  automatic  price  adjustment  formula  for  consumer  prices  of  petroleum 
products linked with international prices has been adopted. Price distortions in natural gas have also 
been eliminated and new pricing framework has been put in place. 
The government has freed up agricultural prices by moving towards market based pricing. With a view 
towards allowing farmers to receive international prices for their produce, all restrictions on the import 
and export of agricultural commodities have been removed. Wheat procurement and trade, which was 
until recently an exclusive monopoly of the state, has been opened up to the private sector. Exports of 
wheat and wheat products have also been allowed to the private sector. 
Financial sector reforms 
Financial sector has made the farthest progress by transforming itself into a market oriented, private 
sector dominated sector performing efficient intermediation. The regulatory and supervision functions 
of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  have  been  significantly  strengthened,  and  strict  enforcement  of 
prudential regulations have led to widespread recapitalization and a consequent improvement in the 
efficiency and profitability of banking system. More than 80 percent of banking assets are now owned 
and managed by the private sector. 
The ratio of net Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) to total advances in Pakistan, has been brought down 
to less than 5 percent through a variety of strategic measures. An asset management company, the 
Corporate  and  Industrial  Restructuring  Corporation  (CIRC),  has  taken  over  a  large  volume  of 
non-performing loans of NCBs and DFIs at a discount and disposed them off to third party buyers. 
Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) have been restructured through mergers and acquisitions, 
closure, liquidation and reorganization. Auction of Pakistan Investment Bond (PIB) for tenures of five 
to  ten  years  government  paper  and  a  burgeoning  corporate  bond  market  has  begun  to  emerge 
bringing  together  long  term  institutional  investors  and  borrowers  interested  in  long  term  sources  of 
financing. 
Governance and institutions 
The  cornerstone  of  the  governance  agenda  is  the  devolution  plan  which  transfers  powers  and 
responsibilities, including those related to social services from the federal and provincial governments 
to  local  levels.  This  plan  was  put  into  effect  in  2001.  The  development  effort  at  the  local  level  is 
expected  to  be  driven  by  priorities  set  by  elected  local  representatives,  as  opposed  to  bureaucrats 
sitting  in  provincial  and  federal  capitals.  Devolution  of  power  will  thus  strengthen  governance  by 
increasing  decentralization,  transparency,  accountability  of  administrative  operations,  and  people’s 
participation in their local affairs. 
Other  essential  ingredients  for  improving  economic  governance  are  the  separation  of  policy  and 
regulatory functions, which were earlier combined within the ministry. Regulatory agencies have been 
set up for economic activities such as banking, finance, aviation, telecommunications, power, oil, gas 
etc. The regulatory structures are now independent of the ministry and enjoy quasijudicial powers. The 
Chairman and Board members enjoy security of tenure and cannot be arbitrarily removed. They are 
not  answerable  to  any  executive  authority  and  hold  public  hearings  and  consultations  with 
stakeholders. 
The National Accountability Bureau (NAB) has been functioning quite effectively for the last five years 
as  the  main  anti-corruption  agency.  A  large  number  of  high  government  officials,  politicians  and 
businessmen have been sentenced to prison, subjected to heavy fines and disqualified from holding 
public office for twenty-one years on charges of corruption after conviction in the courts of law. Major 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 3
loan  and  tax defaulters were  also  investigated,  prosecuted  and  forced  to  repay  their overdue  loans 
and taxes. 
Institutional reforms 
Civil  service  reforms  aimed  at  improving  recruitment,  training,  performance  management,  career 
progression,  right  sizing  of  ministries  and  attached  departments,  and  improving  compensation  for 
government employees are the reforms that have been initiated for building strong institutions in the 
country. In order to depoliticize recruitment, promotions and career development, the independence 
and  responsibilities  of  the  Federal  Public  Service  Commission  (FPSC)  have  been  enhanced  and  is 
now  fully  in  charge  of  meritbased  recruitment  and  promotions.  The  Civil  Service  Act  has  been 
amended to reflect performance based career progression and would enable the government to retire 
civil servants who are inefficient and/or corrupt. The public sector educational training infrastructure is 
also being restructured to strengthen skillbased training of civil servants at all levels. 
The reforms in some of the most important federal institutions – the Central Board of Revenue (CBR), 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SECP),  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  and  Pakistan 
Railways - initiated some years ago - are already beginning to take some hold and making a difference 
as far as governance is concerned. 
Reforms  in  access  to  justice  will  deal  with  delays  in  the  provision  of  justice,  case  management, 
automation,  and  court  formation  systems.  In  addition,  human  resources,  management  information 
systems and the infrastructure supporting judicial system are being revamped and upgraded. Small 
Causes Courts have been established to provide relief to the poor who have small claims. 
Extensive  police  reforms  have  been  introduced  to  separate  the  law  and  order,  investigation,  and 
prosecution functions of the police and promote functional specialization. Public Safety Commissions 
have  been  set  up  at  the  federal,  provincial  and  district  levels,  which  will  institutionalize  public 
accountability of Pakistan’s Police Force. To improve the overall performance of the policy, enhancing 
efficiency,  logistics,  communication,  mobility  and  training  are  being  given  greater  emphasis.  The 
example of motorway police in this respect is illustrative of the quick turnaround that can be brought 
about through better incentives and logistic support. 
Poverty reduction 
Pakistan’s  economic  growth  rate  has  picked  up  to  6.4  percent  in  2003-4  (population  growth  rate  is 
2.0 percent). A key element of the poverty reduction strategy is to sustain this high rate of economic 
growth. Towards this end, the government has identified four major areas; agriculture, SMEs, oil and 
gas sector, and information technology as the drivers of growth. With relatively low investment, these 
sectors are likely to generate higher employment opportunities and thus have direct impact on poverty 
reduction. 
Poverty targeted interventions 
Economic growth is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for poverty reduction. Where poverty is 
endemic,  high  economic  growth  must  be  accompanied  by  direct  poverty  alleviation  measures. 
Towards  this  end,  poverty  targeted  intervention  programs  consisting  of  several  major  elements  are 
being introduced. These elements include: (i) integrated small public works programme in both urban 
and  rural  areas  (Khushal  Pakistan  Programme),  and  the  (ii)  development  of  microfinance  sector  to 
help improve credit access of the poor. 
Public works 
Khushal Pakistan program had generated economic activity in the country through local public works. 
The provinces, in close collaboration with the local authorities and communities, completed almost half 
a  billion  dollar  of  small  projects  creating  about  1  million  job  opportunities  along  with  essential 
infrastructure  in  rural  and  low  income  urban  areas.  The  program  has  resulted  in  construction  of 
farm-to-market  roads,  rehabilitation  of  water  supply  schemes,  repair  of  existing  schools,  small  rural 
road, streets, drains, and storm channels in villages. Moreover, the program has been supplemented 
with the schemes for lining of watercourses and laser land leveling, desilting canals, and provision of 
civil amenities in towns, municipal committees, and metropolitan corporations. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2005
Microfinance 
The role of microfinance in poverty alleviation and employment generation has been widely accepted. 
The  government  has  established  a  micro-credit  bank  (Khushali  Bank),  as  a  prototype  institution  for 
providing  credit  access  to  poor  households.  This  bank  has  so  far  reached  out  to  200,000  poor 
households  throughout  the  country.  The  work  of  this  bank  has  been  reinforced  by  the  Pakistan 
Poverty Alleviation Fund, which through a network of partner organizations in non-governmental sector 
has reached out to another 300,000 poor families. 
Education and health 
Pakistan’s  poor  educational  outcomes  have  become  a  major  constraining  influence  on  its  quest  for 
integration in the global economy. High rates of illiteracy, particularly among women, low educational 
attainment of the labour force, and lack of qualified technical and scientific manpower have impeded 
economic growth. 
The strategic thrust of Education Sector Reforms (ESRs) consists of (a) achieving universal primary 
education and adult literacy; (b) improving the quality of education; (c) renewed focus on technical and 
vocational  education.  Higher  education  and  Science  and  technological  research  capacities  are  also 
being  bolstered  in  the  country.  Madarassahs  are  being  brought  into  the  mainstream  educational 
system so that their products can find gainful employment in the economy. The National Commission 
on Human Development is mobilizing community volunteers to bring out-of-the school children into the 
system. Female educational enrolments have jumped in the province of Punjab since the girl students 
were awarded monthly stipends to support their education. 
The  new  health  policy  follows  a  “health  for  all”  approach  based  on  accessibility,  affordability  and 
acceptability of health services by the general population. The health strategy places greater focus on 
a continuous shift from curative services to preventive health services by improving the primary health 
care system. Improvements in health status are taking place mainly through maternal and child health, 
communicable and infectious disease control and elimination of nutrient deficiencies. The budget for 
the Expanded Program of Immunization has been increased and coverage is being expanded in rural 
areas  as  well  as  among  women.  A  sound  tuberculosis  control  program,  HIV/AIDS  program,  and 
anti-malaria program are also under implementation. 
The shift of public expenditures from tertiary to primary and secondary health care and devolving and 
decentralizing  financial  and  administrative  powers  to  local  tiers  form  the  crux  of  the  health  sector 
reforms. This new approach provides a clear signal that preventive rather than curative health care will 
be given priority in allocation of expenditures. 
Poor access to water supply and sanitation are often associated with poor health outcomes. At present 
only  63  percent  of  the  country’s  population  has  access  to  safe  drinking  water,  whereas  proper 
sanitation facilities are available to only 39 percent of the total population. The government is planning 
to increase water supply facilities and sanitation facilities to reach 100 percent of population as part of 
Millennium Development Goal. Construction of drinking water supply and sanitation facilities is already 
receiving prime importance under the Khushal Pakistan Program. 
Social safety nets 
As  part  of  Social  Safety  net  programme,  the  government  has  launched  direct  cash-transfer 
programmes  for  poor  families  through  medical  assistance,  and  educational  stipends  from  the 
Bait-ul-Maal  (a  public  welfare  programme).  The  Food  Support  Programme  covers  1.2  million  of  the 
poorest  households  with  monthly  incomes  of  up  to  Rs.2,000  per  family  (US$35).  A  system  of 
needstesting has been adopted for the identification of beneficiaries by linking the programme with the 
zakat system. 
The zakat programme that targets widows, orphans and the disabled has been strengthened. About 
two  million  beneficiaries  received  assistance  from  the  Zakat  Fund,  of  which  0.5  million  receive 
assistance on a regular basis. It is envisaged that an additional 1.5 million will be added to the list of 
zakat recipients through rehabilitation schemes, which will provide micro loans of Rs.10,000 (US$160) 
to  Rs.50,000  (US$800)  each  for  starting  up  small  businesses.  An  allocation  of  Rs.5  billion  (US$80 
million)  has  been  made  for  these  schemes  in  addition  to  the  normal  stipends  to  mustahqeen  (the 
needy) out of the Zakat Fund. It is estimated that zakat contributes 10-15 percent to the government’s 
poverty reduction programme. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 5
The  school  feeding  programme  for  female  students  (Tawana  Pakistan  Programme),  which  was 
successfully piloted  in a  few  districts will  be replicated  throughout  the country.  This programme  will 
help  address  malnutrition  in  female  students  as  this  has  resulted  in  low  enrolment,  high 
absenteeism/dropout rate and low cognitive achievement. It is estimated that community mobilization 
will strengthen ownership of this programme and lead to a 30 percent decrease in the dropout rate. 
The Employees Old-age Benefits Institutions (EOBI) and provincial social security institutions provide 
pension  and  medical  care  benefits  to  private  sector  employees.  Sindh  and  Punjab  provide  medical 
care  benefits  to  about  700,000  beneficiaries  and  their  dependents.  Similarly,  the  Workers  Welfare 
Fund provides social security support to workers and their families. 
Moving ahead 
Despite the progress made during the last five years the challenges ahead remain daunting. To meet 
these  challenges  and  the  MDGs  by  2015,  Pakistan  remains  committed  to  keep  the  momentum  of 
structural reforms high, to maintain prudent macroeconomic management, to further reduce the debt 
ratios to keep the current account in balance to improve revenue performance without any relaxation 
of fiscal stance but to expand education and health services. The thrust of the monetary policy would 
be not to allow inflationary expectations to become entrenched while providing credit and liquidity to 
private  sector.  The  efficiency  of  the  energy  sector  will  be  enhanced  by  privatizing  the  distribution 
companies encouraging private investment in low cost generation projects and laying cross border gas 
pipeline.  The  efforts  to  attract  foreign  direct  investment  particularly  export  oriented  industries  and 
services will be  stepped  up  by  further  improving  the  business  climate  and  governance.  The  judicial 
framework will be strengthened to enforce property rights and contracts. Investment in human capital 
to upgrade the quality of labor force and improve the opportunities of employment for the poor would 
remain a priority. The quality of institutions will be improved through reforms of civil service and law 
enforcement agencies. 
The current policy stance of an open trading regime with low tariffs and non-existent non-tariff barriers, 
a  liberal  foreign  investment  environment  with  no  restrictions  or  prior  approvals  of  any  kind,  a 
market-based financial sector working under competitive structure, a dynamic private sector producing 
goods  and  services  with  an  enabling  public  sector  providing  infrastructure  and  social  services  will 
remain in place. 
6 
 BIS Review 24/2005
