Jean-Claude Trichet: Jackson Hole Conference - monetary policy and “credible 
alertness”  
Intervention by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB at the Panel discussion “Monetary policy 
strategies:  a  central  bank  panel”,  at  the  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005. 
 Dear Alan, dear ladies and gentlemen, 
I had the privilege of participating with Alan in all meetings of the G7 Ministers and Governors over the 
last  18  years.  But  there  is  one  big  difference  between  us!  He  participated  in  all  these  meetings  as 
President of the Federal Reserve, whereas my responsibilities changed three times during this period. 
I was successively Undersecretary of the Treasury of my country, Governor of Banque de France and 
then  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  I  could  therefore  look  at  the  legendary  exposition  of 
Alan in the G7 from three different angles, now not only with the benefit of a multiocular perspective 
but also of hindsight. And I can say that in 3-D Alan’s expositions in this intimate, restricted format are 
incredibly sharp, profound and visionary. I personally share fully, in particular, the judgement of Alan 
Blinder and Ricardo Reis on the lucidity of Alan as regards the early diagnosis of the productivity jump 
in the US economy.  
Not  only  in  the  United  States,  also  in  Europe  as  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  Alan  has  a  very  high 
reputation. In some European quarters, he is even sometimes made the principal witness of monetary 
policy activism, but I am not sure whether he himself would agree with such a role. Still, the issue of 
the Fed’s movements in interest rates and those of the ECB is frequently debated. Let me elaborate 
on this debate somewhat further. 
Since  1  January  1999,  when  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  officially  became  the  monetary 
authority of the euro area, the ECB has changed its policy rate 15 times. The easing cycle that started 
in 2001 on both sides of the Atlantic saw a cumulative reduction in the euro area’s policy rate of 275 
basis points, accomplished over 7 moves. That cycle has not yet been reversed.  
The fact that we have moved less frequently than the Federal Reserve, in particular over the last 2 
years, has generated a very interesting discussion on central bank activism. The undisputed notion 
that  the  central  bank  should  react  to  the  state  of  the  economy  goes  a  long  way  to  explaining  why 
different currency areas have witnessed different degrees of central bank activism. Shocks of greater 
magnitude and/or longer duration, and an economic system in which exogenous disturbances run their 
course more strongly and speedily, can largely explain different policy responses, as measured by the 
frequency of policy moves and the cumulative change in the policy rate.  
So, different contingencies and economic structures – quite naturally – can result in a different conduct 
of policy. And I could explain at length why in 2001 the highest rates in the euro area were only at the 
level of 4.75%, when they were at 6.5% in the United States and why the cumulative reduction in the 
easing cycle has been larger in the United States, only taking into account objective measures of the 
differences of amplitude of the economic swings that have characterised both sides of the Atlantic.1 
But I would like to share with you today some thoughts on a different sort of difference in “activism”: 
one that is not induced by the state of the economy, but rather one that finds deeper motivation in the 
central bank’s strategy.  
It  is  the  degree  of  activism  that  results  from  the  way  policymakers  try  to  reconcile  a  fundamental 
tension inherent in their profession. On the one hand, as a quite general principle of prudent monetary 
governance, it pays to adopt a systematic policy focused on responding to the fundamental forces at 
work in the economy in a predictable manner, disregarding the vagaries of expectations and markets’ 
fads. This policy would enhance markets’ ability to anticipate the central bank’s behaviour, favour a 
smooth  adjustment  of  the  economy  to  disturbances,  and  prevent  instability  of  expectations  from 
injecting  volatility  into  monetary  policy,  and  in  turn  into  the  economy.  If  successful,  the  degree  of 
activism displayed by this policy would be mainly related to the variability of the state of the economy. 
                                                      
1  Table  1  in  the  Annex  displays  the  evolution  of  several  macroeconomic  indicators  both  for  the  euro  area  and  the  United 
States over the last few years.
On the other hand, a central bank does also need to recognise that misled expectations can amplify 
and  prolong  the  response  of  inflation  and  economic  activity  to  an  inflationary  or  deflationary  shock. 
This  would  in  general  imply  that  the  central  bank  should  embark  on  an  aggressive  policy  action  in 
response to expectations instability. And, this will add to the degree of activism displayed by the policy 
rate.  
I will argue that, whilst the central bank must always be ready to take aggressive action if needed, a 
well-designed  institutional  framework,  which  undisputedly  assigns  the  central  bank  the  primary 
objective of price stability, and the adoption of a clear monetary policy strategy, which quantitatively 
defines price stability and does not pretend to fine-tune directly the business cycle, can make the latter 
type of policy activism unnecessary in many circumstances. The reason is that this framework reduces 
uncertainty  about  the  central  bank’s  ultimate  motives,  provides  a  stronger  anchor  for  inflation 
expectations and makes it easier for the markets to map the expected path of the policy rate to the 
evolution of macroeconomic conditions. This would reduce the likelihood that expectations might over-
react in the first place and, should expectation instability nevertheless occur, provides the central bank 
with an additional viable option.  
I  will  argue  that  under  some  conditions  the  central  bank  can  regain  control  of  private  expectations 
without  necessarily  changing  interest  rates,  but  by  being  visibly  and  credibly  “alert”,  explaining  and 
stressing its commitment to maintaining inflation at levels consistent with the price stability objective. 
The  threat  to  act  will  be  more  effective  the  more  credible  the  central  bank  has  been  over  time  in 
actually delivering price stability, as defined quantitatively. The paradox would be that this policy of a 
priori  “reinforced  alertness”  would  make  the  central  bank  appear  ex  post  less  “activist”  in  terms  of 
changes  to  the  policy  rate.  Importantly,  as  a  side  effect,  this  policy  would  better  sustain  economic 
activity and minimise macroeconomic volatility.  
In  practice,  the  central  bank  would  normally  make  use  of  all  available  options  –  as  circumstances 
dictate  –  to  counteract  situations  that  have  the  potential  for  undermining  confidence  and  perturbing 
market conditions for a lasting period. We have done that in the past and we will do it in the future. As 
an  example,  under  the  chairmanship  of  my  predecessor,  Wim  Duisenberg,  whose  passing  away  a 
month ago has deprived our community of central bankers of a man of remarkable wisdom and lucid 
judgement, we took immediate decisions after the dramatic events of 9/11, pouring very large amounts 
of  liquidity  in  euro,  setting  up  a  swap  agreement  with  the  Fed  and  decreasing  rates.  This  has 
demonstrated very clearly that the ECB was eager to act decisively and immediately when appropriate 
and had absolutely no enshrined bias for waiting for the “slowest ship in the convoy”. This observation 
that all observers and market participants made was certainly important in reinforcing the credibility of 
the Governing Council of the ECB when embarking on a “reinforced alertness”. 
In  all  situations,  we have been  aided  in  our  task  by  our  monetary  policy  strategy.  Clarity  about  the 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  and  about  the  framework  we  adopt  to  assess  risks  to  price 
stability has been particularly important for us to ensure a smooth start to Monetary Union in Europe. 
Such clarity afforded considerable latitude for action in the early years of the decade, despite repeated 
unfavourable shocks, and a remarkable leverage over market conditions. 
The advantages of a rule-like behaviour  
At first thought, a “discretionary” response to shocks might seem exactly what one would expect of a 
professional  central  banker.  After  all,  each  economic  contingency  is  a  unique  combination  of 
circumstances that, in its own way, is unprecedented, and will probably never repeat itself again in that 
precise form. So, each new contingency would seem to command a different, tailor-made response on 
the part of monetary authorities.  
There  is  some  grain  of  truth  to  this.  But  decades  of  reflections  on  the  role  of  expectations  in 
macroeconomics  have  taught  us  that  monetary  policy  is  not  a  sequence  of  isolated  policy  actions. 
When forming their expectations, agents seek to capture the general pattern of monetary policies, and 
it is that pattern that matters in shaping their economic behaviour. Therefore, the relevant problem to 
solve  for  central  banks  is  not  so  much  about  the  size  and  timing  of  a  given  interest  rate  move  in 
response to a particular contingency. It is more about the strategy for repeatedly adjusting the policy 
instrument in response to the state of the economy, whatever this might be.  
If the central bank is able to convince economic agents and markets participants of its analysis and 
assessment of the outlook, and about the policy measures that it is going to take in response to it, this 
mechanism of anticipation will act in self-equilibrating manner. As soon as the macroeconomic news is 
released,  expectations  of  the  short-term  interest  rates  will  adjust  in  the  equilibrating  direction  that 
markets expect to see implemented by the central bank. Such a credibility asset can turn out to be 
very beneficial in cases of major shocks and risks.  
It is clear that a world in which central banks’ inclinations and market views are perfectly aligned is 
unlikely to emerge in reality. However, decades of academic reflection and central banks’ quest for 
stability have not past in vain. Our keen preoccupation with making ourselves understood by words 
and deeds has established a new climate of mutual understanding with academics, investors, market 
participants and public opinion at large. We have stepped up the number of gatherings in which we 
document our strategies and carefully explain our actions to broad audiences. On the markets’ side, 
our  constant  drive  toward  a  continuous  and  all-round  exchange  with  the  public  has  been  tangibly 
rewarded  with  high  marks.  The  leverage  of  central  bank  pronouncements  and  actions  over  private 
economic behaviour has strengthened to an extent that we could not have remotely imagined only a 
decade ago.  
There is no shortcut to fully revealing a central bank’s strategy. This disclosure – which we perform in 
an  ongoing  process  of  interactions  with  a  large  and  complex  audience  –  helps  to  clarify  the  policy 
environment and anchors expectations. But unless deeds support words, words will be unconvincing. 
So, there is no better way to establish a reputation for actually following a strategy of monetary policy 
than letting the public infer and recognise it from our repeated behaviour. Consistent behaviour is a 
precondition for outsiders to understand our actions and believe our pronouncements. In synthesis, it 
is a precondition for our credibility.  
This  capital  of  credibility  is  built  over  time  and  easily  squandered.  So,  as  a  general  principle,  in 
weighing  up  the  arguments  for  and  against  such  and  such  a  decision,  we  should  never  fail  to 
appreciate that our behaviour has durable significance. It can add to the asset of credibility, or detract 
from it in important ways.  
A corollary: beware of false signals 
In my view, the statement that a reputation for consistent behaviour is an asset carries an important 
corollary with it. We should guard against over-reacting to indicators that might give a distorted picture 
of  economic  reality  and  thus  promote  policies  that  might  be  regretted  –  and  hastily  reversed  –  in 
retrospect.  
To  be  more  specific,  in  carrying  out  our  strategies,  we  would  ideally  need  accurate,  quantitative, 
contemporaneous  readings  of  the  current  pertinent  economic,  monetary  and  financial  data.  For 
instance,  knowledge  of  the  level  of  production  that  would  be  consistent  with  stable  prices,  the  so-
called “natural” rate of output, would be an important tool for assessing whether the stance of policy is 
broadly appropriate. However, estimates of the time-varying natural rate of output, and by implication 
measures  of  economic  slack,  are  notoriously  very  imprecise.  Even  in  hindsight,  different  estimation 
methods yield quite dispersed figures. Allowing for data revisions, that is re-appraising those synthetic 
indicators by aggregating revised data, only makes the uncertainty surrounding those measures more 
pervasive.  
Now, acting too strongly on such indicators, only to be forced to reverse gear soon thereafter as new 
estimates become available, risks the danger of an erratic policy process. Importantly, it confounds the 
markets, which look back on our record and try to make sense of our past behaviour using the wisdom 
that is only available in hindsight. If this gives indications that differ markedly from those which could 
be  reasonably  inferred  in  real  time,  outside  observers  might  extract  a  distorted  picture  of  our 
intentions.  Even  prudent  policy  conduct  could  appear  ex  post  –  and  be  deplored  –  as  evidence  of 
incorrect decisions. This could drain the central bank’s stock of credibility. 
All this is not new and revives memories of the 1970s. Were the spectacular policy mistakes of that 
unfortunate  decade  due  to  poor  economic  theory,  poor  policy  or  a  biased  representation  of  the 
economy? It was probably a blend of all of these factors, with the last one carrying substantial weight.  
Advances  in  theory  since  the  1970s  and  more  sophisticated  econometrics  have  not  immunised  the 
policy process from these potential pitfalls. And here is a concrete example of what I mean. The first 
estimates of the output gap are typically available during the reference year, and are then revised over 
subsequent years. It is important to note that the final estimate is not available for a very long period of 
time: 1999 estimates, for example, were still revised by non-negligible amounts in 2004. Revisions are 
also large: they can often affect the sign, as well as the magnitude of the estimates. In the case at 
hand,  for  example,  the  revised  output-gap  measure  available  to  us  today  is  positive  in  almost  all 
estimates  for  1999,  2000  and  2001,  but  it  was  estimated  to  be  negative  in  real  time  [as  shown  in 
Chart 1.] 2  
Uncertainty  is  even  higher  for  output  gap  projections,  which  are  the  only  measures  of  output  gap 
existing at the beginning of each year. For example, the real-time estimates of the output gap for 2005, 
published in spring by the European Commission, the IMF and the OECD, differ on average more than 
25% from the output-gap projections that these institutions made at the end of 2004. And, if we add to 
the real-time measures of the output gap for 2005 the average size of revisions observed in the past, 
we can conclude that it may ex post turn out to be anything between -3.6% and +0.8%.  
Clearly, output-gap measurement issues are not a fact of the past. Central banks also need to cope 
with  this  problem  at  present.  I  take  this  as  a  warning  that  the  central  bank  should  not  rely  on  any 
simple indicator of economic slack in taking its policy decisions. To conclude this point I would say that 
there are, undoubtedly, great differences in terms of monetary policy strategy between us at the ECB 
and, to use Alan Blinder terms, the Greenspan’s Fed. We consider the public display of our arithmetic 
definition  of  price  stability  essential  to  the  success  of  our  strategy.  We  equally  deem  that  the 
communication to the markets of our two-pillar monetary policy concept is important and has been of 
great help in the actual implementation of our policy. It is true that, in that sense, we belong to two 
different schools of thoughts on each side of the Atlantic. 
But there is an important point on which on the contrary we share exactly the same views. We both 
want  to  be  as  comprehensive  as  possible  in  our  analysis.  We  both  do  not  want  to  neglect  any 
information, any in-depth appreciation of a particular situation. We both do not want to rely exclusively 
on a single particular model of the economy, as sophisticated as it may be. I have myself said several 
times that the Governing Council of the ECB has no intention of being the “prisoner” of a single system 
of equations. We both highly praise “robustness”. There is no substitute for a comprehensive analysis 
of the risks to price stability that pays due attention to all relevant information. It stands better chances 
of anchoring policy and – through that channel – expectations in a durable fashion.  
Responding to risks of instability  
It is to expectations and the way their dynamics should be factored into policy that I now turn.  
Why should expectations be a problem within a credible policy environment? Because the economy is 
never at rest. Agents have to catch up with the continuous change in their environment by an ongoing 
process of learning. When shocks are moderate, or the underlying evolution of the economic structure 
proceeds  at  a  slow  pace,  imperfect  information  and  learning  do  not  excessively  complicate  our 
interactions with the private sector. But there are times in which stormy perturbations and accelerated 
structural  change  make  uncertainty  more  acute.  These  are  times  in  which  a  perpetual  process  of 
learning on the part of economic agents can have implications for the overall stability of the economic 
system – to some extent, independently of the monetary policy regime that is in place. If agents do not 
possess  rational  expectations,  but  have  to  re-estimate  continuously  the  coefficients  of  an  unknown 
model of the economy, using rolling windows of new observations, it can well happen that a shock of 
sufficiently  serious  magnitude  can  unsettle  expectations,  even  under  credible  monetary  institutions. 
The  reason  for  this  is  simple.  It  might  become  impossible  for  private  forecasters  quickly  to  form  a 
reasoned guess about the scale of the shock, its duration and persistence, and the likelihood that it 
might  not  be  easily  washed  away,  so  that  it  would  become,  in  their  eyes,  embedded  in  the 
fundamental  relations  regulating  the  functioning  of  the  economy  for  some  time  to  come.  Long-term 
expectations thus may over-react to the shock. They may drift endogenously reflecting the impact that 
the unprecedented disturbance exerts on agents’ own re-assessment of the key structural features of 
the economy.  
These  are  times  in  which,  typically,  there  is  a  disconnection  between  private  views  about  the 
macroeconomic  outlook  and  the  central  bank’s  own  internal  forecasts.  The  expectation  of  the  most 
likely  outcome  entertained  by  the  median  agent  in  the  economy  is  likely  to  depart  from  the  central 
                                                      
2   Chart 1 displays estimates of the output gap constructed by the European Commission, the IMF and the OECD. To better 
contrast the difference between initial estimates and revised data, Chart 1 shows real-time estimates and the latest available 
revisions only and, making the simplifying assumption that data revised 3 years after the initial estimates are approximately 
correct, it displays revised data for the period up to spring 2002. 
scenario  that  is  considered  most  plausible,  given  the  conditioning  assumptions,  for  purposes  of  the 
central bank’s own internal assessment of the macroeconomic outlook. As agents’ expectations shape 
the market reaction to new economic data and to the central bank’s own policy actions, they embed 
information that the central bank cannot neglect or grossly underrate in its own analysis.  
The difficulty lies in devising a prudent way to factor such situations into policy. And here is where the 
fundamental tension inherent in our profession comes in. On the one hand we want to keep our eyes 
on the fundamentals and avoid being misled or intoxicated by what could well be noise and unfounded 
overreactions. On the other hand, excess endogenous volatility in private expectations could indeed 
provide  advance  warning  of  pending  risks  that  the  central  bank  should  take  into  account.  Misled 
market expectations can prolong the dynamic response of inflation and real activity to an inflationary or 
deflationary  shock  of  sufficiently  great  potency.  This  might  entail  serious  risks  of  instability.  Recent 
work done at the Federal Reserve Board by Athanasios Orphanides and John Williams3 shows that, in 
these circumstances, a rise (or fall) of private inflation expectations beyond (or short of) those implied 
by  perfect  knowledge  should  elicit  a  more  aggressive  response  than  could  be  expected  in  normal 
conditions. The optimality of such a response is corroborated in a study by Vitor Gaspar, Frank Smets 
and  David  Vestin4[4]  at  the  ECB.  They  argue  that  when  agents  perceive  inflation  persistence  to  be 
high, inflationary – or deflationary – shocks can easily become entrenched, because agents suspect 
that these forces will be perpetuated by the economic structure. 
An aggressive policy adjustment in reaction to detected signs of expectation instability can help head 
off the risks that one might see associated with the manifestation of such phenomenon. It might be an 
effective  way  to  prove  that  the  central  bank  is  perceptive  to  changing  circumstances  –  even  to 
changing  views  about  circumstances,  present  and  prospective  –  and  ready  to  act  pre-emptively. 
However, any unexpected and possibly unprecedented action that the central bank takes in response 
to  these  risks  might  disorient  the  market.  So,  the  process  by  which  market  participants  price  long-
dated securities and assets in general might be impaired, as investors might misinterpret the central 
bank’s intentions. As a consequence, asset prices could be driven far away from fundamental values 
and confidence could be undermined.  
This  would  suggest  that  action  may  not  always  be  advisable.  Sometimes,  more  optimal  behaviour 
consists in appropriately communicating the central bank’s assessment of the fundamental state of the 
economy  and  its  prospects  in  order  to regain  control  of  inflation expectations.  In  the  long  term,  the 
advantages  of  having  systematically  avoided  hasty  reactions  outweigh  the  benefits  that  might  be 
apparent in the short term. By maintaining a steadier posture, the central bank embracing this policy 
views  its  role  as  that  of  a  lighthouse  or,  more  accurately,  a  lightship,  in  a  storm.  In  this  respect, 
building a reputation for a calm and firm management of the events can pay off. 
The viability of this approach – and its efficiency – is enhanced when the central bank operates within 
a  clearly  defined  institutional  framework.  In  policy-making  regimes  that  feature  a  primary,  sharply-
defined objective – reinforced by a precise numerical definition of the central bank’s notion of price 
stability – the likely evolution of the economy vis-à-vis that objective gives clear indications as to the 
most likely future stance of policy. This is supposed to diminish the odds that expectations might start 
diverging  in  the  first  place.  And,  if  expectation  instability  should develop nonetheless,  being  able  to 
refer  in  communication  unambiguously  to  that  objective  can  –  at  times  and  under  certain 
circumstances – provide an effective substitute for tangible action, provided “credible alertness” of the 
central bank is undisputed by market participants.  
Action and vigilance  
All in all, the art of central banking involves finding a fine balance between action and words in order to 
react  to  changing  market  expectations.  The  easing  cycle  that  started  in  2001  and  the  instability  in 
inflation expectations that occurred in 2003 represent 2 episodes that illustrate how the ECB has in 
practice devised its own way to address these issues.  
                                                      
3   Athanasios  Orphanides  and  John  Williams  (2005):  “Inflation  Scares  and  Forecast-Based  Monetary  Policy”,  CEPR 
Discussion Paper Series No. 4844. 
4   Vitor Gaspar, Frank Smets and David Vestin (2005): “Monetary Policy under Adaptive Learning”, ECB, mimeo, available at 
http://econ.ucsc.edu/~walshc/Workshop_Program_links.pdf
.
In early 2001 the ECB started an easing cycle. At the time, on the heels of significant adverse supply 
shocks  and  rather  strong  wage  dynamics,  inflation  rates  were  high  at  levels  unseen  since  the  late 
phases of convergence to the new currency in the euro area. However, we equally saw an upcoming 
worsening of the outlook for economic activity, as indicated by the rapid decline in several confidence 
measures.  This  lowered  the  risks  to  inflation  coming  from  wages,  and  inflationary  pressures  more 
generally. 
While  we  assessed  that  the  information  coming  from  monetary  trends  was  consistent  with  price 
stability  over  the  medium  term,  we  took  the  view  that  the  upward  inflationary  pressures  were  of  a 
temporary nature and warranted looking through the shocks that had caused them to emerge. We held 
the view that a protracted period of weak economic activity, and the increasing odds that the recovery 
would  not  materialise  soon,  would  eventually  facilitate  a  downward  adjustment  in  price  and  wage-
setting behaviours. The easing cycle, which we readily initiated, registered a cumulative decline in the 
policy rate of 275 basis points over 2 years, moving the policy rate down to 2%, which was below the 
lowest intervention rates of the central banks over a century for an overwhelming majority of countries 
that are members of the euro area, including Germany.  
Let me stress a point which is often underestimated. What looks perfectly appropriate with the benefit 
of hindsight, moving down interest rates to such low levels – exploring secular uncharted waters – was 
indeed bold ex ante for a new institution, which in mid 2003 was exactly 5 years old – and for a new 
currency – that at that time was 4½ years old. It had not been done to that extent by either the Fed or 
the Bank of England! In retrospect, we have been bold and equally lucid. There is no doubt that the 
Governing Council used appropriate judgement in granting high weight to the decrease of inflationary 
pressures stemming from the downside risks to economic activity. And there is also no doubt that the 
resolute  action  of  the  ECB,  based  on  its  own  inflationary  analysis,  not  only  permitted  to  stabilise 
inflation  and  inflationary  expectations,  but  also  helped  to  forestall  a  much  deeper  slowdown  in  the 
economy.  
The behaviour of inflation expectations brings me to the other episode I have mentioned. Long-term 
inflation expectations, which had remained well anchored at levels in line with the ECB definition of 
price stability from the outset of Monetary Union in January 1999, started displaying signs of upward 
instability in the second half of 2003 after the last decision to decrease rates. The ten-year Break-Even 
Inflation Rate (BEIR) suggested an incipient rise in longer-term inflation expectations [see Chart 2]. 
Survey-based data also revealed that the probability assigned to inflation outcomes being above our 
definition of price stability at long horizons was rising [see Chart 3a].  
Movements in these indicators of long-term inflation expectations possibly reflected concerns that the 
policy stance was incompatible with the inflationary impact of the surge in oil prices, accompanied by a 
pick-up  in  economic  activity  and  protracted  conditions  of  ample  liquidity,  which  could  be  seen  as 
favouring spending propensities and granting firms increasing pricing power.5[5]  
The  rise  in  inflation  expectations  was  considered  very  carefully  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council.  It 
was  of  utmost  importance  to  regain  control  of  these  expectations.  For  all  reasons  that  would  be 
common  to  all  central  banks  plus  three  which  were  peculiar  to  the  ECB.  First,  as  I  have  already 
explained, we had been bold in exploring new territory in the lower side of interest rates, and we had 
to  dissipate  any  wrong  sentiment  in  the  markets  that  we  could  have  neglected  our  main  objective, 
namely  price  stability.  Second,  we  also  had  to  eliminate  the  risk  that  part  of  the  market  might  be 
tempted  to  regard  the  single  currency  as  embedding  the  average  features  of  the  constituent 
currencies,  rather  than  inheriting  the  characteristics  of  the  best  performing  monetary  regimes  that 
constituted its legacy: that the euro, since its inception, has been, was and will be at least as credible, 
as  stable  and  as  good  a  store  of  value  as  the  most  credible  national  currencies  were,  was  a 
fundamental goal of Monetary Union, remarkably marshalled with the greatest success at the time of 
the  transition.  And,  third,  because  our  analysis  was  that  market  participants  –  by  possibly  over-
assessing medium and long-term inflationary expectations – were pushing up medium and long-term 
market rates at a moment when it was not necessarily advisable in our own judgement. 
                                                      
5   BEIR may have been also affected by technical market factors. When assessing developments in BEIR, caution is needed. 
Beyond  short-term  movements  in  financial  prices  that  may  distort  the  information  content  of  long-term  interest  rates,  an 
upward  movement  in  BEIR  may  signal  an  increase  in  inflation  expectations  or  in  the  risk  premium  associated  to  higher 
inflation uncertainty, although both are of obvious concern for a central bank 
Our concern about rising inflation expectations was signalled to the market from autumn 2003 in the 
press conference. Over time, our communication became increasingly “alert”, signalling our vigilance 
to  the  upside  risks  to  inflation  which  grew  at  the  time.  We  made  it  clear  in  our  June  2004  policy 
statement, stating that such an upward trend in inflation expectations called for “particular vigilance”, 
and  in  September  the  expression  of  concern  was  reinforced  with  a  statement  of  “strong  vigilance”, 
making it crystal clear that the ECB was ready to take whatever action necessary to eliminate the drift 
in expectations and restore stability.  
It  is  of  course  difficult  to  isolate  the  effect  of  our  renewed  emphasis  on  our  objective  and  on  the 
determination with which we would enforce it. But what we could observe from the second quarter of 
2004 onwards was that measures of inflation expectations stabilised, then started to edge down and 
the  probability  assigned  by  survey  respondents  to  inflation  outcomes  being  higher  than  our  price 
stability objective declined. We also observed a decline to unprecedented low levels in the standard 
deviation of individual respondents’ point forecasts, the “disagreement”, revealing increased alignment 
of  private  sector  expectations  around  a  focal  point  –  which  was  coherent  with  our  notion  of  price 
stability [see Chart 3b]. As the stabilisation of inflation expectations and their following decline coincide 
with the display by the ECB of its constant alertness as a key feature of the central bank’s policy, it can 
probably be argued that the market had become increasingly aware of the ECB’s readiness to act, and 
therefore  that  the  ECB’s  communication  was  one  of  the  main  factors  driving  expectations.  An 
argument supporting this view is that the decline in Break-Even Inflation coincides with a sharp rise in 
oil prices. This constituted a major break from the past, when rises in oil prices regularly led to higher 
Break-Even Inflation rates. However, other factors also may have contributed to the fall in expected 
inflation,  such  as  technical  market  factors,  dampened  dynamics  in  labour  costs  and  increasing 
weakness  in  leading  indicators  of  economic  activity.  Of  course,  while  communication  can  play  a 
decisive role in  steering  expectations,  it  is  in  the end  the actual conduct  of  monetary policy  and  its 
success in maintaining price stability that over the longer run will determine inflation expectations. 
Further  insights  about  this  episode  can  be  obtained  by  looking  at  developments  in  inflation 
expectations at different horizons [see Chart 4a]. The short-term Break-Even Inflation Rate (derived 
from instruments with maturity 2008) was not lastingly affected by the ECB’s communication of 2004 
and remained at values slightly above the ECB’s definition of price stability all along 2004 and up to 
June 2005. As should be expected, its dynamics were more closely associated to movements in actual 
inflation and short-term indicators of inflationary pressure, such as oil price dynamics. However, the 
implied forward Break-Even Inflation Rate (referring to the period 2008-14) – which one would expect 
to reflect much more closely central bank’s credibility – exhibits a downward trend that starts in mid-
2004. These patterns are even more striking if compared to the experience of other countries with a 
long track record, such as the United States. Over the same period, indicators of short and long-term 
inflation  expectations  in  the  United  States  display  a tighter  association  [see Chart  4b],  and,  in  turn, 
they are more closely correlated with actual inflation and developments in oil prices.6
Over  the  last  2  years,  stability  in  long-term  inflation  expectations  was  restored  without  engineering 
policy actions. The easing cycle that started in 2001 has not been reversed yet and the ECB has kept 
the policy rate constant at 2% since June 2003. During this period, the ECB has stressed that its policy 
assessment is conditional to macroeconomic conditions and this seems to be well understood by the 
markets.  Changes  in  economic  conditions  and  concomitantly  in  the  ECB’s  assessment  of  these 
conditions and their implications for the prospects, and the associated risks, for economic activity and 
inflation have allowed market participants to read signals about future changes in the policy rate. This 
is evident in movements in money-market forward rates, which are mainly driven by expectations of 
future policy rates: although the ECB has maintained constant its interest rates over this long period, 
forward rates have displayed substantial movements [see Chart 5]. A close look at these movements, 
and especially their timing, show how difficult it has been to correctly forecast the turning point during 
the  current  economic  cycle  in  the  euro  area  and  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  as  evidence  of  a 
brightening in the prospects for a gradual economic recovery was shortly afterwards contradicted by 
the appearance of downside risks to economic growth, and as oil prices showed significant volatility. 
                                                      
6  This decomposition of Break-Even Inflation into short and long-term expectations can be carried out for the euro area only 
from 2004, as the financial instruments needed to compute it are not available for previous periods. However, survey-based 
data  are  available  since  1999  -  the  inception  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Table  2  in  the  Annex  presents  mean  and 
standard  deviation  of  these  survey-based  measures  of  inflation  expectations  and  compare  them  with  corresponding 
measures  of  inflation  expectations  for  the  United  States.  Chart  A  in  the  Annex  displays  long-term  implied  forward  Break 
Even Inflation rates for the euro area and the United States.
This pattern of events has repeated itself more than once over this period and uncertainty has still to 
fully dissipate. 
The  Governing  Council,  on  the  basis  of  its  comprehensive  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  has 
constantly monitored and assessed macroeconomic conditions and the outlook for price stability, and, 
in its judgment, overall, they have required keeping the policy rate at 2% in each meeting over this 
period. In the monthly press conference following the Governing Council meeting in which we discuss 
monetary policy, I have very regularly made the point that we were not making any promises to the 
markets about future policy moves and that we stood ready to act as soon as is necessary to maintain 
price stability. 
Conclusion  
If I had to draw some lessons for the future both from what has been observed on this side of the 
Atlantic, during Alan’s tenure, and what has been our experience in Europe, I would like to suggest 
three words: risks, robustness and credibility.  
First, we have to stand ready at any time to weather the materialisation of new risks. The last 18 years 
have been particularly impressive from that standpoint. Those risks are probably the unavoidable and 
necessary counterpart of the immense chances that science and technology on the one hand, and the 
success  of  emerging  economies  and  globalisation  on  the  other,  are  bringing  about  in  the  world 
economy. Being intellectually and conceptually ready is extremely important. Incidentally, that is the 
reason why financial stability should continue to be of the essence and be a constant inspiration for 
monetary policy. 
Second, we have to fully accept that our economies, as well as the global economy, are experiencing 
a period of very rapid structural changes. I would fully subscribe to Alan’s remark that “the economic 
world  …  is  best  described  by  a  structure  whose  parameters  are  continuously  changing”.  It  is  even 
truer in Europe. Because in addition to the impact of science and technology, in addition to the effect 
of  globalisation,  in  addition  to  the  very  rapid  demographic  changes  that  characterise  the  industrial 
world,  we  also  have  to  take  into  account  the  structural  transformations  that  Europe  has  boldly 
marshalled for itself: the single market, the single currency, the historic enlargement. But the lesson is 
valid for all. Robustness in the present situation is key and we should not depend on a single model 
which would necessarily impoverish considerably the wealth of information needed for an enlightened 
decision.  
Third, I would stress more than ever for the future the concept of credibility. It is because the Fed has, 
throughout  the  last  18  years,  been  very  highly  credible  that  remarkable  successes  have  been 
achieved  on  price  stability,  even  without  what  I  would  consider  as  a  precondition  for  anchoring 
inflationary expectations: a quantitative definition of price stability. In all difficult episodes and crises 
the credibility of the Fed has been decisive in the effectiveness of its handling of the situation. In the 
case  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  I  have  explained  that  our  credibility  has  enabled  us  to 
regain full control of inflationary expectations with remarkable efficiency over the last two years. And 
this  was  because  observers  and  market  participants  rightly  had  the  intimate  conviction  that  we 
intended  to  be  absolutely  ready  to  act  at  any  time  if  needed  and  were  not  inhibited  in  any  respect 
either by unconditional commitments – that we have always carefully avoided – or by any kind of well 
intentioned  public  pressures  coming  from  many  circles,  including  the  political  sphere,  of  which  we 
were not particularly deprived since the setting up of our Institution. 
I thank you for your attention.  
 
Chart 1 
Measures of output gap for the euro area  
Source: European Commission, IMF, OECD. 
Note: The European Commission’s output-gap measure displayed in the chart refers to “trend GDP gap”. Making the simplifying 
assumption that data revised 3 years after the initial estimates are approximately correct, the chart displays revised data for the 
period up to spring 2002. 
 Chart 2 
Developments in long-term inflation expectations  
 
Note: Last observation is April 2005 for Consensus Economics forecast, and July 2005 for SDF and BEIR. 
Chart 3a 
Chart 3b 
Survey of Professional Forecasters: probability 
that 5-years ahead inflation may stand at or 
above 2%  
Survey of Professional Forecasters: 
disagreement of 5-years ahead forecast of 
inflation  
 Chart 4a 
  Note: Disagreement is measured as the standard deviation of 
individual forecasters’ point estimates. 
Chart 4b 
Developments in short-term and long-term 
inflation expectations in the euro area  
Developments in short-term and long-term 
inflation expectations in the United States  
(20-day centred moving averages of daily 
observations, March 2004-August 2005)  
(20-day centred moving averages of daily 
observations, March 2004-August 2005)  
Note:  short-term  inflation  expectations  are  measured  by  the 
2008 BEIR. Long-term inflation expectations are measured by 
the implied forward BEIR 2008-14.  
Note:  short-term  inflation  expectations  are  measured  by  the 
2009 BEIR. Long-term inflation  expectations are measured by 
the implied forward BEIR 2009-14. 
Chart 5 
Money market rates, implied forward rates and minimum bid rate  
Note: The minimum bid rate in the ECB’s Main Refinancing Operations is one of the ECB’s key policy rates. Last observation is 
23 August 2005. 
 ANNEX 
Table 1 
Macroeconomic developments in the euro area and the US  
(annual percentage changes, unless otherwise specified)  
Sources: European Commission, US Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Federal Reserve Board 
Note: (1) HICP for the euro area, CPI for the US; (2) Total economy for euro area and Business sector for the US 
Table 2 
Survey-based measures of long-term inflation expectations for the euro area and the United 
States (1999-2005)  
 Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., ECB calculations, Reuters. 
Note : (a) Long-term inflation expectations from Consensus Economics refer to 6-10 years ahead. The last observation is April 
2005. For the euro area, data before 2003 are taken from ECB Working Paper No. 273. (b) Long-term inflation expectations 
from  the  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  refer  to  5  years  ahead  for  the  euro  area  and  10  years  ahead  for  the  US.  Last 
observation is July 2005 for the euro area and August 2005 for the US. 
Chart A 
Long-term implied forward Break Even Inflation rates in the euro area and the United States  
 
Source: Reuters and ECB calculations. Euro area BEIRs are derived from Italian government inflation indexed bonds maturing 
in 2008 and 2014. 
 