Philipp M Hildebrand: SNB gold sales - lessons and experiences 
Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, 5 May 2005. 
 Introduction 
I.  
I am pleased to be in Washington today and would like to thank Fred Bergsten and his colleagues at 
the Institute for International Economics for providing me with this opportunity to talk about the recently 
completed gold sales of the Swiss National Bank (SNB).  
In  June  1999,  the  Governing  Board  of  the  SNB  decided  that  half  of  its  then  gold  reserves  of 
2590 tonnes were no longer required for monetary purposes and that it would inform the market and 
the public accordingly. This decision contributed to the process that eventually led to the first central 
bank agreement on gold sales. This so called Washington Agreement provided the framework for the 
subsequent gold sales of the Swiss National Bank, the ECB and thirteen European national central 
banks. Under this agreement, the SNB’s realized sales of 1170 tonnes which represented the bulk of 
the total sales of 2000 tonnes for all participating central banks. The SNB completed its gold selling 
program  on  March  30,  2005  after  selling  a  residual  130  tonnes  under  the  second  central  bank 
agreement on gold sales. After completion of the gold sales and the distribution of the proceeds from 
the  sales  to  the  Swiss  government  and  the  26  cantons,  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  will  consist  of 
approximately CHF 90bn. With the remaining 1290 tonnes of gold reserves, the SNB retains roughly 
20  percent  of  its  assets  in  gold.  By  international  comparison,  the  SNB  continues  to  hold  a  very 
significant stock of gold. 
During the remainder of my talk, I would like to address what strike me as the most relevant issues 
that came up in connection with these gold sales. I will begin by outlining the historical context of the 
SNB’s Governing Board’s decision to declare 50% of its then gold reserves as no longer necessary for 
monetary  purposes.  As  you  will  see,  a  number  of  constitutional  and  legislative  changes  were 
necessary  for  that  policy  decision  to  result  in  actual  gold  sales.  I  will  then  outline  how  the  SNB 
designed, revised and implemented its selling strategy. Finally, I will attempt to draw some tentative 
lessons  from  these  gold  sales,  some  of  which  might  be  of  interest  to  those  central  banks  or 
international institutions that are considering gold sales or have recently begun to sell gold. 
Historical context 
II.  
In 1999, the SNB held 2590 tonnes of gold on its balance sheet. At that time, the SNB’s gold stock 
represented 30% of U.S. gold reserves. In relative terms, Switzerland’s position was extreme among 
the  G10  countries.  As  you  can  see  in  Figures  1  and  2,  Switzerland  held  more  than  five  times  the 
amount of gold on a per capita basis than the second-ranked Netherlands. Similarly, its gold holdings 
as a proportion to imports also far exceeded those of any other G10 country. In light of this extreme 
position, it is legitimate to ask why the issue of gold sales did not arise much earlier in Switzerland.  
For  one  thing,  public  opinion  in  Switzerland  generally  held  gold  in  high  esteem  as  a  symbol  of 
monetary stability. More importantly, however, a reduction in the gold stock required a fundamental 
reform of the legal framework of the Swiss monetary system. The process leading up to this reform 
was  lengthy  and  complex.  As  you  know,  Switzerland  is  proud  of  its  political  system  of  direct 
democracy and consensual government. On the whole, these traditions have served the country well. 
Comprehensive legal reforms, however, often require substantially more time than in other democratic 
traditions. 
Despite the fact that Switzerland had been under a flexible exchange rate regime since the breakdown 
of Bretton Woods, the Swiss franc remained legally linked to gold. For practical reasons, this legal link 
of the Swiss franc to gold had lost its monetary policy relevance. Nonetheless, it prevented the Swiss 
National Bank from buying or selling gold at any other price than the official parity of CHF 4’595 per 
kg. In the late 1990s, this parity was three times lower than the price of gold in the open market. The 
official parity also determined the valuation of the gold stock on the SNB’s balance sheet. In order to 
eliminate these residual relics of the gold standard and enable a change in the SNB’s gold policy, the 
Swiss Constitution as well as the Coinage Act needed to be amended first.  
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
Whereas during the 1980s and the early 1990s, the political climate did not permit such constitutional 
and  legal  amendments,  the  situation  finally  evolved  in  the  late  1990s.  The  deterioration  of 
Switzerland’s public finances led to a growing awareness of the opportunity costs of maintaining the 
existing structure of the SNB’s assets. The vast gold holdings increasingly gave rise to concern in the 
context of bearish market sentiments and of gold sales by other central banks. In November 1997, a 
partial  revision  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  Law  increased  the  flexibility  of  the  SNB’s  reserve 
management activities. However, further legislative reforms were required to enable gold sales. 
In February 1997, a first decision regarding the demonetisation of gold was taken by the Committee 
for Economic Affairs and Taxation of the National Council, the lower chamber of the Swiss Parliament. 
Two months later, against the backdrop of mounting international criticism about Switzerland’s role in 
WWII, the President of the Confederation proposed to allocate some of the gains in the likely event of 
a gold revaluation to fund a Swiss Foundation for Solidarity which would provide assistance to persons 
in  needs  in  Switzerland  and  abroad.  According  to  this  proposal,  the  initial  contribution  to  the 
foundation would be in the form of a 500-tonne gold donation by the SNB.1  
In 1997, the SNB was not only a special case with respect to the size of its gold holdings but also with 
respect to the amount of its capital reserves. The extreme level of capital reserves was the result of 
the  restrictive  profit  distribution  of  the  previous  decades.  In  April  1997,  the  Swiss  government 
commissioned a group of experts to draft a proposal for a new monetary constitution and to estimate, 
among others things, the excess capital reserves of the bank. The report, which was presented to the 
public in October 1997, came to the conclusion that capital reserves equivalent to 1300 tonnes of gold 
were no longer necessary for monetary purposes and could therefore be withdrawn from the SNB’s 
balance  sheet  and  used  for  other  purposes.  In  May  1998,  this  proposal  was  incorporated  in  the 
government’s message concerning the new monetary article of the federal constitution. 
Two further legislative steps were required for actual gold sales to begin. First, the Swiss people had 
to  ratify  the  reform  of  the  constitution.  This  occurred  in  April  1999.  Second,  the  Swiss  Parliament 
needed  to  adopt  the  new  federal  law  on  currency and  payment  instruments which  replaced  the old 
Coinage Act. The new law came into force in May 2000. Hence, it was only 27 years after the collapse 
of Bretton Woods that the SNB was legally in a position to start selling gold. The first gold sales by the 
SNB were promptly executed the day after the new law came into force.  
Meanwhile, the market environment was far from optimal for the SNB’s gold sales. While the SNB had 
merely announced its intention to sell gold, the central banks of Argentina, Austria, Australia, Belgium, 
Canada,  Luxembourg,  the  Czech  Republic  and  India  had  all  initiated  actual  sales.  Against  this 
backdrop,  the  gold  market  had  been  under  pressure  since  1996.  Here  in  Washington,  intense 
discussion revolved around the question of whether the IMF should sell gold. Moreover, the gold policy 
of the future European monetary area had been subject to intense speculations. The market feared 
that  once  the  European  Monetary  Union  came  into  force,  the  participating  central  banks  or 
governments would lose their inhibition about selling off parts of their 12’000 tonnes of total reserves. 
In May 1999, the announcement by the UK Treasury that it planned to sell 415 tonnes set a new wave 
of  producers  hedging  activity  and  front  running  speculation.  The  gold  price  dropped  by  10%  to 
252 USD/oz, a 20 year record low (see Figure 3). 
It is against this background of heightened speculation about wide-ranging central bank gold sales and 
corresponding  market  anxiety  that  the  joint  statement  on  gold  was  signed  at  the  IMF  meeting  in 
Washington on September 26, 1999. The participating central banks undertook to sell a total amount 
of no more than 2,000 tonnes of gold in the next five years, with annual sales limited to approximately 
400 tonnes. The fifteen central banks furthermore agreed not to expand their gold lending and gold 
forward transactions during this period. While the U.S. and Japan were not part of the joint statement, 
they declared that they had no intention of changing their “passive” gold policy. Furthermore, the IMF 
announced  that  it  would  abandon  its  plan  to  sell  some  of  its  gold  reserves  in  the  market.  These 
declarations had a big impact on the market for two reasons: First, they removed the uncertainty about 
the behaviour of the holders of 85% of the world’s official gold reserves. Second, the planned annual 
total sales (400 tonnes) compared favourably with the sales and increases of gold lending activity of 
the previous years (700 tonnes).  
                                                      
1   The  idea  of  a  Swiss  Foundation  of  Solidarity  was  suggested  to  the  President  of  the  Swiss  Confederation  by  the  then 
President of the Governing Board of the SNB.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
The Washington joint statement on gold was a coordinated effort aiming at clarifying the intentions of 
the  participants  in  a  market  prone  to  rumours  and  secrecy.  Of  the  1,300  tonnes  of  gold  which  the 
Swiss National Bank intended to sell, 1170 tonnes were included in the 2000-tonne total sales quota 
of the Washington Agreement. In other words, the SNB ended up being the main beneficiary of the 
agreement.  Formally,  the  initiative  for  the  Washington  Agreement  did  not  come  from  the  SNB. 
Nonetheless, the SNB’s unilateral announcement in June 1999 of its intention to sell 1300 tonnes of its 
gold reserves  certainly contributed  to setting  in motion  the  process  that  led  to  the  September  1999 
joint statement issued by the fifteen European central banks. 
Selling strategy 
III.  
The  Washington  Agreement  now  set  the  parameters  for  the  SNB’s  selling  program.  The  practical 
details were negotiated in the months following the signature of the agreement. Annual quotas were 
assigned for each period going from October to the following September. As you can see in Figure 4, 
the  SNB  was  allowed  to  sell  120  tonnes  of  gold  between  October  1999  and  September  2000,  200 
tonnes for the next 12 months, 283 tonnes between October 2001 and September 2002, 283 tonnes 
again  between  October  2002  and  September  2003,  284  tonnes  between  October  2003  and 
September  2004  and  130  tonnes  after  September  2004.  The  participating  central  banks  agreed  to 
eliminate the possibility of hedging the gold price risk for the entire five year period. However, flexibility 
was maintained in hedging the gold price risk for the selling quota within each current 12-month sub-
period. In other words, forward sales or option programs were possible for the annual allocations only. 
On the other hand, there were no limitations on hedging currency risk. The SNB was therefore free to 
hedge the expected USD proceeds from the sales against the Swiss franc.  
At  the  outset,  the  SNB  decided  to  use  the  BIS  as  its  selling  agent.  Between  May  2000  and  March 
2001, the BIS sold 220 tonnes on behalf of the SNB. For the first 120 tonnes, the SNB paid the BIS a 
fixed commission while the performance risk resided with the SNB. For the next 100 tonnes, the BIS 
agreed to pay the average price of the AM and PM London gold fixing plus a small fixed premium.  
In April 2001, the Governing Board decided that there was no reason to continue to sell through the 
BIS. The SNB now had the necessary professionals, know-how, trading resources and contacts to the 
international gold market to trade directly. Two types of selling operations were subsequently pursued: 
spot sales in the market and sales programs with price caps.  
Over the next three and a half years, 730 tonnes were sold directly in the spot market. For these sales, 
the  SNB  used  25  counterparties  in  four  different  continents.  In  an  effort  to  receive  consistently 
competitive pricing, the Governing Board allowed the SNB traders to become two-way participants in 
the market. In other words, traders were allowed to buy gold on an intra-day basis up to two thirds of 
the  daily  allocated  sales  volume.  Overall,  the  sales  had  to  be  conducted  within  a  clearly  defined 
corridor  which  was  structured  around  daily  sales  volumes  of  approximately  one  tonne  (Figure  5).  
Typically, the Bank of England was used for the physical settlement of these operations.   
Apart from spot operations, 350 tonnes were sold through option programs. In a typical program, the 
buyer committed  to  buy  50  tonnes  of gold spread evenly  over several  months and  to  pay  the  daily 
average  AM  and  PM  London  Fixing  plus  a  premium.  In  order  to  increase  this  premium,  the  SNB 
accepted to fix a cap to the maximum selling price. In other words, the programs were based on the 
idea  of  selling  gold  on a  spot  basis  and  writing  out-of-the-money  call  options.  In  an  effort  to  obtain 
competitive  premiums,  each  program  was  allotted  in  an  auction  between  three  major  dealers. 
Considering  the  high  variance of  the bids we received,  this auction  procedure  proved  suitable.  The 
realized premium varied between USD 1.4 and USD 3.5 per ounce. These modest premiums reflected 
the SNB’s prudence in choosing the caps. At the time of the relevant auctions, these were far above 
the  market  price.  This  explains  why,  despite  an  overall  bullish  market,  the  strike  levels  were  only 
attained on two occasions, namely in February 2003.  
While the possibility of hedging the gold price risk was limited by the Washington agreement, the SNB 
was  allowed  to  hedge  the  USD/CHF  risk  associated  with  the  expected  proceeds  of  the  gold  sales. 
Originally,  the  Governing  Board  decided  to  hedge  20%  of  the  expected  proceeds  in  USD.  In 
December 2000, it increased this hedging proportion to 35% and maintained it throughout the entire 
sales program.  
Overall, the gold sales proceeds amounted to CHF 21.1bn, or CHF 16,241 per Kg. Expressed in USD, 
the average selling price was USD 351,40 per ounce, which was 17.2 USD higher than the average 
London  fixing  price  between  Mai  2000  and  March  2005  (334,2  USD).  The  bulk  of  this  excess 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 3
performance  (13.4  USD)  resulted  from  the  currency  hedge  of  the  expected  USD  proceeds  (CHF 
829mio). In the context of increasing gold prices, the profile of the yearly quotas, with their overweight 
at the end of period, contributed with 3.1 USD to the excess performance. The residual performance 
(0.7 USD) was related to the combined effects of the option programs, the spot sales and the sales 
through the BIS. SNB spot sales were realized at a price corresponding to the fixing plus 22 cents, 
whereas the average premium over the fixing for the cap sales was USD 1.9.  
Lessons and conclusions  
IV.  
Last week, the SNB’s General Assembly approved the 2004 accounts of the SNB, thereby formalizing 
the disbursement of the CHF 21.1bn proceeds of the 1300 tonnes of gold. One third of that amount 
will go to the federal government and two thirds to the 26 cantons. Beginning on May 12, the SNB will 
disburse the money in ten weekly tranches. The disbursements will have no impact on the Swiss yield 
curve or the exchange rate as the necessary portfolio adjustments were made in the run up to the pay 
out. With the final tranche on July 14, the disbursement of the proceeds from the gold sales will have 
been  completed,  representing  the  largest  financial  transaction  in  the  history  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank.   
In my view, the most important lesson to be drawn from the SNB’s gold sales is that the decision to 
sell  official  gold  holdings  should  be  made  separately  from  any  consideration  on  how  to  use  the 
proceeds.  The  history  of  the  SNB  sales  shows  that  notwithstanding  the  constitutional  and  legal 
complexities I referred to earlier, the time between the expert opinion about the SNB’s excess reserve 
capital and the first sales was two and a half years. Switzerland’s politicians, on the other hand, failed 
to reach a consensus on what to do with the proceeds. After eight years of relentless debates and a 
squarely  rejected  referendum  on  the  Swiss  Foundation  for  Solidarity  in  2002,  the  funds  will  be 
disbursed according to the constitutional distribution key for the SNB’s regular profits. I don’t want to 
burden you with the intricacies of the Swiss political debate around the gold proceeds. Let me simply 
say that it was not for lack of creative ideas that a consensus failed to emerge. This lesson strikes me 
as  relevant  with  regard  to  potential  renewed  discussions  about  IMF  gold  sales.  Such  discussions 
should exclusively be conducted on the basis of a thorough examination of the solidity of the IMF’s 
financial  position  and  not  become  entangled  with  proposals  on  how  to  allocate  any  expected 
proceeds.   
Finally, let me offer a couple of specific lessons from the SNB’s gold sales that underline the benefits 
of  transparency.  Total  official  gold  holdings  by  central  banks  and  governments  today  account  for 
approximately  ten  times  the  annual  worldwide  production  of  gold.  Prospects  of  official  gold  sales 
therefore have an inherent ability to destabilize the gold market. The initial Washington Agreement and 
the follow up agreement have demonstrated that official sales are best conducted in the context of a 
clear  and  transparent  overall  framework.  While  the  terms  of  the  agreement  were  not  rigid  in  their 
nature, they provided sufficient guidance to the gold market to prevent excessive market volatility. In 
the  event  that  official  gold  sales  continue  to  be  meaningful  beyond  the  current  central  bank 
agreement, a new set of parameters will have to be established upon its expiry. Moreover, should the 
IMF or any other official institution decide to sell substantial gold reserves during the next couple of 
year, it strikes me as essential that such additional sales get incorporated into the existing framework.  
Even within a broad international framework, national sales are best conducted on the basis of a clear 
and transparent sales strategy. In the case of the SNB, the specific sales programs evolved over time 
but the principles of regularity and transparency were maintained throughout. Market participants knew 
at all times what the SNB was doing with regard to its gold sales. Moreover, the market knew how the 
sales were conducted. Finally, while there were a number of adjustments over the five and a half year 
period, the SNB never departed from the principle of regular and transparent sales. As a result, market 
rumors and price volatility associated with SNB’s sales practices were virtually non-existent.  
In a similar light, the SNB’s experience as a gold seller suggests that it is best to consider ex-ante to 
what  extent  performance  considerations  should  play  a  role  in  how  the  sales  are  conducted.  In  the 
case of the SNB, the Governing Board made a number of key performance related decisions at the 
outset:  to  limit  the  foreign  exchange  risk  associated  with  the  dollar  proceeds  of  the  sales,  to  allow 
clearly defined active trading around the daily sales quotas, to use a conservative option strategy to 
achieve a modest outperformance and to assure competitive pricing from the dealer community. Once 
these  parameters  were  set,  little  room  was  left  for  discretion  by  the  Governing  Board  or  the  SNB’s 
trading desk. Human nature being what it is, we all know that too much discretion can quickly turn into 
room  for  judgmental  error,  particularly  at  times  of  heightened  market  pressure.  A  central  bank  in 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2005
particular has every incentive to minimize such room for error in all its activities as its all important 
reputation is ultimately indivisible.   
Contrary to initial expectations, the SNB was able to conduct its gold sales in a relatively favorable 
market environment. A former FED governor once said that the recipe for successful monetary policy 
is one part skill, one part art and one part luck. Presumably, there was nothing artistic about the SNB 
sales. On the other hand, good fortune may have indeed played a role. I will let you be the judge of 
whether or not the SNB conducted its sales skillfully.  
 
Figure 1 
Gold per Capita as of December 1998 in Grams 
United States
30.5
Germany
France
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
45.1
54.3
45.0
68.9
Japan
6.0
United Kingdom
12.3
Belgium
29.1
Sweden
16.6
Canada
2.6
365.5
Source: IWF, OECD  
BIS Review 31/2005 
 5
 
Figure 2 
Gold Holdings in Percent of Annual Imports as of 1998 
6.5%
6.3%
9.0%
8.9%
5.2%
United States
Germany
France
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
Japan
United Kingdom
Belgium
Sweden
1.8%
1.6%
1.7%
1.6%
Canada
0.3%
Figure 3 
Gold Price since 1996 
 z
o
D
S
U
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
Announcement 
of Swiss Foundation 
for Solidarity
Experts propose 
the sale of 1300 t gold
Government's approval
to experts plan
Parliament vote 
new federal law on 
currency
Swiss approve 
revision of 
federal constitution
Beginn of the 
sales
UK sales
announced
Washington Agreement
25.4%
Source: IWF, OECD  
End of the sales
01 96
01 97
01 98
01 99
01 00
01 01
01 02
01 03
01 04
01 05
 6 
 BIS Review 31/2005
 
Graph4 
SNB’s Quotas under the Washington Agreement in Tonnes 
 
283
283
284
200
120
130
1999-2000
2000-2001
2001-2002
2002-2003
2003-2004
2004-2005
 Graph5 
SNB’s Cumulative Gold Sales 
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
s
e
n
n
o
T
 
n
i
0
May-00
BIS Review 31/2005 
 Direct Sales
Sales through BIS
May-01
May-02
May-03
May-04
 7
