Ewart S Williams: An intensified focus on communications 
Opening remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the launch of the redesigned website, Port of Spain, 21 April 2005. 
 SALUTATIONS: 
Members of the Board of Directors 
Management and staff of the Bank 
Specially invited Guests 
Members of the Media 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The Central Bank sincerely thank you for accepting our invitation to participate in the launch of our 
Redesigned Website. As you know, the Central Bank is responsible for the integrity and stability of the 
currency and of the financial system. To effectively promote these objectives, we need to build trust 
with  our  various  stakeholders  –  the  financial  markets,  the  business  community,  the  politicians,  the 
media and the public at large. The most effective way of building this trust is through forthright, open, 
honest communication. 
Over  the  past  two  years,  we  in  the  Bank  have  sought  to  pay  an  intensified  focus  on  our 
communications.  We  have  done  this  in  several  ways  –  through  our  quarterly  press  conferences, 
through ongoing open contact with the media; through speeches by senior Bank officials; and through 
periodic press releases. 
Last year, in the context of our 40th Anniversary Celebrations, we introduced a new instrument in our 
communications  arsenal,  by  way  of  our  Money  Museum.  As  you  know,  in  addition  to  tracing  the 
history of money and the institution, the Museum is designed to give a summary view of how the Bank 
works. 
In  the  context  of  our  new  communications  strategy,  we  have  reorganised  and  strengthened  our 
Corporate Communications Department which is now under the leadership of Mrs. Nicole Crooks, who 
has the new title of Senior Manager, Human Resources and Corporate Communications. The Bank is 
paying particular attention to building and sustaining relationships with external stakeholders, and to 
assist  in  this  effort  we  have  appointed  a  Head  of  External  Communications,  operating  with  Mrs. 
Crooks’ Department. 
Our redesigned website is but further confirmation of our enhanced communications thrust. We intend 
to  use  our  website  to  help  us  achieve  several  of  our  objectives.  For  instance,  we  plan  to  use  the 
website: 
●  
●  
●  
to explain what we do and why; 
to launch a program of public education on financial matters; 
to  serve  as  a  medium  for  conveying  policy  signals  to  the  market  and  building  support  for 
monetary soundness; and 
to inform about our community activities. 
●  
We  also  plan  to  use  the  website  to  build  on  the  bank’s  long  established  reputation  for  providing 
accurate and timely information in keeping with the Bank’s mandate to promote stability, growth and 
confidence. 
If I may say so myself, the redesigned website is more aesthetically pleasing. It highlights the bank’s 
new corporate logo, and colours and really does justice to the Bank’s image as the industry leader and 
regulator, and a major player in the financial sector of Trinidad and Tobago and in the region. 
The site has been redesigned to offer something to the casual browser (who can get a quick idea of 
the scope of our activities), to the researcher (more interested in statistics and financial analysis) or to 
someone  looking  for  information  on  how  to  book  the  auditorium  or  to  plan  a  tour  to  the  money 
museum. There is transparent information on the Financial Institutions Act and on the process of Bank 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
and Insurance Supervision; the website will be linked to that of the Financial Services Ombudsman 
which would expose the user to a whole new set of information. 
We like to feel that we are the employer of choice, so we have also included information on career 
opportunities and competency profiles for jobs within the Bank. 
The  new  website  is  easier  to  navigate  and  attractive.  Information  on  the  website  is  classified  into 
simple groupings to meet the needs of out core publics: employees, financial institutions; researchers 
and  academics;  other  Central  Banks;  external  financial  institutions;  the  media  and  the  national 
community as a whole. 
The  scope  of  statistical  information  has  also  been  expanded  to  meet  user  needs.  Information  on 
monetary policy developments, economic developments, bank information, data and statistics are now 
available.  
The financial environment is changing very rapidly – more so now than at any period in our history and 
this  is  being  driven  by  the  proliferation  of  modern  information  technology.  As  we  respond  to  these 
changes,  we  invite  the  public  to  access  our  resources  to  find  out  more  about  us,  so  that  you  can 
enable us to better serve you. 
Let me emphasise that the media will continue to be an important part of our communications strategy 
- even if you misquote us sometimes. You have a ready audience that our website will never be able 
to  rival.  The  advantage  of  our  website  is  that  it  creates  an  expanded  and  direct  communications 
channel between the Bank and its publics. Also, while in the media, the message is mediated and the 
quality and accuracy are beyond our control. In our website we have no excuses, since we have 
full control of the message. 
I wish to thank all the persons responsible for bringing us to this point. I encourage the media and the 
public at large to be vigilant in ensuring that the site is adequately maintained and updated so that we 
may continue to provide a truly useful service. 
Over  the  next  several  weeks  we  will  actively  reach  out  to  a  wide  range  of  constituencies  such  as: 
school children,  university  students  and  business people;  with a  view  to  generating excitement  and 
interest in our website. 
Let me thank you all once again for coming …. and Happy Surfing. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
