Marion Williams: Regional growth of accounting and other service firms  
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the launch of the New 
Deloitte (Barbados), St. James, 12 May 2005. 
 Good Evening, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I wish first to congratulate Toppin, Walker and Deloitte for achieving this milestone, that of combining 
to  establish  the  new  firm  Deloitte  (Barbados).  It  is  a  remarkable  achievement  which  needs  to  be 
celebrated.  Such  accomplishments  are  the  result  of  hard  work,  application  and  the  ability  to  grasp 
opportunities when they arise. 
This  evening  I  plan  to  look  at  the  need  for  firms  in  Barbados  and  the  region  to  look  outside  their 
domestic markets and to venture further afield. In times where the world is going global, it is timely that 
there is a renewed call for firms to position themselves for greater interaction in the regional and global 
environment. I will look especially at accounting firms. 
Within  the  last  three  years,  legislators  in  various  jurisdictions  have  embarked  on  changes  to  the 
accounting environment to make auditors of publicly quoted companies more responsible for financial 
statements  and  have  sought  to  separate  audit  from  other  professional  services.  The  most  famous 
initiative  is  the  Sarbanes  Oxley  Act  in  the  USA,  which  provides  for  greater  regulatory  oversight  of 
public  companies  and  restricts  the  types  of  services  auditors  can  provide  to  such companies.  As a 
result,  audit  firms  can  no  longer  provide  accounting,  internal  audit,  IT  consultancy  and  secretarial 
services to their clients. In our local environment this has resulted in a reordering and restructuring of 
several audit firms. In addition, other developments in the offshore sector have resulted in changes in 
audit firms activities. Generally changes bring opportunities. In this case, it has offered an opportunity 
for the establishment of Deloitte Barbados. 
Change is universal and is increasingly evident in every form of activity. Increasingly, non-local factors 
are important for maintaining firm profitability, for supporting local industries and for ensuring national 
competitiveness.  Consequently,  every  enterprise  stretching  from  fast  food  outlets  to  clothing 
manufacturers has to deal with new forms of competition and a new economic framework. And this is 
not  confined  to  regional  market  entrants.  More  and  more,  new  and  global  competitors  are  entering 
regional  markets  and,  hence,  increasing  the  intensity  of  competition  for  and  among  established 
regional companies. It is for this reason that networking among firms, including accounting firms, is 
very important. It establishes opportunities and provides platforms for future growth. 
We promote ourselves as a financial services sector and subsidiaries of major public companies in 
North America and Europe are incorporated here. These subsidiaries must adhere to the Sarbanes 
Oxley or similar legislation and this has the potential for exposing local auditors to higher scrutiny, not 
only  from  local  regulators  but  foreign  ones  as  well.  These  include  Securities  Commissions  and 
Accounting Oversight Bodies. This has resulted in higher professional indemnity insurance and calls 
from  audit  firms  for  limited  liability  partnerships.  (On  this  matter,  representations  were  made  to  the 
relevant ministry by ICAB on behalf of audit firms – successfully so). 
These kinds of protective mechanisms help the CSME as they give firms a more secure base from 
which they can grow and can assist their entry into the global marketplace. The CSME then plays a 
key part in the region’s defensive mechanism and can be a vehicle for going global. 
The merging of national boundaries 
Until recently domestic firms principally acted within a domestic market, and this market was governed 
by national rules and protected by national barriers. The global thrust started long before CSME, but 
now  the  boundaries  between  national  economies  are  becoming  blurred,  as  there  is  a  growing 
penetration of production and markets. Such events give rise to new dynamics in terms of markets and 
production. 
Services  have  now  become  a  powerful  source  of  income  in  many  countries  including  ours.  This 
applies to accounting services as well. But even in the services industry there is an overriding need to 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 1
deal  with  global  forces,  regulatory  and  otherwise,  and  to  ensure  that  the  benefits  of  the  services 
industry are maximised not only regionally but internationally. 
in  national  markets, 
they  built  oligopolies 
through  concentration 
The global co-operation phenomena 
In the past the regional and international dimensions of production were usually the preserve of large 
multinationals,  as 
through 
internationalisation and though the branding of their product. In a sense, the opportunity for local and 
regional companies to piggy- back on that branding is now most welcomed. What you are marketing 
today is the Deloitte brand and that brings with it name recognition. 
Even though it is also possible to observe a strong concentration in many industries at a global level, 
resulting  in  the  building  of  global  oligopolies,  these  oligopolies  are  at  the  same  time  searching  for 
co-operation and for ties with jurisdictions like ours. This search for co-operation results from the limits 
to  concentration  and  the  desire  to  avoid  customer  anonymity  which  can  so  often  be  an 
accompaniment to large size. 
Regulation is becoming very international and as a regulator, we, in the Central Bank follow what is 
happening in the discipline. Most audit firms, for example, are part of an international franchise and 
are required to adhere to the requirements of head office. Most of these requirements are international 
though in some cases, I am advised that separate franchises were created for the Caribbean region. 
In fact, it is not unlike the regulation of the offshore sector, where a separate dispensation was created 
for “OFCSs”, meaning of course financial centres in small developing countries. The point here is that 
for the most part, the Caribbean, despite putting its special case, tends to be a receiver of regulatory 
rules. 
In  the  new  environment,  global  involvement  needs  mean  that  access  must  be  gained  to  strategic 
resources.  These  may  exist  in  the  non  English  speaking  jurisdictions.  Indeed,  it  is  becoming 
increasingly likely that more firms will seek to form alliances with firms in the non English-speaking 
territories. Thanks to the development of communication infrastructure and information networks, the 
physical distance between people is becoming less important, so it is possible. Moreover, in the case 
of  accounting  firms,  your  business  is  numbers  and  numbers  are  universal,  so  language  difficulties 
should  be  a  less  important  hurdle  to  regional  expansion  for  accounting  firms,  compared  to  several 
other service industries. 
The  changes  that  I  have  so  far  highlighted  present  both  an  opportunity  and  a  challenge,  for  the 
advantages or disadvantages caused by globalisation depend on specific reactions, at least in some 
areas. 
Generally, however, if firms want to stay competitive they have to become more externally oriented. 
They must look outside the domestic market. We should not, however, be deterred by limited capital 
and unfamiliarity in dealing with mergers and external alliances. We also need to be less constrained 
by the desire to have the company or firm dominated by a single family or shareholder. In the current 
environment such attitudes may be to the detriment of the firm in the long run. Since what is lost in 
control can be gained in increased market share. 
In recent times there have been various forms of combinations and networking occurring, particularly 
in the financial sector, where there has been a flurry of takeovers and combinations within the last five 
years. The main aspects of networking are, on the one hand, the concentration of core competencies 
to  exploit  comparative  advantages  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  access  to  specialised  skills  and 
experience which can be beneficial to the firm, by allowing the organisation to benefit from specialist 
skills in specific areas which would be otherwise costly to maintain for a small clientele. 
Networking also enables enterprises to accelerate their processes, to save time and to shorten output 
schedules. It enables a more effective alignment with the rapidly changing demands of the customers 
since new enterprises with different skills increase functional flexibility. 
Most  businesses  benefit  by  establishing  a  more  solid  presence  in  new  markets,  either  directly  of 
through  a  local  partner,  particularly  since  some  traditional  customers  are  still  wary  of  conducting 
extensive business over the Internet because of the uncertainty of legal environment governing such 
transactions. Concerns about enforcement of contacts, liability, intellectual property, privacy, security 
and  other  matters  have  caused  international  business  and  consumers  to  be  cautious.  Hence,  it  is 
useful to have a local presence. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2005
Nevertheless, subsidiaries of foreign companies may require financial statements under US, Canadian 
or UK GAAP, thereby expanding the work of local firms and increasing their exposure. International 
business  jurisdictions  like  ours,  therefore,  tend  to  benefit  from  a  vast  international  exposure  even 
though they are locally based, because their clients are multi jurisdictional. 
Evaluating entry options 
Research  shows  that  over  80%  of  companies  seeking  to  expand  plan  to  grow  by  adding  new 
customers  and  entering  new  markets.  However,  entering  new  markets  often  involves  learning, 
adopting and implementing new business practices and policies. Fortunately for us in the Caribbean, 
regional  markets  have,  for  the  most  past,  similar  accounting  and  regulatory  systems,  so  that 
expansion regionally should not be problematic. 
Successful companies who instinctively recognize the importance of new customers and new markets, 
are the firms which tend to succeed since they are proficient at establishing both effective marketing 
and new business development processes, including benchmarking and competitive analysis aimed at 
achieving sustained growth. 
In  the  increasingly  market-oriented,  global  economy,  challenges  bring  changes.  Even  banks  and 
others in the financial industry are revising their strategies, focusing on revenue generation after years 
of focussing on costcutting measures. 
Global trends point therefore to increasing revenue growth, but the success of many firms located in 
the region, will be also determined by how well they respond to the forces that are changing the face 
of their respective industries, including the changing requirements relating to standards, and the need 
for additional transparency with respect to both the customer and the investing public, and how well 
they adjust to these global trends. 
The CSME can assist in helping firms in accessing external markets through using the region as a 
stepping stone, though this intermediate step is not always essential to going global. With the help of 
some of the initiatives of government as well as initiatives from private firms themselves, successful 
regional expansion is possible. 
Each firm will need to be able to formulate its own strategy to effectively respond to global forces in a 
strategic manner. In the end, however, the resources which firms put into integrating into the regional 
market  in  a  proactive  manner  could  influence  relative  success  in  the  years  ahead,  not  only  in  the 
region but internationally. 
In closing, let me once again congratulate Toppin, Walker and Deloitte and all the partners on their 
recent initiative in establishing Deloitte (Barbados) and for the bold step which they have taken. I wish 
you every success. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 3
