Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Recent initiatives designed to increase the 
efficiency of the Ugandan banking system 
Address by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of Bank of Uganda, to the Annual Bankers’ 
Dinner, Kampala, 4 March 2005. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Fellow Bankers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
An after dinner speaker who was new to the art of public speaking stood up and 
having  suitably  saluted  his  audience  stopped  dumbfounded.  Presently,  however, 
he composed himself sufficiently to begin his speech. “A few hours ago only the 
Lord and I knew what I was going to say ….. but now the Lord only knows”. 
It is always an honour for me to be a guest speaker at this annual event where the banking fraternity 
gets an opportunity to interact and exchange views in a relaxed environment away from each one’s 
busy place of work. 
At a similar event last year, I was challenged to speak about the Basel II Accord or the New Capital 
Accord as it is referred to by many of you. I vaguely recall the levels of boredom which showed on the 
faces  of  most  of  those  who  were  present  that  evening,  which  is  something  I  do  not  wish  to  see 
repeated tonight. This time round I will make life easy for everyone by talking about mundane things 
Let me first report on the state of the financial sector. Substantive progress has been made in building 
a  sound  and  profitable  financial  system.  In  the  1980s  and  1990s,  the  banking  system  was  under 
severe stress; many banks were riddled by high levels of non-performing assets and some banks were 
insolvent. As a result, in 1995, two banks were seized by Bank of Uganda. The Uganda Commercial 
Bank  had  to  be  restructured  and  recapitalised  by  the  Government  and  the  Non-Performing  Assets 
Recovery Trust was created in 1995 to recover unpaid debt totaling the equivalent of US$34million. 
UCB deposits at that time represented over 20% of the total deposits of the banking system and the 
feeling  was  abroad  that  it  was  too  large  to  be  allowed  to  fail.  In  1998  and  1999,  four  more  banks, 
accounting to about 12% of the total deposits of the Banking System, were intervened by the Bank of 
Uganda and closed. 
The Central Bank also intervened in UCB and attempted another rescue operation. 
During  this  period,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  of  Uganda  instituted  an  internal  programme  to  strengthen 
Banking  Supervision  with  substantial  resources  being  put  into  training  and  moving  towards  a 
risk-based approach to Banking Supervision. 
The resolution of the Bank of Uganda intervention into the Uganda Commercial Bank through the sale 
of its assets to Stanbic Bank further strengthened the financial sector. Stanbic has not only retained all 
the  branches  of  UCB,  it  has  improved  service  quality,  outreach  and  efficiency.  They  have  also 
successfully  introduced  Automatic  Teller  Machines  throughout  their  branch  network  which  has 
substantially increased convenience and reduced transactions costs. 
As a result of these reforms, public confidence in the financial sector has greatly improved. Over a 
period  of  the  last  ten  years,  the  banking  sector  has  registered  a  tremendous  increase  of 
Shs.2,591.2bn.  in  total  assets  from  Shs.723.7bn.  in  1995  to  Shs.3,315.0bn.  in  2004.  Total  deposits 
grew by Shs.2,052.9bn. from Shs.383.0bn. to Shs.2,435.9bn. during the same period while total loans 
went up by Shs.673.2bn. from Shs.303.5bn. to Shs.976.7bn. 
Over the period 1988 to 2004, non-banking financial institutions recorded growth of assets amounting 
to  Shs.139.02bn.  from  Shs.56.78bn.  to  Shs.195.79bn.  Deposit  liabilities  grew  by  Shs.94.46bn.  from 
Shs.17.89bn.  to  Shs.112.35bn.  The  loan  portfolio  grew  by  Shs.72.245bn.  from  Shs.18.99bn.  to 
Shs.91.24bn. over the same period. 
Overall,  the  asset  quality  and  profitability  of  the  Commercial  Banks  have  substantially  improved, 
although it is troubling to see that banks’ balance sheets still reflect a strong preference for liquid and 
low-risk  assets,  and  the  margin  between  interest  rates  paid  on  deposits  and  lending  rates  is  still 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
unconscionably  high.  The  quality  of  the  bank’s  risk  portfolio  has  improved  tremendously  with 
non-performing assets ratio falling from 29% of the portfolio in 1998 to 2.6% in September 2004. 
However, the maturity structure of loans, and the degree of concentration need to be reviewed. On the 
maturity  structure  only  12%  of  all  loans,  35%  of  loan  volume,  17%  of  total  deposits  and  less  than 
0.5% of time deposits have a maturity structure of more than one year. 
There is also a high degree of concentration on both the loans and deposit sides. Large exposures 
represent 44% of all loans, with loans to the largest five borrowers accounting for 24% of total loans. 
On  the  deposit  side,  the  largest  five  depositors  account  for  21%  of  all  deposits.  This  level  of 
concentration poses a risk to the safety and soundness of banks. To deal with this threat, I will not 
hesitate to use the powers conferred upon the Bank of Uganda by the Financial Institutions Act 2004 
to force a reduction in loan concentration. 
Let me now review a number of recent initiatives which are designed to increase the efficiency of the 
banking system. 
The National Payments System: 
The Bank of Uganda has established a Real Time Gross Settlement system in Uganda in abbreviation 
referred to as the RTGS. The RTGS is an inter-bank credit transfer system in which large payments 
and time-sensitive payments are settled immediately (real time) and individually (on a gross basis). 
The RTGS system has advantages of: 
• 
• 
• 
doing away with the long clearing cycles for traditional settlement instruments 
strengthening the management of risk in payment systems 
promoting economic efficiency and competitiveness through expeditious transfer of funds , 
and 
enabling  Bank  of  Uganda  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  management  of  monetary  policy 
through timely availability of data on the stock of money flows in the financial system. 
 From  the  foregoing,  the  RTGS  system  is  a  critical  national  infrastructure  that  will  promote 
macroeconomic stability and the further development of the financial sector. The RTGS went live on 
21st February 2005 and is now fully operational. 
The performance of the Uganda National Inter-bank Settlement System in its first week of operation 
has been outstanding. On its first day of implementation, 86.4% (i.e. nearly UGX 220 billion) of the 
inter-bank payments that were settled at Bank of Uganda were channeled through the UNIS system. 
Such a level of performance on the first day of operation of an RTGS system is unusual. 
In the first five days, the transaction value throughput of the UNIS system averaged 70% of the total 
value that was settled at the Bank of Uganda. The system has also registered a 100% availability rate 
since its implementation on 21st February 2005. 
We have also undertaken a number of initiatives to develop and modernize the value (retail) payment 
systems.  In  May  2002,  Bank  of  Uganda,  working  closely  with  Uganda  Bankers’  Association, 
implemented  the  Electronic  Cheque  Clearing  system.  The  electronic  cheque  clearing  project 
automated cheque clearing and also strengthened risk management through the implementation of a 
National Cheque Standard. We currently have a 3-day cheque clearing cycle in Kampala and a 7-day 
clearing cycle for upcountry areas. However, Bank of Uganda is working together with UBA to develop 
a cost-effective method of implementing a uniform 3-day clearing cycle for the whole country. 
I am sure that most of you will recall that in August 2003, Bank of Uganda implemented another retail 
electronic payment system for relatively low value transactions called the Electronic Fund Transfer 
(EFT) System. In the EFT system, bank customers can instruct their bankers to transfer funds from 
their accounts to named payees in other banks. This system is especially convenient for payment of 
periodically recurring utility bills like bills for electricity, water and telephone services. While the utility 
company gets its money on time and as a result, minimizes debt collection expenses, the customer 
does not suffer the inconvenience of being disconnected when the customer has money in a specified 
bank account. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
The EFT system can also be used to overcome the current inconvenient system of paying university 
dues or school fees. Parents or guardians should authorize both their bankers and schools to transfer 
fees  from  their  accounts  to  school,  university  or  tertiary  institution  accounts.  For  this  system  to 
succeed,  utility  companies,  educational  institutions  and  banks  must  support  Bank  of  Uganda  in 
promoting and popularizing the use of the EFT system. 
The National Electronic SWITCH: 
Another  recent  development  in  the  payment  system  is  the  ongoing  implementation  of  an  electronic 
SWITCH that will enable banks to share their Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) with other banks in 
the industry. The switch will be another facility which can facilitate customer payments for utilities (i.e. 
electricity,  water  and  telephone  services),  or  loading  of  airtime  on  mobile  phones,  and  payment  for 
purchases using debit cards, which is technically referred to as Electronic Funds Transfer at Point 
of  Sale  (EFTPOS).  Bank  of  Uganda  has  already  given  its  No  Objection  to  Bankom,  a  private 
company,  to  set  up  and  operate  the  electronic  switch.  We  expect  that  in  the  not-too-distant  future, 
customers  of  banks  which  are  connected  to  the  electronic  switch  will  be  able  to  access  ATM  and 
related services at any ATM of any bank that is a member of the electronic switch. 
We  also  expect  the  implementation  of  the  switch  infrastructure  to  significantly  increase  the  use  of 
payment cards in the country. All Banks are obliged to use the switch so as to enhance the use of 
cards on the POS as Debit Cards. In this regard, Bankom must work closely with supermarkets, petrol 
stations and other outlets to install point of sale machines throughout the country. 
At this point, in order to help those who are tempted to doze off, I must quote Ogden Nash;  
“Most  bankers  dwell  in  marble  halls  which  they  get  to  dwell  in  because  they 
encourage  deposits  and  discourage  withdrawals.  And  particularly  because  they 
observe one rule which woe betides the banker who fails to heed it. Which is that 
you must never lend money to anybody unless they don’t need it”. 
Micro-Finance Sector: 
I  will  now  say  something  about  the  tremendous  developments  taking  place  in  the  Micro-finance 
sub-sector which developments seem to be unrecognized by observers of the financial sector. Overall, 
the  country  has  about  500  microfinance 
institutions  operating  either  as  community  based 
organizations or NGOs, virtually covering the whole country. In the year 2003, Parliament passed the 
Micro-finance Deposit-taking Institutions Act, 2003 (MDI Act, 2003). The MDI Act regulates only those 
micro-finance  institutions  that  take  deposits  from  the  public  essentially  because  there  is  a  public 
interest  in  protecting  depositors’  money  and  those  micro-finance  institutions  which  do  not  take 
deposits from the public can be well governed by the laws under which they have been licensed to 
operate. The implementing regulations of the MDI Act 2003 were gazetted in 2004. During the year, 
Bank  Of  Uganda  licensed  M/S  Finca  Uganda  Ltd  (MDI)  as  the  first  micro-finance  institution  to  be 
supervised by the Central Bank under the Act. I know that there are several other applications being 
processed in the Bank of Uganda and I want to encourage many other operators to study the benefits 
to  be  derived  from  taking  deposits  and  to  apply  for  licenses.  The  major  challenges  facing  this 
sub-sector are bad corporate governance and limited outreach. 
The Financial Institutions Act, 2004: 
The banking sector is strong and is poised to remain so because the regulatory framework governing 
financial  institutions  has  been  further strengthened. The  Financial  Institutions Act,  2004  (FIA,  2004) 
was enacted and became effective early 2004. The implementing regulations in respect of FIA 2004 
have  already  been  approved  by  the  Minister of  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic  Development  and 
they  will  soon  be  gazetted.  The  new  law,  coupled  with  strengthening  of  Bank  Supervision,  have 
enhanced  capacity  for  supervision  and  strict  prudential  regulation  of  financial  institutions.  The  FIA, 
2004 strengthened the regulatory framework of the financial sector by addressing a number of issues 
including  the  licensing  of  financial  institutions,  the  ownership  and  control  of  financial  institutions,  as 
well as corporate governance, transparency and disclosure requirements for financial institutions. The 
regulatory  framework  has  tightened  the  prudential  requirements  for  insider  transactions,  credit 
concentration and mandatory corrective actions to be taken by the Central Bank on distressed banks 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 3
and  other  financial  institutions.  From  this  year,  there  will  be  no  forebearance  for  recalcitrant  or 
renegade financial institutions. 
Credit Reference Bureau: 
A  lot  of  consultations  have  been  undertaken  to  reach  agreement  on  the  establishment  of  a  Credit 
Reference  Bureau  (CRB)  in  Uganda.  I  will  not  dwell  on  the  obvious  importance  of  the  CRB  to  the 
financial  system  but  only  to  state  that  the  success  of  the  CRB  will  require  the  co-operation  of  all 
financial institutions. 
Anti-Money Laundering Initiatives: 
Significant  progress  has  also  been  made  in  providing  a  legal  framework  for  dealing  effectively  with 
money laundering. A draft Anti-Money Laundering law has already been approved by Cabinet and is 
ready to be tabled in Parliament soon. The efforts to enact this Anti-Money Laundering law are geared 
towards  preventing  the  misuse  of  the  financial  system  in  Uganda  for  purposes  of  international 
money-laundering and related economic crimes or for facilitating the financing of terrorism. 
Bank Charges: 
In view of the fact that the level of Banks’ charges is of topical interest in the Press, I would like to say 
something  on  the  subject.  There  has  been  public  outcry  about  high  bank  charges  especially  with 
regard to customer’s deposits and withdrawals. Prohibitive bank charges for deposits and withdrawals 
can potentially discourage the development of a saving culture especially for the medium and small 
income earners and small savers. I am aware that the problem of bank charges and more importantly 
the problem of high interest rates is partly a result of structural problems in the industry, as well as a 
result  of  the  efforts  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda  to  sterilize  the  impact  of  domestic  liquidity  of  the  donor 
financed  inflows  which  help  the  government  to  finance  the  fiscal  deficit  but  as  the  authorities  take 
action to reign in the deficit, I fully expect banks to reduce bank charges and lending interest rates. But 
I  also  know  that  there  are  banks  whose  regime  for  charges  on  their  facilities  are  way  above  those 
warranted  by  prevailing  circumstances.  Several  months  ago,  I  wrote  to  these  banks.  While  I  am 
committed to a freely market determined regime of bank charges and interest rates, I must make it 
clear that the Bank of Uganda possesses powers, not least through the annual licensing system, to act 
on banks which behave like rogue elephants abusing the commons. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  to  thank  you  all  for  all  your  efforts  in  financial  innovation  which  has 
contributed  to  the  tremendous  achievements  recorded  within  the  financial  sector.  The  available 
statistics show a vibrant financial sector with continuous growth in total assets, deposits and loans, 
and  a  significant  reduction  in  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans.  All  financial  institutions  are  fully 
compliant with the statutory requirements in relation to capital adequacy, asset quality and liquidity on 
sustainable basis. I congratulate you all upon the registered achievements. 
I  want  to  conclude  my  speech  with  the  story  of  a  Chief  Executive  whom  I  would  not  like  you  to 
emulate. 
The Chairman of a leading travel agency dies and finds himself sitting alone on a 
cloud. Along comes an angel and says “Hello, we’re having trouble deciding where 
you  should  go,  whether  it  should  be  heaven  or  hell.  So  we’ve  decided  you  can 
choose for yourself from these brochures The angel gives the man some brochures 
containing  pictures  and  descriptions  of  both  places.  Heaven  looks  very  nice  and 
peaceful with lots of lovely scenery and people sitting around reading, singing or 
listening  to  music.  Hell  looks  a  lot  more  lively.  Scantly  clad  girls  are  frolicking  in 
swimming  pools,  there  are  pictures  of  tables  full  of  sumptuous  food,  there  is 
dancing,  drinking  and  generally  ‘a  good  time’  feel.  It  doesn’t  take  long  for  the 
chairman to decide he’d rather go to hell and with that he is whisked away. 
A  month  goes  by  and  the  angel  happens  to  be  passing  hell’s  gateway  when  he 
sees the chairman chained to a rock with a pair of bellows in his hand, frantically 
keeping  the  flames  of  hell  burning.  He  spots  the  angel  and  says  bitterly  “This  is 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2005
nothing  like  I  thought  it  was  going  to  be!”  “All  well”  says  the  angel,  “You,  of  all 
people should know better than to believe all it says on the brochures”. 
I thank you once again for inviting me and for listening to me. 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 5
