Timothy F Geithner: Perspectives on US monetary policy  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, before Princeton University’s Center for Economic Policy Studies, Princeton, NJ, 
1 April 2005. 
 I am glad to be here at Princeton's Center for Economic Policy Studies to have this conversation with 
Alan  Blinder  and  to  address  some  of  the  key  questions  regarding  monetary  policy  today.  I  am 
particularly  pleased  to  be  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  audience,  including  colleagues  from  the 
Federal Reserve who will be talking about some of the same questions at tomorrow's meeting.  
I would like to start with a few propositions about the state of U.S. monetary policy and the Fed today.  
The  achievements  in  inflation  outcomes  of  the  past  decade  or  so  -  low  inflation,  less  volatility  in 
inflation,  more  moderate  long  term  inflation  expectations,  and  less  volatility  in  those  expectations, 
achievements  that  are  impressive  relative  to  past  U.S.  experience  as  well  as  to  the  gains  of  other 
mature central banks - suggest we are close to the frontier of monetary policy credibility. These gains 
came alongside a significant reduction in the volatility of U.S. output. And they are impressive in light 
of the speed and force with which the Fed acted in several instances of systemic financial distress.  
The major economic policy challenges facing the nation today - pick your favorites among the usual 
suspects of low public and household savings, concerns about educational quality and achievement, 
high  and rising  income  inequality,  the large  imbalances  between  our  social  insurance commitments 
and  resources  -  are  not  about  monetary  policy.  Poor  monetary  policy  choices  would  make  these 
problems harder to address, but monetary policy itself can't do much to fix them.  
The issues about monetary policy regimes we spend most of the time debating these days - such as 
those  involving  communications  and  disclosure  and  variants  on  inflation  targeting  -  are  high  class 
problems to have. Even if they were resolved in the direction of what seems to be the broad academic 
consensus, they would still leave us with all the hard questions in monetary policy. The color of truth in 
monetary policy (apologies to McGeorge Bundy) is often grey, not black or white, and moving further 
along the spectrum toward greater transparency or more explicit rules, will not make easier the hard 
choices of what to do in the face of the normal fog that surrounds the forecast.  
In  thinking  about  the  durability  of  these  gains  in  monetary  policy  delivered  under  Volcker  and 
Greenspan, there are a few aspects of our history and about the world today that deserve note.  
The  actions  of  individual  chairmen  have  been  very  important  in  the  history  of  the  Fed.  The 
considerable strengths of the institutional framework of the Fed - full de jure independence, the depth 
of  technical  talent,  a  committee  designed  to  bring  a  diversity  of  independent  perspectives  to  the 
monetary policy decision making process - have not been strong enough to deliver consistently good 
monetary policy decisions over time. 
The constituency for price stability in the United States today seems broad and strong and reasonably 
bipartisan,  but  it's  been  a  generation  since  we've  had  high  inflation  and  had  to  face  the  costs  of 
bringing it down. It seems like a long time since monetary policy has been the subject of major political 
or popular attention. And the extent of deference the Fed now enjoys - the extent of de facto autonomy 
-  is  a  relatively  recent,  surprisingly  recent  phenomenon,  and  substantially  due  to  the  competence 
demonstrated by the past two chairmen.  
Monetary policy has been the beneficiary of a long period of good fortune in the form of smaller and 
less  adverse  external  shocks,  a  sustained  and  very  large  acceleration  in  productivity,  the 
disinflationary forces produced by global economic integration, greater flexibility in the U.S. economy 
and improved financial sector resilience, and the effects of these factors and technological change in 
reducing macroeconomic volatility. We don't know much about the probabilities surrounding the future 
path of most of these variables.  
We face a number of transitions ahead that will have important implications for U.S. monetary policy. 
Among these are:  
• 
The transition from a long period of exceptionally low short-term nominal and real interest 
rates  in  the  major  economies  and  in  many  emerging  market  economies  as  well.  Real 
short-term interest rates in much of the world, as in the United States, are still some distance 
below the band of estimates of equilibrium.  
The  approaching  demographic  pressures  on  fiscal  resources,  which  will  hit  most  major 
economies at a time when underlying fiscal positions are still likely to be in substantial deficit.  
The inevitable evolution in the exchange rate regimes of China, and the substantial number 
of countries that have been actively targeting their nominal exchange rate against the dollar, 
to a system where there is more variability in their bilateral and real effective exchange rates.  
The  disposition  of  the  global  imbalances  reflected  most  conspicuously  in  the  U.S.  current 
account deficit.  
   These are all types of disequilibria. They can be sustained for a time, but not indefinitely. They could 
be diffused gradually and smoothly. But the transitions to a more sustainable equilibrium could also 
bring a risk of greater volatility in asset prices, less stability in macroeconomic outcomes, and more 
uncertainty. This could mean a less benign future environment for U.S. monetary policy.  
The potential uncertainties posed by these challenges may be more troubling because of confidence 
engendered by the stability and resilience of the U.S. economy over the past decade. We are in the 
midst  of  an  unusual  dynamic  in  financial  markets,  in  which  low realized  volatility  in  macroeconomic 
outcomes, low realized credit losses, greater confidence in the near term path of monetary policy, low 
uncertainty  about  future  inflation  and  interest  rates,  rapid  changes  in  the  nature  of  financial 
intermediation (role of hedge funds and the change in how credit risk is bought and managed), and a 
large  increase  in  the  share  of  global  savings  that  is  willing  to  move  across  borders,  have  worked 
together to bring risk premia down across many asset prices.  
There is no reliable analytical framework one can use to determine whether we are experiencing an 
unwelcome  or  unjustified  decline  in  expected  volatility,  or  whether  investors  are  giving  too  much 
weight  to  the  relative  stability  of  the  recent  past  and  too  little  to  the  uncertainty  posed  by  the 
challenges ahead. And analysts can point to good fundamental reasons and some plausible theories 
to support this collective judgment of market participants about low future risk and volatility. But there 
is much we do not understand about how these transitions ahead will unfold - in fiscal positions, the 
U.S. external imbalance, and in the exchange rate system and portfolio preferences. The recognition 
that things that are not sustainable will eventually come to an end does not give us much of a guide to 
whether the transition will be calm or exciting.  
These  dimensions  of  the  broader  context  in  which  we  will  be  making  monetary  policy  in  the  years 
ahead  put  a  very  important  premium  on  keeping  U.S.  monetary  policy  as  close  to  the  frontier  of 
credibility as possible. And this suggests we need to continue to examine the case for a measured 
further evolution in the U.S. monetary policy framework - evolution in the direction of finding ways to 
provide more clarity about our long term inflation objective, about the underlying forces shaping the 
Federal Open Market Committee's forecast, the dimensions of uncertainty that surround that forecast, 
and the likely implications for monetary policy, to the extent we are aware of them. We have moved a 
long way in this direction, even in the past 18 months.  
The FOMC's record over the past 25 years suggests that the state of monetary policy and the state of 
the Fed is strong. The challenge in thinking about what's next in any further evolution in our regime is 
about  how  to  ensure  that  U.S.  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  stable  at  a  level  close  to 
reasonable definitions of price stability, while retaining the flexibility to act wisely, but with speed and 
force and creativity in response to changing circumstances.  
Thank you.  
