Paul A Acquah: The ECOWAS Trade Liberalization Scheme 
Welcome remarks by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana and Chairman of 
the Committee of Governors of ECOWAS Central Banks, at the meeting of the Committee of 
Governors of ECOWAS Central Banks, Accra, 30 August 2005. 
 the  benefits  of  economic  and  monetary 
Fellow Governors, 
Director General of WAMA, 
Director General of WAMI, 
Director General of WAIFEM, 
Distinguished Delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
We  have  once  again  converged  here  in  Accra  in  pursuit  of  our  common  objective  of 
monetary integration. 
I suspect you already feel welcome here. But I would still like to assure you of our pleasure in 
having you and our desire to make your stay comfortable and enjoyable. 
integration  cannot  be 
Fellow  Governors, 
overemphasized.  Even  though  most  member  countries  are  registering  significant  levels  of 
growth  in  recent  times,  but  to  attain  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  requires  that  we 
explore all the means at our disposal to ensure that these growth rates are accelerated and 
sustained. And as you will all agree trade provides strong impetus to growth. Economic and 
monetary  integration  offers  a  regionally  based  strategy  for  the  promotion  of  growth  and 
poverty reduction. Our quest to promote and sustain growth and reduce poverty in the sub-
region hinges very much on our success in economic and monetary integration.  
As we strive to push forward our agenda for monetary integration in the subregion therefore 
we should emphasize as well the centrality of ensuring full implementation of the ECOWAS 
Trade Liberalization Scheme and the liberalization of financial flows within the sub region. 
Today, we have among the items for discussion, a study on Capital and Financial Accounts 
Liberalization in ECOWAS. This is an item that has been on our agenda for a while and it is 
my  hope  that  this  study  would  set  in  motion  the  full  process  that  could  engage  member 
countries towards the implementation of policies to make progress in this important area. 
Fellow  Governors,  in  short  an  efficient  trade  liberalisation  policy  in  the  subregion  should 
receive  equal  priority  in  our  deliberations  in  order  to  present  a  consensus  platform  for  the 
Ministerial committee. Fellow Governors, al so taking place concurrently with our meetings 
are  the  meetings  of  the  West  African  Monetary  Zone.  At  those  meetings  we  will  be 
discussing  issues  flowing  from  the  Banjul  declaration,  and  the  focus  will  be  on  positioning 
cooperation at that level to deliver on the expanded workprogramme of the Zone and lead 
the Zone to its objective of a second subregional currency by 2009. I believe that this ties in 
with our proposals to refocus WAMA so it can also deliver most efficiently on the objectives 
behind its establishment. 
The  ECOWAS  sub-region  has  for  long  championed  the  cause  of  economic  and  monetary 
integration. We are now at a stage where we need to take stock of our activities to examine 
the record of what we have been able to achieve as a sub-region and develop strategies for 
the  way  forward,  to  build  on  stabilization,  to  accelerate  growth  and  become  significant 
participants in international trade and capital flows. 
Fellow Governors, I know that most of you were here in Accra during the meetings of the 
Association of African Central Banks. But I would still like to formally inform the Committee 
that  Ghana,  as  a  member  of  our  Group  assumed  the  chairmanship  of  the  Association  for 
2005/2006. This is a challenge. Your continued support, advice and collaboration during my 
   1/2 
chairmanship of the Association would be essential to move the cooperation arrangements 
significantly forward. 
The issues that confront us at these meetings are all too familiar and this may suggest that 
we  are  not  trying  hard  enough  on  the  policy  front  in  dealing  with  these  issues  over  time. 
Today, some of the issues on the agenda go to the core of the integration strategy, therefore 
I hope we can use this opportunity for serious discussions on integration in the sub-region as 
we look to the task ahead. 
On this note Fellow Governors, let us all have fruitful deliberations. 
I hope you enjoy your stay in Accra. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
   2/2 
