Ishrat Husain: Pakistan’s economic achievements, prospects and challenges  
Address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  a  seminar  held  at  the 
Embassy of Pakistan, Washington DC, 15 April 2005. 
 During  the  last  five  years,  Pakistan  has  traversed  the  road  from  a  difficult  default  situation  on  its 
external  payments  to  a  vigilant  program  under  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  finally 
reestablished  access  to  international  capital  markets.  GDP  growth  rate  has  exceeded  6  percent, 
inflation  had  remained  under  control  for  four  out  of  five  years,  fiscal  deficit  has  been  reduced 
significantly, public debt ratios have declined, external debt burden has been lowered, exchange rate 
has remained stable, exports have almost doubled, tax revenues are recording double digit growth, 
interest  rates  had  never  been  at  such  low  levels  in  the  history,  remittances  of  Pakistanis  overseas 
have multiplied by a factor of four, foreign exchange reserves have expanded twelve times from their 
1999 level and unemployment is on a downward slide. 
Can  these  impressive  achievements  be  sustained  and  not  reversed  with  the  change  in  political 
regime? What has happened to the Pakistani economy that is different from the past this time around? 
I would submit that there are at least eight factors that have contributed to the sustainability and will 
make the difference: 
1) 
There is a wide recognition in Pakistan now that prudent macroeconomic management and 
sound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  are  pre-requisites  for  achieving  high  growth  rates  and 
maintaining stability in the markets. 
Continuity,  consistency,  predictability  and  transparency  in  economic  policies  have  a  better 
pay-off in terms of restoring the confidence of investors in particular and economic actors in 
general. 
Structural  reforms  such  as  privatization,  deregulation  and  liberalization  are  critical  for 
attaining macroeconomic stability and economic growth. In Pakistan, all the political parties 
are  not  only  agreed  upon  this  agenda  but  have  implemented  these  reforms.  It  should  be 
recalled that it was the Nawaz Sharif Government which introduced these reforms in 1991 
that  subsequently  were  pursued  by  the  Benazir  Government  when  it  came  to  power.  The 
same policies have been implemented with vigor in the last five years. 
A number of checks and balances have been built in the system that will minimize the risk of 
slippages  and  reversal  and  ensure  prudence  and  faithful  implementation  of  the  reform 
agenda. These are: 
(i) 
 
(ii) 
 
(iii) 
 
(iv) 
 
There has been a shift in the structure of production, distribution and trade from the public 
sector  owned,  managed  and  controlled  enterprises  to  private  sector  firms  and  entities. 
Competition among the firms and the markets will promote efficiency in the resource use and 
require lower inputs per unit of output enhancing the overall productivity in the economy. 
Allocation  of Capital  –  an important  factor  of  production  –  through  private  banks,  financial 
institutions  and  Capital  Markets  will  be  more  efficient  than  the  politically-motivated  loans 
granted  by  the  nationalized  commercial  banks.  The  restructured  financial  sector  has  also 
extended  its  outreach  to  provide  broader  access  to  the  middle  income  and  lower  income 
groups and underserved sectors such as agriculture and SMEs. 
Fiscal responsibility and Debt Limitation Law which puts limits on fiscal deficits and 
thus ensures fiscal discipline. 
Independence  of  the  Central  Bank  and  separation  of  regulatory  agencies  from 
policymaking. 
A  fierce  and  independent  media  that  acts  as  a  watchdog  on  wrongdoings  and 
corruption. 
Emergence of stronger civil society organizations which reinforce the role played 
by the media. 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
7) 
8) 
The  quality  of  governance  has  improved  at  least  at  the  top  and  the  impending  reforms 
should  be  able  to  remove  excessive  discretionary  powers  employed  by  the  lower 
functionaries in the bureaucracy. For example, the introduction of Universal Self Assessment 
Scheme  has  eliminated  the  discretionary  powers  of  income  tax  collectors.  The  use  of 
technology and business process re-engineering should further reinforce this tendency. 
Globalization, financial market integration and access to global capital markets will force the 
governments  towards  continued  good  behavior  and  performance  as  the  markets  can 
penalize  the  countries  indulging  in  infractions  instantaneously  and  heavily.  The  market 
discipline will act as a brake upon the egregious behavior of the Government. 
What  are  the  possible  areas  of  concern  or  risks  to  the  future  sustainability  of  the  growth  path  and 
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals set by Pakistan, the most important being the 
reduction in poverty by one half? I can identify at least seven challenges that the country has to deal 
with in the coming years which can otherwise derail the journey: 
(a) 
There  should  be  no  major  shift  in  the  direction  of  economic  policies  and  the  quality  of 
economic management that have been followed so far. The year 2007 is the test case for 
establishing  the  seriousness  and  credibility  of  Pakistan’s  economic  program.  Should  the 
newly-elected political regime continue to move in the same direction, of course with some 
changes suited to the circumstances, Pakistan would be perceived in the same vein such as 
China and India. China has been following the same economic path set by Deng Xiaoping in 
1980  with  modifications  and  adaptations  to  the  changing  external  and  internal  condition  – 
despite  changed  political  leadership.  India,  which  started  its  reform  process  under  the 
Congress  in  1991,  was  finally  accepted  as  a  credible  reformer  only  after  the  BJP 
Government forcefully and vigorously moved on the same path since 1996. 
The external environment remains favorable. The present oil price hike has created serious 
pressures  on  the  current  account  balances  and  it  is  essential  for  an  oil-importing  country 
such  as  ours  to  see  some  moderation  in  the  prices  of  oil.  The  other  burning  issue  is  the 
increased  market  access  to  Pakistan’s  textile  exports  to  the  U.S.  and  the  EU.  The  tariff 
discrimination and anti-dumping duties against Pakistan’s exports have tilted the playing field 
against  us.  The  developed  countries  can  assist  Pakistan  not  by  increasing  the  burden  on 
their taxpayers in the form of aid but by reducing the prices of apparels and textiles for their 
own consumers in the form of enlarged market access. 
Pakistan has been a laggard in human resource development for quite some time. The “All 
hands on the- deck” approach in which the Government, private sector, non-governmental 
organizations, charities, communities and philanthropists combine their efforts to effectively 
deliver education, health, drinking water to the poor towns and villages at affordable prices 
will work. The Government has an obligation to finance the education of the lower income 
groups but it is not necessary that they should be the providers also. Only those who are 
efficient and effective and can reach out to the poor communities should be encouraged to 
provide  these  services  financed  partly  or  wholly  by  the  Government.  Technical  and 
vocational education should be given priority to produce the skills that are required by the 
economy while minimizing the unemployment among the educated youth. 
Higher growth rates for an extended period of time in the range of 7 to 8 percent annually are 
possible only if energy, water resources and infrastructure needs are fully met. Otherwise, 
shortages, congestions, and bottlenecks will slow down the growth process. Government’s 
budget  can  absorb  only  one  half  of  these  requirements  in  a  non-inflationary  environment. 
The other half has to be raised through public-private partnerships with recourse to capital 
markets. Innovative ways of financing have to be explored for this partnership to take off and 
produce results. 
One  of  the  most  interesting  experiments  initiated  in  Pakistan  in  2000  was  devolution  of 
administrative and financial powers to the local governments. This experiment has run into 
some  snags  since  the  elections  and  a  stable  equilibrium  between  the  provincial  and  local 
governments  has  not  been  found  as  yet.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  for  bringing  about 
demand-driven  balanced  regional  development  and  delivering  basic  services  to  the  vast 
majority  of  the  poor,  there  is  no  better  vehicle  than  the  district,  tehsil  and  union-level 
governments. The sooner the problems facing this transition are resolved, the greater will be 
the impact on development of backward areas and the services to the poor. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
1) 
Growth alone will not suffice to reduce the incidence of poverty. It has to be accompanied by 
poverty-targeted  interventions  and  social  safety  nets.  The  Khushal  Pakistan  program 
initiated by the Musharraf Government in 2000 was a success in building minor but essential 
infrastructure projects at the local level and creating employment opportunities. Zakat, Baitul 
Mal, and Food Stamps are some other programs that can distribute the benefits of growth to 
the vulnerable and disadvantaged segments of the population. These programs need to be 
revamped and revitalized in order to become effective social safety nets for the poor. 
Pakistan’s export base is still quite narrow and highly concentrated. Cotton textiles account 
for two-thirds of total exports. Dynamic export, products that are all dependent on medium 
and  high  technology  are  conspicuous  by  their  absence.  In  order  to  maximize  the  benefits 
from  globalization  and  buoyant  world  trade,  we  have  to  gradually  build  up  our  capacity  to 
produce medium and hi-tech exports. This will not only diversify the base but also insulate us 
from fluctuations and volatility in cotton and textile output and trade. 
Even if all the above mentioned challenges are successfully tackled, the economy and the 
people, particularly the poor, will not be able to derive full benefits unless our institutions are 
restructured and their capacity strengthened. Civil Service, Judiciary and Police are the key 
institutions that affect a common man’s daily life. Regulatory impediments are still hampering 
new  businesses.  Reforms  of  these  institutions  have  to  be  put  on  top  of  the  agenda  and 
pursued relentlessly. The Thana-Kutchery Tehsil nexus that has remained intact since the 
colonial  days  has  instilled  a  sense  of  fear  and  insecurity  in  the  minds  of  the  poor  and 
unconnected and locked in their initiative and drive so critical for any growing economy. 
The unleashing of their energies in a more supportive institutional environment will do a lot of 
good to higher growth and poverty-reduction goals. 
In  the  short  term,  however,  we  are  grappling  with  the  problem  of  inflation.  After  four  years  of  low 
inflation rate below 4 percent, the rise in aggregate demand arising from rising per capita incomes, the 
monetary  expansion  policy  pursued since  2001,  the  oil  price  spike and  the  food shortages  have all 
combined to intensify inflationary expectations in this fiscal year. The State Bank is already tightening 
the  monetary  policy  and  raising  interest  rates.  A  bumper  wheat  crop  is  expected  this  year  and  oil 
prices are beginning to slide downward. 
These factors should be able to dampen inflationary expectations in the coming months. 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 3
