Zhou Xiaochuan: Improve corporate governance and develop capital market 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Euromoney “China 
Forum: Capital Market and Corporate Governance”, Beijing, 1 December 2004. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman, 
Good morning, 
First of all, on behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I would like to congratulate on the convening of 
the  “China  Forum”  sponsored  by  Euromoney  and  the  exciting  topic,  namely  “capital  market  and 
corporate governance”, you have selected for discussion. I also appreciate the support given by the 
Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China,  HSBC,  Anst  &  Young,  Hong  Kong  Stock  Exchange  and 
Moody Asia to this conference. 
Corporate governance is crucial to China’s development. It involves broad contents and has profound 
implications. Hence, I wish to take the opportunity to share with you my observations on this exciting 
topic. While the concept of corporate governance was is relatively new in China, we have encountered 
many difficulties in this process. At the very beginning, we even disagreed and argued about some of 
the  very  fundamental  issues  like  primary  school  students.  However,  as  we  moved  forward, 
encouraging progress has been made in establishing sound corporate governance in the country. Of 
course, many issues remain to be addressed in this regard and more in-depth research will have to be 
done. On today’s occasion, I would like to raise 12 issues for discussion and wish the discussion could 
have a constructive input to corporate governance development in China. 
Twelve issues for discussion 
1. 
(1) 
The  role  of  government  in  promoting  corporate  governance.  The  concept  of  corporate 
governance was introduced from abroad and there has been a process for us to understand and apply 
corporate  governance  in  China.  The  Third  Plenary  Session  of  the  Fourteenth  National  Congress  of 
CPC in 1993 attempted to include the concept of corporate governance in its communiqué, calling for 
a  clarified  relationship  among  “shareholders,  Board  of  Directors,  management  and  employees”. 
However, it was not until 1999 when the concept was formally cited in the major documents published 
by the Fourth Plenary Session of the Fifteenth National Congress of CPC. On the basis of international 
experiences, it might be helpful for the government to clarify its attitude towards the Five Principles on 
Corporate Governance issued by the OECD in 1999 and its role in establishing the institutional and 
legal framework for corporate governance. The Revised Principles on Corporate Governance issued 
by the OECD in 2004 also attached great importance to this issue. In recent years, some government 
agencies,  including  the  China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  and  China  Banking  Regulatory 
Commission, have issued some very helpful guidelines on corporate governance. However, what the 
government should do to further improve corporate governance remains to be studied. 
(2) 
International  practices  have  been 
characterized in this regard by different selections. For example, there are Anglo-Saxons model, Lain 
River model, Japan-Korea model, and so on. Experiences in the past ten years have shown a trend of 
convergence  among  these  patterns,  despite  differences  remaining  in  many  other  aspects.  In  this 
consideration,  the  selection  of  a  corporate  governance  model  suitable  to  the  Chinese  situation 
remains to be further explored. 
(3) 
The  problem  of  insider  control  and  ownership  ambiguity.  In  early  1990s,  China  began  to 
introduce  the  concept  of  corporate  governance  mainly  because  many  enterprises  faced  serious 
problems of insider control and ambiguity in ownership. So far, the problem remains not fully solved 
and thus deserves further discussion. 
(4) 
The remaining issues of “debt-equity” swap. A problem closely linked with insider control was 
the distortion and irregular transactions created in the process of massive “debt-equity” swap that took 
place in 1999, despising the principles of corporate governance. Leaders of the State Council have 
also  been  highly  concerned  with  this  issue.  Given  the  mistakes,  what  should  be  done  to  clean  up 
legacies left over by the debt-equity swap? 
The  selection  of  corporate  governance  model. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 1
Feasible  ways  to  promote  corporate  governance.  In  China,  companies  with  the  best 
(5) 
corporate governance are generally those listed in the market as they are subject to the guidelines of 
corporate  governance  issued  by  regulatory  authorities  and  to  the  supervision  of  investors,  general 
public  and  the  market.  The  practice  of  listed  companies  also  indicates  that  joint-stock  reform  is  an 
important way out and thus to have large and medium-sized enterprises listed is a crucial and effective 
measure to foster corporate governance. Without joint-stock reform and public listing, are there any 
other feasible ways to make substantial progress in corporate governance in the enterprises? In my 
view, the answer might not be so encouraging. 
(6) 
The  role  of  Party  Committee  in  corporate  governance.  In  China,  the  Communist  Party 
Committee, in addition to investors, Board of Directors, management and stakeholders, also plays a 
role in corporate governance. The related issues need further study. 
(7) 
The  role  of  stakeholders  in  corporate  governance.  We  have  benefited  from  many  good 
experiences in corporate governance from abroad. However, relevant authorities in China have always 
been shy from clearly stating their attitudes towards the stakeholders’ role in corporate governance. 
Compared  with  the  Principles  on  Corporate  Governance  issued  by  the  OECD  in  1999,  the  revised 
version issued in 2004 stresses more the role of stakeholders in corporate governance. Now, it is an 
important  topic  as  to  how  to  accurately  define  and  make  people  understand  the  role  played  by 
stakeholders and have them positively contribute to corporate governance. 
(8) 
The protection of stockholders’ interests. One of the major weaknesses of China’s corporate 
governance  lies  in  its  negligence  over  the  shareholders’  interests.  For  example,  in  some  old  state-
owned enterprises, shareholders have still been barred from dividend distribution. Hence, it remains 
an important topic in corporate governance as to how to protect shareholders’ interests. 
(9) 
The role of independent directors in corporate governance. An encouraging development in 
recent years is the introduction of independent directors in corporate governance. Despite the worries 
and skepticism of many people about the introduction of independent directors at the very beginning, 
fearing they might not be able to perform their duties properly and such an arrangement is an artificial 
system  at  best,  many  independent  directors  have  begun  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role  in 
corporate governance after receiving training and field education. It remains to be studied as to how to 
have them better fulfill their duty in the future. 
(10) 
The role of institutional investors in corporate governance. Many new institutional investors 
have  emerged  in  China’s  capital  market,  such  as  close-ended  funds,  open-ended  funds,  venture 
capital funds, industrial investment funds and social securities funds. Given the ambiguity in business 
ownership  and  the  prevalence  of  insider  control,  should  these  institutional  investors  take  a  passive 
approach to corporate governance like those in the United States or involve themselves more actively 
in promoting corporate governance? 
(11) 
The role of banks as creditors in corporate governance. Many Chinese enterprises are highly 
leveraged.  That  is,  they  borrow  hugely  from  the  banks  and  have  little  capital  of  their  own.  In  this 
context,  banks  are  major  creditors.  The  Principles  on  Corporate  Governance  issued  by  the  OECD 
attach  great  importance  to  the  role  played  by  creditors  in  corporate  governance,  the  mechanism 
protecting the creditors’ rights and the effective framework of liquidation. It is very important for China’s 
banking sector to think carefully of their role as creditors in corporate governance. 
(12) 
Corporate governance in non-state enterprises. Last but not least, an important step forward 
in China’s corporate governance is that it is no longer deemed an issue solely for the restructuring of 
state-owned  enterprises,  but  also  an  equally  important  topic  for  other  non-state  enterprises.  In  the 
past, policy documents usually focused only on corporate governance in the state-owned enterprises 
as  if  it  were  not  an  issue  for  non-state  enterprises.  Recently,  more  people  have  come  to  realize  it 
needs  to  be  introduced  in  the  non-state  sectors  as  well.  Enterprise  reforms  actually  have  much  in 
common. 
These are the twelve issues about corporate governance on which I wish to hear your views. I also 
hope the participants, in particular those from China, could take notice of the major achievements of 
the Revised Principles on Corporate Governance issued by the OECD in 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2005
2. 
Major achievements of the Revised Principles on Corporate Governance issued by the 
OECD in 2004 
The Five Principles on Corporate Governance issued by the OECD in 1999 has attracted widespread 
attention  from  policy  makers,  investors,  companies  and  stakeholders.  With  the  development  of  the 
macro  environment  and  emergence  of  new  events  associated  with  corporate  governance,  new 
challenges have arisen to the Principles. In this case, the OECD has since 2002 conducted survey 
and  consultations  worldwide  on  how  to  guarantee  an  effective  implementation  of  the  principles  of 
corporate governance such as the strengthening of the independence of the Board in decision making, 
enhancing the information rights of the shareholders, improving the independence of auditing and the 
transparency  of  ownership  structure,  etc.  Finally,  the  Revised  Principles  on  Corporate  Governance 
was issued in April 2004. 
Compared with the version of 1999, the revised principles of 2004 is advanced in the following five 
aspects: 
First, a new chapter titled “The foundation for an effective framework of corporate governance” was 
introduced. The chapter elaborates the role of government in establishing the overall institutional and 
legal framework for corporate governance. It lays out the principles the government should follow in 
advocating  and  establishing  the  framework  of  corporate  governance,  including  the  enforcement 
mechanism of formulating corporate governance principles, the protection mechanism for the parties 
involved  in  corporate  governance,  and  the  approach  to  avoiding  rising  cost  incurred  by  excess 
supervision, etc. Hence, the Principles of 2004 was expanded to six chapters. 
Second, the 2004 version strengthened protection for shareholders’ rights. The voice of shareholders 
is raised in four aspects: (1) Salaries of the executives are determined by the Board on the basis of 
their  long-term  performance.  Shareholders  have  rights  to  get  access  to  information  on  the 
compensation policy of executives and Board members. All equity remuneration must be approved by 
shareholders.  (2)  Shareholders  have  rights  to  change  members  of  the  Board  and  participate  in  the 
nomination  and  vote.  (3)  Institutional  investors  as  fiduciaries  shall  publish  their  own  corporate 
governance policy, procedures of voting and the way to fulfill voting rights in case of interest conflicts. 
(4) All the barriers impeding cross-border voting shall be removed. 
Third,  more  emphasis  is  put  on  the  resolution  of  interest  conflicts.  Based  on  the  1999  version  that 
stresses  disclosure  of  interest  conflicts,  the  2004  version  requires  the  interest  parties  involved  to 
disclose the way of resolving interest conflicts. In addition, it also takes note of the conflict of interests 
existing between the big and small shareholders in the emerging markets. It (1) adds a new principle 
that requires rating and research agencies to reasonably handle conflicts of interest when disclosing 
information about the company; (2) clarifies auditing responsibility by stating that the auditors shall be 
responsible  to  the  Board;  (3)  strengthens  the  independence  of  auditing  and  defines  the  steps  that 
should be taken by the auditors to manage and alleviate potential interest conflicts; and (4) pays more 
attention  to  the  protection  of  small  shareholders’  interests  and  states  that  “the  interests  of  small 
shareholders shall be protected and they shall be  effectively compensated for any direct or indirect 
impairment caused by the controlling shareholders”. 
Fourth,  it  puts  more  emphasis  on  the  protection  of stakeholders and  whistle blowers.  It,  to  a  larger 
extent,  stresses  the  rights  and  role  of  employees  and  creditors.  (1)  It  clearly  states  to  establish  a 
mechanism  that  “enhances  the  participation  of  employees”.  Stakeholders,  including  individual 
employees  and  their  representatives,  shall  be  able  to  freely  express  their  views  to  the  Board  with 
respect to any illegal or immoral activities. Employees’ views and their rights to express the views shall 
be respected and protected. It shall be ensured that information can flow safely and confidentially to 
the Board. (2) Corporate governance shall ensure the enhanced participation of employees, through 
which  the  information  of  employees’  special  skills  can  flow  to  the  management,  benefiting  the 
company  directly  or  indirectly.  The  examples  of  employees’  participation  include  increasing 
representatives  of  employees  in  the  Board,  adopting  the  plan  of  employees  holding  of  stocks  and 
establishing  a  profit  sharing  mechanism  such  as  pension  contribution.  For  instance,  pension 
contributions  can  be  pooled  into  an  independent  fund  and  the  fund  manager  shall  be  independent 
from the company’s management in terms of business operation. (3) It stresses the important role of 
creditors in corporate governance and external supervision. It also states that effective and efficient 
liquidation framework and credit rights enforcement mechanism are important supplement to effective 
corporate governance, ensuring effective protection for the rights of the shareholders. The importance 
of employees and creditors is raised in the new version. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 3
Fifth,  it  further  stresses  the  responsibility  of  the  Board.  (1)  It  stresses  the  role  of  the  Board  in 
establishing a high ethical standard, complying with laws and regulations, exercising internal control 
and disclosing financial information. (2) It stresses the independence of the Board, which shall not only 
be  independent  from  the  executive  management,  but  also  be  independent  from  controlling 
shareholders.  (3)  It  stresses  the  importance  of  information  disclosure  with  respect  to  connected 
transactions, resolutions adopted by committees under the Board, procedures of meetings and their 
structure, etc. 
The revised Principles of Corporate Governance issued by the OECD in 2004 further expanded the 
concept  of  corporate  governance.  In  the  process  of  transition  to  a  market  economy,  China  has 
primarily  introduced  the  concept  of  corporate  governance  and  its  principles.  In  this  regard,  further 
studies of international experiences in corporate governance need to be conducted to follow any new 
development and strengthen relevant perceptions and practices. 
The  development  of  China’s  capital  market  is,  to  a  large  extent,  determined  by  the  quality  of  listed 
companies,  which  is  closely  linked  with  corporate  governance.  With  the  enrichment  of  our 
understanding  and  experiences  in  corporate  governance,  I  am  confident  of  China’s  capital  market 
development  in  the  future.  Since  we  have  discussed  most  issues  associated  with  corporate 
governance, our understanding of this important issue is very much improved. As we gradually move 
to  consensus  on  the  residual  issues,  rules  and  practices  will  be  definitely  improved  as  well.  The 
strengthening  of  corporate  governance  will  lay  a  solid  foundation  for  the  development  of  China’s 
capital market, and thus will play an important role in helping transform the relationship between banks 
and enterprises. 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2005
