I J Macfarlane: Gresham’s Law of Payments 
Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the AIBF Industry Forum 
2005, Sydney, 23 March 2005. 
 I suppose I should start by explaining why I have chosen this title for my talk today.  
Gresham's Law is usually stated simply as 'the bad currency drives out the good' and it refers to a time 
when all transactions used coins. If you had to buy one pound's worth of merchandise and you had 
two coins – one which you knew contained one pound's worth of gold and another where some of the 
gold had been shaved off – you would pass the second coin and keep the first one. In that way, most 
of the transactions would take place using the inferior transaction medium and the superior one would 
play a minor role. Note that this can occur only if both the inferior and superior transaction medium 
were accepted at the same price, or in modern parlance, the price signals were not getting through to 
the users.  
Having introduced this quaint historical economic law, I would now like to put it aside for a moment 
and  move  on  to  the  main  subject  of  my  talk  today,  which  is  the  regulation  of  the  retail  payments 
system. As you are probably aware, the Payments System Board of the Reserve Bank, of which I am 
the Chairman, is charged by an act of Parliament with responsibility for the efficiency, competition and 
safety  of  the  payments system.  This  is  quite  a daunting  task,  and  has  involved  us  in an enormous 
amount of research and consultation on payments system issues, some controversy with payments 
system providers and, to a lesser extent, with some payments system users.  
Most  of  us  at  the  Reserve  Bank  come  from  a  background  in  economics  and  hence  have  a 
predisposition in favour of free markets and a sceptical attitude towards intervention in those markets 
unless  there  is  a  clearly  defined  economic  rationale  for  it.  After  much  analysis  and  discussion,  we 
came to the view some time ago that there was, in fact, an overwhelming case for regulation of some 
parts of this market, and that competition, such as it was, would not lead to an optimal outcome in 
terms of the public benefit. In my remarks this afternoon I would like to set out why this is so and, in 
the process, I hope it will become clear why I introduced this talk by referring to Sir Thomas Gresham 
and his famous law.  
There are five basic ways of making a payment in the Australian retail payments system: with cash, 
cheque,  credit  card,  debit  card  (EFTPOS)  and  electronic  transfer.  When  we  looked  at  how  these 
methods  of  payment  were  evolving,  we  saw  that  credit  cards  were  growing  faster  than  the  other 
means  of  payment.  This  was  initially  somewhat  surprising  as  credit  card  transactions  are  more 
expensive than most other means of payment – that is, they involve a larger payment from the users 
of the payments system to the providers of the payments system. In effect, what was happening was 
that the most expensive way of paying was driving out the cheaper ways and, in the process, raising 
the average cost of the Australian retail payments system. Why was this possible?  
We concluded this was because there was an asymmetry between the price signals (and the capacity 
to  act  on  them)  faced  by  the  two  classes  of  payments  system  users  –  the  cardholders  and  the 
merchants. For cardholders, the price signal they received was that credit card transactions were free, 
or could even result in receiving a payment in the form of 'points'. Furthermore, cardholders were able 
to act on this signal as they were the party that chose the method of payment at the point of sale. 
Merchants, on the other hand, received a signal that the credit card was the most expensive way of 
making a payment (via the merchant service fee that was paid to their bank). But merchants had no 
power  to  influence  the  method  of  payment  for  the  transaction  –  for  that  was  in  the  hands  of  the 
cardholder.  Thus,  the  incentives  in  the  system  were  designed  to  encourage  the  decision-maker  to 
choose the form of payment that was the most expensive from the perspective of society as a whole.  
Now it could be argued that merchants could have refused to accept credit cards in the first place. But 
that would have been a big decision, and the fact is that most merchants felt that they would forgo too 
many sales if they had taken that path (particularly if their competitors did not). They did not feel that 
they had much bargaining power vis-à-vis the credit card schemes and the banks. And until our recent 
reforms, they did not have the power to 'pass on' the merchant service fee to the customer, that is, 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
employ  the  'user  pays'  principle by  insisting  that  if  customers use  an  expensive  means of  payment 
they should pay more than if they use a cheaper one. Merchants now have that power as a result of 
our reforms, but in most cases they are reluctant to use it as the public have become accustomed to 
the old system and thus often resist the transition to 'user pays'.  
In short, the asymmetry in price signals is still there despite our efforts to redress the imbalance by 
'empowering  the  merchants'.  It  is  this  asymmetry  which  is  at  the  heart  of  the  process  whereby  the 
more expensive means of payment expands at the expense of the less expensive.  
The  mechanism  that  allows  the  asymmetry  to  be  exploited  is  the  system  of  fees  that  banks  in  the 
payments  system  pay  one  another  –  commonly  known  as  interchange  fees.  In  the  case  of  credit 
cards, the fee is paid from the merchant's bank to the cardholder's bank on each transaction. These 
fees play an important role in determining the prices charged to both merchants and cardholders for 
payment services, yet they are not subject to the normal competitive forces that operate in most other 
markets. To the extent that competitive forces work at all, they perversely have had two effects: 
  they have encouraged the high-interchange-fee means of payment to grow at the expense of 
the low-interchange-fee one;  
they have tended to push interchange fees up for the competing systems, not down.  
In this respect, the Australian experience is not unique. There are many examples around the world 
where these two effects are evident.  
I would like to illustrate this process by drawing on three examples, two of which are from the United 
States  and  the  third  from  Australia.  I  am  using  US  examples,  not  because  examples  do  not  exist 
elsewhere,  but  simply  because  legal  cases  in  the  United  States  have  shone  the  spotlight  on 
interchange  fees  more  intensely  than  has  been  the  case  elsewhere,  and  because  in  many  other 
countries interchange fees remain closely guarded secrets.  
Competition Between Credit Card Schemes  
The first example relates to the interchange fees in the MasterCard and Visa credit card systems in 
the United States, where over the past decade there have been a series of competitive increases in 
these fees (Graph 1). There is an incentive for each scheme to raise its interchange fee in order to 
encourage  banks  to  issue  its  cards  because  the  higher  fee  provides  the  issuing  bank  with  more 
revenue. The issuing banks in turn use the revenue to attract cardholders away from the scheme with 
the lower fee by offering cardholders more attractive pricing or more 'reward points'. Once one of the 
schemes raised interchange fees to give itself an advantage in attracting issuers and cardholders, the 
other responded in the same way. The result has been that competition amongst the schemes has 
seen fees increase from under 1.3 per cent in 1994 to 1.65 per cent today – a perverse outcome to 
anyone with an economics background who expects competition to lower prices. I might add that this 
is three times the average level of interchange fees in Australia following the Reserve Bank's reforms 
in 2003.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
Graph 1 
  Of  course  the  increase  in  US  interchange  fees  has  to  be  paid  for  by  somebody.  And,  in  the  first 
instance, that somebody is the merchant, since interchange fees are built into the merchant service 
fee  (what  the  merchant's  bank  charges  it  for  processing  credit  card  transactions).  Not  surprisingly, 
average merchant service fees have increased broadly in line with the increase in interchange fees 
since the mid 1990s.  
The end result is that merchants have to bear the extra costs of the competition between the credit 
card  schemes.  But,  of  course,  the  story  does  not  stop  here.  Ultimately,  higher  merchant  costs  flow 
through into higher prices for the customers of those merchants. This is a cost borne by all consumers 
whether they use a credit card or not.  
Competition Between Debit Card Schemes  
There  is  a  similar  story  in  the  competition  between  two  types  of  debit  card  systems  in  the  United 
States. In one system, operated mainly as regional networks, transactions are authorised by PIN (the 
PIN-based systems), while in the other, operated by Visa and MasterCard, transactions are authorised 
by signature (the scheme-based systems).  
The  interchange  fee  paid  by  the  merchant's  bank  to  issuing  banks  is  much  higher  in  the  scheme-
based systems than the PIN-based systems (Graph 2). As a result, issuing banks have been switching 
to the scheme-based systems and their share of the market has increased from 45 per cent to 60 per 
cent over the past decade (Graph 2). The PIN-based schemes have retaliated to some extent, and 
their interchange fees have more than doubled over the decade, although they are still well below the 
scheme-based systems' interchange fees. Once again, interchange fees have encouraged the growth 
of the relatively expensive payments system at the expense of the lower-cost system, and forced the 
lower-cost scheme to raise the price that is charged to merchants.  
BIS Review 20/2005 
 3
Graph 2  
  
There is an interesting additional twist to this story, and it concerns the question of why the merchants 
of America allowed this to happen? Why didn't they resist more strongly the inroads into their profits 
caused by the expansion of the expensive system? Partly, of course, it was because they could pass 
the costs on to consumers in the form of higher prices, but there was an additional factor at work. This 
was  the  'tie-in'  arrangement  imposed  by  Visa  and  MasterCard  that  forced  any  merchant  accepting 
their credit cards to also accept their debit cards.  
  By  the  mid  1990s,  the  merchants  had  become  so  upset  by  this  rule  that  they  took  the  credit  card 
schemes to court – in what became known as the Wal-Mart case – arguing that the rule breached anti-
trust laws. In April 2003, the case was finally settled, with Visa and MasterCard agreeing to abolish the 
rule, reduce the interchange fee, and pay damages of $3 billion to the merchants.  
Credit and Debit Cards in Australia  
This brings me back to where I started. In Australia, prior to the Bank's recent reforms, the average 
interchange  fee  for  a  $100  transaction  paid  to  a  credit  cardholder's  bank  was  95  cents.  In  the 
Australian  EFTPOS/debit  card  system,1  the  interchange  fee  flows  in  the  opposite  direction  and  the 
cardholder's bank has to pay around 20 cents per transaction to the merchant's bank (Graph 3). Given 
these flows, it is clear why card issuing banks wanted to issue credit cards rather than EFTPOS cards 
– they received $1.15 more for each $100 transaction.  
                                                      
1   Debit  cards  can  be  used  to  make  purchases  via  the  EFTPOS  system  or  to  withdraw  cash  from  ATMs.  In  the  following 
account of the Australian case, I will employ the widely-used term EFTPOS rather than debit card. I will ignore the other type 
of  debit  card  –  the  Visa  debit  –  because  that  has  a  separate  set  of  characteristics,  some  of  which  are  under  separate 
regulatory review. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2005
During  the  mid  1990s,  the  Australian  banks  worked  hard  at  developing  reward  schemes  (largely 
financed  by  their  interchange  fee  receipts)  to  encourage  cardholders  to  use  credit  cards.  Reward 
points, together with interest-free credit, meant that many cardholders were being paid 1 per cent or 
more of the value of each transaction by credit card.  
Not surprisingly, there was a big shift towards credit cards, with transaction numbers growing at 20 to 
30 per cent for around five years, while EFTPOS growth fell to less than 10 per cent per year. As with 
the  US  experience,  a  higher-cost  payments  system  was  displacing  a  lower-cost  one,  and  the 
community's resources devoted to making payments increased.  
Graph 3  
  One of the longer-term aims of our reforms is to reduce the distortions in the payments system caused 
by  the  pattern  of  interchange  fees.  If  large  differences  in  the  fees  in  the  credit  card  and  EFTPOS 
systems continue, it is hard to see why in the long run banks would continue to put resources into 
promoting the EFTPOS system. This is why we think that the merchants who oppose our EFTPOS 
reforms are extremely short-sighted. Without the proposed reforms, we could see a gradual withering 
away of the EFTPOS system, so that the merchants would face a larger and larger proportion of their 
sales taking place using the higher-cost credit card system.  
Back to Gresham's Law  
It is pretty obvious by now where Gresham's Law fits into my account, so I hardly need to spell it out. 
Instead of the bad currency driving out the good, we have the high-cost means of payment driving out 
the  low-cost  one.  To  take  the  most  obvious  example,  a  credit  card  offers  the  same  service  to  a 
merchant  –  irrevocable  payment  –  as  a  debit  card,  yet  costs  the  merchant  a  lot  more.  To  the 
cardholder,  the  credit  card  offers  more  –  about  50  days  free  credit  –  yet  it  costs  less,  with  the 
cardholder often receiving payment for using it. Clearly, the second condition for Gresham's Law is 
met, namely that the price signals to the decision-maker do not reflect the underlying costs, that is the 
“user pays” principle is not being applied. This tendency for competition to favour the high-cost product 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 5
seems to be a feature of card-based systems around the world and explains the increasing attention 
given to the system by competition regulators.  
Before I finish, I would like to reassure you that in some other parts of the retail payments system, the 
normal laws of economics are leading to the normal results. The cheque provides the best illustration 
of this. All over the world the cheque – universally acknowledged as a relatively high-cost means of 
payment – is in decline, replaced by more efficient forms of electronic payment. The most important 
reason for this is that banks at both ends of the payments chain are charging their customers for the 
costs of writing and depositing cheques. So the “user pays” principle works well in this case, but of 
course, there are no interchange fees.  
At the Reserve Bank, we are in favour of a retail payments system that provides users with a wide 
choice  of  options  from  a  wide  range  of  providers.  Each  payments  method  has  its  strengths  and 
weaknesses,  and  so  users  should  be  able  to  choose  the  most  suitable  payments  method  for  each 
particular type of transaction. In some cases the pricing of the transaction enables them to do so in a 
manner which contributes to an efficient low-cost retail payments system, while in some other cases it 
does  not.  The  best  way  of  improving  efficiency  is  usually  to  increase  competition  rather  than  to 
regulate, but I think I have shown that some parts of the retail payments system are constructed in 
such  a  way  that  competition  increases  costs  and  reduces  efficiency.  In  those  areas,  regulation  is 
required,  and  the  Reserve  Bank  through  the  Payments  System  Board  will  continue  with  its  task  of 
improving efficiency, competition and safety of the retail payments system.  
6 
 BIS Review 20/2005
