Jarle Bergo: Business cycles and monetary policy 
Address by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a meeting 
hosted by Handelsbanken and the Centre for Economic Research at NTNU, Trondheim, 21 April 2005.  
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s  monetary policy meeting on 20 April, Inflation 
Report 1/05 and on previous speeches. 
The references and the 
Charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace and there are prospects that growth will remain 
high. The recession was mild after the previous expansion culminated two and a half years ago. The 
period of relatively high cost inflation in Norway came to an end without production being impacted to 
the  same  extent  as  during  the  recessions  in  the  early  1980s  and  around  1990.  One  of  the  main 
reasons for this is probably that low inflation in the 1990s and current monetary policy have anchored 
expectations of low and stable inflation among economic agents.  
The need to bring down inflation was the main reason why New Zealand introduced an inflation target 
for monetary policy, as the first country to do so, at the end of the 1980s. Canada, the UK, Sweden 
and Australia followed suit later in the 1990s. Inflation targeting has gradually become the standard 
monetary policy regime in developed economies. In Norway, the Government introduced an inflation 
target in 2001. The target is set at 2.5 per cent.  
The various components of economic policy in Norway have varying effects. This is why they have 
different functions:  
• 
Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to 
smoothing swings in output and employment.  
The central government budget – growth in public expenditure – influences the krone and 
the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  medium  term.  Government 
expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the long term.  
Wage formation, the structure of the economy and incentives determine how well and how 
efficiently we utilise our labour resources and other economic resources. 
  There is also an interaction:  
• 
In its budget resolutions, the government authorities will attach importance to the effects of 
the  budget  on  the  Norwegian  economy  and  will  therefore  take  account  of  interest  rate 
effects. In this way, they avoid a situation where growth in public expenditure and the interest 
rate push the economy in different directions.  
With  a  known  monetary  policy  response  pattern,  the  parties  to  the  centralised  income 
settlements can take interest rate effects into account when wage increases are negotiated.  
Moreover, the parties to public sector negotiations can take into account that the higher pay 
increases are, the fewer people that can be paid over government budgets. The interaction 
here came into clear evidence when employment in the general government sector fell after 
the expensive wage settlement in 2002. 
  The authorities can achieve better economic policy results if they can commit in advance to a set of 
credible policy  rules. Households,  enterprises and capital  market  participants are  forward-looking  in 
their  decision-making.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  authorities  do  not  sow  doubt,  but  on  the 
contrary act in a long-term and predictable manner. There must be consistency between plans and 
actions.  
Monetary policy’s role is to ensure low and stable inflation. Experience shows that we cannot reduce 
unemployment over time by simply accepting somewhat higher inflation. In many countries, including 
Norway, confidence that inflation will be held at bay has increased because interest rate setting has 
been delegated to the central bank.  
BIS Review 27/2005 
 1
For  monetary  policy  to  contribute  to  stabilising  developments  in  output  and  employment,  economic 
agents must be confident that the inflation target will be reached.  
Inflation  targeting  has  proved  to  be  a  sound  system  and  particularly  well  suited  to  small,  open 
economies.  Normally,  interest  rate  setting  under  an  inflation  targeting  regime  will  also  contribute  to 
stabilising output and employment. In downturns, with prospects of low and falling inflation, the interest 
rate will be reduced to boost demand and prevent an inflation level that is too low. During an upturn 
when  there  are  prospects  of  high  inflation,  the  interest  rate  will  be  increased.  Inflation  targeting  is 
softer around the edges than the exchange rate regimes Norway and many other countries operated 
earlier. The system has proved fairly robust to disturbances.  
Nevertheless, the soft landing of the Norwegian economy after several years of high domestic cost 
inflation  and a  low  level  of  activity  abroad  must  not  lead  us  to  believe  that  output  and  employment 
cannot  show  pronounced  fluctuations  in  the  future.  We  cannot  expect  the  interest  rate  to  have  the 
same impact from one period to the next. The economy is exposed to unexpected disturbances. As a 
result,  we  cannot  fine-tune  economic  developments,  but  we  can  avoid  the  largest  effects  when  the 
economy  is  exposed  to  disturbances.  Monetary  policy’s  most  important  contribution  is  to  anchor 
inflation expectations. Experience indicates that inflation expectations remain stable even if inflation 
varies somewhat as long as the interest rate is used actively to moderate the variations in inflation. 
Given our highly open economy, we may have to accept somewhat wider variations in inflation than 
some other countries.  
Exchange rate expectations are influenced by growth in public expenditure and developments in terms 
of  trade,  although  stable  inflation  expectations  can  also  have  a  stabilising  effect  on  exchange  rate 
expectations.  
Just over a year ago, the interest rate was reduced by 0.25 percentage point to 1.75 per cent. Since 
then, the key rate has remained at this historically low level.  
Real interest rates are also low. Between December 2002 and March 2004, the key rate was reduced 
by a total of 5.25 percentage points. The interest rate decline can be ascribed to a number of factors.  
In  late  autumn  2002,  inflation  started  to  fall.  The  inflation  projections  were  also  revised  down.  New 
information  gradually  emerged  about  the  outlook  for  other  countries  and  the  Norwegian  economy, 
indicating  that  inflation  might  be  very  low.  Short-term  real  interest  rates  have  fallen  by  close  to 
4 percentage points. It would seem that it is not only changes in the real interest rate that have an 
influence, but also its level. Between December 2002 and March 2004, the interest rate has moved 
from a high to a low level. The real interest rate is now lower than a neutral real interest rate. A real 
interest rate that is lower than the neutral rate will stimulate activity even after the effects of the interest 
rate fall itself have been exhausted.  
Calculations seem to indicate that the neutral real interest rate for Norway is between 2½ and 3½ per 
cent, and it has probably fallen somewhat in recent years.  
It  takes  time  for  an  interest  rate  reduction  to  have  an  impact  on  inflation.  We  are  now  seeing  the 
effects of previous monetary policy decisions, some of which were taken two years ago.  
The  interest  rate  has  affected  inflation  via  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  via  demand  for  goods  and 
services. In particular, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services has picked up. 
In addition, the reduction in the interest rate has probably contributed to holding up expectations of 
future inflation even when inflation is low.  
If there is confidence in monetary policy, economic agents will expect inflation to be close to target 
over time. Companies will draw up their budgets on this basis. This will then contribute to stabilising 
inflation. Many companies change their prices only once or twice a year. When they change prices, 
they probably take into account the expected rise in other prices.  
It has been important to prevent inflation expectations from falling and becoming entrenched at a low 
level.  Surveys  of  inflation  expectations  nevertheless  indicate  that  expectations  are  well  anchored 
around the inflation target in the long term.  
The first signs of the effects of the interest rate cuts appeared in the foreign exchange market. The 
interest rate differential against other countries narrowed. It became more attractive to borrow and less 
profitable to invest in the Norwegian krone. The movement in the krone exchange rate was reversed 
and the krone depreciated through 2003 and into 2004. However, the impact on the krone exchange 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2005
rate has been considerably dampened because external interest rates have remained low. High prices 
for oil and gas and other export goods also contributed to an appreciation of the krone last year.  
The depreciation of the krone in 2003 contributed to restraining the fall in prices for imported goods. 
The effect occurred gradually. Companies and importers may have preferred to observe changes in 
the exchange rate over time before changing their selling prices.  
After  several  expensive  wage  settlements  and  a  short  period  of  a  strong  krone  had  weakened 
profitability in the Norwegian business sector, the depreciation of the krone contributed to curbing the 
decline in activity and employment. The downturn was short-lived.  
Together  with  private  consumption  and  fixed  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector,  traditional  exports 
were an important factor underlying growth in the early stages of the recovery that started in the first 
half of 2003. Prices for many of our main export goods have risen as a result of strong growth in new 
markets. However, growth in Norway’s total exports excluding oil and gas is lower than import growth 
among our trading partners.  
Mainland fixed investment has gradually become an important driving force in the upturn. Investment 
has picked up in most industries and growth was stronger than expected towards the end of 2004. 
Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  has  registered  rising  investment  in  all  industries.  Petroleum 
investment in particular appears to be growing at a faster pace than projected. This may continue to 
boost mainland output.  
In the last few years, household demand has been underpinned by low interest rates, high real wage 
growth  and  higher  asset  prices.  According  to  preliminary  national  accounts  figures,  private 
consumption  expanded  by  4.3  per  cent  last  year.  House  price  inflation  has  slowed  somewhat,  but 
remains  high.  In  2004,  housing  starts  were  the  highest  in  several  years.  Home  refurbishment  is 
probably also rising sharply.  
Overall, the supply of capital to households has increased sharply. Debt accumulation was somewhat 
more than 11 per cent in 2004 and is now considerably higher than growth in household disposable 
income. This largely reflects the sharp rise in house prices since the mid-1990s.  
According to TNS Gallup’s consumer confidence indicator for the first quarter of 2005, households are 
still highly optimistic with regard to their personal finances and the domestic economy. Our regional 
network confirms this impression, with reports of strong growth in companies that provide goods and 
services to households. On the whole, household consumption and housing investment are projected 
to show fairly strong growth over the next few quarters.  
Even with a strong upturn in the mainland economy, the increase in the number employed has been 
relatively modest. Productivity rose fairly sharply in the first few quarters after economic growth picked 
up. Normally, when productivity growth is strong, enterprises again begin to hire new staff. The current 
upturn has lasted about two years. The fairly low level of growth in employment, as measured by the 
number of employed, must be seen in the light of the sharp decline in sickness absence through 2004 
after rising for several years. The decrease in sickness absence has increased companies’ supply of 
labour  and  reduced  the  need  for  new  employees.  Measured  in  person-hours  worked,  employment 
growth was solid last year. The number of person-hours worked rose by 2.2 per cent from 2003 to 
2004.  A  corollary  to  the  increase  in  the  number  of  person-hours  worked  is  partly  reduced  sickness 
absence and partly three more working days in 2004 compared with 2003.  
An increase in available person-hours and increased competition and rationalisation in many sectors 
led to higher-than-normal growth in potential output last year. The economy has therefore been able to 
grow fairly rapidly for a period without the emergence of bottlenecks in the labour market.  
In the business tendency survey, manufacturing industry reported rising output volumes and capacity 
utilisation.  Average  capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  sector  is  now  close  to  its  historical 
average.  Information  from  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  also  indicates  an  approximate  balance 
between supply and demand in the economy, and that capacity utilisation is close to normal. A normal 
level of capacity utilisation is consistent with an output gap – the percentage difference between actual 
output and potential output – that is close to zero.  
Growth in demand and output is expected to remain high in the near term. Unemployment may fall 
somewhat more quickly than has been the case over the past year. The output gap is expected to be 
positive in 2005.  
BIS Review 27/2005 
 3
Higher  demand  for  companies’  goods  provides  scope  for  increasing  prices.  Experience  shows  that 
inflation is directly influenced by the level of capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Some of 
the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services can be attributed to higher margins in 
the business sector.  
The effects of the interest rate decline on demand, output and employment have been pronounced. It 
has taken time for inflation to pick up. This partly reflects low external interest rates and high oil prices, 
which have moderated the impact on the krone exchange rate. Higher imports from low-cost countries, 
competition and improved efficiency in Norwegian production have also kept inflation at a low level.  
Initially, it was the fall in prices for imported consumer goods that pushed down underlying inflation. 
After a period, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services also slowed. This was 
due in particular to increased competition in some goods and service markets. At the same time, wage 
growth eased as a result of lower capacity utilisation in the economy. A more subdued rise in house 
rents also contributed. Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE reached its lowest level in the first months 
of 2004. Inflation remained at below ½ per cent until the end of summer and then picked up through 
the  autumn.  Inflation  moved  up  primarily  as  a  result  of  a  slower  decline  in  prices  for  imported 
consumer goods. The depreciation of the krone since the beginning of 2003 has contributed to these 
developments. In addition, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services stabilised, 
and towards the end of 2004 there was a tendency towards a higher rise in prices for these goods and 
services.  
At  the  beginning  of  2005,  inflation  measured  by  the  CPI-ATE  was  lower  than  expected.  The  fall  in 
prices for imported consumer goods was unexpectedly sharp. It is uncertain whether this price fall was 
due to abnormal seasonal patterns or a decline in underlying inflation. The fall in prices may be related 
to  an  unusually  warm  winter,  which  has  made  it  more  difficult  to  sell  winter  clothing  and  sports 
equipment  at  ordinary  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  indications  that  prices  for  imported 
consumer goods in foreign currency may have fallen somewhat more than previously assumed.  
The wide variations in prices for some imported consumer goods, especially clothing and footwear, 
may  lead  to  wide  monthly  variations  in  consumer  price  figures.  Excluding  changes  in  prices  for 
clothing  and footwear,  the  year-on-year  rise  in  the CPI-ATE  in March was  1.2  per cent,  down  from 
1.3 per cent in February.  
Changes in indirect taxes, and particularly in VAT rates, have made it more difficult to interpret the 
price figures for the beginning of the year. The low level of inflation may be partly due to a lag in price 
adjustments following the indirect tax changes.  
Among the companies in our regional network, the share expecting a sharper rise in selling prices in 
the  coming  year  is  larger  than  the  share  expecting  a  slower  rise  in  prices.  TNS  Gallup’s  business 
sentiment  survey  conveys  a  more  neutral 
indicate 
expectations of a sharper rise in prices in the service sector.  
The other Nordic countries have also experienced falling inflation.  
Inflation in the Nordic countries has declined, and is now relatively low in Sweden, Denmark, Finland 
and  Norway.  According  to  the  harmonised  indices  of  consumer  prices,  inflation  in  February  was 
around  1  per  cent  in  Denmark,  Sweden  and  Norway,  while  the  year-on-year  rise  in  prices  was 
unchanged in Finland. By way of comparison, inflation in the euro area was a good 2 per cent.  
A common feature of the low level of inflation in the Nordic countries seems to be the sluggish trend in 
prices for imported consumer goods, even though developments have not been entirely the same in all 
the Nordic countries.  
The  upturn  is  broadly  based.  This  also  applies  to  the  counties  in  the  central  Norway  region.  Most 
industries here are continuing to show solid growth, and there is confidence that growth will remain 
firm for the rest of the year.  
The level of activity in the construction sector is high. Manufacturing industry producing goods for the 
construction sector is experiencing solid growth. In contrast to the prospects for the rest of the country, 
however,  the  pace  of  growth  in  the  construction  sector  in  central  Norway  seems  to  be  moderating. 
Turnover growth is stable in retail trade, partly due to an increase in the number of sales outlets. The 
fish farming industry has also shown considerable turnover growth recently. The printing industry is 
still in decline.  
impression.  Nevertheless,  both  surveys 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2005
Employment is largely stable. In the construction industry, the labour market is tight and enterprises 
are making use of foreign labour to some extent. The supply of skilled labour is, however, a constraint 
on growth potential. Signals from service industries also indicate that the supply of labour is becoming 
more limited.  
The  general  level  of  investment  in  this  region  is  relatively  stable.  Investment  activity  in  the  public 
sector appears to be somewhat lower in 2005 than in 2004. In manufacturing and services, there are 
signs of increased investment activity.  
Tender prices are rising slightly in the building and construction industry as a result of increased costs 
and a higher level of activity throughout the country. Prices have risen slightly in manufacturing and 
service industries. In retail trade, prices have changed little or remained unchanged.  
Profitability  is  improving  due  to  increased  activity,  but  there  are  no  major  changes  for  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises.  
In  the  approved  budget  for  2005,  the  structural,  non-oil  deficit  increases  compared  with  2004.  It 
therefore  appears  that  fiscal  policy  will  provide  some  stimulus  to  growth  this  year.  In  the  National 
Budget for 2005, underlying spending growth over the central government budget was estimated at 
5.2  per cent,  which  is somewhat  lower  than  the previous  year and somewhat  lower  than  estimated 
nominal  growth  in  mainland  GDP.  As  from  2006,  it  is  assumed  that  nominal  growth  in  central 
government  expenditure  will  be  approximately  the  same  as  nominal  growth  in  central  government 
revenues and that the real tax level will remain unchanged.  
Growth in the global economy is expected to moderate somewhat this year and stabilise in the years 
ahead. In the US, growth seems to have remained solid in the first quarter. Heightened uncertainty 
with regard to developments in the US economy and weaker results for some large companies have 
resulted  in  falling  prices  on  world  stock  markets.  Developments  are  weaker  in  the  euro  area  – 
unemployment remains high and consumer confidence has fallen. In Japan, it appears that growth will 
be positive from the fourth quarter of 2004 to the first quarter of 2005.  
Growth  in  Asia,  except  Japan,  and  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  is  expected  to  moderate  but  to 
remain strong.  
The outlook for growth in different regions indicates that the imbalances in the global economy, with 
large deficits in the US and large surpluses in some other countries, will persist. Low growth in the 
euro  area  and  Japan  is  weakening  the  prospect  of  a  gradual  correction.  This  increases  the  risk 
associated with these imbalances. Increased imbalances in addition to high oil prices and volatile oil 
markets are contributing to the uncertainty surrounding developments in the global economy.  
Robust expansion in China and India has in particular pushed up prices for oil and other important 
commodities. Growth impulses to the Norwegian economy may therefore be somewhat stronger than 
the  overall  outlook  for  our  most  important  trading  partners  would  indicate.  High  demand  for 
commodities  produced  by  Norway  is  boosting  activity  and  strengthening  profitability  for  Norwegian 
enterprises.  
Partly due to very high growth in demand for oil, the average price for Brent Blend oil rose to almost 
USD 40 per barrel in 2004. Strong economic growth, particularly in the US and China, has resulted in 
high electricity consumption. So far this year, the price of Brent Blend oil has largely moved between 
USD 45 and 55 per barrel. In the past few days, it has been close to USD 50 per barrel.  
Oil futures prices have also increased.  
Little excess production capacity in OPEC countries, combined with the prospect of lower production 
in non-OPEC countries, has probably influenced oil prices. At the same time, there are prospects of 
continued strong demand growth in important oil-importing countries, such as China and some other 
emerging economies.  
Diminishing  petrol  stocks  in  the  US  and  fears  of  petrol  shortages  this  summer  have  contributed  to 
fluctuations in oil prices in the past month.  
Plans for large-scale development projects resulted in strong growth in petroleum investment in 2004. 
As a result of persistently high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high, investment in 
the  petroleum  sector  may  reach  record  levels  this  year.  The  investment  intentions  survey  for  the 
petroleum  sector  points  to  very  high  growth.  The  level  is  expected  to  remain  high  throughout  the 
projection period. Activity in the petroleum sector will have spillover effects on the mainland economy, 
initially on the shipbuilding industry and the construction sector.  
BIS Review 27/2005 
 5
The  scale  of  petroleum  investment  and  its  spillover  effects  are  highly  uncertain.  The  last  time 
petroleum investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than 
had been assumed. An upturn occurred in the Norwegian economy as a whole at the same time. The 
unexpected increase in petroleum investment contributed to an economic upturn that was substantially 
stronger than projected. If oil prices rise further or remain at the current high level for a long period, 
petroleum investment may again amplify the cyclical upturn to a greater extent than projected.  
Inflation among our trading partners is expected to be low in the next few years. It is likely that high 
prices for oil and other commodities will continue to push up prices for goods where wages account for 
a small portion of total costs. On the other hand, growth among most of our main trading partners will 
probably be too low for idle resources to be utilised in the next few years. Particularly in the euro area, 
wage growth is likely to be low as a result of moderate economic growth and high unemployment.  
Overall, it would appear that external price impulses via consumer goods to the Norwegian economy 
will  remain  negative  this  year  and  next.  There  is  no  indication  that  growth  in  imports  from  low-cost 
countries  is  declining.  For  example,  China’s  share  of  footwear  imports  to  Norway  increased  by 
4 percentage points to 20 per cent in 2004. The share of clothing imports increased by 2 percentage 
points  to  32  per  cent.  The  decline  in  prices  for  clothing  and  footwear  will  probably  continue  in  the 
coming  years.  Prices  for  audiovisual  equipment  are  still  falling  as  a  result  of  strong  international 
competition and high productivity growth. We assume that the effects of structural changes in these 
markets will gradually be exhausted towards the end of the projection period. External price impulses 
via  consumer  goods  are  expected  to  increase  in  pace  with  unit  labour  costs  among  our  trading 
partners.  
The projections in Inflation Report 1/05, published on 16 March, are based on a gradual increase in 
the interest rate. This is in line with financial and foreign exchange market expectations. It is assumed 
that  the  exchange  rate  will  shadow  movements  in  the  forward  exchange  rate.  This  implies  that  the 
krone will remain fairly stable around the current level in the years ahead.  
Growth in private consumption is expected to remain high this year and next. Low real interest rates, 
solid  growth  in  real  disposable  income  and  a  continued  rise  in  house  prices  will  contribute.  Goods 
consumption picked up sharply, as expected, from January to February. The upturn was broad-based, 
with strong growth in car sales, other goods and electricity consumption. In the period ahead, higher 
employment and wage growth will continue to fuel household demand. On the other hand, household 
debt has risen sharply. This implies that a normalisation of interest rates will increase household net 
interest expenses. After a period, growth in consumption may be fairly low. However, we assume that 
households will choose to spread consumption over time, so that the saving ratio will continue to fall in 
spite of an increase in interest rates.  
Housing construction activity is still high. In January and February, housing starts were 17.5 per cent 
higher than in the same period last year. Growth in housing investment is expected to ease through 
2005.  However,  the  projection  for  housing  starts  is  also  very  high  for  2005.  Such  a  high  level  of 
housing starts over several years probably means that more dwellings will be constructed than implied 
by underlying demand. As a result, housing investment is expected to decline after a period. Higher 
interest  rates  and  weaker  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  may  also  lead  to  a  fall  in 
residential construction after a period. The rise in house prices has moderated, and prices in March 
were 8.2 per cent higher than in the same month last year.  
The  upturn  in  mainland  fixed  investment  is  broadly  based.  Stronger  profitability,  higher  capacity 
utilisation and solid export growth will contribute to continued investment growth in goods-producing 
industries. Demand for services is expected to continue to grow for a period ahead with an attendant 
increase in investment in service sectors. When growth in the economy gradually slows, investment 
growth will probably slacken.  
Mainland exports of goods and services will also benefit from solid global growth this year. Later in the 
period, a continued loss of market shares as a result of high cost levels will dampen export growth.  
Unemployment is projected to decline this year and next. In subsequent years, growth in demand and 
output  is  expected  to  ease  and  unemployment  may  edge  up  again  when  capacity  utilisation 
approaches a more normal level.  
With a somewhat tighter labour market and rising inflation in the years ahead, wage growth may pick 
up. Over the past year, low consumer price inflation has probably contributed to keeping nominal wage 
increases lower than implied by labour market tightness in isolation. Low inflation has resulted in high 
growth in household purchasing power even with moderate pay increases.  
6 
 BIS Review 27/2005
The  first  results  from  this  year’s  wage  settlements  may  indicate  that  centralised  pay  increases  this 
year may be lower than the projection in the March Inflation Report.  
With  a  path  for  the  interest  rate  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  in  line  with  the  baseline  scenario  in 
Inflation Report 1/05, inflation may increase gradually from less than 1 per cent today to close to 2 per 
cent  in  mid-2006.  Under  these  assumptions,  inflation  may  stabilise  at  around  2½  per  cent  at  the 
three-year horizon. Developments in line with these projections imply that the output gap will increase 
to about 1¼ per cent in 2006. As the interest rate is gradually increased to a more normal level, growth 
in  private  demand  will  probably  ease,  and  capacity  utilisation  may  be  brought  down  and  stabilise. 
Developments  over  the  past  few  weeks  do  not  provide  grounds  for  changing  this  perception  of  the 
state  of  the  real  economy.  The  first  wage  settlements  seem  to  suggest  that  the  negotiated  pay 
increases are somewhat lower than projected by Norges Bank. Inflation, on the other hand, has been 
broadly in line with expectations, and there has been virtually no change in the krone exchange rate. 
The inflation outlook has not changed substantially since the March Inflation Report was published.  
The March Inflation Report pointed to the risk that a low interest rate over a long period may gradually 
result in even stronger pressures in the economy. The Report also noted the possibility that continued 
changes in trading patterns, with higher imports from Asia and stronger competition in retail trade, may 
prolong the period of low inflation. These uncertainties still apply. Since the previous monetary policy 
meeting, oil prices have varied, but have generally remained high.  
The real krone exchange rate measured by relative labour costs is strong. Historically, the real krone 
exchange rate has tended to return to an average, measured over a longer period. Should this occur 
in today’s situation, through a depreciation of the nominal krone exchange rate, inflation will pick up 
somewhat faster than projected. If the krone appreciates, on the other hand, there is a greater risk that 
inflation will not move up as quickly as projected.  
The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace, and capacity utilisation is rising. An interest rate 
that is kept at the current level for a long period might lead to a situation where capacity utilisation 
becomes  too  high  further  ahead.  Bottlenecks  may  arise  in  some  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  the 
sharp rise in property prices and borrowing may persist for a longer period. This could be a source of 
instability  in  demand,  output  and  inflation  in  the  somewhat  longer  run.  This  implies,  in  isolation,  a 
higher interest rate. At the same time, the current rate of inflation is low, and there are prospects of low 
inflation for a period ahead. The objective of bringing inflation back to the target of 2½ per cent and 
anchoring inflation expectations imply a continued expansionary monetary policy.  
The monetary policy assessments presented by Norges Bank in March indicated that the interest rate 
will rise after a period and at a gradual pace. Economic developments since then have been broadly in 
line with expectations. International key rates are rising, albeit slowly and from a low level. Although a 
gradual rise in the interest rate seems to provide a good balance between the different objectives, the 
Executive  Board  concluded  that  it  is  too  early  to  increase  the  interest  rate  at  this  monetary  policy 
meeting.  
The  Executive  Board  decided  yesterday,  20  April,  to  leave  the  interest  rate  unchanged  at  1.75  per 
cent. The Executive Board weighed the objective of bringing inflation back to target and stable inflation 
expectations against the risk that output growth may eventually be too high.  
BIS Review 27/2005 
 7
