Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Launch of the Financial Mediation Bureau 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  launch  of  the 
Financial Mediation Bureau (FMB), Kuala Lumpur, 20 January 2005. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim, 
YB Tan Sri Dato’ Seri Haidar bin Mohamed Noor, 
Pengerusi, Biro Pengantaraan Kewangan 
Dif-dif kehormat 
Tuan-tuan dan Puan-puan hadirin sekalian 
Assalamualaikum warahmatullah dan salam sejahtera 
Our  financial  landscape  is  continuously  being  redefined.  The  objective  is  the  development  of  a 
financial  system  that  best  serves our nation.  To achieve  this, a comprehensive  approach has been 
adopted,  addressing  all  the  key  elements  and  building  blocks  in  the  respective  components  of  the 
financial system so as to form a solid foundation on which an effective, efficient and resilient financial 
system  could  be  progressively  built.  An  important  component  in  the  system  that  has  not  been 
neglected  has  been  the  consumer  protection  framework.  The  requirements  and  expectations  of 
consumers  are  changing  rapidly  in  tandem  with  increased  education  levels,  growing  wealth  and 
greater  affluence.  Consumers  are  becoming  more  discerning  and  demand  better  product  choices, 
more efficient delivery channels and more customer centric practices from financial institutions. These 
trends  have  become  important  in  reinforcing  the  more  competitive  environment  in  the  financial 
services sector. 
Tuan-tuan dan puan-puan, 
Antara  komponen  utama  Pelan  Induk  Sektor  Kewangan  ialah  usaha  meningkatkan  kesedaran  dan 
kefahaman  pengguna  tentang  produk  dan  perkhidmatan  kewangan,  di  samping  mewujudkan 
infrastruktur sokongan untuk melindungi pengguna, serta mengukuhkan rangka kerja kawalselia untuk 
meningkatkan  tahap  ketelusan.  Pelan  Induk  tersebut  menggariskan  beberapa  inisiatif  penting  yang 
bertujuan meningkatkan kuasa pengguna, di samping meningkatkan kefahaman mereka tentang hak, 
dan  tanggungjawab  kewangan  masing-masing.  Ianya  juga  akan  membolehkan  pengguna  membuat 
keputusan  yang  bijak,  demi  kesejahteraan  mereka.  Usaha  meningkatkan  tahap  celik  kewangan  di 
kalangan  pengguna  sentiasa  diberi  keutamaan  oleh  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  Sejak  tahun  1996, 
beberapa  inisiatif  telah  diperkenalkan  untuk  meningkatkan  tahap  celik  kewangan,  dan  memupuk 
kemahiran pengurusan kewangan yang baik di kalangan pelbagai kumpulan sasar. 
Kesukaran  pengguna  mendapat  akses  kepada  maklumat  sering  menyebabkan  pengguna  tidak 
mendapat  maklumat  yang  secukupnya  bagi  membolehkan  mereka  membuat  keputusan  yang  bijak. 
Pada tahun 2003, Bank Negara Malaysia dengan kerjasama institusi kewangan, telah melancarkan 
satu  rancangan  10  tahun  Program  Pendidikan  Pengguna  yang  melibatkan  sektor  perbankan  dan 
insurans.  Program  tersebut  bertujuan  meningkatkan  akses  kepada  maklumat  oleh  pengguna  serta 
meningkatkan  kesedaran  pengguna  tentang  hak  dan  tanggungjawab  mereka.  Ianya  juga  bertujuan 
untuk memperdalamkan pengetahuan pengguna tentang konsep dan operasi perbankan Islam serta 
produk  dan  perkhidmatan  takaful  yang  ditawarkan  oleh  institusi  kewangan.  Dalam  hal  ini,  laman-
laman web InfoPerbankan dan InfoInsurans telah memainkan peranan penting dalam meningkatkan 
kesedaran  pengguna.  Sehingga  kini, 
telah  mendapat  sambutan  yang 
menggalakkan  dengan  jumlah  pelawat  mencecah  17.6  juta.  Di  samping  itu,  lebih  4.2  juta  naskhah 
buku  penerangan  kecil  telah  diedarkan  kepada  pengguna.  Peningkatan  maklum  balas  yang  kami 
terima daripada pengguna mencerminkan tahap kesedaran pengguna. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In addition to the focus on financial literacy and awareness among consumers, considerable efforts 
have  also  been  made  to  strengthen  the  consumer  protection  infrastructure.  These  include  specific 
initiatives  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  framework  governing  market  practices  by  financial  service 
providers  as  well  as  enhanced  minimum  disclosure  requirements  and  standards  for  credit  card 
issuers, and on fees and charges for financial products. At the same time, ongoing efforts to raise the 
level of professionalism have also been intensified. 
laman  web 
tersebut 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 1
In  2004,  the  Bank  introduced  measures  relating  to  sales  practices  in  the  insurance  industry.  Life 
insurance  agents  are  also  required  to  adopt  best  advice  practices  in  the  sale  of  life  insurance 
products. To facilitate comparisons by consumers through enhanced disclosures, the Bank introduced 
mandatory  disclosures  of  commissions,  fees  and  charges  for  insurance  products  with  savings  and 
investment  features  that  are  sold  through  banking  institutions.  To  ensure  equitable  treatment  of 
policyholders,  the  Bank  further  strengthened  the  regulations  on  claims  settlement  practices  and 
enhanced  the  controls  over  bonus  reductions  by  life  insurers  to  ensure  reasonable  returns  to 
participating policyholders. 
More  recently,  the  industry,  together  with  the  Ministry  of  Transport,  implemented  the  e-cover  notes 
system,  which  will  effectively  eliminate  forged  motor  insurance  cover  notes.  This  represents  an 
important  development  towards  protecting  the  interests  of  both  vehicle  owners  as  well  as  road 
accident victims. The Bank also expects to license financial advisers in 2005. Following the enactment 
of the relevant legislation, financial advisers will be licensed and regulated by Bank Negara Malaysia 
to  provide  professional  advisory  services  on  insurance  to  consumers  in  relation  to  their  financial 
planning  needs.  This  development  marks  an  important  milestone  in  the  ongoing  evolution  of  the 
overall consumer protection framework for the industry. 
A number of initiatives have also been taken by the banking industry to maintain the integrity of the 
payments  systems  and  instruments,  focused  at  promoting  user  confidence  and  ensuring  that 
consumers’  interests  are  safeguarded.  In  combating  card  fraud,  significant  investments  have  been 
made  by  the  industry  players  to  migrate  all  magnetic  stripe  ATM  and credit  card  infrastructure  to a 
chip-enabled environment. New payment channels and infrastructures that leveraged on the Internet 
have also been developed, aimed at increasing safety and efficiency in the financial system. 
Measures have also been introduced to enhance customer service levels at financial institutions. For 
this  purpose,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  undertaken  a  nationwide  survey  to  assess  how  well 
consumers  are  being  serviced  by  the  financial  service  providers.  The  findings  of  the  survey  were 
shared  with  the  industry  and  individual  institutions  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  financial  institutions  to 
assess  their own performance  and  to use  the  results  to  benchmark  themselves  against  global  best 
practices. The objective is to achieve world-class quality in financial services. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  provision  of  adequate  avenues  for  redress  is  also  important  to  enable  consumers  to  resolve 
conflicts  through  an  equitable  process.  Efforts  have  been  made  to  strengthen  redress  mechanisms 
both  at  the  institutional  level  as  well  as  on  an  industry  level.  As  you  may  be  aware,  avenues  for 
redress by consumers against banking institutions and insurers are already available via the Banking 
Mediation  Bureau  (BMB),  and  the  Insurance  Mediation  Bureau  (IMB)  respectively.  These  bureaus, 
established  more  than  a  decade  ago,  have  achieved  considerable  success  in  resolving  disputes 
against banks and insurance companies. In 2004, a total of 1,515 cases have been handled by these 
two bureaus. Nevertheless, with the blurring of the traditional boundaries between financial products 
and services provided by banks, insurance companies, and other financial intermediaries, the creation 
of an integrated bureau is necessary for the resolution of a broad range of consumer issues raised in 
relation to the diverse range of financial institutions under the supervision of Bank Negara. There are 
also  clear  synergies  to  be  achieved  from  leveraging  on  the  resources  available  to  enhance  the 
efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  dispute  resolution  process as  consumers will  be  provided  with  a 
convenient and efficient one-stop centre to seek formal redress as an alternative to litigation, which 
may involve considerable time and financial resources. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  therefore  gives  me  great  pleasure  today  to  launch  the  Financial  Mediation  Bureau,  an  integrated 
dispute resolution centre for financial institutions under the supervision of Bank Negara Malaysia. The 
creation of an integrated agency is in line with the international trends towards such resolution centres, 
and the framework and model for the Financial Mediation Bureau has been benchmarked against best 
practices worldwide, notably in countries such as the United Kingdom, Canada and Australia. 
The scope of the Financial Mediation Bureau has been expanded to cover, for the first time, Islamic 
banks,  takaful  operators,  development  financial  institutions,  as  well  as  selected  payment  system 
operators and non-bank issuers of credit and charge cards. I am also pleased to announce that with 
the launch of the Financial Mediation Bureau, the limit on cases falling within the jurisdiction of the 
Bureau  has  been  increased  from  the  limits  applicable  to  the  former  Mediation  Bureaus.  This  will 
provide increased access to the Bureau as an avenue for redress for a wider spectrum of the public. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2005
Apart from the expanded coverage, the Financial Mediation Bureau plans to improve its nationwide 
accessibility by progressively establishing 5 regional offices. 
The Financial Mediation Bureau will be governed by a Board of Directors comprising nine members, of 
whom five are independent directors, with the balance from the banking and insurance industries. Tan 
Sri Dato’ Seri Haidar bin Mohamed Noor, the first Chairman of the Board of the Financial Mediation 
Bureau,  has  a  long  and  distinguished  career  in  the  judicial  service.  I  believe  that  the  Financial 
Mediation Bureau will benefit from his vast experience and expertise in judicial matters. The Financial 
Mediation Bureau will be staffed by independent and experienced mediators who are experienced in 
judicial matters. With the depth and diversity of experience represented on both the Board and staff of 
Financial Mediation Bureau, I am confident that the new Bureau will be well placed to discharge its 
responsibility in ensuring a fair and equitable resolution process for consumers. 
The creation of this Bureau represents an important milestone in the enhancement of the consumer 
protection infrastructure. Consumers are encouraged to make full use of the avenue available to seek 
resolution of the issues faced by them. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the previous Board of Directors of 
the Banking Mediation Bureau and Insurance Mediation Bureau for their contributions and dedication 
in giving selflessly of their time and experience in the operation of the bureaus. I would also like to 
acknowledge the contributions and support by the Association of Banks in Malaysia, Association of 
Finance  Companies  in  Malaysia,  Association  of  Merchant  Banks  in  Malaysia,  Life  Insurance 
Association of Malaysia, Persatuan Insurans Am Malaysia, Association of Islamic Banking Institutions 
Malaysia, Malaysian Takaful Association, Association of Development Finance institutions of Malaysia, 
MBF Card Services (M) Sdn. Bhd., American Express and Diners Club (M) Sdn. Bhd. in making this 
bureau  a  reality.  They  have  agreed  to  fund  the  operational  costs  of  this  bureau  through  levies  on 
individual member companies in order that the services of the bureau can be provided free of charge 
to members of the public. The strong and continuing support and commitment shown by the industry 
will augur well for the success of the Financial Mediation Bureau. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  recent  years,  much  progress  has  been  achieved  in  developing  and  strengthening  the  financial 
sector  through  policy  initiatives  in  the  areas  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks,  risk 
management and corporate governance. These have been complemented with consumer protection 
and education initiatives that promote more active consumerism to create a dynamic and responsive 
financial system. Moving forward, Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to focus on the development of 
the  necessary  infrastructure  to  ensure  that  consumers  are  given  greater  access  to  information  on 
financial  products  and  services  that  will  enable  them  to  make  well-informed  choices  and  safeguard 
consumer interests. 
Among  the  measures  that  are  being  finalized  for  implementation  is  the  issuance  of  guidelines  to 
ensure  that  the  public  has  access  to  banking  services  at  reasonable  costs.  Guidelines  have  been 
issued  to  banking  institutions  to  govern  the  imposition  of  fees  and  charges.  With  effect  from 
1 February  2005,  banking  institutions  will  also  be  required  to  provide  ‘basic  banking  services’  to 
Malaysians at minimal costs. The guideline specifies the minimum threshold of services and monthly 
transactions  that  are  to  be  offered  without  charges.  The  details  of  the  services  offered  under  this 
guideline  are  being  announced  today.  Over  and  above  these  financial  services,  as  products  and 
services become more complex, financial institutions need to provide appropriate pricing that not only 
reflect costs but also adequately reflect the cost saving that arises from investments undertaken. In an 
increasingly  competitive  environment,  efforts  also  need  to  continuously  aim  at  enhancing  efficiency 
and cost effectiveness. This will not only bring benefits to the consumers and businesses but to the 
overall economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
One crucial element of the safety net for consumers is deposit insurance. Work in this area is at an 
advanced  stage  and  will  be  operational  soon.  The  deposit  insurance  system  will  further  strengthen 
incentives for financial institutions to adopt sound financial and business practices and enhance public 
confidence  in  the  financial  system  by  providing  explicit  protection  on  deposits.  This  represents  an 
additional  enhancement  to  the  consumer  protection  framework  to  promote  confidence  in,  and  the 
soundness of the financial system. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 3
tanggungjawab  mereka, 
Tuan-tuan dan puan-puan, 
Pembangunan  masyarakat  pengguna  yang  berpengetahuan  dan  mampu  menguruskan  hal  ehwal 
kewangan  peribadi  masing-masing  dengan  baik  memerlukan  usaha  dan  kerjasama  erat  di  antara 
institusi kewangan, pengguna dan persatuan pengguna serta pengawal selia. Bank Negara Malaysia 
akan  mempastikan  industri  kewangan  memainkan  peranan  secara  aktif  dalam  usaha  ini.  Namun 
demikian,  proses  ini  wajar  dipacu  oleh  institusi-institusi  kewangan.  Persatuan-persatuan  pengguna 
juga  mempunyai  peranan  penting  dalam  memberi  pendidikan  dan  penerangan  kepada  pengguna 
tentang  hak  dan 
termasuk  saluran  untuk  pengguna  mendapatkan 
pem-bela-an. Walaupun inisiatif yang diambil akan meningkatkan perlindungan pengguna dan tahap 
celik  kewangan,  pengguna 
lebih  bersikap  proaktif  untuk  memahami  hak  dan 
tanggungjawab  mereka  serta  lebih  berhemat  dalam  memilih  produk  dan  perkhidmatan  kewangan. 
Pembangunan  pengguna  yang  lebih  berpengetahuan  juga  akan  memberi  cabaran  kepada  institusi 
kewangan  untuk  mempercepatkan  proses  inovasi  dan  mempelbagaikan  produk,  perkhidmatan  dan 
saluran penghantaran yang ditawarkan. Ini akan merangsang pembangunan sektor kewangan yang 
kukuh dan progresif, yang selanjutnya akan menyumbang kepada pertumbuhan ekonomi negara yang 
mapan. 
Dengan  lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pembukaan  Biro 
Pengantaraan Kewangan di Malaysia. 
Terima kasih. 
juga  perlu 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2005
