Y V Reddy: Monetary policy - an outline 
Presidential address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, circulated in the Annual 
Conference of Andhra Pradesh Economic Association, Visakhapatnam, 12 February 2005.  
 Respected  Vice-Chancellor  Professor  Simhadri,  Professor  Bhanoji  Rao,  Professor  K.C.  Reddy,  and 
fellow-members of Andhra Pradesh Economic Association. I am thankful to the organisers for inviting 
me to be the President and deliver the Presidential Address. There are several reasons for my being 
keen  to  be  in  Visakhapatnam  to  deliver  the  Presidential  Address.  I  commenced  my  career  in 
Government  of  Andhra  Pradesh  in  Visakhapatnam  as  Assistant  Collector  Under  Training  over  forty 
years ago - in 1965. I had the benefit of professional guidance from eminent scholars and economists 
in Andhra University such as Professors Sarveswara Rao garu, D.V. Ramana garu, G. Parthasarathy 
garu,  K.V.  Ramana  garu  and  S.  Chandrasekhar  garu.  Subsequently,  I  acquired  many  friends  with 
strong  links  here,  such  as  Professors  Krishnamurthy  garu  and  R.  Radhakrishna  garu.  Professor 
Bhanoji  Rao  garu  has  been  a  valued  friend,  whether  he  was  in  the  World  Bank  with  me,  or  in 
Singapore  or  in  the  Administrative  Staff  College  in  Hyderabad.  Professor  K.C.  Reddy  garu  worked 
alongside me when I was the Secretary in Planning and Finance Department of the Government of 
Andhra Pradesh.  With all these attractions, I regret to say that I am not able to be physically present 
in  Visakhapatnam  to  deliver  the  Presidential  Address  at  the  23rd  Annual  Conference  due  to 
unavoidable official commitments. 
The Andhra Pradesh Economic Association has been one of the pioneering efforts in our country in 
organising  a  sub-national  level  professional  body  of  economists.  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  is  a  wise 
initiative  and  needs  to  be carried  forward.  As  the  economic  reform  in  India  progresses,  the  relative 
balance in public policy would shift in favour of the states relative to the centre. The important areas 
earmarked  for  the  centre,  such  as  external  sector  and  financial  sector,  tend  to  be  subjected  to 
globalisation  while  in  areas  such  as  education,  health,  sanitation,  roads,  water  works,  power,  etc. 
which are localized in nature, states could have a greater role. Greater marketisation of economies 
and  private  capital  flows  tend  to  look  for  conducive  governance  at  the  state-level  where  economic 
activities are located. Hence, the state governments are well advised to take dynamic policy-initiatives 
and it is in this background that the economists engaged at the state level have to play a crucial role in 
the reform-process. In fact, there is some evidence of a positive link between education health and 
other public services and economic growth. Interestingly, most states which have done well in terms of 
investment  and  growth  also  have  research  institutes  of  repute  in  the  area  of  social  and  economic 
sciences.  
Needless  to  say  that,  in  this  background,  I  am  delighted  to  deliver  the  Presidential  Address  at  the 
Annual  Conference  of  Andhra  Pradesh  Economic  Association.  In  a  conference  of  economists,  it  is 
appropriate to go by the principle of comparative advantage, and accordingly I decided to focus my 
comments  on  the  core  of  my  current  professional  as  well  as  official  preoccupation  and  talk  on  the 
monetary policy.   
In its conduct of monetary policy, the central bank responds to the evolving economic activity within an 
articulated monetary policy framework. This framework would normally have three basic constituents, 
viz.,  
• 
• 
• 
For  convenience,  each  of  these  issues  has  been  dealt  with  separately  and  in  this  light,  the  Indian 
experience has been touched upon briefly. 
the objectives of monetary policy;  
the analytics of monetary policy focusing on the transmission mechanism; and 
the operating procedure focusing on operating targets and instruments. 
Objectives  
Traditionally,  central  banks  have  pursued  the  twin  objectives  of  price  stability  and  growth.  Central 
banks have to keep in view the considerations of exchange rate stability and financial stability also in 
pursuing the basic objectives. Can we achieve these objectives all at a time? As in most aspects of 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
life, the objectives of monetary policy are interrelated, and there are trade-offs as well. Illustratively, 
economists  often  talk  of  the  Phillips  curve  according  to  which  there  is  a  short-run  negative  relation 
between inflation and unemployment. While there are various viewpoints on Phillips curve, in a world 
where the Phillips curve is valid, a central bank can reduce inflation only at the cost of having more 
unemployment. Similar trade-offs exist among other objectives as well.  
Faced with multiple objectives that are equally desirable, there remains the problem of assigning to 
each policy instrument the most appropriate objective. Accordingly, there is a broad consensus, both 
in academic and policy circles, that monetary policy is useful as an instrument to achieving the goal of 
price stability. 
The  adoption  of  price  stability  as  the  only  objective  of  monetary  policy  is,  however,  by  no  means 
universal. While a number of prominent central banks including the European Central Bank, Bank of 
England and Bank of Japan have adopted price stability as the single objective of monetary policy, the 
Federal  Reserve  of  the  US  continues  to  pursue  multiple  objectives  of  monetary  policy,  viz.,  a) 
maximum  employment,  b) stable  prices,  and  c)  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.  Central  banks  in 
several  developing  countries  have  placed  exchange  rate  management  as  another  important  policy 
objective.  In  recent  years,  particularly  after  the  financial  crises  of  1990s,  the  concern  for  financial 
stability is an integral part of the central bank’s activism.  
Analytics of monetary policy  
The process through which changes in the monetary policy get transmitted to the ultimate objectives 
like inflation or growth has come to be known as “monetary transmission mechanism”. Interestingly, 
economists often refer to the channels of “monetary transmission” as a black box – implying that we 
know  that  monetary  policy  does  influence  output  and  inflation  but  we  do  not  know  for  certain  how 
precisely  it  does  so.  Nevertheless,  in  the  literature,  a  number  of  transmission  channels  have  been 
identified:  (a)  the  quantum  channel  (e.g.,  relating  to  money  supply  and  credit);  (b)  the  interest  rate 
channel; (c) the exchange rate channel; and (d) the asset price channel. How these channels function 
in a given economy depends on the stage of development of the economy and its underlying financial 
structure.  Illustratively,  in  an  open  economy  one  would  expect  the  exchange  rate  channel  to  be 
important;  similarly,  in  an  economy  where  banks  are  the  major  source  of  finance  (as  against  the 
capital  market),  credit  channel  seems  to  be  a  major  conduit  for  monetary  transmission.  Besides,  it 
needs  to  be  noted  that  these  channels  are  not  mutually  exclusive  –  in  fact,  there  could  be 
considerable feedbacks and interactions among them.  
Central  banks  may  not  be  in  a  position  to  directly  achieve  their  ultimate  objectives  and  hence, 
monetary  policy  is  often  formulated  in  terms  of  an  intermediate  target.  For  example,  in  a  monetary 
targeting framework, a suitable monetary aggregate is considered as an intermediate target based on 
the basic relationship between money, output and prices. Exchange rate as an intermediate target can 
be suitable for small open economies, setting the exchange rate against a low-inflation anchor country. 
This may, however, entail loss of independence in steering domestic interest rates. 
In this context, it is necessary to touch upon what is known as the ‘impossible trinity’, or ‘trilemma’ of 
monetary policy. This refers to the incompatibility among three policy choices, viz., (a) fixed exchange 
rate,  (b)  open  capital  account,  and  (c)  independent  monetary  policy.  The  basic  message  of  the 
‘trilemma’ is that a central bank can achieve any two of the above-mentioned parameters, but not all 
the  three.  Illustratively,  if  a  country  wants  to  have  fixed  exchange  rate  and  independent  monetary 
policy then it is difficult to maintain an open capital account.  
Another important issue in monetary policy is the extent of transparency. Central bankers all over the 
world are not exactly known for clarity in their language. Nevertheless, the rational expectations school 
in  macroeconomics  holds  that  no  policy  can  be  successful  over  a  period  by  “fooling”  the  economic 
agents. In this context, one may differentiate between genuine uncertainties about the future vis-à-vis 
not  revealing  the  expected  outcome  of  the  policy.  In  fact,  since  the  1990s,  there  has  been  a 
preference all over the world to improve the transparency of monetary policy.  
In the context of improving transparency, the recent trend has been towards direct inflation targeting. 
Adoption of explicit inflation targeting as the final goal of monetary policy involves the preparation of 
an  inflation  forecast,  which,  in  a  way,  serves  the  purpose  of  both  an  intermediate  target  and  final 
objective.  The  pre-requisites  for  inflation  targeting  include  a  considerable  degree  of  operational 
autonomy  or  independence  for  central  bank,  flexible  exchange  rate  conditions,  well-developed 
financial markets and absence of fiscal dominance.        
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
In view of the growing complexities of macroeconomic management, several central banks including 
the European Central Bank have placed reliance on a broad set of economic and leading indicators 
rather  than  focusing  exclusively  on  an  intermediate  target  or  a  direct  inflation  target.  The  Federal 
Reserve  has  traditionally  been  following  a  more  broad  based  approach  to  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy in the US.  
Operating procedures: instruments and targets 
Operating  procedures  refer  to  the  day-to-day  implementation  of  monetary  policy  by  central  banks 
through  various  instruments.  These  instruments  can  be  broadly  classified  into  direct  and  indirect 
instruments. Typically, direct instruments include required cash and/ or liquidity reserve ratios, directed 
credit  and  administered  interest  rates.  Cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  determines  the  level  of  reserves 
(central  bank  money  or  cash)  banks  need  to  hold  against  their  liabilities.  Similarly,  liquidity  reserve 
ratio requires banks to maintain a part of their liabilities in the form of liquid assets (e.g., government 
securities). Credit and interest rate directives take the form of prescribed targets for allocation of credit 
to preferred sectors/industries and prescription of deposit and lending rates.  
The indirect instruments generally operate through price channel which cover repurchase (repos) and 
outright  transactions  in  securities  (open  market  operations),  standing  facilities  (refinance)  and 
market-based discount window. For example, if the central bank desires to inject liquidity for a short 
period, it could do so by providing funds to the banks in exchange of securities at a desired interest 
rate,  reversing  the  transaction  at  a  pre-determined  time.  Similarly,  if  the  central  bank  desires  to 
influence  liquidity  on  an  enduring  basis,  it  could  resort  to  open  market  operations  (OMO),  involving 
outright purchase (or sale) of securities.  
While OMO including repo transactions operate at the discretion of the central bank, standing facilities 
provide limited liquidity which could be accessed by the eligible market participants (generally banks) 
at  their  discretion.  Market-based  discount  window  makes  available  reserves  either  through  direct 
lending or through rediscounting or purchase of financial assets held by banks. 
In practice, the choice between direct and indirect instruments is not easy. While direct instruments 
are effective, they are considered inefficient in terms of their impact on the financial market. On the 
other hand, the use and efficacy of indirect instruments depends on the extent of development of the 
supporting  financial  markets  and  institutions.  These  instruments  are  usually  directed  at  attaining  a 
prescribed value of the operating target. Central banks typically adopt either (a) bank reserves or (b) a 
very short-term interest rate (usually the overnight inter-bank rate) as the operating target. 
The optimal choice between price and quantity targets would depend on the sources of disturbances 
in  the  goods  and  money  markets.  In  reality,  it  often  becomes  difficult  to  trace  out  the  sources  of 
instability. Hence, monetary policy is implemented by fixing, at least over some short time interval, the 
value of an operating target. In a single-period context, the choice of the level of the target amounts to 
setting  a  rule  for  monetary  policy.  However,  in  a  dynamic  context,  their  connection  is  less 
straightforward. Indeed, a deviation from a target could occur, either intended or unintended, which 
may impart an inflationary bias when monetary policy is conducted with discretion. In order to address 
such  problems  of  dynamic  inconsistency,  rule-based  solutions  are  emphasized  in  literature,  e.g., 
monetary rule (changes in money supply at a pre-determined rate) and Taylor-type rule (changes in 
interest  rate  based  on  deviation  of  growth  and  inflation  from  their  potential/desired  levels).  While  a 
rule-based system imparts transparency, providing certainty about future policy response, it becomes 
ineffective in its response to unanticipated shocks given its inflexibility. In practice, therefore, central 
banks follow an approach of what has been best described as constrained discretion. 
The operating procedures of monetary policy of most central banks have largely converged to one of 
the following three variants: (i) estimate the demand for bank reserves and then carry out open market 
operations to target short-term interest rates; (ii) estimate market liquidity and carry out open market 
operations  to  target  the  bank  reserves,  while  allowing  interest  rates  to  adjust;  and  (iii)  modulate 
monetary conditions in terms of both the quantum and price of liquidity, through a mix of open market 
operations, standing facilities and minimum reserve requirement and changes in the policy rate with 
the  objective  of  containing  overnight  market  interest  rate  within  a  narrow  corridor  of  interest  rate 
targets. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
Indian specifics 
In this backdrop, let me now turn to the conduct of monetary policy in India.  
What has been the objective of Indian monetary policy? The preamble to the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 sets out the objectives of the Bank as “to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping 
of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency 
and  credit  system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage”.  Although  there  is  no  explicit  mandate  for  price 
stability,  as  is  the  current  trend  in  many  countries,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  in  India  have 
evolved as those of maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to the productive 
sectors of the economy. In essence, monetary policy aims to maintain a judicious balance between 
price  stability  and  economic  growth.  The  relative  emphasis  between  price  stability  and  economic 
growth is governed by the prevailing circumstances in a particular time and is spelt out from time to 
time in the policy announcements of the Reserve Bank. 
Of  late,  considerations  of  financial  stability  have  assumed  greater  importance  in  view  of  increasing 
openness of the Indian economy and financial reforms. In the Indian context, financial stability could 
be  interpreted  to  embrace  three  aspects,  viz.,  (a)  ensuring  uninterrupted  financial  transactions,  (b) 
maintenance  of  a  level  of  confidence  in  the  financial  system  amongst  all  the  participants  and 
stakeholders,  and  (c)  absence  of  excess  volatility  that  unduly  and  adversely  affects  real  economic 
activity. It is the endeavour of the Reserve Bank to ensure all these aspects of financial stability. 
As far as the conduct of monetary policy is concerned, it may be noted that monetary policy in India 
used to be conducted till 1997-98 with broad money (M3) as an intermediate target. The aim was to 
regulate money supply consistent with two parameters, viz., (a) the expected growth in real income, 
and (b) a projected level of inflation. On the basis of estimates of these two crucial parameters, the 
targeted monetary expansion could be set. In practice, the monetary targeting framework was used in 
a flexible manner with feedback from developments in the real sector. However, questions were raised 
about the appropriateness of such a framework with the changing inter-relationship between money, 
output and prices in the wake of financial sector reforms and opening up of the economy. The Working 
Group  on  Money  Supply  (1998)  sought  to  address  some  of  these  issues.  The  most  significant 
observation  of  the  Group  was  regarding  the  changing  nature  of  transmission  mechanism  as  it 
highlighted that the interest rate channel was gaining in importance.  
In line with this thinking, since 1998-99, the Reserve Bank has switched over to a multiple indicator 
approach. As per this approach, interest rates or rates of return in different markets (money, capital 
and government securities markets), along with data such as on currency, credit extended by banks 
and financial institutions, fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing 
and transactions in foreign exchange available on high-frequency basis, are juxtaposed with output for 
drawing policy perspectives.     
What is the operating procedure of monetary policy in India? In the current monetary policy framework, 
with growing inter-linkages in the financial market, reliance on direct instruments has been reduced 
and  liquidity  management  in  the  system  is  carried  out  through  OMO  in  the  form  of  outright 
purchases/sales of government securities and daily reverse repo and repo operations under Liquidity 
Adjustment  Facility  (LAF).  The  LAF  has  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to  modulate  short-term  liquidity 
under varied financial market conditions, including large capital inflows from abroad. In addition, it has 
enabled the Reserve Bank to set a corridor for the short-term interest rates consistent with the policy 
objectives.  This  has  also  facilitated  bringing  down  the  CRR  of  banks  without  engendering  liquidity 
pressure. These operations are supplemented by access to the Reserve Bank’s standing facilities. In 
this  new  operating  environment,  changes  in  reverse  repo  and/or  the  Bank  Rate  have  emerged  as 
interest rate signals. 
There is no explicit interest rate target envisaged in India. Nevertheless, a great deal of reliance has 
been  placed  in  recent  years  on  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  in  the  day-to-day  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  In  the  context  of  increasing  openness  of  the  economy  and  a  market-determined 
exchange rate, the large capital inflows witnessed in recent years have posed major challenges to the 
conduct  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  management.  A  critical  issue  in  this  regard  is  a  view  on 
whether the capital flows are temporary or permanent in nature. The recent episode of large capital 
flows  prompted  a  debate  in  India  on  the  need  for  exchange  rate  adjustment.  In  a  scenario  of 
uncertainty facing the monetary authorities in determining temporary or permanent nature of inflows, it 
is prudent to presume that such flows are temporary till they are firmly established to be of permanent 
nature.  
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
The liquidity impact of large inflows was managed till the year 2003-04, largely through the day-to-day 
LAF and OMO. In the process, the stock of government securities available with the Reserve Bank 
declined progressively and the burden of sterilization increasingly fell on LAF operations. In order to 
address  these  issues,  the  Reserve  Bank  signed  in  March  2004,  a  memorandum  of  understanding 
(MoU) with the Government of India for issuance of Treasury Bills and dated government securities 
under the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS). The intention of MSS is essentially to differentiate the 
liquidity  absorption  of  a  more  enduring  nature  by  way  of  sterilisation  from  the  day-to-day  normal 
liquidity management operations. The ceiling on the outstanding obligations of the Government under 
MSS has been initially indicated but is subject to revision through mutual consultation. The issuances 
under  MSS  are  matched  by  an  equivalent  cash  balance  held  by  the  Government  in  a  separate 
identifiable  cash  account  maintained  and  operated  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  operationalisation  of 
MSS to absorb liquidity of more enduring nature has considerably reduced the burden of sterilisation 
on the LAF window.  
In  its  monetary  operations,  the  Reserve  Bank  uses  multiple  instruments  to  ensure  that  appropriate 
liquidity is maintained in the system so that all legitimate requirements of credit are met, consistent 
with the objective of price stability. Towards this end, the Bank pursues a policy of active management 
of  liquidity  through  OMO  including  LAF,  MSS  and  CRR,  and  using  the  policy  instruments  at  its 
disposal flexibly, as and when the situation warrants. 
Way ahead 
Conduct of monetary policy is complex. It has not only to be forward looking but also to grapple with 
uncertain future. Additional complexities arise in the case of an emerging market like India, which is 
transiting from a relatively closed to a progressively open economy. In an environment of increasing 
capital  flows,  narrowing  cross-border  interest  rate  differentials  and  surplus  liquidity  conditions, 
exchange  rate  movement  tends  to  have  linkages  with  interest  rate  movements.  The  challenge  of  a 
monetary authority is to balance the various choices into a coherent whole and to formulate a policy as 
an art of the possible. 
Let me now conclude by wishing this Conference all success. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 5
