Toshihiko Fukui: Elaboration on the Bank of Japan’s assessment of the 
economic and financial situation 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 13 December 2004. 
 The  Japanese  economy  has  been  in  a  recovery  phase  since  the  summer  of  2003.  With  the  recent 
release  of  weak  economic  indicators  mainly  related  to  exports  and  production,  market  participants 
seem  to  have  become  a  little  bearish  about  the  economic  outlook.  We  believe,  however,  that  the 
current  slowdown  in  the  pace  of  recovery  is  temporary,  and  that  the  economy  is  likely  to  move 
gradually onto a sustainable growth path. Today, I will elaborate on the Bank of Japan’s assessment 
of the economic and financial situation, and the thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in overseas economies 
Let me start with overseas economies, which provide the background to Japan’s economic activity. 
Overseas economies, the United States and China in particular, are expected to continue expanding, 
albeit at a slower pace. 
The  U.S.  economy  is  continuing  its  expansion  supported  by  domestic  private  demand,  including 
household consumption and business fixed investment. It seems to be emerging from a soft patch: the 
pace of increase in household consumption has picked up again, and growth in employee numbers 
has been recovering albeit with some fluctuations. Looking forward, the U.S. economy is expected to 
continue expanding steadily despite the fact that tax cuts have run their course and crude oil prices 
remain at high levels. 
The Chinese economy is continuing to show robust growth underpinned by steady demand at home 
and  abroad,  and  still  seems  to  be  overheating.  Since  this  spring,  the  public  authorities  have  taken 
administrative measures to deal with this overheating. Furthermore, the People’s Bank of China raised 
its  policy  rates  for  the  first  time  in  nine  years  at  the  end  of  October  2004.  We  continue  to  closely 
monitor the effects of these measures on the economy. 
The current economic situation and the sustainability of the economic recovery 
Although  growth  in  exports  and  production  has  been  sluggish  since  the  summer  of  2004  and  the 
annualized  growth  rates  of  real  GDP  for  the  April-June  and  July-September  quarters  of  2004  have 
both  turned  out  to  be  more  or  less  flat,  there  are  several  reasons  for  believing  that  a  recovery 
mechanism remains in place. 
First, exports and production are expected to resume trending upward. Their recent sluggish growth 
has been attributed to the lagged effect of the slowdown in overseas economies, and they are picking 
up again as overseas economies start growing. In addition, adjustment in production and inventories 
of IT-related goods is unlikely to be as severe as at the time of the bursting of the IT bubble in 2001. 
This is because demand for IT-related goods, such as digital home appliances and electronic parts for 
automobiles,  has  been  expanding,  and  manufacturers  have  been  adjusting  their  production  and 
inventories promptly. 
Second,  with  the  rise  in  corporate  profits,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  continue 
increasing.  Although  growth  in  business  fixed  investment  slowed  in  GDP  terms  during  the  July-
September quarter and the pace of increase in shipments of capital goods moderated, manufacturers 
seem  to  have  maintained  positive  investment  plans,  supported  by  the  higher  corporate  profits 
evidenced  in  the  semiannual  financial  statements  of  listed  companies  at  the  end  of  September. 
Construction starts have been increasing in a wide range of areas, such as factories, office buildings, 
shopping malls, and delivery centers. Part of the reason for this may have been the growing tendency 
for pricing in real estate transactions to be based on the discounted cash flow method. We will get a 
clearer picture of corporate profitability and business fixed investment, particularly of small businesses 
and non-manufacturers, with the release of the upcoming December Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey of Enterprises in Japan). 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 1
Third,  the  effects  of  improvement  in  the  corporate  sector  are  spreading  steadily  to  the  household 
sector, albeit at a moderate pace. Employee numbers are continuing to increase, and the perception 
that labor is in excess is becoming less acute among companies. The rate of decline in wages per 
worker is diminishing gradually despite companies’ continuing labor cost restraint. Household income 
has bottomed out, and is likely to rise gradually with the increase in corporate profits and the relaxing 
of companies’ perception that labor is in excess. Household consumption, underpinned by improved 
consumer sentiment, has been steady thus far, and is expected to increase at a moderate pace in line 
with the rise in household income. 
We will continue to be vigilant against downside risks to the economy, such as those stemming from 
developments in IT-related demand and crude oil prices. Although adjustment in IT-related goods is 
unlikely  to  be  severe,  it  may  be  somewhat  protracted  due  to  the  inherent  volatility  in  IT-related 
demand. We cannot deny the possibility that a prolonged adjustment in IT-related goods, if it happens, 
may  affect  the  ongoing  recovery  through  deterioration  in  business  and  household  sentiment.  In 
addition, although crude oil prices have recently stopped rising, they remain at historically high levels. 
We  need  to  continue  closely  monitoring  their  impact  on  economic  activity  and  prices,  including  the 
effects of their past rises. 
In  foreign exchange  markets,  attention  has been  paid  to  the downtrend  of  the  U.S.  dollar.  Concern 
about  the  U.S.  twin  deficits  is  often  cited  as  a  reason  for  the  weaker  dollar.  The  U.S.  economy, 
however, continues to maintain high growth, and with inflation rates remaining low due to increased 
productivity,  it  is  still  providing  golden  opportunities  for  investors  in  increasingly  global  financial 
markets. Confidence also remains high that fiscal and monetary policy will be directed toward securing 
sustainable economic growth. Given this situation, the United States is not experiencing difficulty in 
financing its deficit. Having said this, we need to carefully monitor foreign exchange rates and their 
impact  on  the  economy  since  speculation  may  cause  short-term  volatility  in  foreign  exchange  and 
other financial markets. 
Let me briefly comment on the recently released GDP statistics, which some see as confirming the 
weak economic recovery. The recent introduction of the chain index method for calculating the GDP 
deflator  resulted  in  a  downward  adjustment  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  from  the  figure  calculated 
using the previous method. The problem with the previous method was that the base year was fixed, 
and this caused an increasing downward bias in the GDP deflator the further it moved away from the 
base year. The chain index method, which revises the weighting of various goods and services every 
year, has thus been introduced to reflect changes in the economic structure more appropriately. GDP 
statistics, which describe overall economic conditions, have their own properties and limitations like 
any  other  statistics.  Since  our  evaluation  of  the  economy  has  incorporated  these  properties  and 
limitations,  the  introduction  of  the  new  calculation  method  is  not  thought  to  affect  our  overall 
assessment of the economy. 
Progress in structural adjustments supporting economic recovery 
The difference between this recovery and the two previous recovery phases since the bursting of the 
bubble  is  that,  in  both  the  corporate  sector  and  the  financial  system,  there  has  been  progress  in 
dealing with the structural factors affecting the Japanese economy, and as a result, the private sector 
has become more proactive. 
Companies have made steady progress in addressing the structural problems of their excess holdings 
of  debt,  labor,  and  capital,  and  at  the  same  time  have  made  efforts  to  formulate  business  models 
generating  high  value  added.  Corporate  profitability  has  therefore  improved  considerably.  Ratios  of 
current profits to sales in fiscal 2004, for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing companies, are 
expected to reach their highest levels since the bursting of the bubble. 
Turning to the financial system, considerable progress has been made toward restoring the system to 
soundness. Recessionary phases since the bursting of the bubble have tended to involve a vicious 
circle in which the fragility of the financial system has amplified the extent of the recession, but this risk 
has diminished in line with the improvement in the condition of the financial system. 
More  concretely,  financial  institutions  have  made  headway  in  dealing  with  their  nonperforming-loan 
(NPL) problems, assessing and provisioning for NPLs more appropriately and employing a variety of 
measures  to  remove  NPLs  from  their  balance  sheets  and  revitalize  companies.  Recently,  progress 
has  been  made  in  the  rehabilitation  of  large  borrowers  with  a  succession  of  schemes  for  radical 
reconstruction,  some  of  which  include  the  use  of  the  Industrial  Revitalization  Corporation  of  Japan. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2005
Efforts to revitalize regional businesses are also gradually bearing fruit, and as the economic recovery 
takes  hold,  improvements  in  companies’  financial  conditions  and  a  more  favorable  assessment  of 
these by market participants have become evident. 
In the semiannual financial statements released last month, the ratio of NPLs to total loans for major 
banks stood at 4.6 percent, within sight of the target of halving the volume of NPLs on their books. For 
regional  banks,  the  NPL  ratio  has  been  steadily  falling,  down  to  6.4  percent  from  6.9  percent 
registered  at  the  end  of  March  2004.  The  costs  of  writing  off  and  provisioning  for  loan  losses, 
otherwise known as “credit costs,” have declined overall, and this meant that most banks managed to 
close their books in the black. During this period unwinding of cross-shareholdings, which had been 
deemed excessive, progressed with a concomitant reduction in exposure to market risk. In addition, 
efforts geared toward reducing expenses and expanding fee business also began to bear fruit. 
Thanks to this reduction in their exposure to credit risk and the market risk pertaining to stock price 
volatility,  financial  institutions  have  been  less  constrained  in  the  uses  to  which  they  can  put  their 
capital, and this situation has encouraged them to seek new business opportunities. Indeed, there has 
been an intensification of efforts to strengthen profitability and reorganize businesses: banks’ lending 
attitudes toward small and medium-sized businesses in particular have become more positive; some 
financial  institutions  are  paying  back  previous  injections  of  public  funds;  mergers  between  financial 
institutions are becoming widespread; and tie-ups with non-bank institutions are increasing. 
As the April 2005 date for the full removal of blanket deposit insurance approaches, individual financial 
institutions may be expected to redouble their efforts to improve business performance. This will not 
only further reinforce the soundness and stability of the financial system, but it will also inject fresh 
vigor into the financial system as a whole. 
At  this  juncture,  a  variety  of  businesses,  including  foreign  companies  and  non-banks,  will  each  be 
making use of their own particular strengths to compete by offering a wide range of financial services. 
In  the  markets  for  such  diverse  financial  services,  competitiveness  will  depend  on  the  ability  to 
accurately identify and respond efficiently to the full diversity of client needs. In their efforts to achieve 
this,  it  is  hoped  that  various  market  players  will  generate  a  range  of  channels  for  financial 
intermediation, and that the financial system as a whole will become more innovative and increasingly 
robust to external shocks. 
Making full use of the functions of on-site examination and off-site monitoring of financial institutions, 
the Bank backs up private financial institutions’ efforts to develop creative new financial services, and 
hence to reinforce and improve the performance of the financial intermediary function. 
Against  this  general  background,  although  bank  lending  remains  down  year  on  year,  this  may  be 
considered largely due to factors affecting companies’ demand for loans. One of these factors is the 
problem of companies’ excessive debt. In the non-manufacturing sector, although progress has been 
made, the ratio of total liabilities to total sales remains high and companies continue to pay down their 
interest-bearing liabilities. The situation is somewhat different in the manufacturing sector, where this 
ratio has fallen to a rather low level compared to the first half of the 1980s. 
Considering  that  there  has  been  a  rise  in  corporate  profitability,  with  the  cost  of  raising  funds 
remaining low, and that bankruptcy risk has fallen on the whole, it might reasonably be expected that 
companies, especially manufacturers, would be looking to increase their return on capital by raising 
their leverage. However, companies have become highly ratings-conscious. Their experiences in past 
periods  of  financial  uncertainty  remain  fresh.  And,  their  expectations  of  future  growth  are  not  yet 
sufficiently  high.  As  a  result,  they  retain  an  overall  tendency  to  favor  repaying  their  debts  and 
strengthening their capital bases. 
To grasp future developments in bank lending and its corollary, movements in the money stock, it is 
necessary not only to pay attention to the behavior of financial institutions and to debt repayments, 
particularly  in  the  non-manufacturing  sector,  but  also  to  keep  a  close  eye  on  the  extent  to  which 
companies’ views regarding the economic outlook become more bullish as the recovery continues. 
Outlook for prices and the conduct of monetary policy 
The Japanese economy has been in a recovery phase since the summer of 2003. Domestic corporate 
goods prices have been rising partly due to high crude oil prices. Consumer prices, however, have 
been on a slightly declining trend due to the fact that the rise in corporate goods prices has mostly 
been offset by higher productivity and labor cost restraint. 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 3
The Bank has been providing ample liquidity in accordance with its commitment to continuing with the 
quantitative easing policy until the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (excluding 
fresh food prices, on a nationwide basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. The 
positive  impact  of  the  commitment  on  the  economy,  acting  via  interest  rates,  has  increased  as  the 
economic recovery has progressed. This impact is expected to become stronger as corporate profits 
continue to increase in line with the economic recovery. 
The  Bank’s  thinking  on  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy  was  explained  in  the  Outlook  for 
Economic Activity and Prices published in October 2004. The Bank said that if higher productivity and 
other  factors  continue  to  broadly  contain  the  upward  pressure  on  prices  as  the  economy  follows  a 
sustainable and balanced growth path, this will give the Bank more latitude in conducting monetary 
policy. Here, the “conduct of monetary policy” includes monetary policy decisions relating to the timing 
of the termination of the current monetary policy framework and the pace at which the Bank will raise 
short-term interest rates to keep them consistent with economic conditions at the time. 
If  prices  remain  less  responsive  to  increased  economic  activity,  the  Bank  can  more  flexibly  and 
effectively respond to emerging economic situations. For example, it could choose to continue with the 
quantitative easing policy as long as possible, or it could choose to raise interest rates at a moderate 
pace  after  the  termination  of  the  policy.  Whatever  policy  option  is  chosen  in  the  future,  it  seems 
unlikely  that  the  Bank  will  be  required  to  take  precipitate  action.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  it  enjoys 
“latitude” in making monetary policy decisions. As an end to the quantitative easing policy approaches, 
the Bank will further endeavor to offer a lucid explanation of its assessment of the economic situation 
as well as the thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy. Furthermore, the Bank will continue to 
enhance  its  communication  with  market  participants  so  that  they  will  be  better  able  to  predict  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2005
