Lars Heikensten: Inflation targeting in Sweden - implementation, 
communication and effectiveness 
Opening remarks by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Conference on 
inflation targeting: implementation, communication and effectiveness, Stockholm, 10 June 2005. 
 I would like to begin by welcoming you all to Stockholm and to this conference on inflation targeting. 
The idea of holding this conference was hatched a couple of years ago, when Lars Svensson and I 
were  talking  about  how  the  thinking  in  this  area  has  evolved  in  recent  years  both  in  theory  and  in 
practice. Where do we stand today in research terms as well as in practice? And what can we learn 
from each other on the basis of our experiences? The fact that the conference was planned to take 
place this year provided added incentive, as it is ten years since Sweden’s inflation targeting regime 
was  fully  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  original  decision  in  1993.  We  decided  to  spread  the 
word  in  our  respective  networks:  Lars  on  the  academic  side  and  I  on  the  practical  side.  We  are 
delighted that you, our colleagues and friends, have accepted our invitation, and believe we can look 
forward  to  a  rewarding  discussion  of  where  inflation  targeting  stands  today  and  how  it  can  be 
developed further. 
I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that monetary policy today is, on the whole, being conducted 
better  and  more  prudently  than  ever  before.  In  many  countries,  the  key  to  this  success  has  been 
inflation  targeting.  Although  the  main  reason  for  introducing  inflation  targeting  in  many  cases  -  not 
least  Sweden’s  -  has  been  frustration  over  the  previous  regime  and  economic  performance,  it  has 
subsequently proved to work so well that it now stands out as an interesting option also for already 
well-functioning  economies.  This  is  demonstrated  in  particular  by  the  current  debate  regarding  a 
possible  introduction  of  inflation  targeting  in  the  United  States,  where  the  economic performance  in 
recent decades has been remarkably good and monetary policy successful. 
But first, before I go into a problem that currently feels significant for us at the Riksbank and that I also 
think is central to the discussion in the United States and elsewhere - the balance between concerns 
for output stability and inflation stability - allow me to say a few words about my fundamental views 
regarding  inflation  targeting  policies.  Unsurprisingly,  I  see  considerable  advantages  of  having  an 
explicit, symmetric inflation target. It is also my impression that this view enjoys considerable support 
in the academic literature, an assertion, however, that no assembly is better placed to question than 
this one. 
The  clear  framework  encompassing  an  inflation  target,  published  forecasts  and  a  specified  target 
horizon has generally worked well as a guide for policy. There have been communication problems 
here and there, but it is not obvious that the situation would have been much better under a different 
regime. Another benefit of a clear framework, which I think has received too little attention in academic 
circles, but which in my opinion has been important for the favourable outcome, is that it helps bolster 
both the internal work and the economic discussion. Other considerations than those purely related to 
inflation have most likely been put to a more rigorous intellectual test than would otherwise have been 
the case, which I think has been useful. 
However, the fact that inflation targeting has worked well does not mean, of course, that all problems 
have been solved and that there are no more issues worth discussing; if that were so, there would 
have been no reason to arrange this conference. By way of introduction, I intend to describe some 
Swedish experiences of a problem area in inflation targeting that I see as one of the more significant, 
perhaps  even  the  most  significant  -  how  to  deal  with  the  trade-off  between  stabilising  inflation  and 
stabilising the real economy. I will focus in this regard on two of the areas central to this conference - 
how policy is implemented and communicated. 
The inflation-real economy trade-off 
Flexible inflation targeting policy 
It  is  presumably  safe  to  say  that  all  inflation-targeting  countries  today  conduct  what  Lars  Svensson 
would call a flexible rather than a strict inflation targeting policy, even though the degree of flexibility 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
probably varies somewhat from country to country. In other words, they are not, to use Mervyn King’s 
well-known expression, “inflation nutters”, i.e. they do not focus only on stabilising inflation but also 
take account of real economic developments and possibly other factors too. 
However, the present degree of flexibility in inflation-targeting policies has probably not always been 
regarded as so obvious as it is today. At least as far as Sweden is concerned, I think I am right in 
saying that it has been a gradual process that has brought us to where we are today. That is probably 
also true for many other inflation-targeting countries. 
Immediately after the announcement of the inflation target in 1993, the Riksbank tended to formulate 
policy as if the intention was to be anything but flexible. This may have been because the credibility 
problems  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  were  considered  damaging  and  were  deemed  to  warrant  “tough 
talk”. Whether it was a wise strategy to begin in this way with a one-sided focus on inflation is perhaps 
open to question. One could argue that it would have been better to choose a more balanced line from 
the  outset.  It  might  then  have  been  possible  to  counteract  some  of  the  criticism  levelled  at  the 
Riksbank for supposedly “focusing exclusively on inflation and completely disregarding employment”. 
From the mid-1990s and onwards, though, the Riksbank tried in various ways to clarify that we were 
not focusing solely on stabilising inflation. I believe it is correct to say that the implementation of policy 
also began to become more flexible around that time. One of the examples of this is the fact that we 
did  not  utilise  the  scope  for  rate  cuts  that  -  according  to  a  stricter  interpretation  -  deregulation  and 
other supply factors had created during the last few years of the 1990s. 
The clearest example of how we attempted to convey that our inflation targeting policy was flexible 
rather than strict was the clarification of monetary policy that the Executive Board published in 1999. In 
that, we explained that it may be appropriate in some situations - e.g. in the event of large shocks and 
deviations from target - to refrain from bringing inflation back to target too quickly in order to mitigate 
the adverse consequences for output and employment.1 We expressed this in terms of there being 
reasons  to  occasionally  depart  from  our  simple  policy  rule  -  that  the  repo  rate  is  normally  raised  if 
inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead  is  forecast  to  be  above  2  per  cent,  and  vice  versa  if  inflation  is 
forecast to undershoot the target. 
Explicit framework as basis 
The  strategy  that  we  in  Sweden  have  chosen  for  dealing  with  the  “flexibility  problem”  could,  in 
simplified terms, be described as that we, when we have found it necessary, have in various ways 
modified  and  adapted  a  framework  -  mainly  represented  by  an  explicit  symmetric  target,  regular 
publication of detailed decision-support data including forecasts, and a simple policy rule for how the 
repo rate is normally adjusted against the background of the forecasts. This is probably the key reason 
why the flexibility on our part can chiefly be said to be reflected in “exceptions” to the policy rule, rather 
than it being explicitly described in terms of a continual procedure of balancing concerns for output 
and inflation stability. I do not think this way of handling the flexibility issue is in any way unique to 
Sweden but instead is fairly typical. 
One  of  our  experiences  is  that  we  have  found  it  quite  difficult  from  time  to  time  to  get  this  kind  of 
message  across,  at  least  when  the  flexibility  is  reflected  in  an  unchanged  or  raised  policy  rate,  as 
opposed to a cut. In such circumstances it seems to be rather hard to debunk the idea that monetary 
policy should be conducted according to a mechanical rule that says that the policy rate, regardless of 
what forces are acting on the economy at the time, should always be set to ensure that the inflation 
forecast at a given time horizon meets the target. On those occasions we have found it appropriate to 
depart  from  our  policy  rule  in  this  regard,  our  actions  have  all  too  seldom  been  taken  in  the  public 
domain  as  a  sign  that  we  conduct  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  policy.  Instead,  the  interpretation  at 
times has been that we have changed our way of conducting monetary policy or that we have decided, 
for some more or less obscure reason, to maintain a certain line irrespective of what our forecasts tell 
us. 
                                                      
1  For an overview of what inflation-targeting central banks say about stabilising output, see Kuttner, K.N. (2004), “A Snapshot 
of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence” in Kent, C. and S. Guttman, The Future of Inflation Targeting, Conference Volume, 
Reserve Bank of Australia. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2005
To some extent, the problems we have experienced probably reflect the fact that most people always 
prefer  lower  interest  rates  to  higher  ones.  But  it  could  also  be  the  case,  of  course,  that  the  way  in 
which we have dealt with and communicated the flexibility problem has simply not been clear enough, 
despite  our  best  efforts.  One  could  perhaps  see  it  as  a  sign  that  we  have  been  too  successful  in 
“anchoring” the simple rule that we introduced at an early stage in an attempt to clearly explain our 
decisions and to create confidence in the new regime. 
Discrepancy between word and deed 
Of course, Sweden is not the only country in which the communication of flexible inflation targeting has 
caused problems. For instance, at the international level there is more general criticism claiming that 
the  central  banks  in  inflation-targeting  countries  are  biased  in  their  monetary  policy  communication 
towards stabilising inflation.2 The criticism is hence not levelled at how inflation targeting is conducted 
in practice; it recognises that the central banks in inflation-targeting countries do take account of the 
real economy. It does however claim that there is a discrepancy between word and deed that raises 
questions regarding what status the stabilisation of the real economy really has in relation to stabilising 
inflation. I should perhaps underline here that this criticism, as I understand it, does not say that there 
has been greater clarity in countries that do not have specific targets for inflation. 
In my opinion, the assertion that the communication of inflation-targeting central banks generally tends 
to  focus  a  lot  more  on  the  stabilisation  of  inflation  than  of  the  real  economy  is  essentially  correct. 
Inflation forecasts undeniably have the leading role in the reports published by these central banks, 
and it is usually on the basis of these forecasts that the banks explain their policy decisions. 
So why have central banks that pursue a flexible inflation targeting policy chosen to concentrate on 
inflation  in  their  communication  and  often  been  rather  vague  as  regards  how  they  look  upon  the 
trade-off  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  the  real  economy?  One  important  explanation, 
which  I  already  have  touched  upon,  is  probably  that  many  of  the  economies  that  have  adopted 
inflation  targeting  policies  were  previously  beset  with  high,  sharply  fluctuating  inflation.  The  task, 
accordingly,  was  to  create  broad  understanding  and  credibility  for  a  new  policy  focused  on  price 
stability. It therefore was natural to communicate policy in terms of factors that are relatively easy to 
measure and comprehend, and to do so according to concrete, relatively simple principles that could 
serve  as  a  guide  for  monetary  policy  and  that  could  contribute  to  stabilising  inflation  expectations. 
Moreover, from the point of view of explaining policy it is good if the overall objective of price stability 
that has been adopted by elected bodies in many countries can also be used in the implementation of 
policy and be allowed to play a prominent part in the debate. 
That  the  communication  still  tends  to  focus  so  strongly  on  inflation,  despite  the  considerable 
confidence in low-inflation policies today, could reflect a perception that it is not all that easy to make 
substantial changes to the policy rhetoric. Personally, however, I think the problem runs deeper than 
that. It is quite simply difficult to clearly communicate the kind of varying, subtle deliberations that are 
involved.  Of  all  inflation-targeting  central  banks,  Norges  Bank  is  perhaps  the  one  that  has  come 
furthest in terms of the ambition to clarify the way policy takes the real economy into account, regularly 
publishing estimates of the output gap parallel with inflation forecasts as well as discussions of how 
policy takes account of it. It seems an interesting path to take, but at the same time it is evident - on 
the basis of my ten years’ experience - that far from all the considerations we have faced would be 
captured by this model. 
Concluding remarks 
By way of conclusion, there are a number of issues on which we need to evolve our thinking. I believe 
that the contributions to this conference have indeed succeeded in capturing the most important and 
relevant ones. 
                                                      
2   See,  for  example,  Fischer,  S.  (1996),  “Why  Are  Central  Banks  Pursuing  Long-Run  Price  Stability”,  in  Achieving  Price 
Stability, symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. A recent reference 
that has brought the problem to the fore once again is Faust, J. and D.W. Henderson (2004), “Is Inflation Targeting Best-
Practice Monetary Policy?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 86(4), 117-143. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 3
One of the most central from my point of view concerns, as I have indicated, the balance between 
inflation stability and output stability - both in terms of the most appropriate way to accommodate it in 
the practical policy and the best way to communicate it. Although there is hardly any doubt that “we 
are all flexible inflation targeters now”, how can we progress as regards concretising this flexibility in 
action and communication? 
Another interesting question is whether inflation targeting is better suited than other regimes when it 
comes  to  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations.  I  have  always  thought  so  myself,  but  it  is  of 
course an issue that requires empirical investigation. One might also ask whether inflation targeting, 
even  if  it  should  have  succeeded  in  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations,  can  become  better 
than it is today at facilitating the formation of expectations in the near and medium term? 
This relates to an issue that is addressed in several of the contributions, namely how we should best 
communicate our expectations and plans regarding the future conduct of policy. Recently, a number of 
central  banks  have  begun  to  depart  from  the  assumption  of  an  unchanged  policy  rate  in  their 
forecasts,  choosing  instead  to  work  with  paths  for  future  interest  rate  developments.  What  kind  of 
interest rate paths should we use in that case - “exogenous” paths based on implied forward rates or 
“endogenous”  paths  that  reflect  the  central  bank’s  own  expectations  and  plans,  and  what  are  the 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  both  options?  And  could,  for  example,  an  excessive  degree  of 
openness and detail as regards the central bank’s own expectations risk increasing market volatility 
instead of facilitating economic agents’ planning? 
These are just a handful of the issues that are addressed in the contributions to the conference and 
that I hope will provide the basis for a rewarding discussion. 
Once again - you are all very welcome! 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2005
