Zamani  Abdul  Ghan:  Creating  a  competitive  banking  system  -  towards  the 
enhancement of quality and efficiency in Malaysian banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
9th Malaysian  Banking  Summit  2005  -  “Enhancing  Competitiveness  to  Meet  Strategic  Challenges”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 10 May 2005. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim 
Y. Berusaha Encik Mirzan Mahathir,  
President, the Asian Strategy and Leadership Institute or ASLI 
Y.Bhg. Dato' Dr. Michael Yeoh, CEO/Director of ASLI 
Your Excellency 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Assalamualaikum warahmatullah and Good Morning 
On  behalf  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  officiate  at  this  year's  Banking 
Summit organised by ASLI. It is indeed a great pleasure to be here today at this important forum. The 
theme chosen for this year's Summit is most relevant as it provides an opportunity to deliberate on the 
challenges ahead and the strategic initiatives needed to realise our common goal of a progressive and 
competitive banking system that will facilitate and drive our economic transformation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  financial  landscape  is  undergoing  transformation,  driven  by  financial  liberalisation  and 
consolidation, economic transformation, and more discerning consumers. These developments have 
been  reinforced  by  technological  advancements, which have allowed  the developments of  new  and 
more  efficient  delivery  and  processing  channels  as  well  as  more  innovative  products  and  services. 
Against this backdrop, a number of challenges have emerged. Foremost amongst these is intensified 
competitive  pressures,  spurred  by  financial  liberalisation  and  technological  revolution.  Banking 
institutions are facing competition not only from each other but also from non-traditional competitors 
such as non-bank financial intermediaries as well as from alternative sources of financing, such as the 
capital markets. Indeed, the Malaysian capital markets have broadened and deepened, and are now 
playing a more pronounced role than before in the financial intermediation process. In this respect, the 
challenges to the banking sector are manifold. On the funding side, consumers' continued interest in 
diversifying  their  investments  in  search  of  higher  returns,  have  seen  funds  flowing  directly  into  the 
financial markets instead of going into banking institutions' deposits. At the same time, companies are 
increasingly  meeting  their  financing  needs  in  the  equity  and  bond  markets,  thereby  reducing  their 
reliance on banking institutions. This is evidenced by the growth of outstanding private debt securities 
or PDS in the market by 10.7% to RM160 billion as at end of 2004, accounting for approximately 25% 
of the total financing channeled to the economy. The challenge to banking institutions is to enhance 
their competitive edge by being cost efficient without compromising on the quality of their services. On 
the  other  hand,  the  disintermediation  process  also  offers  opportunities  to  banking  institutions.  In 
particular, they can enhance their income by cross-selling mutual funds products and increasing their 
role as advisors, arrangers, underwriters and brokers for corporate financing arrangements. There is 
also bancassurance and bancatakaful in the area of cross-selling.  
On the Islamic banking front, new foreign Islamic banking players and the transformation of Islamic 
windows into Islamic subsidiaries of a banking group present new challenges to the Islamic banking 
scene  where  competition  is  expected  to  intensify.  In  line  with  the  government's  strategic  direction, 
initiatives are being taken to encourage strong and capable Islamic financial players to venture abroad 
to  explore  new  markets.  In  the  years  to  come,  it  is  envisaged  that  corporations  and  multilateral 
institutions  will  increasingly  use  Malaysia  as  a  launching  pad  to  raise  Shariah-compliant  long-term 
capital  and  issue  sukuks,  while  investors  look  to  Malaysia  for  investment  in  Islamic  financial 
instruments. This is not merely a national vision, but actually a national target. The key challenge is to 
ensure  that  the  financial  infrastructure  is  well  in  place  and  that  our  banking  institutions  are  well 
equipped with distinct capabilities to enable Malaysia to compete regionally and internationally as a 
leading Islamic financial centre. 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  competition  intensifies  with  the  entry  of  foreign  players  and  non-bank  financial  intermediaries, 
another challenge confronting banking institutions is to find new markets or growth areas to tap new 
sources of income and thereby diversify their income sources. Amongst the growth areas is financing 
to  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs).  SMEs  play  a  very  significant  role  in  terms  of  generating 
employment  and  contribution  to  export  earnings,  and  that  SMEs  can  blossom  and  contribute 
significantly to the national economy in the future. Given the importance of SMEs to the economy, a 
number of initiatives are being taken to foster the development of SMEs and improve their access to 
financing. In this respect, banking institutions have provided considerable support in terms of financing 
to  the  SME  sector.  Moving  forward,  the  banking  industry  is  expected  to  play  a  greater  role  in  the 
development  of  SMEs,  such  as  by  offering  a  complete  financial  services  solution  as  part  of  and  in 
conjunction  with  their  financing  programs.  Aside  from  the  SME  sector,  banking  institutions  should 
explore  other  potential  growth  areas  such  as  microcredit  and  agro-based  financing,  which  are 
generally  perceived  as  riskier  and  more  costly  than  lending  to  larger  firms.  The  challenge  is  for 
banking institutions to innovate and develop new form of financing arrangements and business models 
to exploit the opportunities offered by these market sectors. Strategic opportunities are also available 
from a larger marketplace as economic integration and regional linkages of markets in the East Asian 
region gather pace, driven by increasing regional trades and investment flows. In this regard, banking 
institutions should broaden their strategic outlook and expand their presence in the region to support 
Malaysian businesses and investors as they venture into new activities and expand their geographical 
profiles.  
Another strategic challenge facing banking institutions today is the growing and changing needs and 
expectations of consumers in tandem with increased education levels and growing wealth. Consumers 
are becoming increasingly discerning and have become more involved in their financial decisions. For 
this reason, they are demanding a broader range of products and services at more competitive prices 
through  more  efficient  and  convenient  channels.  Corporate  customers  have  also  become  more 
performance-oriented  and  are  demanding  both  competitively  priced  credit  facilities  and  world-class 
financial advisory services. In this environment, the challenge is for banking institutions to anticipate 
and  respond  quickly  to  the  differentiated  demands  and  expectations  of  customers  to  sustain  their 
competitive advantage. With growing customer expectations for continuous availability of services, the 
ability to continue to provide critical banking services at all times will also be crucial in the pursuit of 
building and maintaining their competitive edge. In conjunction with this, banking institutions must be 
able  to  quickly  recover  mission  critical  functions  and  assets  during  a  major  interruption  to  ensure 
efficient and reliable services to their customers.  
Technological advancement, which has increased the complexity of banking business and which has 
led  to  the  emergence  of  increasingly  innovative  products  and  distribution  channels,  also  presents 
opportunities  for  the  banking  sector.  With  ICT,  financial  services  are  being  delivered  to  places  and 
markets  without  requiring  physical  branch  networks  through  a  growing  array  of  alternative  delivery 
channels, including Internet, ATMs, and even mobile phones. The challenge to banking institutions is 
to effectively leverage on the opportunities offered by technology to innovate products and services 
aimed at attaining greater efficiency, reliability and competitiveness. While the efficiency of electronic 
means of doing banking is acknowledged, banking institutions should recognise the need for them to 
meet  customer  expectations  for  more  personalised  and  quality  services.  Additionally,  the  potential 
benefits from electronic delivery channels need to be exploited without undermining the security and 
confidence  of  the  banking  public.  The  growing  incidences  of  e-banking  scams  globally  present 
banking institutions with the challenge of being one step ahead by deploying security measures that 
will provide customers with the highest level of confidence. 
Technological development has also redefined the landscape of the payment systems industry with 
the  introduction  of  new  payment  instruments  and  new  delivery  channels,  as  well  as  the  entry  of 
non-banks into payment services once thought to be the domain of banking institutions. While a vast 
array of electronic payment systems and instruments have been introduced against a background of 
more flexible regulatory policies, the use of cheques remains pervasive, accounting for more than 90% 
of the non-cash retail payments in Malaysia. Significant development efforts and initiatives have been 
taken  aimed  at  increasing  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  payment  systems  infrastructure,  including 
upgrading funds transfer systems, migrating all magnetic stripe ATM and credit card infrastructure to a 
chip-enabled environment, and introducing payment platforms that leveraged on the Internet. These 
trends underpin the challenge for banking institutions to accelerate the adoption of electronic payment 
instruments and channels amongst consumers to gradually replace paper based payment instruments. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2005
While  significant  investments  have  been  made  to  develop  the  network  infrastructure,  banking 
institutions  should  capitalise  on  the  opportunity  to  further  drive  cost  reductions  and  reap  efficiency 
gains.  There  should  be  industry-wide  participation  in  the  e-payment  infrastructure  to  attain  critical 
mass in a much faster time frame and drive the unit cost of production lower. Accessibility of payment 
services should be made more convenient by leveraging on existing network infrastructure, such as 
facilitating inter-bank funds transfers via the ATMs. Further, industry standards on common payment 
value dates, payment references and notifications would entice consumers to use the more reliable 
e-payment channel. To encourage the use of e-payments, consumers should also be provided with 
the  right  pricing  incentives.  In  this  regard,  banking  institutions  should  price  their  payment  services 
according  to  their  production  costs  to  encourage  the  use  of  the  more  cost  effective  and  efficient 
payment modes. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Malaysian  economy  has  registered  a  robust  growth  of  7.1%  in  2004,  the  fastest  growth  since 
2000. The economic prospects for 2005 will continue to be favourable as the economy enters the year 
from a position of strength. Growth is expected to be sustained at 5-6% as underlying conditions in the 
domestic  economy  remain  strong,  with  robust  private  consumption  and  investment  activities.  The 
sustained global growth as well as relatively favourable prices for primary commodities would ensure 
that the external environment would remain supportive of growth.  
The banking sector also enjoyed a very good year in 2004, a year in which strong performance was 
recorded, and this positive trend has continued into the first quarter of 2005. Buoyed by favourable 
economic  and  financial  market  conditions,  2004  marked  another  year  of  strong  profitability 
performance  by  the  banking  system  where  the  combined  pre-tax  profits  rose  by  16.1%  to  RM11.8 
billion. Banking institutions have diversified their revenue source by venturing into a broader range of 
fee-related activities, which yielded a strong growth of 17% for the banking sector as a whole. This 
shift in the sources of revenue has been gradually taking place over the past few years as banking 
institutions  seek  to  lessen  their  dependence  on  interest-based  activities  as  their  main  source  of 
revenue. With the growth in the middle-income group in Malaysia, banking institutions are poised to 
provide value-added services to this increasingly affluent group including wealth management services 
and sale of unit trusts and bancassurance.  
Perhaps the biggest contributor to strong earnings has been the steady improvement in asset quality, 
consistent  with  a  gradually  improving  economy.  The  net  non-performing  loans  have  declined  to  a 
record  low  of  5.4%  as  at  end-March  this  year,  the  lowest  level  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis. 
Improvement in economic conditions is a key reason for the sustained decline and credit quality is on 
track to improve further, more so as the economy improves. The underlying strength of the Malaysian 
banking  system  is  also  confirmed  by  trends  in  capital  adequacy.  The  banking  sector  continued  to 
exhibit strong risk-weighted capital ratio where the level has remained above 13% for 33 consecutive 
months and continues to improve.  
For Islamic banking, the sector has registered a strong growth of 19% per annum from 2000 to 2004. 
While the Islamic assets accounted for almost RM95 billion or 10.5% of total assets of the banking 
system  as  at  end-2004,  market  shares  of  Islamic  deposits  and  financing  increased  to  11.2%  and 
11.3% of the banking system respectively. The capital position of the Islamic banking sector remained 
strong during 2004, registering an increase of 14.7% to RM7.8 billion. The risk-weighted capital ratio 
and core capital ratio were sustained above 12% and 10% respectively.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While our banking sector has made progress, as financial liberalisation and consolidation gather pace, 
greater  competition  in  the  banking  sector  is  likely  to  ensue.  As  such,  the  need  to  enhance  the 
competitiveness  of  the  banking  sector  to  withstand  forces  of  change  and  compete  in  this  more 
liberalised environment becomes even more pressing. Successful institutions will be the ones with the 
agility  to  adapt  swiftly  and  respond  to  the  changing  market  needs  through  -  innovative  and 
differentiated product offerings; excellent service quality; and superior level of efficiency. With growing 
competition in traditional banking products and services, banking institutions need to continually strive 
for  excellence  in  product  development  capabilities  with  a  greater  focus  on  customised  and  higher 
value-added  services.  In  this  respect,  banking  institutions  should  capitalise  on  the  opportunities 
presented  by  the  emergence  of  new  growth  areas  as  well  as  rising  households'  wealth  by 
strengthening  their  capabilities  in  the  areas  of  wealth  management,  financial  advisory  services  and 
consumer banking. Product innovation must also be high on the agenda of Islamic banking institutions 
going  forward.  The  move  into  niche  markets  will  not  only  increase  the  potential  to  secure  higher 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 3
returns  for  shareholders  and  depositors  but  would  also  increase  the  diversity  of  new  asset  classes 
available for Islamic investment. Banking institutions are expected to maximise the full advantage of 
the universal Islamic banking licence issued, which allows a wide range of business to be undertaken 
ranging from retail and corporate banking to investment banking and fund management. 
To  meet  the  challenge  from  more  discerning  and  demanding  customers,  it  is  equally  important  for 
banking  institutions  to  complement  the  richer  and  more  customised  range  of  product  offerings  with 
higher  levels  of  service  performance.  Of  importance  is  the  enhancement  on  customer  relationship 
management and development of 'front-office' strategy that is aligned with the customer-centric value 
proposition  to  improve  customer  satisfaction  and  retention.  Closely  related  to  this  is  the  need  to 
promote  a  customer-centric  culture  and  align  the  organisational  structure  and  strategies  towards 
supporting the strategic focus of building a lasting and profitable relationship with customers. In this 
regard, clear communication of business strategies to front-line staff is important to achieve excellence 
in service performance, particularly in complaint management and customer service. As service quality 
is the essence in banking business, the quality of manpower will increasingly be the defining factor of 
competitive  advantage  and  long-term  sustainability.  As  such,  continuous  investment  in  human 
intellectual capital must be made to ensure the availability of best talents at all levels of the institution. 
Most importantly, strategic leadership at top management level is required to chart the strategic course 
and drive the banking institution towards attaining the highest standards of performance.  
The  business  environment  remains  dynamic,  as  such  human  resource  management  must  adjust  to 
support business strategies and realise improvements in business processes and systems by ensuring 
employees  are  equipped  with  the  appropriate  skills  at  all  times.  Such  adjustment  requires  greater 
integration of personnel policies and practices with the corporate mission and goals, improvement in 
recruitment practices to attract the best talents and greater focus on human resource development. 
While  qualification  and  skills  of  staff  are  critical  elements,  of  greater  importance  is  the  ability  to 
translate  knowledge  into  enhancing  the  capabilities  and  excellence  of  the  institution.  Banking 
institutions  will  have  to  enhance  the  level  of  competencies  and  motivation  on  an  ongoing  basis, 
cultivate professionalism and the right attitude, and create and maintain a learning environment. For 
Islamic  finance,  the  banking  industry  needs  to  continually  promote  human  capital  development  and 
expertise  to  create  a  larger  pool  of  experts  and  high  calibre  professionals  in  Islamic  banking  and 
finance. In particular, adequate resources should be allocated in building distinctive capabilities in the 
newly emerging areas such as private equity investments, real estate investments, private wealth and 
asset management. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Another  key  aspect  that  drives  higher  standards  of  performance  and  competitiveness  is  the 
capabilities  to  deliver  products  and services  in  the most  efficient  and effective  manner.  To  facilitate 
this, banking institutions should adopt the relevant technology to enhance their delivery capability to 
ensure speedy and seamless customers access to banking services through a wider range of delivery 
channels,  aimed  at  reducing  operating  costs  and  providing  greater  convenience  to  customers. 
Information  technology  still  has  immense  untapped  potential  in  banking.  For  instance,  technology 
could  be  harnessed  as  an  enabler  in  building  higher  quality  research,  strengthen  risk  management 
capabilities,  enhance  market  information  gathering  and  analysis  capacity  to  keep  pace  with  the 
changing  trends  and  demand  patterns.  While  leveraging  on  technology  may  achieve  improved 
efficiency, banking institutions should also ensure that the new banking technology does not lead to 
the emergence of a digital divide in the access to banking services. In this regard, banking institutions 
are expected to continue providing high standard of banking services to all consumers, regardless of 
their income and where they live, whether urban or rural.  
With  the  growth  in  the  diversity  and  complexity  of  products  and  services,  risk  profiles  of  banking 
institutions  will  change.  Consequently,  banking  institutions  should  continuously  upgrade  their  risk 
management framework by improving their governance standards, adopting global best practices and 
enhancing  information  management  systems.  Enhancing  risk  measurement  and  management 
systems  would  better  prepare  banking  institutions  in  complying  with  the  criteria  required  under  the 
Basel II Capital Accord. In addition, with enhanced risk management capabilities, banking institutions 
will be better equipped to price products and services more competitively while ensuring that their risk 
exposures  remained  within  manageable  levels.  Better  insights  into  their  risk  profile  also  facilitate  in 
their  formulation  of  business  strategies  and  enable  the  optimal  use  of  their  capital.  In  this  context, 
banking institutions must be prepared to beef up their financial strength and capital level during the 
current favorable economic environment so that they could weather vulnerability during downturns and 
crisis situations. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2005
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While  the  responsibility  for  strengthening  competitiveness  rest  with  the  banking  institutions,  Bank 
Negara Malaysia plays an important role in spearheading the development of the banking sector. In 
realising the vision of a progressive and dynamic banking system, Bank Negara's policy initiatives aim 
at  providing  a  more  conducive  environment  that  encourages  innovation  and  competition,  while 
maintaining the safety and soundness of our banking sector. In line with this, Bank Negara Malaysia 
will  ensure  its  prudential  framework  is  adaptable  to  changing  market  circumstances  and  business 
practices,  and  does  not  contain  features  that  might  inhibit  banking  institutions  from  upgrading  their 
capabilities  or  delaying  their  response  to  changes.  Our  regulatory  approach  has  shifted  away  from 
prescribing  detailed  rules  towards  "principle-based"  regulations.  There  is  now  greater  focus  on 
providing  "incentive  compatible"  parameters  that  encourage  banking  institutions  to  conduct  their 
businesses  prudently,  whilst  allowing  them  the  flexibility  to  develop  strategies  within  the  broad 
principles. Over time, our regulatory and supervisory framework would rely more on market discipline 
through increased disclosure and transparency. In this respect, shareholders are expected to play a 
more  active  role  in  overseeing  the  performance  of  banking  institutions  and  the  effectiveness  of 
management in conducting the business in an efficient and professional manner.  
As  we  advance  into  the  second  phase  of  the  FSMP  or  the  Financial  Sector  Masterplan  Plan, 
progressive  liberalisation  will  take  place  to  level  the  playing  field  for  domestic  and  foreign  banking 
institutions. To this end, greater operational flexibility will be accorded to the existing foreign banking 
institutions.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has,  in  addition,  granted  three  new  full-fledged  Islamic  banking 
licences to foreign financial institutions. Additionally, foreign direct investment of up to 49 per cent has 
been allowed in the equity holding of the Islamic subsidiary of a commercial bank. The overall market 
shares  of  local  and  foreign  banking  institutions  have  not  changed  drastically,  but  there  has  been 
qualitative  improvements  in  operational  efficiency,  service  levels,  risk  management  and  corporate 
governance standards. Over time, as the industry further evolves, Bank Negara Malaysia will reassess 
the environment before deciding on further liberalisation measures.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Macroeconomic and financial conditions are evolving swiftly, posing more significant challenges and 
lending urgency to accelerating efforts towards realising our vision of a more progressive and dynamic 
financial  system.  Greater  commitment  towards  enhancing  strategic  competence  and  organisational 
effectiveness are critical as we strive for higher standards of performance and greater efficiency in the 
banking system. To ensure that the financial system is well placed to serve the nation, on-going efforts 
will  be  directed  towards  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  financial  infrastructure  and  strengthening  the 
functioning  of  the  markets  as  we  advance  forward.  Our  policy  initiatives  will  continue  to  maintain  a 
regulatory environment that encourages innovation and efficient competition towards evolving a more 
diversified banking sector, while at the same time maintaining high prudential standards to ensure the 
soundness and stability of the system. With strong concerted efforts between Bank Negara Malaysia 
and the industry, or continuous and honest dialogues in one form or another, we can look forward with 
confidence to continued strong performance from the banking sector to contribute significantly to the 
economic prosperity of the nation.  
On this note, I wish you all an enjoyable and fruitful conference.  
Assalamualaikum and thank you. 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 5
