Lucas Papademos: Monetary stability and financial integration in Europe 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the First Annual 
Meeting  of  Greek  and  Turkish  Bank  Chief  Executives,  organised  by  the  Institute  of  International 
Finance, Alpha Bank and Işbank, Athens, 9 May 2005. 
 Introduction  
Thomas  Jefferson,  the  third  President  of  the  United  States  of  America,  once  said:  “Banking 
establishments  are  more  dangerous  than  standing  armies”.  If  he  was  right,  then  I  have  certainly 
ventured straight into the lion’s den by accepting to speak at the first annual meeting of Greek and 
Turkish Bank Chief Executives. But Jefferson’s remark is clearly not relevant to this gathering. And it 
is,  indeed,  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  address  the  first  such  meeting,  organised  by  the  Institute  of 
International  Finance,  Alpha  Bank  and  Işbank.  The  increasing  cooperation  and  good,  neighbourly 
relations in this region can be further enhanced through this bankers’ forum, which offers opportunities 
to  exchange  views,  establish  contacts  and  foster  closer  ties  in  the  economic  and  financial  fields. 
Moreover, such a forum can also contribute to a deeper understanding of the process of European 
integration, which both Greece and Turkey support. A better understanding of the requirements and 
implications of this evolving process is useful so that all participants can undertake appropriate action 
in order to maximise the benefits expected from integration and minimise potential adjustment costs. 
Being a central banker among commercial bankers, I have chosen my topic accordingly. I will address 
two  issues  that  are  of  fundamental  importance  to  the  banking  sector  and  closely  related  to  the 
responsibilities  and  functions  of  a  central  bank:  monetary  stability  and  financial  integration.  More 
specifically,  I  will  first  review  past  achievements  of  and  future  challenges  for  the  single  European 
monetary  policy  in  securing  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Then,  I  will  assess  the  current  state  of 
financial integration and the outlook for the completion of the single market in financial and banking 
services.  In  examining  the  latter  issue,  I  will  highlight  the  role  of  the  ECB  in  fostering  financial 
integration and the importance and implications of an integrated financial sector for the conduct of the 
single  monetary  policy  and  for  the  establishment  of  conditions  conducive  to  economic  growth  in 
Europe. 
Securing monetary stability in Europe 
Price stability is an essential condition for sustainable growth and entails many benefits for all sectors 
of  the  economy.  Monetary  policy  can  effectively  deliver  price  stability  over  the  medium  and  longer 
term, provided that it is supported by consistent  economic policies. This is why the maintenance of 
price stability in the euro area has been enshrined in the Treaty as the ECB’s primary objective. With 
an average euro area inflation rate of close to 2% since 1999, the ECB’s record so far has been in line 
with our quantitative definition of price stability. It is true that inflation has been somewhat higher than 
2% for some fairly long periods of time as a result of several adverse shocks – such as repeated rises 
in  oil  prices  or  indirect  tax  increases,  to  name  but  two.  Nevertheless,  the  ECB  has  succeeded  in 
delivering a high degree of price stability over the medium term. In fact, by focusing on maintaining 
price stability over the medium term rather than seeking to counteract unfavourable price shocks with 
an overly aggressive monetary policy designed to restore price stability within a short period of time, 
the ECB has avoided excessive volatility in economic activity and employment.  
The ECB’s commitment to its primary objective of price stability and its ability to achieve this goal over 
the medium term are widely recognised by financial markets. A central bank’s credibility in pursuing 
policy objectives is vital to the preservation of monetary stability. The credibility of the ECB’s monetary 
policy  has  been  established,  and  it  is  reflected  in  long-term  inflation  expectations,  which  have 
remained low and stable. And this, in turn, has been a major factor in attaining the historically low level 
of euro area bond yields that is giving considerable support to economic activity.  
What  is  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and  what  are  the  challenges  ahead?  Overall,  there  is  no 
significant evidence of underlying domestic inflationary pressures building up in the euro area. HICP 
inflation, excluding its more volatile components of energy and unprocessed food, was 1.6% in March, 
unchanged  from  February.  Economic  analysis  suggests  that  domestically  generated  inflationary 
pressures are likely to remain limited. In an environment of moderate economic growth and continuing 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 1
slack in labour markets, wages should continue to increase at a modest pace and the pricing power of 
firms should be constrained.  
Nevertheless, there are several upside risks to price stability, despite the presence of downside risks 
to  economic  growth.  At  the  present  juncture,  the  persistently  high  oil  prices  and  their  potential 
second-round effects on wage and price-setting pose a threat to price stability. At the end of April, oil 
prices were around 30% higher than at the beginning of 2005 and around 50% higher than a year ago. 
They  have  exerted  upward  pressure  on  inflation  and  are  the  main  reason  why,  over  the  coming 
months,  HICP  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  around  the  level  of  2.1%  recorded  in  March  and  April. 
Responsible behaviour on the part of social partners is essential if such second-round effects are to be 
avoided.  Further  unanticipated  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  could  also  have 
adverse  effects  on  price  developments.  Moreover,  continued  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth 
stimulated by low interest rates in the euro area, together with the high level of excess liquidity, signal 
risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  as  economic  activity  gains  momentum  and 
approaches its potential aggregate output level. We must therefore continue to be vigilant with regard 
to the materialisation of these upside risks to price stability.  
There are two other important and more general issues that I would like to address with regard to the 
preservation of monetary stability. They concern the role of national fiscal policies and of the structure 
and  functioning  of  markets  in  determining  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  maintaining  price 
stability in the euro area and in individual Member States.  
I  do  not  have  to  explain  to  this  audience  that  prudent  fiscal  policies  foster  growth  and  employment 
directly, through various channels; for example, by allowing a reduction of distorting taxes and of the 
inefficiencies  and  burdens  resulting  from  excessive  levels  of  government  expenditure  and  deficits. 
Sound  fiscal  policies  are  also  key  to  the  effective  functioning  and  credibility  of  the  macroeconomic 
framework  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  In  particular,  they  can  support  monetary  policy  in 
maintaining price stability with low interest rates. Over relatively short periods, fiscal policies that are 
incompatible with a stability-oriented monetary policy may not give rise to tensions in credit markets, 
depending  also  on  the  influence  of  other  determinants  of  economic  activity  and  inflation.  Over  the 
longer  term,  however,  persistently  high  budget  deficits  and  rising  debt-to-GDP  ratios  will  come  into 
conflict with the ECB’s monetary policy, which is committed to the objective of price stability.  
Unfortunately, fiscal developments in the euro area continue to be, on average, far from satisfactory 
and, in several Member States, disappointing. While some countries have succeeded in achieving and 
maintaining sound budgetary positions, a significant number of others have not, including the larger 
ones.  The  prospect  of  a  determined  return  to  balanced  budgetary  positions  is  rather  bleak.  In  the 
meantime, euro area governments’ indebtedness as a percentage of GDP of has again increased. It is 
therefore  essential  that  the  recently  revised  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  be  implemented  in  a  firm, 
rigorous and credible manner in order to ensure a rapid return to sound budgetary positions. This will 
not  only  facilitate  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  over  time,  but  is  primarily  in  the  interest  of  the 
countries themselves.  
The positive confidence effects of fiscal consolidation measures can be enhanced if such measures 
are part of a comprehensive structural reform agenda. I cannot spell out here in detail which reform 
measures would be appropriate. However, the main thrust of the necessary reforms is fairly obvious 
and  generally  agreed  upon.  Besides,  it  has  been  clearly  outlined  in  the  recently  revised  Lisbon 
agenda, which the ECB very much supports. What I would like to stress here is that the necessary 
reforms  for  increasing  the  euro  area’s  potential  output  growth  and  reducing  the  high  rate  of 
unemployment  will  also  contribute  to  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  maintaining 
price stability in the euro area and to minimising output volatility in response to adverse price shocks. 
Reforms that foster productivity growth, improve the flexibility and adaptability of labour markets, and 
increase  competition  in  the  markets  for  goods  and,  in  particular,  services,  will  produce  multiple 
benefits  in  terms  of  faster  growth  and  lower  output  volatility  in  an  environment  of  price  stability. 
Moreover,  such  reforms,  together  with  prudent  fiscal  policies  implemented  at  the  national  level,  will 
help bring the higher inflation rates recorded in some euro area countries down to the average for the 
single currency area. The ECB’s monetary policy can and will secure price stability for the euro area 
as a whole. It is the responsibility of governments to ensure that the same high degree of monetary 
stability is attained at the national level, so that the competitiveness of the respective economies will 
not be eroded and faster growth can be sustained together with price stability.  
Structural reforms are not only needed on the “real” side of the economy. Reform and integration in 
financial markets are also crucial for economic welfare in Europe. Closer to home for me, they also 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2005
have  direct  implications  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses.  The  degree  of  financial 
integration  is  important  in  determining  how  effectively  this  transmission  will  work  in  practice.  For 
example, it cannot be ruled out that single monetary policy decisions may sometimes be channelled to 
countries in a non-uniform manner on account of the fact that the financial system of the euro area – 
that is, financial institutions, markets and the infrastructure – are not yet fully integrated in all aspects. 
This brings me to the second part of my address: European financial integration. 
The state of financial integration in Europe  
First of all, what do we mean by financial integration? We at the ECB see it as an objective that is 
achieved when potential market participants with the same relevant characteristics face a single set of 
rules, have equal access to markets and are treated equally. If the opportunities thus created have 
been exploited by market forces to a substantial degree, financial integration will have been attained. 
Success  in  advancing  towards  that  goal  has  varied  across  market  segments.  While  the  euro  has 
undoubtedly played a very important role as a catalyst for financial integration in general, it is a fact 
that integration is more advanced in the market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy, 
notably the money market. There we have achieved almost complete integration, thanks, inter alia, to 
the  establishment  of  the  necessary  pan-European  payment  infrastructure  (the  TARGET  system).  A 
fully  integrated  interbank  money  market  was,  and  is,  a  sine  qua  non  for  the  implementation  of  the 
single  monetary  policy,  since  it  ensures  an  even  distribution  of  central  bank  liquidity  and  a 
homogeneous level of short-term interest rates across the euro area.  
Integration  in  bond  markets  has  also  progressed  significantly.  Government  bond  yields  have 
converged considerably and they are now mainly driven by euro area-wide shocks and news, and only 
a small fraction of yields can be explained by national risk factors. The convergence of government 
bond yields has largely been due to the elimination of (intra-euro area) exchange rate risks and the 
convergence of inflation expectations across countries as a result of the introduction of the euro. The 
corporate bond market has witnessed exceptional growth since 1999 and is also fairly integrated, in 
the sense that the country of issuance is only of marginal importance in explaining yield differentials. 
From  a  central  banking  perspective,  the  development  of  an  integrated  corporate  bond  market  is  of 
relevance, as a shift from intermediated financing to market financing implies a diminished role for the 
bank-lending channel of monetary policy. 
Looking  at  equity  markets  in  Europe,  I  think  an  appropriate  characterisation  would  be  that  their 
integration  is  a  slow  and  laborious  process  of  overcoming  fragmentation.  That  said,  there  are 
encouraging  signs  of  an  increasing  degree  of  integration,  such  as  the  substantial  decrease  in  the 
so-called  “home  bias”  in  the  equity  holdings  of  investment  and  pension  funds,  and  a  more 
homogeneous reaction of equity prices across the euro area to monetary policy signals.  
In all of this, the banking sector has of course played – and will continue to play – a crucial role. As 
was discussed at various sessions during the morning, the European banking sector has undergone 
considerable consolidation in recent times, and the banking markets in the different EU countries have 
become fairly similar in terms of their market structures, not least because the euro has created more 
transparency across national borders. 
Thus far, however, the consolidation process has mainly involved mergers and acquisitions (M&As) of 
relatively small credit institutions within national boundaries, and mostly in countries where the degree 
of  bank  concentration  was  lowest.  By  contrast,  there  have  been  very  few  cross-border  mergers. 
Indeed, the presence in EU countries of large pan-European banking groups through branches and 
subsidiaries is relatively limited. The average share of foreign branches and subsidiaries accounts for 
only  about  15%  of  the  euro  area  banking  market.  From  a  euro  area-wide  perspective,  the  lack  of 
progress  in  creating  pan-European  banks  is  a  reflection  of  significant  impediments  to  cross-border 
M&As, which are hindering the realisation of economies of scale and blocking the beneficial effects of 
increased efficiency within the EU economy. 
The  pace  of  integration  in  the  banking  sector  has  been  uneven.  Integration  is  well  advanced  in 
wholesale  and  capital-related  activities,  while  it  is  lagging  behind  in  the  retail  markets.  This  partly 
reflects differences in the nature of competition in these segments of financial services. Proximity to 
clients, bank-customer relationships and access to information play a key role in retail banking, while 
they are less crucial for investment banking and for corporate banking aimed at large companies. 
Overall, the rather modest progress in the integration of the banking sector translates into persistent 
cross-country  differences  in  bank  lending  rates,  which  are  relatively  large,  as  can  be  seen,  for 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 3
instance,  in  the  case  of  bank  overdrafts  to  non-financial  corporations  and  consumer  loans  to 
households.  These  differences  stem  from  differing  national  regulatory  arrangements,  practices  and 
product characteristics; and they result in different levels of collateralisation, average maturities and 
periods  of  fixation.  Especially  in  the  retail  sector,  the  low  degree  of  integration  causes  different 
pass-through of changes in monetary policy rates to retail bank interest rates – which is a key aspect 
in  demonstrating  to  the  European  citizens,  in  a  tangible  manner,  the  benefits  of  the  euro  and 
integrated financial markets. 
Fostering financial integration: the role of the ECB 
Given  the  importance  of  financial  integration,  not  only  for  the  welfare  of  European  citizens  and  the 
competitiveness and dynamism of the financial sector in Europe, but also for the effective transmission 
of our monetary policy, what can the ECB do to foster financial integration?  
The  ECB,  as  the  central  bank  of  the  euro  area,  can  first  make  a  direct  contribution  in  its  fields  of 
competence, e.g. through the provision of the pertinent infrastructure. To be more concrete we are, as 
I am sure you are aware, replacing the euro area’s current decentralised payment system with a single 
technical platform, TARGET2, which is due to go live in 2007. TARGET2 will further improve financial 
integration.  It  will  increase  cost-effectiveness  and  allow  for  the  provision  of  a  harmonised  level  of 
services across Europe, supported by the implementation of a single price structure for domestic and 
cross-border payments. TARGET2 will also offer new functionalities in terms of banks’ euro liquidity 
management  and  consolidated  information  –  which  should  make  it  one  of  the  most  sophisticated 
payment systems in the world. 
Beyond such a direct contribution, the ECB sees itself predominantly as a catalyst for change, seeking 
to enrich the debate in the relevant EU-wide fora and through dialogue with market participants. In this 
endeavour  we  wish  to  support  and  complement  the  activities  of  the  private  sector  and  public 
authorities, notably the European Commission.  
One such field of activity relates to retail payment systems, particularly the initiative to create a Single 
European Payments Area (SEPA) as from 1 January 2008. The SEPA is important, not least because 
it  represents  a  very  tangible  benefit  in  the  everyday  lives  of  Europeans.  European  citizens  and 
enterprises will be able to make payments throughout the euro area from a single bank account using 
a single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely as they do today in the national systems. In 
addition, national infrastructures should migrate to a pan-European payments infrastructure by the end 
of 2010, which means that investments in the next generation of national systems should be made 
from a pan-European perspective in order to ensure compliance with the SEPA. Of course, all of this 
concerns the investment decisions in individual banking establishments, but I am confident that banks 
which  can  offer  payment  services  of  the  quality  envisaged  by  the  SEPA  will  have  competitive 
advantages.  
As  outlined  already,  for  the  ECB,  as  a  supranational  institution,  the  cross-border  dimension  of  the 
banking sector in the EU, and the related regulatory and supervisory issues, are of particular interest. 
At  the  ECB,  we  see  the  ongoing  consolidation  of  the  European  banking  sector  as  a  predominantly 
market-driven process. What public policy at the EU level can and should do is to remove potential 
prudential  and  supervisory  obstacles  to  cross-border  M&As.  For  example,  in  2004  the  European 
Commission launched work on possible obstacles to cross-border consolidation in the financial sector, 
aiming  to  clarify,  inter  alia,  the  supervisory  approval  process  for  the  acquisition  of  a  qualifying 
shareholding in a credit institution. The ECB, through its participation in the Committee of European 
Banking Supervisors, is contributing to the shaping of the relevant rules. Similarly, the implementation 
of  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  (FSAP)  should  help  to  reduce  company  law  obstacles  to 
cross-border M&As. I believe that the introduction of the European Company Statute, the forthcoming 
Directive on cross-border mergers, and the new EU Takeover Directive should all have an influence 
on spreading cross-border bank M&As across EU Member States in the years to come. 
Finally, as you might be aware, the European Commission recently issued, for public consultation, a 
Green Paper with its strategy for the so-called “post-FSAP period”. Indeed, this period consitutes a 
“window of opportunity” to further enhance European financial integration. The ECB will contribute to 
defining the priorities to be pursued in order to complete the Single Market for financial services. From 
our  perspective,  the  focus  should  now  be  on  the  consistent  implementation  and  enforcement  of 
existing EU legislation at the national level. New legislative initiatives should be kept to a necessary 
minimum.  Furthermore,  the  policies  relating  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  should  be 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2005
complemented by and be closely coordinated with other relevant policies for financial services. I am 
thinking, in particular, of competition policy, which is crucial for the development of a pan-European 
market. And lastly, incentives should be provided for the private sector to play its role in exploiting the 
opportunities offered by public action.  
Concluding remarks  
Obviously, I have managed to close the circle. My remarks have brought me from the realm of public 
policy to the more concrete activities of the banking sector and back to public policy issues. I shall now 
heed  the  advice  that  a  speaker  should  always  take  care  to  stop  talking  before  his  audience  has 
stopped listening. Let me therefore conclude with two brief remarks: 
The  ECB  is  committed  to,  and  will  continue  to  support,  the  process  of  structural  reform  in  financial 
markets, as well as in labour and product markets. One of the most important contributions that the 
ECB  can  make  in  this  respect  is  to  provide,  as  in  the  past,  a  strong  and  reliable  anchor  for 
safeguarding  monetary  stability.  That  said,  the  relationship  between  a  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy  and  structural  reforms  is  not  unidirectional.  As  the  reform  process  gains  momentum,  it  will 
facilitate  the  conduct  and  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  maintaining  monetary 
stability at a higher rate of economic growth.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 5
