Ardian  Fullani:  Opening,  extension  and  modernisation  of  the  primary  and 
secondary treasury bill market 
Address  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  a  meeting  with  the  Minister  of 
Finance and representatives of all banks in Albania, Tirana, 8 April 2005. 
 Honored ladies and gentlemen! 
First of all I have the pleasure to thank you for your willingness in finding the time to take part in this 
work meeting. I would also thank your technical staff for the devotion shown in dealing with this issue, 
which constitutes one of our priorities at the Bank of Albania. 
At the Bank of Albania conference on “Central banking in the time of integration” I launched, interalia, 
the  idea  of  the  need  for  qualitative  developments  in  the  banking  and  financial  system  and  this  as 
closely  connected  with  the  need  for  further  increasing  the  intermediation  role  of  this  system  in  the 
economy. It is understandable that the implementation of this idea would simultaneously require the 
giving of more possibilities to the banking system, so that this system carries out its role better and 
more actively. 
The  topic  we  are  discussing  today  is  in  this  line.  I  am  strongly convinced  that  the  treatment  of  this 
issue did not appear as something unexpected, but it is a logical result of the positive developments 
taking place so far and the banking system awareness to be more active in its role for raising public 
confidence  in  the  system.  In  the  line  of  this  logic,  the  raising  of  confidence  would  bring  about  its 
positive  effects  even  on  increasing  their  banking  activity,  which  will  be  in  compliance  with  their 
objective to be in the market with as much dignity as possible. 
In  this  discussion  I  will  not  focus  on  the  technical  aspect  of  cause  explanation  and  process 
implementation,  which  I  consider  as  exhausted  by  discussions  made  between  respective  technical 
staff, but I will focus on what we intend to reach and on the shortest and safest way to complete this 
process successfully. Also, I would like to clarify that the individuals will continue to participate in the 
primary market of securities and this market will continue to be organized by the Bank of Albania. 
What we intend to reach through this process is:  
1. 
The  realization  of  a  smooth  transition  process,  at  the  smallest  cost  possible,  in  terms  of 
maintaining the participation of individuals in the primary market. 
The reduction of the time which is needed for the realization of treasury bill primary market 
auction. 
The increasing possibilities to apply into practice the principle “Delivery versus payment” for 
operations that will be performed in the secondary and retail Treasury bill market. Here I take 
into  account  either  the  facilitating  of  procedures  or  the  increased  safety  for  using  these 
securities as collateral and for encouraging the interbank and lending market.  
The  last  but  not  the  least  is  to  increase  the  possibility  of  commercial  banks  to  be  more 
present into the market, making it more liquid and solvent.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
How we think this process will be realized: 
1. 
The Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Albania must review the regulatory basis that covers 
the part of treasury bills issuance and more concretely the Agreement concluded by them 
“On issuance of treasury bills in the form of registration”. 
The Bank of Albania must review the Regulation “On the secondary and retail treasury bill 
market in Albania”. 
The Commission of Securities must review that part of the regulatory basis which is related 
to the licensing process of the securities register. 
The commercial banks should proceed with the Commission of Securities, with the purpose 
to ensure the licence for maintaining the register of individual’s securities. 
The Bank of Albania will prepare, after the completion of this process, the strategic plan of 
the movement of individuals from its windows to the windows of commercial banks. The time 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
available  to  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  also  be  used  for  testing  the  stance  of  “individual” 
investors in advance. 
In this framework, we would also like to inform you that the Bank of Albania is working for considering, 
at  the  shortest  time  possible,  the  possibility  of  increasing  the  participation  amount  of  individuals, 
through  the  Bank  of  Albania,  in  the  primary  treasury  bill  market,  as  well  as  the  application  of  a 
commission on new operations they will carry out with it. The new level and commission will affect only 
the individuals that would like to use the Bank of Albania to participate in the primary market.  
Thanking you again for your attention, I would like to pass on to the discussions about the steps we 
deem to make. At the end of this meeting, I propose we come out with a concrete plan of actions for a 
successful implementation of this process. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
