Süreyya Serdengeçti: Derivatives markets - Turkish Derivatives Exchange 
Speech by Mr Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, on the 
occasion of the opening of the Turkish Derivatives Exchange, İzmir, 3 February 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen and Distinguished Guests, 
It is indeed a great pleasure for me to address you today on the occasion of the opening of the Turkish 
Derivatives Exchange, which is the beginning of a new era for the Turkish economy.  
Today,  I  will  focus  on  the  changing  process  of  the  Turkish  economy  within  the  framework  of 
uncertainty and risk factors. I will also talk about the development of derivatives markets within this 
process, including their functions in the economy and especially in monetary policy. My remarks will be 
based on a macro framework rather than a micro one. 
Dear Participants, 
When we look at the Turkish economy, it can clearly be seen that risk management and derivatives 
markets, where risk is managed, as well as the institutionalized risk management culture established 
in the economy have failed to reach a satisfactory level and yet are still weak both in financial and real 
sectors, although this had constantly been on the agenda since the 1980s. The questions that should 
be  asked  at  this  point  are  that  why  risk  management  principles  could  not  be  established  in  our 
economy in a modern sense until now and why functionality in the derivatives markets could not be 
achieved in the proper sense. 
At this point, two factors come into the foreground: 
The  most  important  and  principal  factor  to  be  underlined  in  both  an  economic  and  social  aspect  is 
chronic inflation and the uncertainty that its presence has caused in Turkey for thirty years. This period 
has seriously damaged the economy. For instance, money and capital markets have failed to develop, 
long-term financial resources have remained limited and it was not possible to develop markets, which 
occupy  a  significant  share  in  the  capital  markets  of  developed  countries,  namely  those  for  the 
provision of housing financing. Moreover, our economy has failed to achieve sound integration with 
international markets and a short-term vision has prevailed in all fields, including the social arena.  
Furthermore,  chronic  inflation  triggered  volatility  in  basic  economic  indicators,  including  growth  and 
employment, as well as in variables such as exchange rates and interest rates. The excessive volatility 
in economic fundamentals resulted in a continuous increase in uncertainty and crises. Thus, after each 
economic crisis, uncertainty jumped to a higher level. Uncertainty and volatility caused a vicious circle 
and made risk management almost impossible.  
Dear Guests, 
At this point, let me elaborate on the concepts of uncertainty and risk, which have a key role in the 
development of derivatives markets and are of great significance for both policy practitioners and the 
economic agents acting as decision-makers.  
Although the word “risk” refers to both its literal meaning and uncertainty in daily use, in fact these two 
concepts  differ  from  each  other  as  to  their  effects  on  economic  agents  and  events1.  Risk  can  be 
measured.  Cases  where  the  course  and  results  of  the  events  neither  cannot  be  measured  nor 
predicted are not referred to as risk but uncertainty. In other words, the intangible aspect of events is 
defined as uncertainty.  
Due to the intangible nature of uncertainty, its results and the extent of its effects cannot be predicted. 
Probability  cannot  be  attributed  to  uncertainty.  Uncertainty  is  inevitable  and  its  results  are 
unmanageable. There exists no market that can avoid uncertainty.  
                                                      
1  Knight, F.H. (1985), “Risk, Uncertainty and Profit”, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, Chapters 2 and 7. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 1
On the other hand, risk refers to the part of the future effects of events which can be measured. Risk 
can  be  calculated;  results  of  risks  can  be  explained  by  certain  probabilities.  In  this  context,  risk  is 
predictable and we can manage its results. There exist markets for risk management.  
In  Turkey,  high  and  volatile  inflation  has been  the main source of  uncertainty  for  the  last 30  years. 
Concepts  of  uncertainty  and  risk  have  become  indistinguishable.  Hence,  it  has  been  impossible  to 
implement risk management or to establish risk management agents on this slippery slope.  
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  on  a  technical  matter.  As  it  is  known,  volatility  is  priced  in 
derivatives  markets.  When  uncertainty  is  high,  volatility  increases  significantly.  This  makes  pricing 
difficult and in these circumstances prices reach very high levels. Hence, risk management becomes 
almost impossible. This is one of the underlying reasons for the poor risk management in our country. 
The fact that future uncertainty was high until recently due to macroeconomic instability had kept the 
general level of interest rates in an upward trend. As a result, these factors have prevented the smooth 
operation of derivatives markets.  
The  second  factor  that  has  led  to  the  poor  development  of  risk  management  and  of  derivatives 
markets in Turkey is high public deficits, which caused the fragility of the public finance. As we are all 
aware,  in  the  past,  capital  accumulation  was  based  on  public  resources  in  Turkey.  However,  as  a 
result of increasing public deficits, the capital provided by the public sector to the private sector was 
then  extended  by  the  private  sector  to  the  public  sector.  In  this  context,  the  market  developed  by 
“government securities” that are issued against public debt have become the most important and only 
market, which uses almost all the resources of the economy due to increasing public debt as well as 
high real interests payable. Such a framework, in other words, an environment where fiscal dominance 
is rather high did not allow neither the emergence of new financial instruments to finance the private 
sector, nor the deepening of financial markets. Moreover, portfolio diversification, the simplest element 
of risk management; could not be achieved. 
The  most  significant  point  in  this  process  is  that,  as  an  outcome  of  both  the  structure  of  financial 
markets and other policies implemented, a lot of risks such as exchange rate risk, interest rate risk, 
price risk and default risk were assumed by the public. In this scenario, the private sector did not feel 
the  need  to  manage  its  own  risks.  In  other  words,  both  individuals  and  institutions  left  risk 
management to the government and this process created a vicious circle.  
In conclusion, the uncertainty caused by chronic inflation and high public debt created by public deficit 
hindered the development of risk management and therefore, of derivatives markets.  
Dear Participants, 
I am glad to say that as of today we have started to solve problems of the past. The Turkish economy 
is still undergoing a structural change process and significant progress has been made.  
Let me outline this process of change in the Turkish economy in three main points, which will serve as 
guidelines to the necessary steps we should take in the future.  
The first point is that we have made great progress in the fight against inflation, the primary source of 
uncertainty  as  well  as  in  establishing  lasting  macro-economic  stability.  Today,  inflation  is  in  single-
digits.  More  importantly,  our  surveys  measuring  expectations  reveal  that  the  public  now  recognizes 
that inflation is controllable and price stability is definitely an achievable target.  
The  tight  fiscal  policy  implemented  during  the  process  of  establishing  macroeconomic  stability  has 
contributed to both entering a growth period based on solid foundations arising from the private sector; 
reducing  the  role  of  the  private  sector  by  decreasing  fiscal  dominance  and  establishing  stability 
through its impact on expectations.  
Parallel  to  this,  following  these  developments,  the  capital  accumulation  process  is  undergoing  a 
change as well. The source of growth is no longer the public sector, but the private sector. A rise in 
productivity  has  come  to  the  foreground  in  all  sectors.  We  are  about  to  establish  an  economic 
structure for which measurements and criteria of the global market apply.    
In  this  scenario,  the  ease  of  uncertainties  brings  risk  management  and  risk  instruments  into  the 
foreground. From now on, each economic unit should assume and manage its own risk as in every 
sound market. This is the basic concept that underlies the development of derivatives markets in the 
world.  
Secondly,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  some  concepts  that  are  relatively  new  for  our  country;  namely 
institutionalization, accountability, transparency and, in this context, the importance of communication 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2005
policies.  Both  the  institutionalization  of  the  policies  in  implementation  and  transparency  of  the 
government agencies implementing these programs and sharing them with the public play a key role 
in easing the uncertainties in our economy. 
The third point regarding the changing process of the Turkish economy I would like to share with you 
is the increase in confidence, which is actually an outcome of the issues that I have just mentioned. To 
clarify  this  point,  public  confidence  in  the  economic  policies  in  implementation  and  favorable 
expectations of the results of these policies have improved and are continuing to improve.  
The most concrete indicator of this confidence is that the inflation target is becoming a more credible 
nominal  anchor  for  most  of  the  economic  agents.  In  other  words,  it  is  more  commonly  used  as  a 
reference.  
The existence of a strong nominal anchor in an economy, which can be used as a reference, helps to 
shape  other  economic  variables.  Accordingly,  volatility  both  in  economic  fundamentals  and  in  other 
variables gradually decreases. As I have already emphasized at the beginning of my speech, this point 
is of great importance with respect to resolving the pricing difficulty arising from excessive volatility. 
Moreover, today we are happy to see that economic units are now able to foresee longer terms and 
they  are  now  able  to  carry  out  longer-term  transactions.  These  developments  are  drastic  steps  for 
determining benchmark interest rates for pricing derivatives operations.  
Thanks to the macroeconomic stability and structural transformation process, we have now reached 
the point where we can make risk management in a sound and healthy environment.  
The  Turkish  Derivatives  Exchange  is  the  most  important  pillar  and  complementary  element  of  this 
process. In all our presentations held in several Anatolian cities, at the Grand National Assembly or in 
the Council of Ministers Meetings since 2001, we, as the Central Bank, has pointed at the significance 
of the derivatives market and indispensability of these markets. 
Dear Guests,  
Now that we have briefly considered the phase of uncertainty and the process of development of risk 
management in Turkey, I would like to give you an overview of this development process in the world. 
First of all, let me remind you that although conducting transactions on the futures market dates back 
to a long time ago, its development has taken a long time. 
Regarding this issue, I would like to share with you some information that I believe to be interesting. 
Aristotles’s writings inform us that the first recorded account of derivative contracts can be traced 2500 
years back to the ancient Greek Thales of Miletus, for the spring olive harvest during the winter. We 
know that rice futures were being traded in Japan in 17th century and futures for grains were traded in 
Holland in 18th century. 
The development of the financial derivatives exchange accelerated parallel to the need for hedging 
increased  exchange  rate  risk  after  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  System  in  the  1970s,  which 
lasted for approximately 30 years and provided a system of fixed exchange rate system. At the outset 
of this process, many people severely objected to the establishment of derivatives markets claiming 
that they would encourage volatility and increase speculations and manipulations on the markets. This 
very much reminds me of the “it is not possible in Turkey” or “it is not the right time,” comments I hear 
whenever we try to implement something new. 
The Nobel prize winning economist Milton Friedman’s speech at the opening of the foreign exchange 
options  market  at  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  in  Autumn  1971  contains  some  very  important 
information  for  us2.  As  Friedman  pointed  out,  financial  instruments  relating  to  foreign  trade  are  all 
complementary and the British case shows that financial services may well become a very profitable 
export item. Within this framework, he argued that the development of a derivatives market, which is 
normally expected to exist in the natural evolution of markets, not in another country but in the USA is 
important not because it increases trade and investment here but it enables export of these services 
as well. Thus, he claimed that the development of derivatives markets would support the development 
                                                      
2   Friedman, M. (1971), “The Need for Futures Markets in Currencies”, in The Futures Market in Foreign Currencies, Prepared 
for the International Monetary Market of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Inc. pp. 6-12. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 3
of other financial activities in the country, would bring additional income through exports in services 
sector and enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Dear Guests, 
Today  the  transaction  volume  in  derivatives  markets  is  very  much  above  the  transaction  volume  in 
spot markets, where the trading and exchange of goods traded is realized on the same day. In 2004, 
the volume of daily derivatives transactions in the global foreign exchange market, excluding over-the-
counter markets, was US dollar 1.2 trillion, which equals 65 percent of the total market turnover3.  
Dear Participants, 
Today we are about to bring in, and more importantly, institutionalize risk management principles and 
to initiate the development process of derivatives markets. This process is of great importance with 
respect to the overall economic activities. It should be borne in mind that this process will sometimes 
be arduous and time-consuming and it will also be a self-fulfilling process. Even if it takes a long time, 
sooner or later the derivatives markets will be established in our country.  
I am pleased to say that I am very happy to witness the efforts to develop derivatives markets and this 
achievement  as  well  as  its  significance  for  the  entire  economy  is  a  very  important  step  for  Turkish 
economy.  
At this point, I would like to share with you an expression we frequently reiterated at the initial stage of 
the fight against inflation, which was supposed to be a tough and long-lasting process: 
“Even a thousand-year long journey starts with a single step4.” 
 
 
Dear Guests, 
As I have mentioned before, derivatives markets are one of the components of economies that “ought 
to be present anyhow in the natural evolution of markets”, as put forward by Friedman. At this stage, I 
would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  magnitude and  significance  of  the  functions  performed  and 
changes  brought  about  in  the  economy  by  these  markets,  which  were  also  evaluated  within  the 
framework of the experiences of other countries. The more informed we are about this subject, the 
more derivatives markets will be embraced and derivative instruments will become more widespread.  
Considering  the  three-dimensional  nature  of  the  functions  of  financial  markets;  time,  risk  and 
information,  the  time  dimension  creates  risks  concerning  the  future,  whereas  the  information 
dimension facilitates more accurate decisions to be taken as the future can be predicted with fewer 
errors.  
Within this framework, the first function of derivates markets is to ensure the management of risks on a 
wide spectrum ranging from financial instruments such as foreign exchange rates and interest rates to 
commodity prices. The second function is to provide economic agents with correct information through 
the prices formed in the market.  
At this point, let me clarify certain points with regards to the floating exchange rate regime, which has 
been implemented in Turkey since 2001 and in almost eighty countries all over the world up to now. 
This has to do with the exchange rate being among the first contracts to be operative in the Turkish 
Derivatives Exchange, as well as its significance within the context of risk management, which is the 
primary function of derivatives markets.  
As we have emphasized at all times since the first day of the floating exchange rate regime in Turkey, 
under this regime exchange rates are determined by supply and demand conditions. The level of the 
exchange  rate  is  shaped  by  economic  developments,  external  shocks,  and  expectations  and 
fluctuations in the risk premium are applicable to all of them. Neither the Central Bank nor any other 
authority has any commitment or target whatsoever as regards the level of exchange rate.  
                                                      
3   Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2004),  “Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and  Derivatives  Market 
Activity in April 2004”. 
4   Chinese proverb. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2005
At this point, I would like to underline two points missed by those who held the opinion from the start 
that the floating exchange rate regime could not be implemented in Turkey, as the risk in this regime 
was too high, there would be too much volatility in the foreign exchange markets, and the economy, 
especially the foreign trade would be adversely affected as a result of these.  
The first point is that when fixed or foreseeable exchange rate regimes are implemented - like we did 
in the past-, in economies similar to our economy, where capital movements are free the exchange 
rate  risk  does  not  disappear,  but  is  assumed  by  the  public  sector  or  by  the  central  banks,  as  the 
monetary  authority.  Considered  as  a  whole,  in  environments  where  the  economy  has  a  relatively 
fragile structure, further elevated by the loose fiscal policies of governments, this may be even more 
costly than each economic unit assuming its own exchange rate risk under the floating exchange rate 
regime.  
The second point is that the presence of derivatives markets would enable foreign trade firms, under 
the  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  to  act  as  if  exchange  rates  were  fixed.  In  other  words,  with  the 
development  and  widespread  use  of  derivatives  markets,  the  level  of  foreign  trade  would  not  differ 
under  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime  from  that  under  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  and 
exchange rate risk would cease to be a factor influencing the level of foreign trade5. 
Although these markets are being newly founded in Turkey, I would like address a point, which often 
comes up in international literature and which I believe might arise in Turkey in the coming periods. 
Leaving aside the fact that speculative transactions are frequently made in derivatives markets, and 
especially in the foreign exchange market, these markets are alleged to increase risk and volatility in 
the  economy.  However,  derivatives  markets  do  not  create  new  risks  in  the  economy;  instead,  they 
allow the management of the imminent risk. The origin of such thoughts is a common misperception 
with regards to transactions carried out speculative purposes. 
Especially  in  foreign  exchange  markets,  the  level  of  exchange  rate  is  determined  not  by  futures 
transactions, but by spot market transactions. As transactions in the derivatives markets do not affect 
one-to-one the supply or the demand-side liquidity, they equally do not affect the price formed in the 
spot markets. In this case, speculative transactions that might be observed in the derivatives markets 
should not be expected to have a drastic impact on the spot markets.  
Furthermore,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out  several  of  my  speeches,  there  are  two  groups  of 
speculators in markets. The first group buys when prices go up, expecting prices to rise further or sells 
when  prices  go  down,  expecting  prices  to  decline  even  more;  we  can  describe  this  group  as  bad 
speculators.  This  is  the  type  of  speculator  mostly  seen  in  Turkey.  Also  in  the  process  of  the  fight 
against inflation, this group held its assets in foreign exchange, in line with old habits; thus continuing 
to buy foreign exchange at high rates, with the belief that Turkish lira would depreciate anyway, used 
no instruments whatsoever for risk management; and when Turkish lira appreciated under the floating 
exchange rate regime due to market conditions, the group criticized the stability program and policies 
implemented. This group of speculators, despite increasing volatility to a certain extent, cannot remain 
in the market for long, as they generally lose money.  
The second group or the good speculator, on the other hand, in line with his/her forecasts, sells when 
it is a bull market and buys when it is a bear market. Leaving aside the problems of causing volatility, 
this group contributes to stability in the markets.  
Within  this  framework,  it  is  possible  to  see  members  of  both  groups  in  any  market.  In  an  effective 
market, it is not possible to make a profit continuously guided by bad speculation, nor do the prices 
formed  in  the  market  approach  those  prices  indicated  by  economic  variables.  Consequently, 
speculation does not have much effect on prices created in an effective market; on the contrary, it may 
make a positive contribution to the markets by increasing liquidity. Hence, speculation is not a threat in 
derivatives markets, but a guide in activating the spot market by increasing liquidity. 
Another  important  point  with  regards  to  derivatives  markets  is  that  these  markets  enhance  the 
predictability  of  spot  markets,  which  form  the  basis,  and  help  them  perform  more  effectively,  by 
enabling the expectations of economic units in the future to be measured and reflected on prices. As a 
matter of fact, prices in derivatives markets are actually the prices that are expected in spot markets in 
the future.  
                                                      
5   Baron D. (1976), “Flexible Exchange Rates, Forward Markets and the Level of Trade”, The American Economic Review, 
Vol. 66, No. 3, pp. 253-66.  
BIS Review 17/2005 
 5
Consequently, derivatives markets contribute to the predictability cash flows of economic agents and 
their profits or losses arising from risk or volatility by reducing excessive volatility in spot markets, on 
one hand, and by offering an opportunity to economic agents for risk management, on the other hand.  
In this way, fragilities in the firms sector arising from deteriorations in balance sheets are restored and 
the economy as a whole strengthens itself against shocks. At this stage, I would like to highlight one 
more  point  about  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime.  In  Turkey,  firms  have  to  be  cautious  about 
imbalances in foreign exchange denominated assets and liabilities on their balance sheets. Under the 
floating  exchange  rate  regime,  firms  with  foreign  currency-denominated  income  and  domestic 
currency-denominated  expenditure,  or  vice  versa,  should  restore  the  imbalances  on  their  balance 
sheets, in other words, eliminate the exchange rate risk they are faced with. In order to achieve this, 
firms should observe risk management principles and employ derivatives market instruments.  
Firms,  especially  production  firms,  can  allocate  more  resources  for  production  by  reducing  the 
financial  risks  on  their  balance  sheets.  This  also  makes  an  important  contribution  to  enhancing  the 
competitiveness of firms.  
As  of 2003, 92  percent  of  world’s  largest  500 non-financial  firms  are  protected  against  risk  through 
derivatives  instruments  and  this  further  reinforces  the  importance  of  such  instruments6.  Moreover,  I 
would like to point out that the benefits of derivatives instruments do not depend on the size of the 
firms  they  are  used  by.  Derivatives  instruments  are  beneficial  for  all  firms  and  the  decision  to  use 
these instruments is largely shaped by the goals of the firm rather than its size.  
Here,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  a  point  about  the  information  transmission  function  of  derivatives 
markets.  Derivatives  markets  offer  economic  agents  the  chance  to  price  their  expectations  of  the 
future.  Thus,  thanks  to  derivatives  markets,  expectations  become  measurable  and  through  prices, 
more information concerning the future is shared with other economic agents. This structure enables a 
more  effective  resource  allocation  mechanism  through  more  effective  financial  markets  in  the 
economy as a whole.  
Besides their contribution to the effectiveness of the resource allocation mechanism, the development 
of derivatives markets helps the financial sector to grow. Hence, derivatives markets contribute to the 
increase  in  national  income  and  employment  by  indirectly  encouraging  more  effective  resource 
allocation and by providing value added. 
Derivatives markets introduce new investment instruments to the financial intermediary system, or in a 
broader sense, to the financial system. This, in turn, increases the number of instruments investors 
can use in order to diversify their portfolios and thus deepens financial markets.  
If we analyze what the diversity in investment instruments means for our country, we see that thanks 
to the derivatives markets, both real sector and financial sector investors will be able to manage their 
risks in diversity in line with the world markets and this structure will help our country to integrate with 
world markets.  
Here, I would like to draw your attention to the large number of studies that stress the favorable effect 
of the presence of sufficiently developed, deepened and efficient derivatives markets on foreign direct 
investments. 
Dear Participants, 
In  addition  to  all  these  benefits  derivatives  markets  provide  to  the  economy,  they  bear  extra 
importance  as  a  complementary  element  of  financial  markets  in  terms  of  their  interaction  with 
monetary policy and thus with the central bank.   
As it is known, establishing financial stability is one of the most important factors to be considered by 
all central banks that have set price stability as their primary objective. In this framework, derivatives 
markets, which help to sustain financial stability through their contribution by reducing volatility in the 
markets, support central banks in maintaining financial stability.  
The second contribution of derivatives markets to the monetary policies of central banks is that thanks 
to  their  functions  in  risk  management  and  in  providing  information,  they  expedite  and  activate  the 
transmission mechanism used by monetary policy in giving direction to the economy.  
                                                      
6 
International Swaps and Derivatives Association, News Release on April 9, 2003.  
6 
 BIS Review 17/2005
Central banks adopt a long-term perspective in their target and try to affect the long-term movements 
of economic variables with the decisions they take. In this framework, it is crucial for a central bank to 
have as much information of a long-term nature about the economy and the future as possible. Hence, 
derivative markets play a crucial role in enlarging the information set used in monetary policy via the 
information they provide about the future.  
The critical point here is that while derivatives markets enable the enlargement of the information set 
required  by  central  banks  in  making  their  decisions,  on  the  one  hand,  they  improve  the  flow  of 
information  about  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  needed  by  economic  agents  and  make 
contributions in terms of assuring a more predictable monetary policy, on the other hand.  
Dear Guests, 
In the framework of the interaction between monetary policy and the derivatives markets, of which I 
have  tried  to  outline  main  points,  I  should  clearly  state  that  the  development of  Turkish Derivatives 
Exchange will make outstanding and diverse contributions to monetary policy.  
Transactions in the Turkish Derivatives Exchange will play a key role in the inclusion of quantitative 
and forward-looking information in Central Bank reports, especially with the transition to full-fledged 
inflation targeting in 2006.  
Before I finish, I want to mention a few issues concerning the future of derivatives markets in Turkey.  
A  new  era  will  start  with  the  operations  of  the  Turkish  Derivatives  Exchange.  The  main  goal  in  the 
coming period should be carrying out all the arrangements concerning the functioning of derivatives 
markets with the utmost care while bearing in mind that these markets act as a catalyst for the whole 
economy. Moreover, measures should be taken in order to direct banks and firms towards transacting 
in these markets.  
Examples in other countries show us that there is a strong positive correlation between the transaction 
volume and liquidity rise of derivatives markets and the presentation of the issue, introduction of the 
markets and the training to be given. It has been confirmed that training programs aimed at enabling 
the economic agents to perform more effective risk management using derivatives instruments fueled 
the development of derivative markets in many countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, 
Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Japan. Taking these examples into consideration, we see that the training of 
institutional  and  individual  investors  bears  great  importance  in  Turkey  as  well,  where  derivatives 
markets are a new concept. The Central Bank has provided all kinds of support for the development of 
these markets and will also continue to give support from now on. However, it is crucial that especially 
non-governmental  organizations  should  fulfill  their  liabilities,  introduce  the  Turkish  Derivatives 
Exchange to their participants and provide the necessary training.  
Dear Participants, 
To conclude, I would like to emphasize once more that a drastic step has been taken today with the 
inauguration of the Turkish Derivatives Exchange, in line with recent favorable developments in our 
country. I hope this step will bring with it new opportunities for the future.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 7
