Ardian Fullani: Modernisation of the payment system in Albania 
Address by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, in the meeting with businesses and 
companies of utility services, Tirana, 25 February 2005. 
 Good day to everybody! 
Thanking you for your presence, allow me to regard today’s meeting as a working table, inviting you to 
stay  away  of  standard  conferences  and  slogans,  orienting  our  discussions  to  concrete  issues  and 
solutions that relate to products in banking payments area. More concretely, I would like to have in this 
table the presence of a debate on advantages, benefits that each group of interest participating in this 
meeting would have from using modern payment instruments. I think that the object of today’s meeting 
is part of our new Vision: Modernization of the payment system which will give a real contribution in 
reducing cash and informal economy. 
The presence in this meeting of government members, of some business managers, whether public or 
private, who provide periodic services in small value and large number, and the presence of banking 
system directors, makes me be provocative right from the beginning, with a simple question to either 
the business or the banking system: how much longer are people going to stay in meaningless queues 
to pay their monthly bills? 
I emphasize that we are already making the first step in modern payments world, while an important 
step  will  be  finalized  by  mid  of  this  year,  once  the  Automated  Electronic  Clearing  House  project  is 
completed. In our ambition to ensure an up-dated payments infrastructure, it’s our pleasure to state 
that even banking system efforts have been numerous and significant progress has been made in this 
direction. 
However, I believe that we are still far away from some basic standards. I think that the reasons have 
to  be  found  in  the  lack  of  tradition,  old  inheritance,  presence  of  informal  economy,  and  in  other 
objective and subjective causes. Assessing the recent developments, I deem that there is room in the 
banking  system  for  a  greater  understanding  between  it  and  the  business  represented  today  in  this 
meeting. From the viewpoint of some infrastructural problems, I think that, in spite of specific aspects 
of each member bank of the system, they should cooperate more with each-other, creating a unique 
network, capable to face and use successfully the cash inflows at their windows. 
Proactive role of banks is a primary one. Banks should not wait for individuals to knock at their doors 
but  they  have  themselves  to  submerge  the  public  with  their  products  and  services.  Banks  should 
further refine their technology to offer as much as possible qualitative products and services to their 
clients.  
On  the  other  hand,  allow  me  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  utility  business  about  some  banking 
payment products, already carried out, or expected to be carried out in a short period of time: 
Establishment of the Automated Electronic Clearing House, referred to as “clearing” system. 
The completion of this joint project of the Bank of Albania and the banking system will have a 
significant  impact  on  increasing  banking  payments  popularity.  Upon  the  realization  of 
investments  in  modern  and  up-to-date  technology,  the  overall  time  of  realizing  these 
payments in the whole territory of the country and in all banking windows is planned to last 
no longer than two days, whereas the service cost is envisaged to decrease. The project will 
enable the provision of services with the same quality and safety as those of the European 
level, whereas the companies of “utility” service in the country and the public will be the main 
beneficiaries. 
Geographic  extension  of  the  system  and  banking  services,  I  think,  is  another  qualitative 
development  of  the  banking  system  in  the  recent  years.  For  the  coming  years,  the  banks 
have planned further extension, making the banking services be a tangible reality, even in 
small districts, why not even in outlying districts. 
Besides  geographic  extension,  through  investments  in  modern  and  up-to-date  technology 
such as ATM and payment terminals in POSs, the banks are trying to increase their products 
virtually.  Through  this  technology,  they  are  trying  to  be  present  in  any  living  centers, 
commercial centers or points of sale. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
A great number of banks are providing or are preparing to be present even in your houses or 
offices, through internet banking, within a short period of time. 
Albanian  banks  are  already  part  of  large  international  networks of  cards  and  provide  card 
payments inside the country and abroad, either for Albanian citizens or foreigners – and this 
has already become a tangible reality. 
Another initiative to be mentioned in this direction is the initiation of cooperation of banks in 
establishing joint networks of using plastic cards. I think that the creation of a joint settlement 
network for national interbank card payments, the extension of card penetration scale and 
the presence of payment terminals in points of sale – in other words the creation of a “unique 
card”  for  the  whole  system,  I  think,  should  be  the  other  major  challenge  of  the  banking 
system following the completion of the clearing system. 
I dealt with these essential banking system developments, inter alia, to make clearer the advantages 
banks  have  in  terms  of  payments  services  provision.  They  are  the  only  institutions  licensed  in  the 
country  for  providing  payment  service  efficiently  and  safely.  This  advantage  is  based  on  the  good 
knowledge of legislation, development level of infrastructure, capable human resources and modern 
technology. Any other organization outside the system should not be regarded as a long-term one.  
However, I take advantage of the opportunity to stress that even the Government should render its 
contribution in this direction. A payment system will always remain sterile in case the authorities do not 
manage  to  impose  the  use  of  fiscal  cases  in  invoicing  the  sales.  To  be  open  and  sincere,  no 
businessman will encourage his small clients to use modern forms of payments, if he is not obliged to 
use  the  fiscal  recorder  of  his  activity.  Otherwise,  it  would  be  much  more  convenient  for  the  same 
businessman to transfer the income on sales directly to his bank account, merely to minimize the risk 
of holding large quantities of cash. Therefore, I think that we should be more active, not only through 
propagandistic  effects,  but  also  by  finding  applicable  formulas  and  by  using  efficient  leverages  to 
impose  the  implementation  of  fiscal  legislation.  The  channeling  of  the  public  administration  salaries 
through accounts opened in the banking system is a first successful step to be welcomed, followed as 
well by other movements in this direction.  
Coming back to my idea stated at the beginning, I think that presently the invoice collection windows, 
pension kiosks, payments in envelopes or bags – have all become out-dated. These practices should 
be estimated as expressions of a mentality to be overcome, which poses the risk of keeping us away 
from European standards. My opinion is that, in a short period of time, we may make the detachment 
of the public from “queues to pay” completely a reality. 
Finally, leaving room for your discussions, I would like to present briefly even some of the benefits the 
overall economy, businesses present in this meeting, as well as beneficiaries or their clients will have: 
Benefits to Albanian economy: 
Reduction of cash and informal economy; 
Growth of deposits and volume of credit to economy; 
Further strengthening and consolidation of domestic banking system; 
Achievement of international standards and practices, improving the image of Albania and 
our domestic economy. 
Benefits to business: 
Growth of the planning process for collecting payments;  
Cost reduction and improvement of control on invoice-collection process; 
Improvement of service to clients; 
Extension and strengthening of business - bank relations. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
Benefits to the public: 
Increased payment possibilities, avoidance of queues and default interest; 
Reduced need for cash as payment means and increased personal security; 
Better management of households’ economy.  
However, I hope that a proper understanding will be achieved today as well as our goal that in the 
coming days we may also be witnesses of a legal cooperation act between the banking system and 
public entities or private businesses present in this hall.  
This  is  not  a  campaign  against  obscurantism  but  an  effort  to  impose  a  new  culture,  education  and 
tradition.  Electronic  cards  will  be  the  key  to  enter  the  modern  payments  world,  that  is  the  services 
world. 
I sincerely wish and I am confident that this will happen.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 15/2005 
 3
