John Hurley: Economic developments in Ireland and other issues 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2004, Dublin, 12 July 2005.  
 You are all very welcome to this press briefing to mark the publication of the Central Bank’s Annual 
Report for 2004.   
The Annual Report gives a detailed account of our activities in 2004. It again proved to be a very busy 
period for us, with major developments at both domestic and European levels.  
The re-structuring of the Central Bank that took place in 2003 was firmly bedded down last year.  As 
you know, the creation of the Financial Regulator as a distinct component of the Central Bank and 
Financial  Services  Authority  of  Ireland  was  a  major  development  that  has  led  to  significant  change 
throughout our organisation.  I am happy to report that these new arrangements are working very well.  
The Financial Regulator will be publishing its own Annual Report next week, which will give details of 
its very busy agenda of the past year or so. 
While the Central Bank has overall responsibility for financial stability, the Financial Regulator is, in 
addition  to  its  very  significant  consumer  mandate,  responsible  for  the  prudential  supervision  of 
individual financial institutions. The greatest interaction between the two sides of the organisation is in 
the area of financial stability. We have in place a joint committee, the Financial Stability Committee, as 
a  very  important  element  in  this  cooperation.    The  Central  Bank  will  be  publishing  the  Financial 
Stability Report in October. As was the case last year, it will focus in particular on risks to financial 
stability. 
As  is  usual,  the  Annual  Report  today  contains  detail  on  our  extensive  Eurosystem  responsibilities, 
including those in the areas of monetary policy, payments, financial markets and currency.  
Economic developments 
I would now like to turn to the general economic situation.  The Irish economy is continuing to perform 
well with GNP growth of 5½ per cent in 2004 (GDP, 4.9 per cent).  This underlying strength is reflected 
in the labour market with unemployment at around 4½ per cent in 2004, falling to just over 4 per cent 
in the first quarter of this year.  Total employment grew by almost 4 per cent in the same period. This 
was  the  fastest  rate  of  growth  since  the  end  of  2000,  with  the  construction  and  related  sectors 
accounting for almost half of this increase. This reflects the fact that the construction sector here is 
large  in  relation  to  other  euro  area  countries,  accounting  for  about  12  per  cent  of  employment 
compared to about 8 per cent for the euro area. The main reason for this concentration in Ireland is 
that we are still endeavouring to address the infrastructure shortfall while, at the same time, housing 
construction  has  been  exceptionally  high.  This  high  level  of  house  building  will  inevitably  moderate 
over time.  
Despite  the  continued  strong  employment  situation,  inflationary  pressures  have  remained  relatively 
subdued.  Inflation fell back in Ireland last year to 2.3 per cent (HICP), very close to the euro area 
average of 2.1 per cent, following some years of adverse differentials.  However, we have seen some 
increase in the Irish inflation rate in the past couple of months, due to higher oil prices, from the low 
point of 1.9 per cent in March. 
The economy is expected to grow at a similar pace this year, with GNP growth of 5¼ per cent in 2005 
(GDP 5½ per cent).  A significant increase in employment of about 2¼ per cent is also expected.   
One  of  the  challenges  we  face  is  to  ensure  continuing  low  inflation  against  this  background  of 
continuing strong economic performance.  It is of vital importance that future pay increases and other 
cost factors take account of the low inflation environment that we are now in.   
There has been a small deterioration in the economy’s price competitiveness position in the last year, 
as reflected in the Central Bank’s Competitiveness Index; this followed a number of years when there 
was a more significant worsening.  However, competitiveness issues remain of concern. In particular, 
the  Irish economy  is  exposed  to any sharp  weakening of  the US  dollar  against  the  euro that  might 
emanate from the large global imbalances.  Additionally, our price level is some 15 per cent higher 
   1/3 
than the euro area. It is necessary now to embed the low inflation regime that we have experienced 
over the past year in order to protect our competitiveness. 
You will recall that this time last year, we expressed our concerns about house price increases, which 
were running at a year-on-year rate of increase of 12 – 13 per cent. We felt at the time that unless 
house price increases were to slow to about the same level as nominal GNP, there was the risk of a 
sharp correction at some stage. House price increases have indeed shown a welcome deceleration 
with a year-on-year increase now of 7 per cent, against the background of increased housing supply. 
Currently, house prices are increasing at an annualised rate of about 4 per cent. 
Given the slowdown in house prices, the main concern now is both the rapid growth and high level of 
indebtedness in the economy. Total private sector credit is growing at an annual rate of about 25 per 
cent. There is no longer any doubt that the private sector is highly indebted by international standards 
and this level will very soon match the levels recorded in Europe’s most indebted economies. The ratio 
of debt to disposable income of the household sector is now in excess of 120 per cent and is growing 
very strongly. 
Regarding the mortgage component of private sector credit, it can be expected that the slowdown in 
house price increases and, in time, a reduction in housing volume to more sustainable levels should 
also lead to a slowdown in mortgage credit growth. However, we will remain concerned until we see 
some evidence of such a slowdown. The point of most concern about the high and growing level of 
indebtedness  is  that  it  is  occurring  at  a  time  of  historically  low  interest  rates  so  that  any  significant 
increase in rates or downturn in economic activity in the future would cause problems, particularly for 
recent and more highly indebted borrowers. 
Looking further ahead, most indicators would point to the Irish economy continuing to grow strongly at 
a  rate  of  about  5  per  cent  over  the  next  few  years.    As  a  very  open  economy,  the  performance  of 
Ireland  is  significantly  dependent  on  the  global  economy,  the  prospects  for  which  are  broadly 
favourable.  
There  are  downside  risks  to  these  forecasts.  Internationally  we  have  seen  a  sharp  increase  in  oil 
prices and uncertainties remain in this regard. As I said earlier, unfavourable moves in exchange rates 
could also impact on growth. Domestically, there are also some risks, the main ones being the high 
and growing level of indebtedness, threats to competitiveness and the expanded construction sector. 
Turning briefly to fiscal policy, it should be framed in a way that provides a capacity to cope in the 
event of the downside risks to the economy materialising. Such an approach would also help avoid 
overheating pressures in an economy that is growing at more or less full capacity. 
Monetary policy and the euro area economy 
Focusing on the euro area, the expectation is that growth will moderate this year from the increase 
recorded in 2004, which itself marked a recovery from successive years of extremely weak growth. 
However, the 2 per cent recorded last year masked a sharp slowdown over the course of the year. 
Moreover,  the  increase  of  0.5  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2005  overstated  the  strength  of  the 
economy somewhat and the indications are that growth has subsequently remained subdued. Though 
the economic recovery has lost momentum, nevertheless, we expect to see a gradual improvement in 
economic  activity,  supported  by  historically  low  interest  rates  and  other  favourable  domestic  and 
external factors. At the same time downside risks to this outlook still exist – most notably the strength 
of energy prices, the large global imbalances and the low level of business and consumer confidence 
prevailing in the euro area. 
Rising energy prices have contributed to inflation increasing to 2.1 per cent in the euro area in June, 
and to the expectation that it will persist around the 2 per cent level for the remainder of this year.  
Uncertainties relating to oil prices and to indirect taxes and administered prices constitute upside risks 
to  inflation  that  warrant  careful  monitoring.  Underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained. However, liquidity is ample by any standard and ongoing vigilance is required if inflationary 
expectations are to be kept in line with price stability. 
In the light of the information currently available, the present monetary policy stance of the Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank is that interest rates are at an appropriate level. Of course, we 
continue to monitor and to carefully assess all emerging data. 
   2/3 
Financial results 
Profit  for  2004  in  the  Central  Bank  amounted  to  €122.5  million,  an  increase  of  €53  million  on  the 
previous year.  The Surplus Income paid by the Central Bank to the Exchequer in respect of 2004 is 
€103 million. The ongoing level of profits reflects the prevailing lower interest rate environment.   
Conclusion 
Before concluding, I would like to briefly draw your attention to another aspect of our Annual Report. 
As you know, last year, following the re-structuring, we published a three-year Strategic Plan for the 
Central  Bank.    This  allowed  us  to  detail  clearly,  and  publicly,  our  responsibilities,  both  in  the 
Eurosystem  and  domestically.    It  also  set  out  our  approach  to  delivering  on  those  responsibilities.  
Today,  as  part  of  the  Annual  Report,  we  publish  a  Progress  Report  on  the  implementation  of  that 
Strategic Plan. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  members  of  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial 
Services Authority of Ireland for their assistance, work and leadership in another very significant and 
busy year for the organisation.  I would also like to thank the Chairman and Board of the Irish Financial 
Services Regulatory Authority for their effective co-operation in ensuring that our new arrangements 
work as smoothly as they do.  Finally, I would like to express my sincere thanks to all of the staff, both 
in the Central Bank and Financial Regulator, for their work and commitment in contributing to a very 
successful year. 
This concludes my opening remarks. My colleagues and I are now available to answer questions. 
   3/3 
