V Leeladhar: Emerging realities in banking and finance - role of new generation 
managers  
Address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to the students of Post 
Graduate  Programme  in  Banking  and  Finance,  National  Institute  for  Bank  Management,  Pune, 
3 April 2005. 
 It is indeed a pleasure to be here in your midst today. To be amongst bright young students is not only 
energizing  but  also  a  learning  experience  -  as  we  look  at  issues  afresh  and  start  by  asking  basic 
questions, which at some level are the most difficult.  
The Reserve Bank has shared a very special relationship with the NIBM - it catalyzed its creation in 
1969, provided the venue for its first campus and has been intimately associated with its functioning. 
While the institute has been a part of the capacity building exercise for the banking sector for over 
three decades, the PGPBF programme in Banking is an endeavour of the NIBM to ‘catch them young’ 
and  create  the  bankers  of  tomorrow  -  a  set  of  new  generation  managers  for  a  new  generation  of 
banks.  
Building  up  an  organizational  architecture  that  generates  intellectual  capital  has  been  a  huge 
challenge  for  banks  and  financial  institutions.  It  is  even  more  so  today,  when  we  are  undergoing  a 
period of the most rapid acceleration of what is alluded to as ‘creative destruction’ in the history of the 
financial  sector.  In  the  process  of  creative  destruction,  new  constructs  emerge.  It  is  here  that  ‘new 
generation’ managers may have a role more demanding than that of the managers of yesteryears. A 
role  which  calls  for  more  than  just  ‘probity  and  prudence’  which  characterized  the  banker  of 
yesteryears and increasingly focuses on managing ‘competing imperatives’.  
What do we mean by a new generation? How is the new generation different from the old? What has 
changed  and  is  changing?  And  does  it  matter?  In  the  context  of  time  measurement,  a  generation 
refers commonly to a period of about 23 to 30 years, in which most humans become adults and have 
children.  In  another  sense,  the  term  generation  refers  to  a  common  identity  arising  from  common 
experience. Thus the identity of ‘new generation’ managers would arise from the common experience 
of a changing world around us, a product of the wider historical context. For a better insight into this 
we take a long view of the Indian banking. 
While  historians  can  slice  the  past  into  countless  slices,  in  terms  of  transformational  change,  there 
have  been  only  a  few  inflexion  points  in  post-independence  banking  in  India.  The  first  was  the 
enactment  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949  which  brought  in  a  comprehensive  and  formal 
structure  of  bank  regulation  and  supervision  in  India.  The  nationalization  of  banks  in  our  country 
marked the second such point. It generated forces that took banking from an elite class to the masses. 
It led to the establishment of a very substantial infrastructure across the geographical expanse of the 
sub-continent and was thus a critical trigger for financial outreach of institutions and empowerment of 
the common man. The third inflexion point in banking was the financial sector reforms initiative that 
was launched in the early 1990s. These reforms heralded a dramatic shift in the way banks functioned 
and  operated  in  India.  The  changed  environment  and  the  internal  compulsions  arising  from  greater 
competition and the need to improve their market share / profitability gave rise to the quest for greater 
efficiency  and  the  need  to  reposition  themselves  given  the  realities  of  the  environment  and  their 
internal strengths and weaknesses.  
This period also coincided with the onset of the knowledge revolution that launched a gigantic Third 
Wave - as famously described by Alvin Toffler - of economic, technical and social change and is still 
forcing businesses to operate in radically new, continually shifting ways. Every shred of industrial-era 
thinking  is  in  fact  now  being  re-scrutinised  and  re-formulated.  It  is  precisely  when  an  old  paradigm 
crumbles and the new one is not yet fixed in place that we get great bursts of creative thinking. This is 
perhaps such a moment.  
What does the future hold? One thing is certain; - the future will clearly not be a continuation of the 
past. It will rather be a series of discontinuities. The exciting thing about discontinuity is that it breeds 
opportunity. We live in an age of unprecedented opportunity. But with opportunity comes responsibility. 
It is for tomorrow’s managers to carve out their own place, to know when to change course and keep 
themselves  engaged  and  productive  throughout.  To  do  things  well,  one  needs  to  cultivate  a  deep 
BIS Review 23/2005 
 1
understanding of oneself - not only the strengths and weaknesses but also how one learns, how one 
works with others, what his or her values are and where he or she can make the greatest contribution. 
Because only when one operates from strengths can true excellence is achieved.  
These challenges call for a new, more dynamic, aggressive and challenging work culture to meet the 
demands  of  customer  relationships,  product  differentiation,  brand  values,  reputation,  corporate 
governance and regulatory prescriptions. Understanding and dealing with difficult transitions is the key 
for  the  new  managers  to  designing  strategies  for  their  organizations.  Broadly  along  an  analysis  of 
transition  trends  by  Edward  E.  Furash,  we  attempt  a  somewhat  loosely  structured  tracking  of  the 
emerging realities of banking in India. An appreciation of these trends would perhaps help map the 
competencies that new generation managers may require to convert these challenges of the changing 
environment into opportunities.  
The trend from deposit banking to financial services 
First, there is the transition from banking to financial services. Banks are uniquely poised to broaden 
their product lines into the complete offerings that would go under the rubric financial services. This 
would imply a new founded emphasis on marketing; be it of investment, insurance and other products 
that  consumers  want.  Banks  have  advantages  in  their  image  of  trustworthiness  and  their  extensive 
distribution systems. How they convert this into a marketing advantage will determine how they win 
market shares. 
The trend from Balance sheet to off-balance sheet intermediation 
Then there is the trend from balance sheet to off-balance sheet intermediation. Banking is no longer 
confined to ‘acceptance of deposits for the purposes of lending’ - today it refers to intermediating and 
managing risk. As the scope of intermediation expands to incorporate market risks, bankers are taking 
a  view  on  how  they  will  strategically  position  themselves  in  this  new  environment.  While  some  will, 
perhaps, choose to migrate rapidly to off-balance sheet investment - or merchant-banking activities, 
others may stress volume origination which they can securitize and then manage for a fee, and still 
others may continue to position themselves as traditional banking retail players focusing on deposit 
intermediation. Nevertheless, the trend to off balance sheet intermediation and the complexities that it 
entails  will  demand  that  the  some  managers  of  the  future  be  equipped  with  financial  skills  in  a 
significantly greater measure.  
The trend from capital adequacy to capital efficiency 
Thirdly,  there  is  the  transition  from  capital  adequacy  to  capital  efficiency.  The Basel  II  prescriptions 
have  already  put  us  on  track  for  transition  from  the  traditional  regulatory  and  market  measures  of 
capital adequacy to an evaluation of whether a bank has found the most efficient use of its capital to 
support its new business mix. In effect, future plans may therefore include the fluid use of capital, an 
approach  that  has  been  called  the  "just-in-time  balance  sheet"  management,  in  which  capital  flows 
quickly to its most efficient use. This transition in how capital is used and how much capital is needed 
will become a significant factor in return-on-equity strategy for years ahead and strategic plans may be 
required to execute this kind of approach.  
The trend from physical to virtual distribution  
Perhaps the most visible and overt change in banking in the eyes of the public has been the trend for 
banks  to  move  away  from  branch  banking  to  electronic,  anywhere-anytime  distribution  of  financial 
services. If this has triggered the ‘death of distance’, the Real time Gross Settlements (RTGS) System 
is threatening to consign time lags in settlement of financial transactions to history. In reality, delivery 
systems like ATMs, on-line banking and ‘phone banking are a continuum of options from which the 
consumer  selects.  Consumers  select  the  delivery  system  that  is  right  for  them.  In  other  words, 
distribution  differentiates  a  bank  when  it  sets  up  a  delivery  system  that  attracts  certain  customers. 
Distribution is the new way to segment consumer markets and the transition of distribution systems is 
in fact emerging as an essential part of bank repositioning strategy.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2005
The trend from fragmentation to consolidation 
The forces of change today are favouring larger entities which bring mergers and acquisitions squarely 
into the strategic decision making of the banking sector. We are slowly moving from a regime of ‘a 
large number of small banks’ to ‘a small number of large banks’. Every bank will of course, depending 
on its strategy, have to migrate to its best position in this new structure. Picking a market position and 
transitioning  to  it  is  one  of  the  most  significant  strategic  decisions  a  bank  must  make.  All  types  of 
entities can be highly profitable if they transition to the right market position and right cost structure to 
execute the strategy.  
The trend from data to information to knowledge 
Perhaps  the  most  talked  about,  yet  least  understood,  transition  ahead  is  in  the  area  of  information 
technology and information application. Distribution and processing technology transitions are keys to 
the  shift  to  virtual  banking  which  is  prompted  by  the  desire  to  have  low  cost  operations.  But 
technology-driven information transformation is at the center of the even more important management, 
marketing, and risk transitions that banks must make. Information is only valuable if it can be put to 
work  and  used  for  decision  tools  such  as  programmed  trading,  target  marketing,  predictive  credit 
modeling and scoring, amongst others. Most new financial services are in fact based on technology 
creating  ways  to  do  them.  The  transition  from  an  old  world  of  data  processing  and  information 
management to a new world in which knowledge is being put to work on competitive advantage will be 
a major strategic preoccupation in the years ahead.  
It  is  today's  bank  strategies  that  must  handle  these  transitions  for  tomorrow's  success.  Managing 
these transitions well is the secret to strategic execution. Organizations however ultimately stand or 
fall  on  the  quality  of  the  work  and  decisions  made  by  their  people.  So  what  sets  most  successful 
organizations apart is how they manage human resources. Increasingly, banks all over are therefore 
adopting the socio-technical approach to job design that recognizes the productivity gains of optimum 
technological  arrangements  as  well  as  the  importance  of  workplace  sociology.  The  new  generation 
managers on their part will have to learn how to create and thrive in an environment that embraces 
change not as a threat but as an opportunity. 
What  are  the  challenges  that  these  changes  bring  to  the  persons  who  manage  the  sector?  A 
challenge  for  the  sector  is  to  attract  and  deploy  a  new  generation  of  managers  in  an  age  when 
turnover  of  human  capital  is  extremely  high.  How  organizations define  and  align  the  job  orientation 
and  employee  expectations  and  put  it  to  optimum  use,  today  top  their  boardroom  agenda.  As  the 
dominant demographic profile of our banks change rapidly and the customer needs and positioning 
strategies take different contours, finding and placing the right person for the right job is indeed critical. 
Not only has the environment changed, there has also been a palpable change in the attitudes of the 
new generation. The present generation, correct me if I am wrong, is increasingly looking for a mix 
between  opportunities  for  personal  growth,  autonomy,  job  delight,  social  esteem  that  comes  with 
responsibilities which are entrusted, diversity, stability, and of course, remuneration.  
There  is  an  increasing  trend  that remuneration,  though  the  most  tangible,  is only  one  of  the  mix  of 
offerings  that  the  new  generation  of  managers  today  demands.  What  truly  gets  them  going  would 
ideally have to be the right mix of a set of ‘push’ - motivation, recognition, career progression, capacity 
building and - and ‘pull’ factors such as higher pay, better benefits, heftier perks as well as drawing out 
plans.  
What is the identity that will define the new generation managers? While leadership skills, the ability to 
multi-task and manage competing imperatives will be the necessary ingredients of the new generation 
managers, the old- fashioned qualities of a desire to learn, a strong sense of professional ethics, an 
enquiring  mind,  a  strategic  view,  the  qualities  of  humility  and  empathy,  a  willingness  to  embrace 
practical experience, and an eagerness to adapt to new experiences would be critical.  
As I have said, this calls for a diverse repertoire of competencies, the diagnostic ability to understand 
what new things are required or what things should be unlearned and the behavioural flexibility to be 
able to change. I am sure your management course would have prepared you to see things before the 
curve, before others do. We live in exciting times and - as you stand on the threshold of a new life and 
a career in the banking - I trust you will continue to cherish the ideals and dreams of youth, after all 
they are what make life worthwhile. I wish all of you - tomorrow’s leaders - every success in your entire 
future endeavour.  
BIS Review 23/2005 
 3
