Jarle Bergo: The Norwegian economy - possibilities and challenges 
Address by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a seminar 
hosted by Agder Research Foundation, Arendal, 12 May 2005. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s  monetary policy meeting on 20 April, Inflation 
Report 1/05 and on previous speeches.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace and there are prospects that growth will remain 
high. The recession was mild after the previous expansion culminated in 2002. The period of relatively 
high cost inflation in Norway came to an end without production being impacted to the same extent as 
during  the  recessions  in  the  early  1980s  and  around  1990.  One  of  the  main  reasons  for  this  is 
probably that low inflation in the 1990s and current monetary policy have anchored expectations of low 
and stable inflation among economic agents.  
Together  with  private  consumption  and  fixed  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector,  traditional  exports 
were an important factor underlying growth in the early stages of the recovery that started in the first 
half of 2003. Prices for many of our main export goods have risen as a result of strong growth in new 
markets. However, growth in Norway’s total exports excluding oil and gas is lower than import growth 
among our trading partners.  
Mainland fixed investment has gradually become an important driving force in the upturn. Investment 
has picked up in most industries and growth was stronger than expected towards the end of 2004. 
Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  has  registered  rising  investment  in  all  industries.  Petroleum 
investment in particular appears to be growing at a rapid pace. This may continue to boost mainland 
output.  
Even with a strong upturn in the mainland economy, the increase in the number employed has been 
relatively modest. Productivity rose fairly sharply in the first few quarters after economic growth picked 
up. Normally, when productivity growth is strong, enterprises again begin to hire new staff. The current 
upturn has lasted about two years. The fairly low level of growth in employment, as measured by the 
number of employed, must be seen in the light of the sharp decline in sickness absence through 2004 
after rising for several years. The decrease in sickness absence has increased the supply of labour to 
companies and reduced the need for new employees. Measured in person-hours worked, employment 
growth was solid last year. Person-hours worked increased by 2.2% from 2003 to 2004. A corollary to 
the  increase  in  the  number  of  person-hours  worked  is  partly  reduced  sickness  absence  and  partly 
three more working days in 2004 compared with 2003.  
Inflation has been low in recent years. Initially, the fall in prices for imported consumer goods pushed 
down  underlying  inflation.  After  a  period,  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and 
services also slowed. Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE reached its lowest level in the first months of 
2004.  Inflation  remained  at  less  than  ½%  until  after  the  summer  before  picking  up  in  the  autumn. 
Inflation moved up primarily as a result of a slower decline in prices for imported consumer goods. The 
depreciation  of  the  krone  since  the  beginning  of  2003  has  contributed  to  these  developments.  In 
addition, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services stabilised, and towards the 
end of 2004 there was a tendency towards a higher rise in prices for these goods and services.  
Prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  fell  more  than  expected  at  the  beginning  of  2005,  while  the 
tendency  towards  a  more  rapid  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  has 
persisted. So far in 2005, inflation measured by the CPI-ATE has been around ¾ per cent. 
The other Nordic countries have also experienced falling inflation. Inflation has declined, and is now 
relatively low in Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway. The year-on-year rate of underlying inflation 
in these countries was around 1 per cent in March. 
A common feature of the low level of inflation in the Nordic countries seems to be the sluggish trend in 
prices for imported consumer goods, even though developments have not been entirely the same in all 
the Nordic countries.  
BIS Review 34/2005 
 1
Reliable  information  about  the  economic  situation  is  important  when  setting  the  interest  rate. 
Information from the regional network is a useful supplement when assessing the current economic 
situation. 
Region South reports high growth in activity in all industries. The market outlook is positive and more 
broadly based than previously. Growth in the export industry and the construction sector is expected to 
remain solid, although somewhat weaker than earlier. On the other hand, there is now more optimism 
in the retail trade and service sectors. 
Capacity utilisation varies across industries. There is little excess capacity in the construction sector. 
Skilled  labour  in  particular  is  in  short  supply.  There  is  some  excess  manufacturing  capacity,  while 
considerable excess capacity is reported in retail trade and services. 
The export industry is expecting a slower rise in prices for export products next year, while in general a 
stable rise in prices is expected in other industries. 
Profitability is increasing, particularly in manufacturing for the domestic market, the construction sector 
and service industries. 
Developments  in  employment  show  a  mixed  picture.  Manufacturing  employment  is  rising  at  a  solid 
pace, while the level of employment is stable in the other sectors. 
Growth in the global economy will have an impact on developments in the Norwegian economy in the 
period ahead. Global growth is expected to moderate somewhat this year and stabilise in the years 
ahead. In the US, growth seems to have remained solid in the first quarter. Heightened uncertainty 
with regard to developments in the US economy and weaker results for some large companies have 
resulted  in  falling  prices  on  world  stock  exchanges.  Developments  are  weaker  in  the  euro  area  – 
unemployment remains high and consumer confidence has fallen. In Japan, it appears that growth will 
be positive from the fourth quarter of 2004 to the first quarter of 2005.  
Growth  in  Asia,  except  Japan,  and  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  is  expected  to  moderate  but  to 
remain strong.  
The outlook for growth in different regions indicates that the imbalances in the global economy, with 
large deficits in the US and large surpluses in some other countries, will persist. Low growth in the 
euro  area  and  Japan  is  weakening  the  prospect  of  a  gradual  correction.  This  increases  the  risk 
associated with these imbalances. Increased imbalances in addition to high oil prices and volatile oil 
markets are contributing to the uncertainty surrounding developments in the global economy.  
There are particularly large imbalances in the US balance of trade and current account. This partly 
reflects the US federal budget deficit. Moreover, US households have a high level of consumption and 
a low level of saving. Strong demand in the US has sustained growth in the world economy. The deficit 
in the US is matched by surpluses in Europe and Asia.  
A persistent deficit has pushed up US foreign debt to a high level.  
The US population is growing faster than that of other OECD countries. This may suggest that saving 
in the US is somewhat lower and investment somewhat higher than in other countries, but the impact 
is now considerably greater than implied by demographic factors alone.  
The imbalances may continue for a period. International capital markets are deep and liquid with an 
ample supply of credit for US borrowers. If creditors begin to fear a fall in asset prices and withdraw, 
this may still trigger substantial corrections. This may lead to higher interest rates and perhaps also a 
fall in US equity markets that spills over to other countries’ financial markets. In that case the dollar will 
also  depreciate.  The  household  debt  burden  in  the  US  may  be  another  source  of  instability  if 
households abruptly reduce both housing demand and consumption.  
The US is not the only source of trade imbalances. They also reflect very low growth in continental 
Europe  and  the  largely  export-based  growth  in  Asian  countries.  Countries  other  than  the  US  must 
therefore also contribute in order to prevent growth in the global economy from faltering.  
With limited domestic growth capacity and high unemployment, many industrial countries are poorly 
equipped to cope with a weaker dollar and lower US demand. The challenges are perhaps particularly 
demanding in Japan and some large European countries. 
There is also a risk that large imbalances in world trade and low employment in Europe will trigger 
protectionism, which could reduce growth capacity even further.  
2 
 BIS Review 34//2005
Partly due to very high growth in demand for oil, the average price for Brent Blend rose to almost USD 
40 per barrel in 2004. Strong economic growth, particularly in the US and China, has resulted in high 
energy consumption. So far this year, the price of Brent Blend oil has largely moved between USD 45 
and 55 per barrel. In the past few weeks, it has hovered around USD 50 per barrel. 
Oil futures have also increased.  
Little excess production capacity in OPEC countries, combined with the prospect of lower production 
in non-OPEC countries, has probably influenced oil prices. At the same time, there are prospects of 
continued strong demand growth in important oil-importing countries, such as China and some other 
emerging economies.  
The IMF has analysed supply and demand in the oil market for the period ahead in the latest issue 
of "World Economic Outlook": 
With  price  expectations  at  around  the  current  level  and  global  GDP  growth  at  approximately  3  per 
cent, demand for oil is expected to increase by around 2 per cent per year over the coming decades 
up to 2030. 
The  rise  primarily  reflects  higher  demand  for  fuel  for  motor  vehicles,  particularly  in  non-OECD 
countries. An increase in per capita income in China will in particular lead to a sharp increase in car 
use. 
Output  in  non-OPEC  countries  will  peak  soon  –  in  5  years,  according  to  IMF  estimates.  Higher 
demand  will  thus  require  higher  output  in  OPEC  countries.  These  countries  have  substantial  oil 
resources,  but  are  currently  producing  close  to  capacity.  Production  capacity  must  therefore  be 
increased. 
Higher demand can thereby be met by non-OPEC oil producers operating at full capacity while OPEC 
passively accommodates any remaining demand by increasing its production capacity. Alternatively, 
OPEC can take a more active position and push up prices even further by capping production. 
Only a few years ago, a long-term price of around USD 20-25 (in real value) per barrel was the normal 
estimate. Analyses such as that presented by the IMF suggest that the long-term oil price level may be 
considerably higher than this. 
Let us return to the Norwegian economy, and the possibilities and challenges facing Norway. 
The projections in Inflation Report 1/05, published on 16 March, are based on a gradual increase in 
the interest rate. This is in line with financial and foreign exchange market expectations. It is assumed 
that  the  exchange  rate  will  shadow  movements  in  the  forward  exchange  rate.  This  implies  that  the 
krone will remain fairly stable around the current level in the years ahead. 
Mainly  as  a  result  of  persistently  high  oil  prices  and  expectations  that  oil  prices  will  remain  high, 
investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  may  reach  record  levels  this  year.  The  investment  intentions 
survey  for  the  petroleum  sector  points  to  very  high  growth.  The  level  is  expected  to  remain  high 
throughout  the  projection  period.  Activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  will  have  spillover  effects  on  the 
mainland economy, initially on the engineering industry and the construction sector.  
The  scale  of  petroleum  investment  and  its  spillover  effects  are  highly  uncertain.  The  last  time 
petroleum investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than 
had been assumed. An upturn occurred in the Norwegian economy as a whole at the same time. The 
unexpected increase in petroleum investment contributed to an economic upturn that was substantially 
stronger than projected. If oil prices rise further or remain at the current high level for a long period, 
petroleum investment may again amplify the cyclical upturn to a greater extent than projected.  
The  upturn  in  mainland  fixed  investment  is  broadly  based.  Improved  profitability,  higher  capacity 
utilisation and solid export growth will contribute to continued investment growth in goods-producing 
industries.  Demand  for  services  is  expected  to  continue  to  expand  for  a  period  ahead  with  an 
attendant  increase  in  investment  in  service  sectors.  When  growth  in  the  economy  gradually  slows, 
investment growth will probably slacken.  
Mainland  exports  of  goods  and  services  will  continue  to  benefit  from  solid  global  growth  this  year. 
Later in the period, a continued loss of market shares as a result of high cost levels will dampen export 
growth.  
Growth in private consumption is expected to remain high this year and next. Low real interest rates, 
solid growth in real disposable income and a continued rise in house prices will contribute. 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 3
Unemployment is projected to decline this year and next. In subsequent years, growth in demand and 
output  is  expected  to  ease  and  unemployment  may  edge  up  again  when  capacity  utilisation 
approaches a more normal level.  
With a somewhat tighter labour market and rising inflation in the years ahead, wage growth may pick 
up. Over the past year, low consumer price inflation has probably contributed to keeping nominal wage 
increases lower than implied by labour market tightness in isolation. Low inflation has resulted in high 
growth in household purchasing power even with moderate pay increases. 
The results from this year’s wage settlement indicate that wage growth this year may be lower than the 
projection in the March Inflation Report.  
Inflation among our trading partners is expected to be low in the next few years. It is likely that high 
prices for oil and other commodities will continue to push up prices for goods where wages account for 
a small portion of total costs. On the other hand, growth among most of our main trading partners will 
probably be too low for idle resources to be utilised in the next few years. Particularly in the euro area, 
wage growth is likely to be low as a result of moderate economic growth and high unemployment. 
Overall, it would appear that external price impulses via consumer goods to the Norwegian economy 
will  remain  negative  this  year  and  next.  There  is  no  indication  that  growth  in  imports  from  low-cost 
countries  is  declining.  The  decline  in  prices  for  clothing  and  footwear  will  probably  continue  in  the 
coming  years.  Prices  for  audiovisual  equipment  are  still  falling  as  a  result  of  strong  international 
competition and high productivity growth. We assume that the effects of structural changes in these 
markets will gradually be exhausted towards the end of the projection period. External price impulses 
via consumer goods are then expected to increase in pace with unit labour costs among our trading 
partners.  
With  a  path  for  the  interest  rate  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  in  line  with  the  baseline  scenario  in 
Inflation Report 1/05, inflation may increase gradually from less than 1 per cent today to close to 2 per 
cent in mid-2006. Under these assumptions, inflation may stabilise at around 2½ per cent at the three-
year  horizon.  Developments  in  line  with  these  projections  imply  that  the  output  gap  will  increase  to 
about 1¼ per cent in 2006. As the interest rate is gradually increased to a more normal level, growth in 
private demand will probably ease, and capacity utilisation may be brought down and stabilise. 
Developments since the March Inflation Report was presented do not provide grounds for changing 
this perception of the state of the real economy. The results of the wage settlement so far suggest that 
wage growth this year will be somewhat lower than projected by Norges Bank. Inflation, on the other 
hand, has been broadly in line with expectations, and there has been virtually no change in the krone 
exchange rate. The inflation outlook has not changed substantially since the March  Inflation Report 
was published. 
At its meeting on 20 April, the Executive Board stated the following: 
“The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace, and capacity utilisation is rising. An interest rate 
that is kept at the current level for a long period might lead to a situation where capacity utilisation 
becomes  too  high  further  ahead.  Bottlenecks  may  arise  in  some  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  the 
sharp rise in property prices and borrowing may persist for a longer period. This could be a source of 
instability  in  demand,  output  and  inflation  in  the  somewhat  longer  run.  This  implies,  in  isolation,  a 
higher interest rate. At the same time, the current rate of inflation is low, and there are prospects of low 
inflation for a period ahead. The objective of bringing inflation back to the target of 2½ per cent and 
anchoring inflation expectations imply a continued expansionary monetary policy.  
The monetary policy assessments presented by Norges Bank in March indicated that the interest rate 
will rise after a period and at a gradual pace. Economic developments since then have been broadly in 
line with expectations. International key rates are rising, albeit slowly and from a low level. Although a 
gradual rise in the interest rate seems to provide a good balance between the different objectives, the 
Executive  Board  concluded  that  it  is  too  early  to  increase  the  interest  rate  at  this  monetary  policy 
meeting.” 
Low interest rates over a long period have contributed to strong growth in household borrowing. Both 
housing investment and house prices have risen sharply. House price inflation has slowed somewhat, 
but remains high. In 2004, housing starts were the highest in several years. Home refurbishment is 
probably also rising sharply.  
The high level of borrowing has resulted in a substantial increase in the household debt burden. Loan 
debt relative to disposable income is now as high as at the end of the 1980s.  
4 
 BIS Review 34//2005
Interest  expenses  relative  to  income  are  nonetheless  considerably  lower  now,  whether  based  on 
current interest rates or expected rates in the next few years. Households will however be vulnerable if 
unexpected disturbances result in higher than expected interest rates. 
Oil gives us an economic base that is not available to many other countries. But it also presents us 
with considerable challenges: 
First,  we  must  remember  that  our  petroleum  resources  are  part  of  our  national  wealth.  When  oil  is 
extracted  and  sold,  natural  assets  are  transformed  into  financial  wealth.  Norway’s  national  wealth 
belongs  not  only  to  our  generation,  but  also  to  future  generations.  This  means  that  our  petroleum 
wealth  must  be  equitably  distributed  between  generations.  The  authorities  must  therefore  exercise 
fiscal discipline, taking into account long-term considerations.  
Moreover,  the  size  of  the  cash  flow  from  petroleum  activities  varies  considerably.  If  petroleum 
revenues were to be used as they accrue, this would lead to considerable fluctuations in demand in 
the Norwegian economy, amplifying cyclical fluctuations as a result.  
Third,  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  would  have  an  impact  on  competitiveness  in  Norwegian 
business  and  industry.  A  high  level  and  substantial  fluctuations  in  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues 
would have a negative impact on the operating parameters for internationally exposed industries. It is 
important that we succeed in maintaining an industry structure that promotes learning, innovation and 
development.  
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  established  in  1990  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  long-term 
considerations in the use of petroleum revenues. In March 2001, the fiscal rule and new guidelines for 
monetary  policy  were  introduced.  The  fiscal  rule  implies  that  the  central  government  budget  deficit 
shall be equivalent over time to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. The new 
guidelines for economic policy received broad support in the Storting.  
The  rule  specifying  that  only  the  real  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund  is  to  be  used  means  that  the 
capital in the Fund is not depleted. The capital in the Petroleum Fund will increase as long as there is 
a positive cash flow (to the central government) from petroleum activities. When the conversion from 
petroleum  revenues  to  financial  wealth  has  been  completed,  the  objective  will  still  be  to  restrict 
withdrawals so that the real value of the Fund’s capital is maintained - in principle, indefinitely.  
The fiscal rule thereby provides a long-term anchor for fiscal policy. It provides a stable framework that 
contributes to curbing fluctuations in the Norwegian economy that are caused by converting petroleum 
revenues into investment at home and abroad. 
The  new  guidelines  have  changed  the  interaction  between  the  different  components  of  economic 
policy. Monetary policy has been given a clearer role in stabilising economic developments. A clear 
monetary  policy  objective  is  a  necessary  complement  to  the  fiscal  rule  for  ensuring  reasonable 
macroeconomic stability. The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. The inflation target provides an anchor for economic agents’ 
choices concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. Households, businesses, public entities, 
employees  and  employers  can  base  decisions  on  the  assumption  that  inflation  in  Norway  will  be 
2.5 per cent over time.  
High  oil  prices  have  a  different  impact  in  Norway  than  in  oil-importing  countries.  When  oil  prices 
increase, the value of Norway’s national wealth rises. The idea behind the Petroleum Fund is that the 
cash flow from an increase in oil prices should accrue to the Fund and be invested abroad and should 
not be included directly in the government budget. As a result, the increase in the cash flow will not 
affect the domestic economy. Likewise, a fall in oil prices will not have an immediate impact on the 
domestic economy, but result in a lower accumulation of foreign assets.  
Even though the Petroleum Fund and the fiscal rule shield the Norwegian economy to a certain extent 
from fluctuations in the oil market, the Norwegian economy will still be affected by developments in oil 
prices.  If  changes  in  oil  prices  influence  growth  in  the  global  economy,  this  will  in  turn  impact 
Norwegian  exports  of  traditional  goods  and  services.  Petroleum  investment  on  the  Norwegian 
continental shelf is another important channel. Fluctuating oil prices contribute to substantial variations 
in petroleum investment. This has spillover effects on the mainland economy. 
The value of the Petroleum Fund, measured as a percentage of GDP, will rise in the years ahead. On 
the  other  hand,  Norway,  like  many  other  countries,  is  facing  substantial  fiscal  challenges.  The 
expected dependency ratio, i.e. the ratio of persons over the age of 67 to persons aged 20 to 66, will 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 5
rise sharply in the years ahead. The National Insurance Scheme’s spending on old age and disability 
pensions, based on the current social security rules, is increasing. 
The  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund  can  only  cover  a  small  portion  of  this  increase.  According  to 
Ministry  of  Finance calculations,  a  funding  requirement  equivalent  to  6  per cent  of GDP will  still  be 
uncovered  in  2060  given  an  oil  price  of  NOK  230  (2005-kroner),  or  around  USD  35  per  barrel.  Oil 
futures  6-7  years  ahead  are  now  higher  than  this.  If  oil  prices  remain  as  high  for  the  foreseeable 
future, the funding requirement will be somewhat lower. To base decisions on this, however, would be 
a very risky strategy. 
Even though Norway’s petroleum wealth is substantial, it is our human resources that account for most 
of  our  national  wealth.  Even  a  small  increase  in  the  “return”  on  human  capital  might  generate 
considerable  gains.  The  return  on  this  capital  partly  depends  on  our  pension  schemes  and  the 
application  of  social  security  rules.  These  should  be  designed  in  such  a  way  that  they  provide 
incentives  and  opportunities  to  work.  Labour  market  legislation  must  also  promote  production  and 
employment.  
The Storting (Norwegian parliament) is currently in the process of completing its deliberations on the 
Pension  Commission’s  proposals  for  reforming  the  national  insurance  system.  If  we  succeed  in 
reducing  the dependency ratio  through  a  modernised  national  insurance system  and  other  reforms, 
this will be an important contribution to addressing the fiscal challenges we are facing.  
6 
 BIS Review 34//2005
