Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Brief overview of the Malaysian bond market 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  launch  of  the 
RM760 million  Wawasan  Bond  by  the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development, 
Kuala Lumpur, 27 April 2005. 
 Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh and good evening 
Mr Hiro Tsubota, Principal Financial Officer IBRD 
Mr Michael Bennett, Senior Legal Counsel, IBRD 
Dato' Nazir Razak, Chief Executive, CIMB 
Mr Jeremy Oliver, Managing Director, ABN AMRO Bank Malaysia Berhad 
Representatives from the Ministry of Finance, Bank Negara Malaysia and the Securities Commission 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to accept the invitation to witness the launch of the 760 million Ringgit-
denominated Wawasan Bonds by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD). 
The decision to launch this bond in Malaysia is reflective of the confidence in the Malaysian capital 
market. This represents another milestone in the development of Malaysia's domestic bond market. 
Malaysia's regulatory institutions are committed to the development of the country's bond market to 
the  advantage  of  borrowers  and  investors.  Our  financial  system  continues  to  be  transformed  and 
redefined to become increasingly more diversified, more robust and more competitive. The significant 
progress achieved in the development of our bond market has been an important part of this process. 
With the foundations for strong performance in our financial system now being achieved, steps have 
been initated to implement phased deregulation and liberalisation of the financial and capital markets. 
This is not only to enhance competitiveness in the Malaysian financial markets but also to strengthen 
its international integration, thereby facilitating our economic inter-linkages with the global economy. 
As  part  of  this  process,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  on  April  11,  2004,  liberalised  the  foreign  exchange 
administration rules to permit Multilateral Financial Institutions and Multinational Corporations to raise 
ringgit-denominated  bonds  in  the  Malaysian  capital  market.  The  recent  liberalisation  of  the  foreign 
exchange administration rules on 23 March 2005, has also eliminated remnants of the restrictions on 
investors  and  greatly  enhanced  access  to  the  Malaysian  domestic  market.  The  Malaysian  foreign 
exchange environment is now by far, much more liberal than that existing prior to September 1998. To 
make the Malaysian capital market more competitive, the Government of Malaysia has also exempted 
non-residents from paying withholding tax on investments in such ringgit bonds issued in Malaysia.  
Infrastructure development on the issuance, trading, information dissemination and settlement system 
have also been improved to encourage new issuance and sustain existing instruments. In addition, the 
regular issuance of Government securities in both conventional and Islamic instruments with different 
maturities  has  facilitated  the  creation  of  a  benchmark  yield  curve.  To  meet  investors'  demand  and 
diversify further Islamic financial instruments, the Government has recently issued shorter-term Islamic 
Treasury Bills and longer-term Islamic bonds with a maturity of 10 years. 
With the development of the ringgit bond market it has continued to become an increasingly important 
source  of  financing  to  the  economy.  Total  gross  financing  amounted  to  RM85.8  billion.  As  a  result, 
total outstanding ringgit bonds increased by 10.7% to RM363 billion, which is equivalent to 81% of the 
gross  domestic  product.  The  general  market  conditions  have  also  remained  favourable  for  both 
issuance  and  trading  activities,  given  the  low  inflation  and  interest  rate  environment  and  the 
strengthening of economic fundamentals. The Islamic bond market has also experienced exceptional 
growth. In 2004 the market expanded by 13.4%.  
To further enhance market turnover, Bank Negara Malaysia announced in January this year the usage 
of  repurchase  agreements  as  a  monetary  policy  instrument,  introduced  the  Institutional  Custodian 
Programme to enable borrowing and lending of securities, and provided a securities lending facility for 
principal dealers. The implementation of these measures are aimed at improving the price discovery 
process and increasing the efficiency of capital allocation within the financial system. To facilitate the 
further  development  of  the  Islamic  bond  market,  the  Government  has  also  imposed  tax  neutrality 
between the treatment on Islamic and conventional capital market products. 
BIS Review 29/2005 
 1
It  has  been  just  one  year  since  we  allowed  Multilateral  Development  Banks  and  Multinational 
Corporations to issue Ringgit denominated bonds in Malaysia, and we are now witnessing the third 
issuance of such bonds by a supranational. In that, I am pleased to welcome the IBRD's issuance of 
its 760 million Ringgit Wawasan Bonds in Malaysia. We are pleased to note that the World Bank has 
decided to make its inaugural issuance structured in compliance with the Shariah. This would indeed 
contribute to further broaden and develop the Islamic domestic capital market. This Islamic securities 
issuance is the largest Ringgit issuance by a supranational to-date.  
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development  for  the 
confidence it has placed in the Malaysian capital market. We look forward to see other issuances by 
non-resident  issuers  into  the  Ringgit  capital  market,  thereby  contributing  towards  broadening  and 
deepening the market. Such issues will have far reaching advantages for the domestic bond market. 
Let me once again, congratulate the World Bank and the Joint Lead Managers CIMB and ABN AMRO, 
for a successful issuance of the IBRD bond debut in Malaysia.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2005
