Jean-Pierre Roth: The population is ageing - we cannot wait any longer! 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Association suisse des actuaires, Basel, 17 June 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Like other developed countries, Switzerland has been hard hit by the phenomenon of demographic 
ageing. It is putting our old age pension scheme to a severe test. The ageing of the population is also 
impacting  on  our  ability  to  innovate,  our  potential  to  achieve  productivity  gains  and  our  competitive 
dynamism in a globalised and demographically diversified world.  
This is why measures need to be put in place quickly. At the heart of this demographic challenge lies 
the need to enhance the productivity of our economy as well as our productive capacity. It is all the 
more important to secure favourable growth conditions because the ageing of the population in itself 
could impact negatively upon our capacity for growth – which is under strain already now.  
Increasing the productivity of our economy and the pace of growth is essential if we wish to maintain 
our system of social security. At the macroeconomic level, the financing of old age pensions works 
according  to  a  simple  principle.  This  involves  imposing  a  levy  on  the  incomes  of  the  working 
population  and  transferring  these  funds  to  pensioners,  either  through  redistribution  in  the  present 
(pay-as-you-go  system)  or  via  a  capital  funding  system  which  benefits  future  generations  of  senior 
citizens.  Thus,  demographic  ageing  means  that  the  working  population  is  obliged  to  shoulder  ever 
greater levies. If, at the same time, the global creation of wealth progresses slowly, the responsibility 
of financing old age pensions is going to impose an increasing social burden.  
Thus, it is not only necessary to improve our economic efficiency, we also need to be careful not to 
impede these efforts through inappropriate measures. We must allow the invisible hand of competition 
to  bring  about  the  most  efficient  allocation  of  our  resources  possible  in  both  the  domestic  and  the 
foreign arenas. Consequently, we need to do more with the resources at our disposal. At the same 
time,  we  need  to  make  sure  we  have  access  to  better  quality  resources.  This  means  taking  a 
longer-term approach to our system of education. The conditions within which our economy operates 
also play an important role. Growth in investment activity not only allows us to create new jobs but 
also, and above all, to accelerate productivity advances – both of these factors encourage growth and 
help to achieve a better financial basis for our old age pension scheme.  
There are three reasons why the Swiss National Bank is concerned about demographic developments 
and growth. First, because a central bank cannot create wealth above and beyond the income derived 
from  its  own  investments,  and  therefore  cannot  finance  old  age  pensions.  Second,  there  are  still 
people  who  believe  that,  in  the  event  of  an  economic  slump,  the  central  bank  will  bring  about  a 
sustained improvement in economic performance. It is an illusion to believe that, in the long term, jobs 
can  be  created  through  monetary  stimulation.  Over  a  longer  period  monetary  policy  is  neutral.  The 
third  and  final  reason  relates  to  the  fact  that  it  is  possible  that  the  response  to  the  demographic 
challenges of the future might affect the equilibrium real interest rate of our economy – a variable that 
always enters into our assessments of a given situation. 
