Timothy F Geithner: Economic policy and the sustainability of US productivity 
growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Puerto Rico Bankers Association Luncheon, New York, 12 April 2005. 
 information 
technology, 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today and to support the important work of improving 
economic and financial education. 
I am going to focus my remarks on two important dimensions of our economic future - the acceleration 
in the rate of growth in productivity of the past decade and the more recent decline in our net national 
savings rate. The former offers considerable promise for future growth in the living standards in the 
United States. The latter presents some risk and challenges to that brighter prospect. Both are areas 
where  education,  education  in  general and  financial  education  in  particular, can  make  an  important 
contribution.  
The United States has been through an exceptionally good decade of economic performance. While 
growth in most mature economies slowed, we averaged a respectable 3.5 percent growth in real GDP 
a year. Inflation moderated to a rate of around 2 percent, and long term inflation expectations stayed 
stable for some time at quite moderate levels. The volatility of U.S. output, which declined significantly 
in the mid-1980s, remained low, meaning growth was smoother, with recessions less frequent, shorter 
and shallower.  
Perhaps the most important dimension of this experience was the doubling of productivity growth, from 
about 1.5 percent a year in the two decades up to 1995 to more than 3 percent a year in the decade 
since.  Productivity  growth  is  important  because  it  is  the  primary  driver  of  long  term  gains  in  living 
standards. And this acceleration in the United States seems more remarkable in part because most 
other large mature economies experienced a slowdown in productivity growth during the same period. 
This doubling of productivity growth in the United States can be broken down into several important 
elements. One was rapid improvement in the productivity of the relatively small part of the economy 
that  produces 
including  computers  and  computer  software  and 
telecommunications  equipment.  Also  important  was  very  substantial  growth  in  investment  in 
information technology by the rest of the economy. And alongside these changes, U.S. firms became 
significantly more efficient in their use of equipment and labor.  
The sources of these improvements in productivity are varied and complex. Economists do not fully 
understand what drove them, but they seem to agree on several contributing factors.  
We experienced a very large and positive technology shock, a dramatic increase in innovation, which 
improved the power of technology, reduced its cost, and made possible a revolution in production and 
business processes.  
The skills and knowledge of the United States workforce played a critical role in contributing to the 
extent and spread of innovation. 
The U.S. economy became substantially more open, with trade increasing substantially as a share of 
GDP. Deregulation in the 1980s (telecom, transportation, finance) and since then have helped make 
the  U.S.  economy  more  dynamic  and  flexible.  The  U.S.  financial  system  became  stronger,  more 
resilient, better at matching capital to ideas, and better at spreading and managing risk.  
And finally, U.S. macroeconomic policy was very supportive. Good fiscal policy choices in the 1990s 
helped produce significant surpluses, freeing private savings for private investment. The gains in price 
stability  delivered  by  the  Fed  under  two  chairmen  provided  a  critical  foundation  for  the  sustained 
increase in private investment that helped translate a shift in the technological frontier into accelerating 
productivity. 
These  forces  reinforced  each  other.  None  would  have  been  as  powerful  without  the  impact  of  the 
others.  Globalization,  deregulation  and  changes  in  the  financial  structure  all  worked  together  to 
produce a more competitive business environment, motivating major improvements in investment and 
in efficiency. Good monetary policy and fiscal policy provided a supportive environment, with higher 
public savings and low inflation. 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 1
Luck seems to have played some role, too. The strategic environment seemed in some ways more 
stable and secure. The size and frequency of external shocks that hit the United States and the world 
economy during this period were in some ways less acute and easier to manage.  
Are  these  improvements  in  underlying  or  structural  productivity  growth  sustainable?  This  is  a  hard 
question to answer. History doesn’t seem to offer much of a guide, though we’ve seen other periods of 
sustained productivity booms. We did not anticipate this acceleration, which itself suggests we need to 
be somewhat tentative in forecasting its future.  
Dale Jorgenson,  Mun  Ho,  and  Kevin  Stiroh  have  concluded  in some  recent  research  that there’s  a 
reasonable prospect that structural productivity growth will average just over 2.5 percent a year for the 
next decade. And they think the probability of growth exceeding that pretty favorable forecast is higher 
than the odds we’ll be disappointed.  
In  support  of  that  view,  they  make  essentially  two  points.  First,  they  do  not  see  evidence  of 
deceleration  in  the  pace  of  advancement  in  technological  innovation;  nor  do  they  see  signs  of 
diminishing marginal returns to IT investment or evidence that we are coming close to fully exploiting 
the  potential of  past  innovations  to  improve  productivity.  And  second,  they  argue  that  the  improved 
competitive environment - in all its dimensions - is likely to continue to be a spur to further innovation, 
to further investment in technology and further adoption of technology.  
These are reasonably compelling arguments. Their forecast is close to that of the Council of Economic 
Advisers, the Congressional Budget Office and the consensus of private forecasters. They may prove 
to be right. But the overall environment for investment and innovation could be materially affected by 
the disposition of our fiscal and external imbalances and our exceptionally low net national savings 
rate. 
A  few  key  points  about  the  dimensions  of  these  imbalances.  Our  fiscal  deficit,  now  between  3  and 
4 percent  of  GDP,  is  in  the  zone  of  unsustainability.  Our  external  imbalance  -  the  current  account 
deficit  -  is  now  between  6  and  7  percent  of  GDP,  a  level  without  precedent  in  U.S.  economic 
experience.  
Each  of  these  imbalances  magnifies  the  risk  in  the  other.  One  might  be  less  troubled  by  a  fiscal 
imbalance  of  this  size  if  it  was  not  accompanied  by  a  substantial  increase  in  our  reliance  on  the 
savings of the rest of the world. The external imbalance might be less troubling if the government was 
in balance and those substantial capital inflows were going to finance private investment.  
Together, however, these imbalances raise the potential for higher risk premia on U.S. financial assets 
and more uncertainty about future returns on claims on the United States. This in turn could reduce 
expected  future  investment,  productivity  growth  and  U.S.  growth  potential.  This  could  reduce  the 
willingness of the world’s savers to put their capital to work in the United States. And this could mean 
lower growth outcomes and slower growth in future incomes.  
These  are  risks,  not  certainties.  And  there  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  the  probability  of  a 
destabilizing adjustment to these imbalances is likely to be low. These explanations are worth some 
attention.  
There is a reasonable case to make that the U.S. fiscal deficit, although a problem, is a problem of 
manageable dimensions  for  the medium  term,  provided we deliver  modest  changes  to  the  paths  of 
expenditures  and  revenues.  The  more  daunting  problems  we  face  of  bringing  our  healthcare  and 
social  security  commitments  and  resources  into  balance  come  later  and  are  less  acute  than  those 
facing most other large mature economies.  
These  facts  provide  some  perspective  but  they  are  not  a  compelling  argument  for  deferring  policy 
action to address them. 
Another  argument  for  perspective  is  that  our  current  account  deficit  reflects  in  part  the  relative 
attractiveness  of  the  United  States  as  a  place  for  the  world  to  invest  its  apparently  ample  present 
supply of savings. It is true that much of the cause of our imbalance seems to lie in optimism about 
future U.S. economic performance reflected in the willingness of non-Americans to put their savings to 
work here rather than in their own countries or in Europe or Japan. In this sense, our external deficit 
may reflect relative strength, rather than weakness.  
This  argument  would  be  more  reassuring  if  we  were  facing  a  lower  and  more  sustainable  current 
account  deficit.  And  it  would  be  more  powerful  if  the  capital  inflows  that  are  the  counterpart  of  our 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2005
current account imbalance were going to finance private rather than public investment, and if a larger 
share of those flows were private rather than official. 
Another  argument  that  is  important  to  weighing  the  risk  in  running  an  external  imbalance  of  this 
magnitude is the very large increase in the share of the world’s savings that now seem to move more 
comfortably  across  borders.  This  decline  in  home  bias  -  as  Alan  Greenspan  has  spoken  about 
extensively - seems to have made it easier for countries to sustain larger current account deficits than 
might have been possible in the past.  
However, we don’t know much about how much further room there is to run in this phenomenon. We 
don’t know much about the present degree of concentration in the exposure of private savers to the 
United States relative to their longer term preferences, or how stable those preference are likely to be. 
And,  therefore,  we  don’t  know  how  likely  it  is  that  those  outside  the  United  States  are  going  to  be 
willing to continue to acquire claims on the United States at the recent pace. 
Finally,  a  number  of  observers  have  suggested  that  the  present  imbalances  reflect  what  could  be 
called a balance of interests, and that this balance is likely to endure for sometime. On one side of the 
balance  is  the  substantial  part  of  the  world  economy  that  has  an  interest  in  shadowing  the  dollar 
closely, as they absorb excess capacity, and that these governments are likely to continue to want to 
acquire dollars to make that exchange rate objective possible. On the other side of the balance is the 
United States, which is able to sustain higher rates of private spending and larger government deficits 
than it could if others were not willing to lend us their savings.  
This is an uncomfortable basis for a forecast of a benign adjustment process, not least because at 
some point the interests of those on one side of the balance may change.  
I think this mix of challenges in our fiscal and external positions deserve concern and attention. They 
may end up being diffused gradually and benignly, but they necessarily bring with them a greater risk 
of higher risk premia, a more adverse investment environment and poorer growth outcomes. Under 
some circumstances, this could undermine an important foundation of the environment for innovation 
that has delivered our productivity acceleration. 
What can we do to mitigate the risks in this constellation of forces? 
We can work to keep monetary policy credible, to preserve confidence we will act to keep inflation and 
inflation expectations stable at moderate levels. 
We  can  act  to  raise  public  sector  savings,  begin  to  bring  our  entitlement  commitments  and  our 
resources closer into balance and build a greater financial cushion into our financial future against the 
risk of a less benign world. 
We  can  make  sure  we  keep  our  markets  open,  and  to  support  rather  than  resist  the  integration  of 
China and India into the world economy.  
We  can  work  to  make  sure  that  our  financial  system  remains  strong,  with  a  substantial  capital  and 
liquidity  cushion,  a  more  resilient  infrastructure  and  continued  rapid  innovation  in  financial 
intermediation. 
And  we  can  work  to  improve  educational  opportunities  in  this  country,  to  improve  educational 
achievement and to improve public awareness of economics and finance. Nurturing a sophisticated, 
technologically  advanced  workforce  that  is  capable  of  contributing  to  the  competitiveness  of  our 
society has to be one of our highest goals and most rewarding objectives. 
These are achievable ambitions. They would not guarantee that the future will look as good as the 
recent past, but they will improve the probability it will. 
The hardest of these are those where the politics are hard. And this is why it’s so important that we 
work to strengthen the constituency in the United States for good fiscal choices and good trade policy 
choices. Education is an important part of this. And the work of the Economic and Financial Education 
Alliance of Puerto Rico can play a valuable part in creating a stronger foundation for future economic 
growth in Puerto Rico and in the country. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 25/2005 
 3
