Sir K Dwight Venner: Issues of concern to the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
and the Caribbean region as a whole 
Feature  address  by  Sir  K  Dwight  Venner,  Governor  of  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank,  at  the 
opening of the new building of ABI Bank Ltd, Antigua, 5 March 2005. 
 Mr Chairman 
I would like to express my appreciation to the Directors, Management and Staff of ABI Bank Ltd for 
inviting me to be the Feature Speaker at the Opening of your new building. 
A few years ago, I performed a similar function for the ACB and you would appreciate that the ABI 
Bank  could  do  no  less  than  invite  me  to  bless  their  own  undertaking,  and  I  could  do  no  less  than 
accept. In addition, the charm and persuasiveness of my dear friend, McAllister Abbott put the matter 
beyond any doubt. 
The ABI Bank Ltd has shown itself to be a very innovative institution. In addition, they respond to the 
regulatory concerns of the Central Bank fully realizing that in the business of finance, innovation must 
be balanced by prudence, and risks of any undertaking must be properly taken into consideration. 
I consider this to be a very timely opportunity given the times we live in, to comment on some of the 
issues which are of concern to the ECCB and the region as a whole. It is also an opportunity to share 
with  you some  of  my  views  on how  we  are approaching  these challenges  as  the  Central Monetary 
Authority of the OECS. 
I would go as far as to say that this is a defining time for the region, as we seek to grapple with both 
external and domestic challenges of a very complex nature. There is also a great desire among our 
people for information and knowledge on the events that affect our lives at this time, and into the near 
and distant future. 
The possession of information particularly when it is accurate and credible gives those who have it 
considerable advantage over those who do not. In the economic and financial spheres, information is 
so critical to the conduct of business that the provision of certain types, for example, accounts, are 
legally required and have to be publicly certified. 
The use of information under certain circumstances, such as insider trading is legally prohibited and 
punishable by fines and imprisonment. Companies have to present statements of their performance to 
Annual  General  Meetings  of  their  shareholders.  Governments  have  to  present  their  Estimates  of 
Revenue  and  Expenditure  to  the  Legislature,  the  elected  representatives  of  the  people  or 
shareholders in the country, and the Budget is a public document. Individuals have to present their 
income and financial statements to the tax authorities so that they can be fairly assessed and make a 
contribution, so that in exchange the government can provide the services of law and order, sanitation, 
education, etc which add to the quality of life. All countries as members of the international community, 
and, in particular, the IMF have to transmit to that organization for official publication in a document 
entitled  “International  Financial  Statistics”  their  National  Accounts,  Balance  of  Payments,  Fiscal, 
Monetary and Price Statistics. These figures obviously are of critical importance to the country itself in 
two ways. Firstly, how can good policies be made if there are no timely and accurate statistics, and 
how can the progress of the country be accurately assessed if there are no reliable statistics to make 
the judgment? 
Secondly, if both foreign and domestic investors have no access to accurate data, how can they make 
serious decisions on potential investment opportunities? 
In both developing and emerging market economies, TV and radio stations, newspapers and business 
magazines  keep  the  public  well  informed  on  commercial,  financial  and  economic  affairs.  In  this 
churning  up of  information,  analysis and commentary,  individuals  and  business  firms are  presented 
with increased choices for both saving and investment. In this environment, businesses rise and fall 
based on the performance of markets, and their ability to manage their resources. While speculation 
abounds this is mostly based on the review and analysis, no matter how cursory, of what is taken to be 
accurate  and  credible  statistics  produced  and  published  at  set  periods  by  official  or  publicly 
acknowledged institutions. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
Information is such a critical part of this era that not only do we speak of the Information Age but three 
distinguished Economists have received the Nobel Prize for their work in this subject area. It is against 
this background that we can outline the external and domestic environment in which we exist, define 
the domain or theatre of action in which we operate, point out the goals and objectives we have set for 
ourselves and/or have been set for us, and review the policy tools we have at our disposal to meet 
these objectives. 
In the case of the external environment, we live in what has now been accepted as an increasingly 
globalised world. Barriers to trade and finance are being removed across the international community, 
and  the  spread  of  technology  both  in  basic  sciences  and  materials,  as  well  as  information  and 
communication technologies have literally created a global village. 
This trend has inevitably presented challenges to all countries in different ways. Free trade regimes 
have  had  an  impact  on  our  traditional  agricultural  export  commodities,  such  as  bananas  and  sugar 
whose preferences are being gradually removed. In the financial arena, the proliferation of standards 
and  codes,  and  the  efforts  of  the  OECD  have  had  a  negative  impact  on  our  embryonic  Offshore 
Finance  Sector.  They  have  also  posed  a  challenge  to  our  indigenous  domestic  banks  by  making  it 
somewhat difficult with their correspondent relationships. 
Fluctuating output of the world economy, and particularly in the countries we trade with, mainly the 
USA, Canada, the UK and Europe has a direct impact on our economic performance. The same is 
true  in  the  case  of  the  fluctuations  in  major  currencies.  We  are  linked  to  the  US  dollar  so  that 
fluctuations between that currency, the Euro, Sterling and the Canadian dollar have implications for us 
in the Currency Union. 
A major factor which impacts on the performance of our economies is the price of oil which in recent 
times has been at unprecedentedly high levels. It is our major import, and the price passes through to 
almost every item of consumption or production. 
Finally,  the  geopolitics  of  the  international  system,  particularly  the  fight  against  terrorism  has  to  be 
carefully examined, as it could potentially impact on our major foreign exchange earner, tourism. 
Domestically we have to treat with the fundamental issue of small size, both in terms of land mass and 
population.  The  question  we  have  to  pose  for  ourselves  is,  given  the  resources  we  have,  what 
standard of living is possible and sustainable over long periods of time? 
The  imbalance  between  expectations  and  resources  in  most  countries  shows  up  in  the  Balance  of 
Payments on the external account and in the budget domestically. Not many, if any country, could like 
the  US  get  away  with  running  these  twin  deficits  over  any  period  of  time,  as  they  are  almost  self 
correcting as creditors both external and domestic will withdraw their support at some stage. In fact, in 
the  US,  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  Alan  Greenspan  has  expressed  his  concern  about  the 
current  situation.  Antigua  and  Barbuda,  as  well  as  other  countries  in  the  Currency  Union  face  this 
situation, and I can only urge that it be vigourously addressed. 
The  OECS  countries  have  understood  more  than  the  rest  of  the  regional  community  the  need  for 
regional integration. While the bigger countries like Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago have felt that 
they had other options, the smaller islands have understood that it meant their very survival. 
This is a defining moment in the sense that we are about to embark on a new venture, the Caribbean 
Single Market and Economy, CSME and for it to succeed the OECS as a bloc must step up to the 
plate, define its interests and assert its leadership. We must, therefore, define to our satisfaction and 
acceptance a unique and coherent space called the OECS, which at least in an economic sense is 
continuous and coterminous. 
We have two concepts to engage our minds in this regard, first the OECS as an Economic Union, and 
the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union as a Single Financial Space. The only difference between the 
two is the absence of the BVI from the Currency Union as it uses the US dollar as its legal tender. 
The OECS is a highly integrated area as the Treaty of Basseterre, 1981 establishing the Organisation 
indicates. In Article 3 (2), it sets out a number of arrangements which if all implemented would result in 
the  formation  of  a  new  state.  The  founders  accepted  that  as  very  small  states  there  were  three 
overriding advantages to the arrangement – 
• 
• 
To take advantage of the economies of scale and scope through sharing vital services; 
To mitigate risks by spreading them over several countries;  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
Enhancing their capacity to negotiate with third countries or groups of countries. 
• 
The result is that the OECS is at a much higher level of integration than CARICOM with a common 
court,  a  common  currency,  central  bank  and  stock  exchange,  a  directorate  of  civil  aviation,  a  joint 
pharmaceutical  procurement  system,  joint  diplomatic  representation,  and  common  projects  in 
education and health, as well as joint regulation of telecommunications. 
We now need to focus on these achievements and use them as a platform for taking advantage of the 
CSME and other arrangements like the FTAA. We also need to see how each individual island can 
contribute to the whole instead of assuming that we will be worst off, or that one will gain at someone 
else’s expense. We need a different mindset in which addition and multiplication is seen as superior to 
subtraction and division. 
Having established the concept of a domain we must then identify the objectives of this entity. This will 
require the convergence of both regional and national goals. At the regional level there is the OECS 
Economic Development Strategy, the OECS Development Charter, and the objectives set at a Special 
Meeting of Heads in November 2002. Those were: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A sustainable growth rate of 6%; 
An unemployment rate of less than 6%; 
A poverty rate of less than 6%; 
Maintaining  and  achieving  the  Human  Development  Indices  goals  consistent  with  the 
Millennium Development Goals; and 
The transformation of our economies into internationally competitive entities. 
Monetary 
Fiscal 
Trade 
International Economic Relations 
Incomes 
Structural 
Social 
Environmental 
• 
At the national level, these objectives can be gleaned from manifestos, development plans, medium 
term economic strategy papers, public sector investment programs and budgets. 
The policies which are available to achieve these objectives are - 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Let me on this occasion confine myself to monetary and financial policies, given the occasion for which 
we are gathered. 
The  ECCB  in  assessing  the  situation  both  domestically  and  internationally  has  identified  consistent 
with the objectives set by the OECS Heads two major objectives which are also consistent with the 
purposes of the Bank as set out in Article 4 of the ECCB. These are Stability and Development. 
Under Stability the Bank has two goals, namely – Monetary Stability and Financial Stability. 
Monetary Stability is tied to the performance of the exchange rate. We have chosen a fixed exchange 
rate regime, and have managed to successfully maintain this at 2.7 EC to the US dollar since July 
1976. This has required us to maintain a very high level of foreign exchange reserves, presently 96% 
to the currency in circulation. This is above the legal limit of 60% and is approximately equivalent to 
four months imports where the benchmark is three months. 
In order for this parity to be maintained, we focus our attention on the performance of the Balance of 
Payments,  the  fiscal  and  debt  ratios  of  the  countries,  and  the  competitiveness  of  the  currency  as 
assessed by the Real Effective Exchange Rate. The Monetary Council has therefore set a number of 
benchmarks in the fiscal and debt areas which member governments have been requested to adhere 
to. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 3
Financial  Stability  is  related  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system  and  the  effective 
regulation  of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries.  This  requires  the  appropriate  legislative  and  legal 
framework and the capacity to effectively regulate the financial system. 
Let me put these two stability conditions in a way that the ordinary layman would understand. If the 
currency is devalued, the ability to purchase goods from abroad will be decreased and the prices of all 
goods will go up due to inflation. Also, on the other hand, if wages and prices increase faster than 
productivity  we  will  become  less  competitive.  The  Monetary  Council  has  recommended  to 
governments  that  they  establish  Tripartite  Committees  comprised  of  representatives  from  the 
government,  private  sector  and  the  trade  unions  to  monitor  wages,  prices,  employment  and 
productivity. 
With respect to financial stability, whereas in the case of the devaluation you will lose the ability to 
purchase more goods and services, in this case, if a bank closes you will lose all of your money. A 
proper legal and regulatory environment is therefore vital to the maintenance of stability. Stability can 
therefore be spelt out under the following headings with the appropriate responsibilities assigned to 
different institutions: 
• 
The Central Bank has the responsibility to maintain the external and domestic value of the 
currency; 
The Central Bank in conjunction with the Governments has the responsibility of ensuring the 
safety and soundness of the financial system; 
The  Banks  have  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  the  safety  of  their  obligations  to  their 
depositors; 
The Government has the responsibility that they keep their obligations for salaries, services 
and debt repayments. 
   Without this stability, growth and development will be very difficult to achieve, much less maintained. 
This brings me to two fundamental premises which I have taken great pains to bring to the attention of 
our governments and citizens, and will continue to do so on every available occasion. 
Number one is that banks do not lend out their own money. They only lend what is deposited with 
them.  It  is  therefore  depositors  money  which  is  at  risk.  Secondly,  governments  can  only  provide 
services  with  money  which  they  take  in  through  taxes  or  its  citizens.  If  the  government  provides  a 
particular service it can follow several procedures. Firstly, it can decide on full cost recovery, that is, if 
it cost $100 to provide, they will charge $100. It can outsource the service so that an external firm 
provides it. The firm will charge the full cost plus, unless the government subsidises all or part of the 
service. It can provide the service free of cost to the consumer. 
In the case of the subsidized and the free provision, the question would be, who pays? The simple 
answer is the Tax payer. 
There is, of course, another route where these costs can be shared with other countries in the OECS, 
thus bringing down the unit costs.  
These issues are important, not only in informing our citizens of our reality, that is, that there is no free 
meal and that someone has to pay or someone has to be held responsible, but also that they have 
developmental costs and implications. 
With  respect  to  costs,  the  expense  of  running  so  many  services  which  have  to  be  passed  on  to 
individual  tax  payers  or  business  firms  either  directly  or  indirectly  impacts  negatively  on  our 
productivity  and  competitiveness.  This  high  cost  of  government  means  less  disposable  incomes  for 
individuals and higher running costs for businesses. The implications are that if we get our citizens into 
the mode of depending on the government for everything this will not get them into the creative spirit of 
creating wealth and jobs. 
We must always remember that a nation is the aggregation of all its individual citizens and that if the 
nation is experiencing difficulty all of its citizens are also suffering in one way or the other. In rectifying 
the  problem  there  has  to  be  some  level  of  equity  in  sharing  the  pain,  but  the  basic  fundamental 
problem  still  remains  and  has  to  be  treated  with.  To  give  a  basic  example,  suppose  an  individual 
earned $10,000 a month and was able to spend through credit $15,000 a month. At the end of the 
year he/she would be in debt to the total of $60,000. At this point the creditors would say we have 
stopped  extending  credit  and  you  now  have  to  start  paying  back.  If  the  repayment  period  was  one 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2005
A common market for the EC dollar and foreign currencies; 
An IBM to provide liquidity for banks; 
A RGSM to provide markets for government securities; 
A securities market for shares; 
A secondary market for primary mortgages. 
year, the individual would now have to live on $5,000 a month, which is quite a drop from $15,000. Of 
course, they might be given more time. The moral of this example is that this holds for individuals, 
firms and governments. 
Speaking directly to the question of development, the ECCB sees its role to be in the area of money 
and  capital  market  development  once  the  stability  conditions  have  been  treated  with.  We  have 
analysed  the  gaps  in  the  system  and  are  proceeding  along  the  lines  of  establishing  markets  and 
institutions, putting in place the regulatory framework, and removing legal and administrative barriers 
to the creation of a single financial space. In the area of markets we have the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
With respect to institutions we have established: 
• 
• 
We  are  now  working  on  an  Eastern  Caribbean  Enterprise  Fund  to  be  followed  by  an  Eastern 
Caribbean Unit Trust. 
A number of supporting institutions such as the Eastern Caribbean Institute of Bankers, the Eastern 
Caribbean Bankers Association, and the Eastern Caribbean Institute of Accountants have also been 
established. 
We  need  to  have  close  liaison  with  the  OECS  Bar  Association  and  we  hope  that  a  vibrant  OECS 
Business Council will be created to push the development of the private sector in the region. 
We  need  the  support  of  our  governments  and  our  people  to  create  a  highly  sophisticated  and 
internationally competitive financial sector, which can pave the way to the achievement of our goals 
and objectives. 
We  are  confident  that  this  is  the  correct  path  to  proceed  on  and  that  with  the  political  will  of  our 
governments,  the  innovativeness  of  our  private  sector,  and  the  societal  consensus  of  our  people 
across the OECS, we will SUCCEED. 
However, in conclusion, we must remember that success comes before work only in the dictionary. 
The Eastern Caribbean Securities Exchange Depository and Registry; 
The Eastern Caribbean Home Mortgage Bank. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 5
