Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening linkages in the Islamic financial markets  
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  seminar  on 
Derivatives  in  Islamic  Finance,  “Strengthening  Linkages  in  the  Islamic  Financial  Markets”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 24 June 2005. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
"Islamic finance in Malaysia today has become increasingly more entrenched and integrated both on 
the domestic and international fronts. The successful integration has contributed to its rapid growth in 
assets  and  created  a  more  robust  and  resilient  Islamic  financial  system.  The  challenge  now  is  to 
further  strengthen  the  linkages  in  the  respective  components  of  the  Islamic  financial  system,  in 
particular, the Islamic financial markets. " 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this seminar on Derivatives in Islamic Finance jointly organised by 
Bank Negara Malaysia and the Financial Market Association of Malaysia. During this recent two days, 
we  have  organized  the  Investors  Conference,  the  seminar  on  the  10-year  Masterplan  on  Islamic 
Finance  and  the  dialogue  among  Shariah  scholars  which  have  gathered  an  extensive  participation, 
from  policy  makers,  investors,  industry  players  and  Shariah  scholars.  Today's  event  is  another 
important  initiative  which  brings  together  financial  experts  to  deliberate  on  a  vital  aspect  in  the 
development of Islamic finance.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The successful development of a robust and resilient Islamic financial system depends on the ability to 
integrate  the  various  components  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  that  includes  the  Islamic  banking 
industry,  takaful  and  the  money  and  capital  markets.  Of  equal  importance  is  also  to  integrate  the 
domestic Islamic financial system with the international financial system. For more than two decades, 
we have witnessed the success of the development of each of these respective components that has 
contributed to the rapid expansion in Malaysia's Islamic financial services industry. Indeed, we have 
seen the development of a comprehensive Islamic financial system. This has placed the Malaysian 
Islamic  financial  system  at  the  forefront  of  the global  Islamic  financial  system.  Notwithstanding  this, 
there  have  been  imbalances  in  the  pace  of  the  growth  of  the  components  of  the  financial  system. 
While  Islamic  banking,  being  the  core  component,  has  recorded  significant  progress,  more  efforts 
need to be directed to promote the growth of takaful and the financial markets. 
My remarks today will focus on measures to accelerate the growth of the Islamic financial markets by 
strengthening its required linkages. Of most importance is the development of a wider range of Islamic 
financial  instruments,  developing  the  relevant  indicators  to  support  benchmarking  and  an  efficient 
pricing mechanism as well as to actively promote the role of the market players. 
Development of a wider range of Islamic financial instruments 
For Islamic financial institutions to effectively manage its funds, there is a need to have diversity in the 
type and the maturity of the Islamic financial instruments. This is one area in Islamic finance that offers 
formidable  challenges  and  opportunities  to  market  participants  in  Malaysia.  A  broader  range  of 
products and services is vital in this fast changing global financial landscape. In today's marketplace, 
there are only  a  number of  Islamic  financial  instruments  that  have  been  developed  to cater  for  this 
need which for the most part constitutes straight private and government Islamic papers. In a bid to 
deepen and broaden the Islamic bond market, the government has been regularly issuing Islamic and 
conventional securities with different maturities, enabling the creation of a benchmark yield curve. This 
was  further  enhanced  with  the  introduction  of  an  Auction  Calender  in  the  year  2000.  In  the  2000, 
Government Investment Issues or GIIs were introduced, followed by Islamic negotiable notes, private 
debt securities, Treasury Bills and sukuk. Furthermore, following the amendment to the Government 
Investment Act in year 2005, the Government has started issuing shorter-term Islamic Treasury Bills 
and  longer-term  sukuk  or  Islamic bonds  with  a  maturity  of  10  years  in  order  to  further  diversify  the 
Islamic financial instruments available for investors. Under the Act, the Government is able to issue 
Islamic instruments under various Shariah principles and for different tenures; short and long term, to 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
meet the varying needs of investors. Islamic private debt securities (PDS) too have been fast growing 
in importance and size, accounting for 50% of the total PDS market in 2004.  
Despite these developments, there has been an inadequate supply of short-term Islamic instruments 
thereby providing less flexibility to the institutions in managing their asset and liability profiles. This is 
important as the Islamic banking institution has, to a large extent of its portfolio, long-term assets that 
include long-term Islamic housing mortgages and long-term Islamic financial instruments. These two 
asset  classes  constitute  approximately  80%  of  their  portfolio.  This  over-concentration  warrants  the 
need to have effective risk mitigating techniques and instruments as to avoid any potential adverse 
consequences that could occur in volatile market conditions. On major importance is the elimination of 
uncertainties  from  a  particular  transaction.  The  need  for  Islamic  hedging  instruments  in  the  Islamic 
financial services industry has therefore become increasingly important. Thus far, significant progress 
in this area has yet to be made. It is hoped that this seminar will be able to generate new ideas that 
can be implemented to support the requirements of the Islamic financial services industry players. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As  the  Islamic  finance  is  undergoing  transformation,  the  financial  infrastructure  and  product 
development  must  be  complemented  by  the  ability  to  manage  risks  by  market  participants.  This 
becomes particularly important as the growing and changing needs and expectations of consumers 
occurs  as  a  result  of  increased  education  levels  and  growing  wealth.  Corporate  customers  have 
become  more  performance-oriented  and  are  demanding  both  competitively  financial  products  and 
world-class financial advisory services. Consumers too are becoming increasingly discerning and have 
become  more  involved  in  their  financial  decisions,  demanding  a  broader  range  of  products  and 
services  at  more  competitive  prices  through  more  efficient  and  convenient  channels.  In  this 
environment,  product  innovation  needs  to  be  escalated  accordingly  in  particular,  to  respond  to  the 
growing need for managing risks to realign the risk-return profile of assets and liabilities for financial 
institutions  and  investors  in  reaction  to  fast  changing  economic  variables.  This  is  made  more 
pronounced  by  the  fact  that  increasingly,  with  the  unprecedented  economic  integration,  financial 
markets across the globe are not immune to financial volatilities. Therefore, it is crucial that market 
participants have the necessary tools to manage financial risks prudently and this is where derivatives 
can be applied. 
Application of derivatives will yield benefits to the general public as spread of risk among economic 
agents will mitigate risk of financial shocks to the financial markets at the macro level and individual 
institutions  at  the  micro  level.  As  a  result,  the  financial  system  becomes  more  robust,  stable  and 
resilient to extreme volatilities in the financial markets. The introduction of derivatives in the Islamic 
finance  with  adequate  legal,  regulatory  and  corporate  governance  framework  will  enhance  the 
development of the functioning of the Islamic financial system.  
Developing the relevant indicators  
The pricing mechanism for the Islamic financial instruments has so far been based on the prevailing 
interest rate framework. There appears to be no real difference in both the conventional and Islamic 
instrument. In order for the Islamic financial instrument to be efficiently priced, it needs to have its own 
indicator. As an example, for an instrument issued based on Ijarah principle using the property as its 
underlying  asset,  the  actual  rate  of  rental  can  be  used  to  determine  the  rate  of  return  on  this 
instrument. The indicator of the rate of rental will fluctuate based on the demand and supply of the 
said property. By having its own indicator, it will give a true reflection of the price of the underlying 
property  asset  as  opposed  to  being  linked  to  the  KLIBOR  which  has  no  direct  correlation  with  the 
changes in the rental rate.  
Actively promote the role of the market players 
The Islamic financial services industry is expected to benefit from the recent increase in the number of 
players following the launching of Islamic subsidiaries, the issuance of foreign Islamic banking licences 
and the measures to issue additional takaful licences. The entrance of these players will contribute to 
an active participation in both the primary and secondary markets for Islamic financial instruments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
I  hope  this  seminar  will  crystallize  positive  ideas  to  pave  the  way  and  contribute  towards  the 
development of a more vibrant and dynamic Islamic financial system. I wish to take this opportunity to 
thank the speakers for accepting our invitation to share their invaluable knowledge and experiences in 
this Seminar. The participation by researchers and practitioners in the Islamic financial system is also 
important. On this note, I wish you all a successful seminar. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
