Y V Reddy: Banking sector reforms in India - an overview 
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Institute  of  Bankers  of 
Pakistan, Karachi, 18 May 2005. 
 Governor Ishrat Husain and distinguished bankers, 
At the outset, let me express my gratitude to Governor Husain for inviting me to visit Karachi and meet 
with you. I consider it an honour to be here amidst the banking fraternity. I would like to congratulate 
Pakistan for its impressive economic performance. Governor Husain, in his address at the Seminar on 
Management of Pakistan Economy in Lahore, a few weeks ago, had this to say about recent economic 
performance of Pakistan and challenges ahead, in his characteristically candid fashion:  
"Economic  growth  rate  has  reached  a  solid  6  per  cent  plus,  inflation  has  been 
contained to 5 per cent which has only recently started rising, exchange rate has 
been stabilized, fiscal deficit has been drastically reduced, domestic interest rates 
have declined dramatically, international reserves have jumped twelve times their 
2000 level, debt ratios have fallen significantly and investment is booming."  
He further added that,  
"Pakistan  has  achieved  macroeconomic  stability,  introduced  structural  reforms, 
improved economic governance and resumed the path for high growth rates. But 
there is no room for complacency."  
Taking account of the nature of audience here and following the example of Governor Husain, who 
spoke  eloquently  on  the  banking  sector  reforms  in  Pakistan  in  January  this  year,  I  have  chosen  to 
present an overview of banking sector reforms in India.  
It  is  useful  to  very  briefly  recall  the  nature  of  the  Indian  banking  sector  at  the  time  of  initiation  of 
financial  sector  reforms  in  India  in  the  early  1990s.  The  Indian  financial  system  in  the  pre-reform 
period (i.e., prior to Gulf crisis of 1991), essentially catered to the needs of planned development in a 
mixed-economy  framework  where  the  public  sector  had  a  dominant  role  in  economic  activity.  The 
strategy of planned economic development required huge development expenditure, which was met 
through Government’s dominance of ownership of banks, automatic monetization of fiscal deficit and 
subjecting  the  banking  sector  to  large  pre-emptions  –  both  in  terms  of  the  statutory  holding  of 
Government securities (statutory liquidity ratio, or SLR) and cash reserve ratio (CRR). Besides, there 
was  a  complex  structure  of  administered  interest  rates  guided  by  the  social  concerns,  resulting  in 
cross-subsidization. These not only distorted the interest rate mechanism but also adversely affected 
the viability and profitability of banks by the end of 1980s. There is perhaps an element of commonality 
of such a ‘repressed’ regime in the financial sector of many emerging market economies. It follows that 
the  process  of  reform  of  financial  sector  in  most  emerging  economies  also  has  significant 
commonalities  while  being  specific  to  the  circumstances  of  each  country.  A  narration  of  the  broad 
contours of reform in India would be helpful in appreciating both the commonalities and the differences 
in our paths of reforms. 
Contours of banking reforms in India 
First, reform measures were initiated and sequenced to create an enabling environment for banks to 
overcome the external constraints – these were related to administered structure of interest rates, high 
levels  of  pre-emption  in  the  form  of  reserve  requirements,  and  credit  allocation  to  certain  sectors. 
Sequencing  of  interest  rate  deregulation  has  been  an  important  component  of  the  reform  process 
which  has  imparted  greater  efficiency  to  resource  allocation.  The  process  has  been  gradual  and 
predicated  upon  the  institution  of  prudential  regulation  for  the  banking  system,  market  behaviour, 
financial opening and, above all, the underlying macroeconomic conditions. The interest rates in the 
banking system have been largely deregulated except for certain specific classes; these are: savings 
deposit accounts, non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits, small loans up to Rs.2 lakh and export credit. 
The  need  for  continuance  of  these  prescriptions  as  well  as  those  relating  to  priority  sector  lending 
have  been  flagged  for  wider  debate  in  the  latest  annual  policy  of  the  RBI.  However,  administered 
interest rates still prevail in small savings schemes of the Government. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 1
Second, as regards the policy environment of public ownership, it must be recognised that the lion’s 
share of financial intermediation was accounted for by the public sector during the pre-reform period. 
As part of the reforms programme, initially, there was infusion of capital by the Government in public 
sector banks, which was followed by expanding the capital base with equity participation by the private 
investors.  The  share  of  the  public  sector  banks  in  the  aggregate  assets  of  the  banking  sector  has 
come down from 90 per cent in 1991 to around 75 per cent in 2004. The share of wholly Government-
owned  public  sector  banks  (i.e.,  where  no  diversification  of  ownership  has  taken  place)  sharply 
declined from about 90 per cent to 10 per cent of aggregate assets of all scheduled commercial banks 
during  the  same  period.  Diversification  of  ownership  has  led  to  greater  market  accountability  and 
improved efficiency. Since the initiation of reforms, infusion of funds by the Government into the public 
sector banks for the purpose of recapitalisation amounted, on a cumulative basis, to less than one per 
cent of India’s GDP, a figure much lower than that for many other countries. Even after accounting for 
the reduction in the Government's shareholding on account of losses set off, the current market value 
of  the  share capital  of  the  Government  in  public  sector  banks  has  increased  manifold  and  as  such 
what was perceived to be a bail-out of public sector banks by Government seems to be turning out to 
be a profitable investment for the Government.  
Third,  one  of  the  major  objectives  of  banking  sector  reforms  has  been  to  enhance  efficiency  and 
productivity through competition. Guidelines have been laid down for establishment of new banks in 
the private sector and the foreign banks have been allowed more liberal entry. Since 1993, twelve new 
private sector banks have been set up. As already mentioned, an element of private shareholding in 
public  sector  banks  has  been  injected  by  enabling  a  reduction  in  the  Government  shareholding  in 
public  sector  banks  to  51  per  cent.  As  a  major  step  towards  enhancing  competition  in  the  banking 
sector, foreign direct investment in the private sector banks is now allowed up to 74 per cent, subject 
to conformity with the guidelines issued from time to time.  
Fourth, consolidation in the banking sector has been another feature of the reform process. This also 
encompassed the Development Financial Institutions (DFIs), which have been providers of long-term 
finance  while  the  distinction  between  short-term  and  long-term  finance  provider  has  increasingly 
become  blurred  over  time.  The  complexities  involved  in  harmonising  the  role  and  operations  of  the 
DFIs  were  examined  and  the  RBI  enabled  the  reverse-merger  of  a  large  DFI  with  its  commercial 
banking subsidiary which is a major initiative towards universal banking. Recently, another large term-
lending institution has been converted into a bank. While guidelines for mergers between non-banking 
financial companies and banks were issued some time ago, guidelines for mergers between private 
sector banks have been issued a few days ago. The principles underlying these guidelines would be 
applicable,  as  appropriate,  to  the public sector  banks  also, subject  to  the provisions of  the  relevant 
legislation. 
Fifth, impressive institutional and legal reforms have been undertaken in relation to the banking sector. 
In 1994, a Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) was constituted comprising select members of the 
RBI Board with a variety of professional expertise to exercise 'undivided attention to supervision'. The 
BFS,  which  generally  meets  once  a  month,  provides  direction  on  a  continuing  basis  on  regulatory 
policies  including  governance  issues  and  supervisory  practices.  It  also  provides  direction  on 
supervisory actions in specific cases. The BFS also ensures an integrated approach to supervision of 
commercial  banks,  development 
finance  companies,  urban 
cooperatives  banks  and  primary  dealers.  A  Board  for  Regulation  and  Supervision  of  Payment  and 
Settlement  Systems  (BPSS)  has  also  been  recently  constituted  to  prescribe  policies  relating  to  the 
regulation and supervision of all types of payment and settlement systems, set standards for existing 
and  future  systems,  authorise  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  determine  criteria  for 
membership  to  these  systems.  The  Credit  Information  Companies  (Regulation)  Bill,  2004  has  been 
passed  by both  the  Houses of  the  Parliament while  the Government  Securities  Bills,  2004  is  under 
process.  Certain  amendments  are  being  considered  by  the  Parliament  to  enhance  Reserve  Bank’s 
regulatory and supervisory powers. Major amendments relate to requirement of prior approval of RBI 
for acquisition of five per cent or more of shares of a banking company with a view to ensuring ‘fit and 
proper’ status of the significant shareholders, aligning the voting rights with the economic holding and 
empowering the RBI to supersede the Board of a banking company. 
Sixth,  there  have  been  a  number  of  measures  for  enhancing  the  transparency  and  disclosures 
standards. Illustratively, with a view to enhancing further transparency, all cases of penalty imposed by 
the  RBI  on  the  banks  as  also  directions  issued  on  specific  matters,  including  those  arising  out  of 
inspection, are to be placed in the public domain.  
institutions,  non-banking 
finance 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2005
Seventh, while the regulatory framework and supervisory practices have almost converged with the 
best  practices  elsewhere  in  the  world,  two  points  are  noteworthy.  First,  the  minimum  capital  to  risk 
assets ratio (CRAR) has been kept at nine per cent i.e., one percentage point above the international 
norm;  and  second,  the  banks  are  required  to  maintain  a  separate  Investment  Fluctuation  Reserve 
(IFR) out of profits, towards interest rate risk, at five per cent of their investment portfolio under the 
categories ‘held for trading’ and ‘available for sale’. This was prescribed at a time when interest rates 
were falling and banks were realizing large gains out of their treasury activities. Simultaneously, the 
conservative accounting norms did not allow banks to recognize the unrealized gains. Such unrealized 
gains coupled with the creation of IFR helped in cushioning the valuation losses required to be booked 
when interest rates in the longer tenors have moved up in the last one year or so.  
Eighth, of late, the regulatory framework in India, in addition to prescribing prudential guidelines and 
encouraging market discipline, is increasingly focusing on ensuring good governance through "fit and 
proper" owners, directors and senior managers of the banks. Transfer of shareholding of five per cent 
and above requires acknowledgement from the RBI and such significant shareholders are put through 
a `fit and proper' test. Banks have also been asked to ensure that the nominated and elected directors 
are screened by a nomination committee to satisfy `fit and proper' criteria. Directors are also required 
to  sign  a  covenant  indicating  their  roles  and  responsibilities.  The  RBI  has  recently  issued  detailed 
guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector banks emphasizing diversified ownership. 
The listed banks are also required to comply with governance principles laid down by the SEBI – the 
securities markets regulator. 
Processes of banking reform 
The  processes  adopted  for  bringing  about  the  reforms  in  India  may  be  of  some  interest  to  this 
audience.  Recalling  some  features  of  financial  sector  reforms  in  India  would  be  in  order,  before 
narrating  the  processes.  First,  financial  sector  reform  was  undertaken  early  in  the  reform-cycle  in 
India.  Second,  the  financial  sector  was  not  driven  by  any  crisis  and  the  reforms  have  not  been  an 
outcome  of  multilateral  aid.  Third,  the  design  and  detail  of  the  reform  were  evolved  by  domestic 
expertise, though international experience is always kept in view. Fourth, the Government preferred 
that public sector banks manage the over-hang problems of the past rather than cleanup the balance 
sheets  with  support  of  the  Government.  Fifth,  it  was  felt  that  there  is  enough  room  for  growth  and 
healthy competition for public and private sector banks as well as foreign and domestic banks. The 
twin governing principles are non-disruptive progress and consultative process.  
In  order  to  ensure  timely  and  effective  implementation  of  the  measures,  RBI  has  been  adopting  a 
consultative approach before introducing policy measures. Suitable mechanisms have been instituted 
to deliberate upon various issues so that the benefits of financial efficiency and stability percolate to 
the  common  person  and  the  services  of  the  Indian  financial  system  can  be  benchmarked  against 
international  best  standards  in  a  transparent  manner.  Let  me  give  a  brief  account  of  these 
mechanisms.  
First,  on  all  important  issues,  workings  group  are  constituted  or  technical  reports  are  prepared, 
generally  encompassing  a  review  of  the  international  best  practices,  options  available  and  way 
forward.  The  group  membership  may  be  internal  or  external  to  the  RBI  or  mixed.  Draft  reports  are 
often  placed  in  public  domain  and  final  reports  take  account  of  inputs,  in  particular  from  industry 
associations and self-regulatory organizations. The reform-measures emanate out of such a series of 
reports, the pioneering ones being: Report of the Committee on the Financial System (Chairman: Shri 
M. Narasimham), in 1991; Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman: 
Dr. C. Rangarajan) in 1992; and the Report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Chairman: 
Shri M. Narasimham) in 1998.  
Second,  Resource  Management  Discussions  meetings  are  held  by  the  RBI  with  select  commercial 
banks, prior to the policy announcements. These meetings not only focus on perception and outlook of 
the  bankers  on  the  economy,  liquidity  conditions,  credit  flow,  development  of  different  markets  and 
directions of interest rates, but also on issues relating to developmental aspects of banking operations.  
Third,  we  have  formed  a  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Money,  Foreign  Exchange  and 
Government Securities Markets (TAC). It has emerged as a key consultative mechanism amongst the 
regulators  and  various  market  players  including  banks.  The  Committee  has  been  crystallizing  the 
synergies of experts across various fields of the financial market and thereby acting as a facilitator for 
the RBI in steering reforms in money, government securities and foreign exchange markets. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 3
Fourth, in order to strengthen the consultative process in the regulatory domain and to place such a 
process on a continuing basis, the RBI has constituted a Standing Technical Advisory Committee on 
Financial Regulation on the lines similar to the TAC. The Committee consists of experts drawn from 
academia,  financial  markets,  banks,  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  credit  rating  agencies.  The 
Committee examines the issues referred to it and advises the RBI on desirable regulatory framework 
on an on-going basis for banks, non-bank financial institutions and other market participants.  
Fifth,  for  ensuring  periodic  formal  interaction,  amongst  the  regulators,  there  is  a  High  Level  Co-
ordination  Committee  on  Financial  and  Capital  Markets  (HLCCFCM)  with  the Governor,  RBI  as  the 
Chairman, and the Heads of the securities market and insurance regulators, and the Secretary of the 
Finance Ministry as the members. This Co-ordination Committee has authorised constitution of several 
standing committees to ensure co-ordination in regulatory frameworks at an operational level. 
Sixth, more recently a Standing Advisory Committee on Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) has been 
activated to advise on structural, regulatory and supervisory issues relating to UCBs and to facilitate 
the process of formulating future approaches for this sector. Similar mechanisms are being worked out 
for non-banking financial companies. 
Seventh, the RBI has also instituted a mechanism of placing draft versions of important guidelines for 
comments  of  the  public  at  large  before  finalisation  of  the  guidelines.  To  further  this  consultative 
process  and  with  a  specific  goal  of  making  the  regulatory  guidelines  more  user-friendly,  a  Users’ 
Consultative Panel has been constituted comprising the representatives of select banks and market 
participants. The panel provides feedback on regulatory instructions at the formulation stage to avoid 
any subsequent ambiguities and operational glitches.  
Eighth,  an  extensive  and  transparent  communication  system  has  been  evolved.  The  annual  policy 
statements  and  their  mid-term  reviews  communicate  the  RBI’s  stance  on  monetary  policy  in  the 
immediate future of six months to one year. Over the years, the reports of various working groups and 
committees have emerged as another plank of two-way communication from RBI. An important feature 
of the RBI’s communication policy is the almost real-time dissemination of information through its web-
site. The auction results under Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of the day are posted on the web-
site by 12.30 p.m the same day, while by 2.30 p.m. the ‘reference rates’ of select foreign currencies 
are  also  placed  on  the  website.  By  the  next  day  morning,  the  press  release  on  money  market 
operations is issued. Every Saturday, by 12 noon, the weekly statistical supplement is placed on the 
web-site  providing  a  fairly  detailed,  recent  data-base  on  the  RBI  and  the  financial  sector.  All  the 
regulatory and administrative circulars of different Departments of the RBI are placed on the web-site 
within half an hour of their finalization.  
Ninth,  an  important  feature  of  the  reform  of  the  Indian  financial  system  has  been  the  intent  of  the 
authorities  to  align  the  regulatory  framework  with  international  best  practices  keeping  in  view  the 
developmental needs of the country and domestic factors. Towards this end, a Standing Committee on 
International Financial Standards and Codes was constituted in 1999. The Standing Committee had 
set up ten Advisory Groups in key areas of the financial sector whose reports are available on the RBI 
website. The recommendations contained in these reports have either been implemented or are in the 
process of implementation. I would like to draw your attention to two reports in particular, which have a 
direct  bearing  on  the  banking  system,  viz.,  Advisory  Group  on  Banking  Supervision  and  Advisory 
Group  on  Corporate  Governance.  Subsequently, 
the 
recommendations of the Advisory Groups and reported the progress and agenda ahead. 
in  2004,  we  conducted  a  review  of 
What has been the impact? 
These reform measures have had major impact on the overall efficiency and stability of the banking 
system in India. The present capital adequacy of Indian banks is comparable to those at international 
level. There has been a marked improvement in the asset quality with the percentage of gross non-
performing assets (NPAs) to gross advances for the banking system reduced from 14.4 per cent in 
1998  to  7.2  per  cent  in  2004.  The  reform  measures  have  also  resulted  in  an  improvement  in  the 
profitability  of  banks.  The  Return  on  Assets  (RoA)  of  the  banks  rose  from  0.4  per  cent  in  the  year 
1991-92 to 1.2 per cent in 2003-04. Considering that, globally, the RoA has been in the range 0.9 to 
1.5 per cent for 2004, Indian banks are well placed. The banking sector reforms also emphasized the 
need to review the manpower resources and rationalize the requirements by drawing a realistic plan 
so as to reduce the operating cost and improve the profitability. During the last five years, the business 
per employee for public sector banks more than doubled to around Rs.25 million in 2004.  
4 
 BIS Review 35/2005
Continuity, change and context 
We lay considerable emphasis on appropriate mix between the elements of continuity and change in 
the process of reform, but the dynamic elements in the mix are determined by the context. While there 
is usually a consensus on the broad direction, relative emphasis on various elements of the process of 
reform keeps changing, depending on the evolving circumstances. Perhaps it will be useful to illustrate 
this approach to contextualising the mix of continuity and change.  
The  mid-term  review  in  November  2003,  reviewed  the  progress  of  implementation  of  various 
developmental as well as regulatory measures in the banking sector but emphasised facilitating the 
ease  of  transactions  by  the  common  person  and  strengthening  the  credit  delivery  systems,  as  a 
response to the pressing needs of the society and economy. The annual policy statement of May 2004 
carried forward this focus but flagged major areas requiring urgent attention especially in the areas of 
ownership,  governance,  conflicts  of  interest  and  customer-protection.  Some  extracts  of  the  policy 
statement may be in order:  
"First, it is necessary to articulate in a comprehensive and transparent manner the 
policy  in  regard  to  ownership  and  governance  of  both  public  and  private  sector 
banks  keeping  in  view  the  special  nature  of  banks.  This  will  also  facilitate  the 
ongoing  shift  from  external  regulation  to  internal  systems  of  controls  and  risk 
assessments. Second, from a systemic point of view, inter-relationships between 
activities  of  financial  intermediaries  and  areas  of  conflict  of  interests  need  to  be 
considered.  Third,  in  order  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system  by 
reducing  the likelihood  of  their  becoming  conduits  for  money  laundering,  terrorist 
financing and other unlawful activities and also to ensure audit trail, greater accent 
needs to be laid on the adoption of an effective consolidated know your customer 
(KYC) system, on both assets and liabilities, in all financial intermediaries regulated 
by RBI.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  essential  that  banks  do not seek  intrusive details 
from  their  customers  and  do  not  resort  to  sharing  of  information  regarding  the 
customer except with the written consent of the customer. Fourth, while the stability 
and  efficiency  imparted  to  the  large  commercial  banking  system  is  universally 
recognised, there are some segments which warrant restructuring."  
The  annual  policy  statement  for  the  current  year  reiterates  the  concern  for  common  person,  while 
enunciating a medium term framework, for development of money, forex and government securities 
markets; for enhancing credit flow to agriculture and small industry; for action points in technology and 
payments systems; for institutional reform in co-operative banking, non-banking financial companies 
and  regional  rural  banks;  and,  for  ensuring  availability  of  quality  services  to  all  sections  of  the 
population. The most distinguishing feature of the policy statement relates to the availability of banking 
services to the common person, especially depositors.  
The statement reiterates that depositors’ interests form the focal point of the regulatory framework for 
banking in India, and elaborates the theme as follows: 
“A licence to do banking business provides the entity, the ability to accept deposits 
and  access  to  deposit  insurance  for  small  depositors.  Similarly,  regulation  and 
supervision  by  RBI  enables  these  entities  to  access  funds  from  a  wider  investor 
base  and  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  provides  efficient  payments  and 
funds transfer services. All these services, which are in the nature of public good, 
involve significant costs and are being made available only to ensure availability of 
banking and payment services to the entire population without discrimination”.  
The policy draws attention to the divergence in treatment of depositors compared to borrowers as:  
“ … while policies relating to credit allocation, credit pricing and credit restructuring 
should  continue  to  receive  attention,  it  is  inappropriate  to  ignore  the  mandate 
relating to depositors’ interests. Further, in our country, the socio-economic profile 
for  a  typical  depositor  who  seeks  safe  avenues  for  his  savings  deserves  special 
attention relative to other stakeholders in the banks”.  
Another significant area of concern has been the possible exclusion of a large section of population 
from the provision of services and the Statement pleads for financial inclusion. It states:  
“There has been expansion, greater competition and diversification of ownership of 
banks leading to both enhanced efficiency and systemic resilience in the banking 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 5
sector. However, there are legitimate concerns in regard to the banking practices 
that  tend  to  exclude  rather  than  attract  vast  sections  of  population,  in  particular 
pensioners,  self-employed  and  those  employed  in  unorganised  sector.  While 
commercial considerations are no doubt important, the banks have been bestowed 
with several privileges, especially of seeking public deposits on a highly leveraged 
basis, and consequently they should be obliged to provide banking services to all 
segments of the population, on equitable basis.”  
Operationally,  it  has  been  made  clear  that  RBI  will  implement  policies  to  encourage  banks  which 
provide extensive services while disincentivising those which are not responsive to the banking needs 
of the community, including the underprivileged.  
The quality of services rendered has also invited attention in the current policy. I quote further, 
“Liberalisation and enhanced competition accord immense benefits, but experience 
has  shown  that  consumers’  interests  are  not  necessarily  accorded  full  protection 
and  their  grievances  are  not  properly  attended  to.  Several  representations  are 
being received in regard to recent trends of levying unreasonably high service/user 
charges  and  enhancement  of  user  charges  without  proper  and  prior  intimation. 
Taking account of all these considerations, it has been decided by RBI to set up an 
independent  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  on  the  model  of  the 
mechanism in the UK in order to ensure that comprehensive code of conduct for 
fair treatment of customers are evolved and adhered to”.  
It  is  essential  to  recognise  that,  while  these  constitute  contextual  nuanced  responses  to  changing 
circumstances  within  the  country,  the  overwhelming  compulsion  to  be  in  harmony  with  global 
developments must be respected and that essentially relates to Basel II. 
Basel II and India  
RBI’s association with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision dates back to 1997 as India was 
among the 16 non-member countries that were consulted in the drafting of the Basel Core Principles. 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  became  a  member  of  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group  in  1998  and 
subsequently became a member of the Core Principles Working Group on Capital. Within the Working 
Group,  RBI  has  been  actively  participating  in  the  deliberations  on  the  New  Accord  and  had  the 
privilege to lead a group of six major non-G-10 supervisors which presented a proposal on a simplified 
approach for Basel II to the Committee. 
Commercial banks in India will start implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007. They will 
adopt Standardised Approach for credit risk and Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk, initially. 
After adequate skills are developed, both at the banks and also at supervisory levels, some banks may 
be allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) Approach.  
Let me briefly review the steps taken for implementation of Basel II and the emerging issues. The RBI 
had announced in its annual policy statement in May 2004 that banks in India should examine in depth 
the  options  available  under  Basel  II  and  draw  a  road-map  by  end-December  2004  for  migration  to 
Basel II and review the progress made at quarterly intervals. The Reserve Bank organized a two-day 
seminar in July 2004 mainly to sensitise the Chief Executive Officers of banks to the opportunities and 
challenges emerging from the Basel II norms. Soon thereafter all banks were advised in August 2004 
to  undertake  a  self-assessment  of  the  various  risk  management  systems  in  place,  with  specific 
reference to the three major risks covered under the Basel II and initiate necessary remedial measures 
to update the systems to match up to the minimum standards prescribed under the New Framework. 
Banks  have  also  been  advised  to  formulate  and  operationalise  the  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment 
Process (CAAP) within the banks as required under Pillar II of the New Framework. 
It  is  appropriate  to  list  some  of  the  other  regulatory  initiatives  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
relevant  for  Basel  II.  First,  we  have  tried  to  ensure  that  the  banks  have  suitable  risk  management 
framework oriented towards their requirements dictated by the size and complexity of business, risk 
philosophy,  market  perceptions  and  the  expected  level  of  capital.  Second,  Risk  Based  Supervision 
(RBS) in 23 banks has been introduced on a pilot basis. Third, we have been encouraging banks to 
formalize  their  capital  adequacy  assessment  process  (CAAP)  in  alignment  with  their  business  plan 
and performance budgeting system. This, together with the adoption of RBS would aid in factoring the 
Pillar II requirements under Basel II. Fourth, we have been expanding the area of disclosures (Pillar 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2005
III), so as to have greater transparency in the financial position and risk profile of banks. Finally, we 
have  tried  to  build  capacity  for  ensuring  the  regulator’s  ability  for  identifying  and  permitting  eligible 
banks to adopt IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches. 
As per normal practice, and with a view to ensuring migration to Basel II in a non-disruptive manner, a 
consultative and participative approach has been adopted for both designing and implementing Basel 
II. A Steering Committee comprising senior officials from 14 banks (public, private and foreign) has 
been  constituted  wherein  representation  from  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  and  the  RBI  has  also 
been  ensured.  The  Steering  Committee  had  formed  sub-groups  to  address  specific  issues.  On  the 
basis of recommendations of the Steering Committee, draft guidelines to the banks on implementation 
of the New Capital Adequacy Framework have been issued.  
Implementation of Basel II will require more capital for banks in India due to the fact that operational 
risk  is  not  captured  under  Basel  I,  and  the  capital  charge  for  market  risk  was  not  prescribed  until 
recently. Though last year has not been a very good year for banks, they are exploring all avenues for 
meeting  the  capital  requirements  under  Basel  II.  The  cushion  available  in  the  system,  which  has  a 
CRAR of over 12 per cent now, is, however, comforting.  
India has four rating agencies of which three are owned partly/wholly by international rating agencies. 
Compared  to  developing  countries,  the  extent  of  rating  penetration  has  been  increasing  every  year 
and a large number of capital issues of companies has been rated. However, since rating is of issues 
and not of issuers, it is likely to result, in effect, in application of only Basel I standards for credit risks 
in respect of non-retail exposures. While Basel II provides some scope to extend the rating of issues to 
issuers,  this  would  only  be  an  approximation  and  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  system  to  move  to 
rating  of  issuers.  Encouraging  rating  of  issuers  would  be  essential  in  this  regard.  In  this  context, 
current non-availability of acceptable and qualitative historical data relevant to ratings, along with the 
related costs involved in building up and maintaining the requisite database, does influence the pace 
of migration to the advanced approaches available under Basel II. 
Above all, capacity building, both in banks and the regulatory bodies is a serious challenge, especially 
with regard to adoption of the advanced approaches. We in India have initiated supervisory capacity-
building measures to identify the gaps and to assess as well as quantify the extent of additional capital 
which  may  be  required  to  be  maintained  by  such  banks.  The  magnitude  of  this  task,  which  is 
scheduled  to  be  completed  by  December  2006,  appears  daunting  since  we  have  as  many  as  90 
scheduled commercial banks in India. 
Concluding observations 
In the current scenario, banks are constantly pushing the frontiers of risk management. Compulsions 
arising out of increasing competition, as well as agency problems between management, owners and 
other stakeholders are inducing banks to look at newer avenues to augment revenues, while trimming 
costs. Consolidation, competition and risk management are no doubt critical to the future of banking 
but I believe that governance and financial inclusion would also emerge as the key issues for a country 
like India, at this stage of socio-economic development. 
Once  again, let  me  thank Governor Husain  for  his kind  invitation and  the audience  for  their  patient 
hearing. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 35/2005 
 7
