Kazumasa Iwata: The role of the price stability anchor in extricating 
Japan from deflation 
Summary of a speech given by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, 
at  the  Panel  Discussion  “Monetary  Policy  Strategies:  A  Central  Bank  Panel”,  at  the 
Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, 27 August 2005. 
 Introduction  
I would like to talk about the issues relating to monetary policy strategies for the future, in the 
light  of  Japan's  experience  in  the  last  decade  of  stagnation  as  well  as  deflation,  and  the 
subsequent  struggle  to  overcome  deflation  under  the  zero  bound  on  the  nominal  interest 
rate.  
After a pause in growth triggered by the bursting of the mini-bubble in the digital electronics 
sector in spring 2004, Japan has resumed growth exceeding the potential growth rate, with 
the  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index,  excluding  institutional  and  special  factors 
such  as  oil,  telephone  charges,  rice  and  fresh  food,  registering  virtually  zero  in  recent 
months.1 Currently we have good prospects to exit from a decade-long period of deflation. In 
this  context,  I  would  like  to  draw  some  lessons  from  previous  policy  developments  for  the 
future conduct of monetary policy, focusing on the role of the price stability anchor. 
The quantitative easing policy and the price stability anchor  
Japan is apparently viewed as a country that has not adopted an inflation targeting policy. 
Yet it is my personal view that Japan implements implicitly a price stability target within the 
framework  of  current  quantitative  easing  policy  (bank  reserve  target  policy)  which  was 
introduced  in  March  2001.  This  is  primarily  because  of  the  strict  observance  of  the 
commitment on the policy duration to secure price stability.  
The preceding "zero interest rate policy" in the period from February 1999 to August 2000 
failed to bear fruit, in part due to the weak commitment on policy duration. In contrast, under 
the quantitative easing policy, the Bank of Japan clarified and strengthened the commitment 
on the duration of the policy by presenting in October 2003 the three conditions for ending 
this policy. The three conditions can be summarized by a phrase such as "stably above zero 
of the core consumer price index on a year-to-year basis" or "never return to deflation."  
This commitment sends a signal to the market that the Bank of Japan finds it important to 
secure price stability to achieve positive inflation rates, although the numerical upper limit is 
not announced.2 It serves as an anchor of price stability to prevent a deflationary spiral under 
the condition of the zero bound on the nominal interest rate.  
                                                 
1   Japan's  economy  resumed  its  recovery  process  after  a  pause  in  growth  triggered  by  the  IT  sector-related 
inventory stock adjustment. The  bursting  of  the mini-bubble in the  digital electronics sector  was associated 
with the downward cyclical phase of the liquid crystal and silicon cycle initiated in spring 2004. Subsequently, 
a  non-IT  sector-related  inventory  stock  adjustment  due  to  the  deceleration  of  exports,  notably  for  China, 
curtailed industrial production activity and the growth rate. Currently, the inventory stock adjustment process is 
almost  over.  In  addition,  domestic  private  final  demand  in  the  first  half  of  2005  was  sufficiently  strong  to 
register growth above the potential growth rate (about 1 percent). 
2   On the lack of an upper limit, there is some similarity to the lack of a lower limit for the numerical definition of 
price stability below 2 percent during the initial stage of monetary operations by the European Central Bank. 
    1/5 
Price level indeterminacy under the zero bound on the nominal interest rate  
Under the Bank of Japan's quantitative easing policy, not only the uncollateralized overnight 
call rate but also the rate of longer maturity of at least one year has virtually reached zero. It 
is well known that monetary policy aimed at fixing the market interest rate faces difficulties in 
controlling the money supply and the inflation rate. The difficulties are augmented under the 
zero interest rates, because the association between the money supply and the price level 
becomes much looser than normal. Therefore, it is all the more important for the central bank 
to provide the price stability anchor to the market.3
Moreover, the zero bound on the nominal interest rate erodes the market mechanism in the 
financial market as well as market discipline, thereby distorting the allocation of funds on the 
market. 
In the past several months, we encountered a difficulty in achieving the bank reserve target 
due to undersubscription to our offers in open market operations, and allowed a temporary 
deviation from the lower limit of the reserve target in early June, end-July, and early August. 
The intention was to maintain the bank reserve target in the face of diminishing demand for 
excess reserves by banks. In other words, the measure was designed to solve the trade-off 
between  strict  implementation  of  the  commitment  and  flexibility.  It  may  be  noted  that  the 
additional  flotation  of  government  bonds  to  frontload  the  rollover  of  existing  government 
bonds concentrated in fiscal 2008 has made it more difficult to maintain the reserve target.4
Bank  of  England  Governor  Mervyn  King  (2004)  once  pointed  out  the  importance  of  debt 
management  policy,  namely,  the  shortening  maturity  structure  of  government  debt,  to 
Japan's  exit  from  deflation.  The  cash  management  by  the  government  sector  also  seems 
relevant to facilitate the efficient implementation of monetary policy.  
At any rate, it is best to preempt the emergence of the zero bound on the nominal interest 
rate,  even  though  room  remains  for  the  central  bank  to  affect  the  expected  future  path  of 
short-term  rates  by  implementing  the  commitment  on  policy  duration  longer  than  is  usual. 
However,  strict  implementation  of  the  commitment  tends  to  limit  flexibility  in  conducting 
monetary policy.  
Effect of quantitative easing policy on interest rates  
A  number  of  proposals  have  been  made  to  overcome  Japan's  deflation.  One  of  them 
recommends  widening  the  application  of  zero  interest  rates  to  longer  maturity  until  the 
deflation  disappears.  In  the  process  of  raising  the  bank  reserve  target,  the  extent  of  zero 
interest  rates  has  been  widened  to  cover  at  least  one  year.  This  effect  arises  due  to  the 
commitment to maintain an ultra-expansionary policy longer than anticipated by the market 
participants under normal circumstances. We name this the "policy duration effect."  
The increase in the bank reserve target seems to have exerted a signaling effect to solidify 
the commitment and thus strengthen the policy duration effect, aside from the ample liquidity 
                                                                                                                                                      
The  ECB  redefined  price  stability  by  adding  a  lower  limit  of  1  percent,  yet  the  final  goal  is  set  closer  to  2 
percent. 
It may be noted that in Japan all the market interest rates are not zero, in contrast to the assumption adopted 
by several theoretical models. 
3  
4   The amount of government deposits and government surplus in the Bank of Japan accounts is about 35 trillion 
yen, in part due to the frontloading of rollover of existing government bonds and the increase in tax revenue. 
Inefficient  cash  management  arising  from  rigid  accounting  rules  results  in  a  significant  revenue  loss. 
Moreover, the fluctuation of budgetary funds in Japan is quite large, compared with other major countries. This 
tends to limit the capability to implement an ultra-easy policy. 
   2/5 
provision  to  avoid  systemic  risk  and  a  deflationary  spiral.  Both  of  the  effects  worked  to 
support  the  recovery  and  prompt  the  restructuring  process of  debtor  companies  under  the 
strain of balance-sheet adjustment, through the maintained low interest rates.  
The price stability anchor implicit in the commitment is not specified in terms of a time frame, 
but is highly data-dependent, as it is defined by the achievement of positive inflation rates.  
Market participants, who once appeared to be skeptical of our scenario of registering a 0.3 
percent  rise  in  the  core  CPI  in  fiscal  2006,  now  seem  to  anticipate  the  likely  end  of  the 
current policy regime within one year, as observed in euroyen futures market interest rates. 
This has led to a pickup in interest rates over a wide range of maturities. In this sense the 
market informs us when the exit is coming.  
President of the San Francisco Federal Reserve Janet Yellen once asked me why deflation 
has subsided despite the existence of the output gap. My answer was, "It is because of the 
speed  limit  effect."  The  narrowing  output  gap  was  brought  about  by  the  lengthy  and 
sustained recovery phase in and after 2002. It may be noteworthy that the effect of the speed 
limit  (narrowing  the  output  gap)  dominated  the  effect  of  the  level  of  the  output  gap  on  the 
deceleration of deflation.5 Now we have reached the stage where it can be said that a long 
time is not needed to satisfy the conditions to end the quantitative easing policy.  
Dynamic price stability target policy  
To  the  extent  that  the  combination  of  the  provision  of  the  price  stability  anchor  with  the 
monetary easing policy based on our clear commitment has succeeded in bringing Japan's 
economy to a virtually zero inflation rate, compared with deflation of the core CPI of about 1 
percent  in  2001,  it  seems  reasonable  to  maintain  the  key  elements  underlying  the 
quantitative easing policy framework at succeeding stages.  
About two years ago, I described the step-by-step approach to attain ultimate price stability 
as a "dynamic price stability target policy" for extricating Japan from deflation, in contrast to 
the  "timeless  perspective"  price  level  target  policy.  I  identified  the  three  phases  of  the 
dynamic  adjustment  process  moving  out  from  the  deflationary  equilibrium  to  the  normal 
equilibrium, thereby avoiding the over- and undershooting of the inflation rate and the long-
term interest rate, notably during the transition period.  
Recently, former Federal Reserve Governor Laurence Meyer (2005) has presented a three-
step strategy for the future of Japan's monetary policy. He identifies three phases: namely, 
the  quantitative  easing  policy,  the  zero  interest  rate  policy,  and  the  interest  rate  policy.  In 
between, there are two transitional phases: One is dismantling the bank reserve target to the 
required  reserve  level  (about  6  trillion  yen),  or  the  shrinkage  of  zero  interest  rates  to  the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate. Another is raising short-term interest rates to the neutral 
level to achieve price stability over the longer term. I personally find it desirable to provide an 
appropriate  anchor  of  price  stability  in  numerical  form  when  we  embark  on  a  new  policy 
regime such as the return to the zero interest rate policy.  
It  seems  necessary  to  retain  the  transparent  commitment  on  policy  duration  in  order  to 
prevent abrupt changes of long-term interest rates in the transition process to reach a new 
                                                 
5  
In  Japan,  the  output  goal  is  not  explicitly  stated  in  the  newly  established  Bank  of  Japan  Law  of  1997,  in 
contrast to the case of the United States, where the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability 
is prescribed in the Federal Reserve Act. Yet it is absolutely necessary to pay due attention to the movement 
of the output gap, notably the size of narrowing of the deflationary gap. In the process of overcoming deflation, 
the output goal may not be in serious conflict with the goal of price stability. 
   3/5 
equilibrium,  with  the  risk  of  entailing  inflation  (overshooting)  or  deflation  (undershooting) 
being preempted.6
Dynamic price stability target policy and the timeless perspective policy  
The dynamic price stability target policy is "strategically coherent" (to borrow a phrase from 
Professor  Bennett  McCallum  [2005])  to  attain  final  price  stability,  but  it  is  not  a  "timeless 
perspective policy" that puts emphasis on the time consistency of monetary policy.7 The price 
level target policy recommends achieving the prescribed path of price levels with a constant 
rate of inflation, regardless of the initial conditions. Yet it seems difficult to accept temporary 
overshooting of the inflation rate and long-term interest rates in the transition path returning 
to the desired price level path from persistent deflation, in particular under the circumstances 
of  the  large-scale  accumulation  of  government  debt  and  the  persistent  budget  deficit  in 
Japan.  
However,  we  recognize  the  importance  of  "history  dependence"  in  conducting  monetary 
policy. In this context, I would like to stress that maintaining the same reserve target level at 
the current stage implies an increased degree of monetary easing, since the excess supply 
of bank reserves is intensified and the maturity of short-term monetary operation instruments 
is  lengthened,  with  the  result  of  extension  of  zero  interest  rates  in  the  market.  Moreover, 
according  to  several  surveys,  the  expected  inflation  rates  turn  out  to  be  positive  in  recent 
periods. This implies that the short-term real interest rate is negative despite the zero bound 
on the nominal interest rates. If the core message of "history dependence" implies that the 
monetary policy effect becomes more expansionary at the point close to the exit, the Bank of 
Japan's current policy is in line with the spirit inherent in the price level target policy.  
The role of fiscal policy  
Let me conclude my remarks by referring to the role of fiscal policy to extricate Japan from 
deflation. We observe that the government announced the fiscal policy target to achieve a 
primary  budget  deficit  of  zero  in  about  ten  years,  and  the  automatic  stabilizer  effect 
dominated fiscal policy management after 2001 under the Koizumi administration.  
The  coordination  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  becomes  more  important,  if  the 
economy were to fall into deflationary equilibrium (or the Friedmanian equilibrium), where the 
size of deflation rate is equal to the natural interest rate. On fiscal policy, we can identify the 
two  different  types;  namely,  the  Ricardian  and  the  non-Ricardian.  If  the  present  value  of 
government debt in the future becomes zero regardless of changes in the path of prices, it is 
classified as a Ricardian policy.  
                                                 
6   This  implies  that  we  should  have  some  safety  margin  on  the  final  numerical  objective  (aside  from  the  bias 
inherent in the price index), given the likely negative macroeconomic shock to the lower natural interest rate of 
Japan's economy over the future which is conducive to the zero bound on the nominal interest rate. 
7   This  issue  may  be  related  to  issues  such  as  the  discretion  versus  rule-based  policymaking,  or  the  risk 
management approach under uncertainty versus rule-based policymaking. It seems sensible to adopt the risk 
management approach under the Knightian uncertainty (Greenspan [2004]). Chairman Greenspan is critical of 
the "too inflexible" management of rule-based monetary policy. Yet "activist" rule-based policymaking seems 
to possess sufficient flexibility in uncertain circumstances. For instance, the Bayesian decision process under 
the  risk  management  approach  involves  a  learning  process.  Learnability  plays  an  important  role  in  rule-
oriented  monetary  policy  to  secure  stability  of  the  equilibrium.  Rule-based  monetary  policy  has  flexibility  to 
implement  a  systematic  revision  of  a  contingent  plan  and  prescribes  the  updating  process  in  a  "timeless 
manner," while discretionary policy revises a contingency plan period by period. In any case, there may arise 
no  conflict  or  inconsistency  between  the  risk  management  approach  and  the  provision  of  the  price  stability 
anchor to market participants. 
   4/5 
As long as the fiscal rule aiming at reducing the primary budget deficit over the medium term 
implies a moderate increase in the nominal government bond supply, then fiscal policy that is 
passive (or Ricardian) under the normal equilibrium with a positive rate of changes in prices 
becomes active (or non-Ricardian) under the deflationary equilibrium. Thus, there is a good 
reason to expect that the gradual consolidation of the fiscal balance facilitates the economy's 
exit from deflation, coupled with a monetary easing policy based on the price stability anchor.  
 
   5/5 
