Jean-Claude Trichet: Asset price bubbles and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Mas  lecture, 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 8 June 2005. 
The references for the speech can be found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Mr Minister, Mr Chairman, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would first like to thank Chairman Lee Hsien Loong for giving me the opportunity to address such a 
distinguished audience. Let me tell you that I consider today’s topic “asset price bubbles and monetary 
policy” to be one of the most challenging issues facing a modern central bank at the beginning of the 
21st  century.  The  economics  profession  has  taught  us  a  lot  about  the  merits  of  consumer  price 
stability,  about  the  value  of  independent  central  banks  and  the  importance  of  credibility  and 
commitment to the objective of price stability. And a broad consensus has emerged on these issues, 
which is actually reflected in a number of very well-designed central bank statutes all over the world, 
with the ECB being only one, though prominent, example. 
Consumer price inflation has been successfully contained for quite some time now at least in the major 
OECD  economies.  But  at  the  same  time  we  observe  large  cycles  in  a  variety  of  asset  prices 
accompanied  by  ample  global  liquidity.  Economists  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  have 
recently  been  arguing  that  the  coincidence  of  low  consumer  price  inflation  and  high  asset  price 
inflation is not by chance. They have labeled this the “paradox of central bank credibility” and hinted at 
the possibility that due to central banks’ success and gained reputation in fighting inflation, inflationary 
pressures  would  first  show  up  in  asset  price  inflation  and  increase  the  vulnerability  of  financial 
systems.1  Is  this  something  a  central  bank  should  be  concerned  about  to  a  degree  that  policy 
strategies have to be amended? Should a central bank react to asset prices directly or indirectly with 
regard  to  possible  future  threats  to  price  stability?  Do  we  know  which  of  the  observed  asset  price 
booms are bubbles? Do we need to know? These are important questions and to most of them a fully 
satisfying answer is still lacking. In the following I will try to deal with some of these issues. I will start 
by exploring what we know about the existence of asset price bubbles. Then I will discuss whether 
asset price bubbles are necessarily harmful developments. Both sections are meant to caution against 
quick  calls  for  policy  intervention  whenever  unusual  and  seemingly  excessive  asset  price 
developments are observed. I will then list some empirical stylized facts about past asset price boom 
and  bust  cycles  to  provide  the  background  for  reviewing  the  recommendations  obtained  from  the 
economics  literature  on  what  is  the  best  monetary  policy  reaction  to  asset  price  booms.  I  will  then 
explain how the Eurosystem deals with the challenging issue of possible asset price bubbles within the 
framework of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
Are we sure asset price bubbles exist? 
There is no consensus about the existence of asset price bubbles in the economics profession. Well 
reputed economists claim that even the most famous historical bubbles - e.g. the Dutch Tulipmania 
from 1634 to 1637, the French Mississippi bubble in 1719/20, the South Sea Bubble in the UK in 1720 
as  well  as  the  worldwide  New  Economy  Boom  in  the  1990s2  -  can  be  explained  by  fundamentally 
justified  expectations  about  future  returns  of  the  respective  underlying  assets  (or  tulip  bulbs).  Thus 
according  to  some  authors,  the  observed  price  developments  during  the  just  mentioned  episodes  - 
although exhibiting extremely large cycles - should not be classified as being excessive or irrational. 
For  example  with  regard  to  the  New  Economy  boom  of  the  late  1990s  it  has  been  argued  that 
uncertainty  about  future  earnings  prospects  increases  the  share  value  of  a  company,  especially  in 
                                                      
1  See e.g. Borio (2005). 
2  See e.g. Peter Garber (1999, 2000) on the three former and Pastor and Veronesi (2004) on the latter. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
times of low risk premia.3 The claim can be derived in a most standard stock valuation model, where 
the  price-dividend  ratio  is  a  convex  function  of  the  mean  dividend  growth  rate.  The  mean  dividend 
growth  rate  in  turn  depends  obviously  on  future  expected  earnings  of  the  company.  Heightened 
uncertainty about future earnings, will increase the price dividend ratio. It has further been claimed that 
assuming apparently reasonable parameter values with regard to the discount rate, expected earnings 
growth  and  most  importantly  the  variance  of  expected  earnings  growth,  one  can  reproduce  the 
NASDAQ  valuation  of  the  late  90s  and  its  volatility.  There  would  thus  be  no  reason  to  refer  to  a 
dotcom bubble. I do not mention this example because I believe the NASDAQ valuation of the late 90s 
has  not  been  excessive.  However,  if  one  takes  the  narrow  definition  of  bubble  very  often  used  by 
these economic researchers4, there exists a fundamental difficulty in calling an observed asset price 
boom  a  bubble:  It  must  be  proved  that  given  the  information  available  at  the  time  of  the  boom, 
investors  processed  this  information  irrationally.  This  is  as  the  above  example  shows  a  formidable 
task. 
Some  economists  would  even  argue  that  apparent  evidence  of  irrationality  should  always  be 
interpreted as a sign of hidden costs (to acquire or process information in a rational way) or model 
misspecification (which is responsible for the divergence between the model based fundamental price 
and the observed price). According to this view, rationality of behavior is not a falsifiable hypothesis 
but an organizing principle of economic thinking. The conclusion of this line of thinking - which by the 
way I certainly do not share - would be that bubbles cannot exist by definition5. 
I rather tend to believe that occasionally we observe behavioral patterns in financial markets, which 
can  even  be  perfectly  compatible  with  rationality  from  an  individual  investor’s  perspective,  but 
nevertheless lead to possibly large and increasing deviations of asset prices from their fundamental 
values,  until  the  fragile  edifice  implodes.  A  simple  example  of  a  bubble  occurring  possibly  despite 
individual rationality, is herding behaviour triggered by some investors’ rather short reporting horizons. 
In  the  same  vein,  some  policy  makers  and  economists  had  stressed  in  the  past  that  market 
microstructure  developments6  and  regulatory  changes,  i.e.  Basel  II  and  IAS397,  had  to  be  carefully 
designed in order not to lead in the future to more rather than less pro-cyclicality and volatility in asset 
prices. 
I would argue that yes bubbles do exist, but that it is very hard to identify bubbles with certainty and 
almost impossible to reach consensus about whether a particular asset price boom period should be 
considered a bubble or not. 
Economists have often been described as “the great prophets of the past”. Despite the magnificent 
words, this appellative is obviously not intended to be a compliment but rather a criticism for not being 
able  to  predict  the  future.  In  light  of  the  difficulties  to  interpret  even  extreme historic developments, 
perhaps  we  should  think  more  positive  about  great  prophets  of  the  past.  After  acknowledging  the 
problems to identify a bubble even after the cycle has collapsed, it is not surprising that the challenge 
to call a boom a bubble is of another order of magnitude if the judgment has to be made in real time, 
which means when the boom is developing. Prominent economists have even considered this to be an 
impossible task.8 I would like to emphasize that acknowledging the possibility of detecting a bubble, 
does not imply that central bankers have more information or better tools for analysis, which would be 
a position difficult to defend. 
However, the question whether a boom is a bubble, is for many practical purposes more of semantic 
than  of  real  importance.  For  policy  makers,  the  important  question  is  whether  we  can  identify  a 
combination  of  events  in  the  financial  and/or  real  sectors,  which  expose  the  financial  system  to  a 
significantly increased level of risk. A financial crisis can make it very difficult to maintain price stability. 
This is demonstrated by the fact that all major deflations in the world were related to substantial falls in 
                                                      
3  The following draws on Pastor and Veronesi (2004). 
4  The  most  usual  definition  of  bubble  used  in  economic  research  defines  it  as  the  part  of  asset  price  movement  that  is 
unexplainable based on fundamentals. See Peter Garber (2000). 
5  See LeRoy (2002). 
6  See Trichet, 2003. 
7  Goodhart, 2005. 
8  E.g. Weber, 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
asset  prices.  The  growing  academic  literature  on  early  warning  signals  already  provides  some 
progress. Researchers from the Bank for International Settlements and the European Central Bank in 
two separate studies illustrate this point. 
It has been shown that an indicator defined to provide a warning signal when both the credit to income 
ratio  and  real  aggregate  asset  prices  simultaneously  deviate  by  4  percentage  points  and  40% 
respectively, from their trends, would have predicted 55% of financial crises three years in advance.9 
The  likelihood  that  this  indicator  triggered  a  false  alarm  has  been  at  least  historically  very  small 
(around 3%). Considering deviations of the credit to income ratio beyond a threshold of 4 percentage 
points  alone as warning signal, would have  predicted  even  79% of  financial crises, although  in  this 
case the indicator would have provided a false warning signal in 18% of times.10 
In  another  paper,  ECB  staff  found  that  defining  asset  price  booms  as  simple  deviations  from  trend 
beyond  a  given  threshold11  and  classifying  the  resulting  boom  periods  in  high-cost  and  low-cost 
depending  on  the  depth  of  the  post-boom  recession,  broad  money  and  credit  developments  are 
among the few early indicators of high cost asset price boom periods.12 
I  consider  it  the  duty  of  central  banks  to  communicate  the  results  of  their  analysis  with  regard  to 
financial stability and potential risks for the financial system and the economy as a whole to the public. 
This  conviction  is  shared  by  many  of  my  colleagues  as  can  be  seen  by  the  increasing  number  of 
financial stability reports published by major central banks, including the ECB. Another example is the 
Financial  Stability  Forum,  which  convened  in  1999  and  brings  together  on  a  regular  basis  national 
authorities  responsible  for  financial stability  in  significant  international  financial  centres,  international 
financial  institutions,  sector-specific  international  groupings  of  regulators  and  supervisors,  and 
committees of central bank experts. The Financial Stability Forum publishes a status report twice a 
year on recent and ongoing work relevant to strengthening financial systems. 
The welcome increase in transparency with regard to financial stability analyses, does however not 
preclude the question whether and to which degree central banks should react to threats of financial 
stability - potentially triggered by asset price booms - at times other policy makers like supervisory or 
fiscal and tax authorities are unable or unwilling to take appropriate action. 
Are asset price bubbles dangerous? 
The question in the title of this section is not a rhetoric one. The answer is not so straightforward as 
one might tend to believe. Certainly not all asset price booms are dangerous. Booms are likely to be 
costly if associated with high leverage, which is, for example, usually the case in housing price booms. 
Economists have argued since long that it is conceivable that a boom-bust cycle ridden development 
could potentially exhibit a stronger rising trend growth path than one would observe for a notoriously 
boom-free country. 
For example,  some researchers  have  defended  the  idea  that  it  is  possible  that  asset price bubbles 
moderate the effects of financial market frictions, like credit constraints and improve the allocation of 
investment, despite the occasional busts.13 Of course, one cannot exclude that it could be beneficial 
for  long  run growth  to  ease  borrowing  constraints, but  it  should not  be  at  the  expenses  of  a  stable 
financial system, which favours an efficient allocation of capital and it is thus intrinsically related to the 
good performance of the economy and its resilience to shocks. 
A different but related argument claimed by the literature is that the optimal degree of vulnerability to 
banking  crises  must  not  be  zero.  Under  certain  conditions  it  can  be  optimal  not  to  be  fully  insured 
against  liquidity  crises  in  the  banking system,  in  order  to spur  financial  intermediation,  increase  the 
amount of credit available for investment and thus foster growth in the long run.14 
                                                      
9  Borio and Lowe (2002). The trend is estimated using information only up to the period under consideration. 
10  The evidence is compiled using evidence for 34 countries for the period 1970-1999. 
11  Again, the trend is estimated recursively, meaning that no information on future developments is used in its computation. 
12  Detken and Smets (2004). 
13  See Ventura (2003). 
14  Gaytan and Ranciere (2003). 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 3
Each of these theoretical findings is clearly derived under special assumptions, but nevertheless they 
provide food for thought. I mention these examples in order to remind us of being prudent in calling for 
policy makers’ corrective actions when some risk of financial fragility is detected. Even if the existence 
of a bubble would be generally acknowledged - an unlikely situation in light of what I mentioned in the 
previous section - the policy maker’s response - if any - has to be carefully devised, especially with 
regard to its long run effect on the working of the financial system. 
Some stylized facts about asset price boom periods and monetary policy 
Let me now turn to present some empirical stylized facts about asset price bubbles. My goal is then to 
focus on the link to monetary policy. A number of researchers have devoted some efforts to analyzing 
historical boom-busts cycles in asset prices in order to detect regularities with regard to the costliness 
of  booms,  and  to  assess  the  potential  for  identifying  dangerous  booms  at  an  early  stage.  Different 
studies  emphasize  different  aspects,  and  use  different  methodologies.  However,  they  coincide  on 
pointing out a range of characteristics, and I would like to call your attention to some of them. 
A recently conducted IMF study acknowledges the importance of housing price booms and compares 
equity  and  housing  bust  periods.  It  reaches  the  conclusion  that  although  housing  price  busts  are 
overall less frequent, they are more likely conditional on the existence of a boom. Historically, housing 
price booms have been followed by busts about 40 percent of the time, while equity price booms are 
followed by busts only 25% of the cases. Housing price peak to trough periods are longer on average, 
and, despite the fact that the decline in prices is somewhat smaller, the associated output losses are 
notably bigger. The output losses incurred during a typical housing price bust amounts to 8 percent of 
GDP, which is double the average loss during an equity price bust. The reason is a different exposure 
of the banking system to mortgages than to shares. In this respect, bank-based financial systems incur 
larger losses than more market-based financial systems during housing price busts, while the opposite 
is true for equity price busts. This finding is corroborated by the fact that all major banking crises in 
industrial countries during the post-war period coincided with housing price busts. 
Other  studies  recently  confirmed  that  developments  in  the  monetary  aggregates  and  credit  play  an 
important  role  for  the  development  of  asset  price  boom  episodes.  Although  the  issue  of  empirical 
causality between asset prices on the one side and money and credit developments on the other side 
is a complicated one, the potential role of credit and money as driving asset prices is straightforward. 
A bubble is more likely to develop when investors can leverage their positions by investing borrowed 
funds.  One  would  expect  to  see  similar  developments  in  credit  and  money  as  credit  is  the  main 
counterpart to money. Furthermore, a high money stock might signal large amounts of liquidity waiting 
to be invested in potentially higher yielding opportunities, which could then fuel a bubble once a trend 
has  been  triggered  and  herding  behaviour  sets  in.  Further  on,  a  high  level  of  outstanding  debt  will 
increase  the  negative  effects  of  asset  price  declines,  through  the  forced  liquidation  of  leveraged 
positions and possible defaults, which in turn put additional pressure on asset prices. In this respect it 
should not be surprising that both money and credit variables have recently been found to be pertinent 
indicators to predict financial crises and identify costly asset price boom episodes.15 For example there 
is evidence that during - and already in the two years before - asset price booms, real (broad) money 
growth has been about two percentage points higher in those booms that led to serious recessions 
than in those that did not.16 More recent evidence along the same lines, seems to suggest that it is 
equally  useful  to  monitor  real  residential  property  price  growth  and  real  investment  growth  rates  in 
order to detect potentially costly asset price boom periods at an early stage.17] 
Actual consumer price inflation is not a good early indicator to distinguish costly asset price booms 
from more benign booms. Only in the last boom year is inflation significantly higher in high-cost than in 
low-cost booms.18 
                                                      
15  Although  the  development  of  net  external  assets  of  the  domestic  MFI  sector  can  put  a  decisive  wedge  between  the 
development of money and credit. This channel is most likely the explanation for those results, which find predictive power 
only for one or the other. E.g. Borio and Lowe (2004) favor credit, while Adalid and Detken (forthcoming, 2005) favor money 
as early indicators. 
16  Adalid and Detken (forthcoming, 2005). See annex for a graphical presentation of this result. 
17  See again the charts presented in the annex. 
18  See Detken and Smets (2002) and Adalid and Detken (forthcoming, 2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2005
How should monetary policy react to asset price booms? 
In  the  following  section  I  will  briefly  review  the  economics  underlying  the  various  practical 
recommendations  for  central  bankers  on  how  optimally  to  react  to  or  take  account  of  asset  price 
booms. 
The orthodox view: no special role for asset prices 
In its strong version the orthodox view claims that price stability is a sufficient condition for financial 
stability.  It  is  argued  that  the  stable  and  predictable  environment  provided  by  a  central  bank 
successfully maintaining price stability over the short-term prevents financial crises.19 This view has 
been  in  the  meantime  empirically  rejected.  Financial  crises  can  occur  also  in  times  of  relative 
consumer  price  stability.  However,  they  often  undermine  conditions  for  maintaining  price  stability. 
Therefore, a concept of price stability with a longer horizon is clearly associated to financial stability. 
The Japanese stock market and property price boom in the late 1980s is another vivid example of this. 
The  more  moderate  version  of  the  orthodox  view  though  has  many  supporters,  especially  among 
central bankers. It says that asset prices should be ignored beyond their impact on consumer price 
inflation via the regular transmission mechanism channel. The regular transmission mechanism would 
include wealth effects resulting from changes in asset prices. Reference to the regular transmission 
mechanism is the key distinction to some other reaction patterns, like “leaning against the wind”, which 
will be discussed below. The strength of the regular transmission mechanism could very well depend 
on asset price levels themselves. For example the size of the wealth effect following changes in the 
policy interest rate could be larger the higher asset price valuations as the share of financial assets in 
total wealth is then more important. But the key point is that the possibility of financial distress in case 
of major price corrections is not explicitly taken into account, ex-ante. Emergency liquidity assistance 
provided by the central bank in case of a severe bust with expected systemic effects is part of this 
orthodox  view.[20  Although  being  a  robust  theory  for  most  of  times,  the  orthodox  view  has  recently 
been repeatedly questioned for not being optimal in all circumstances. 
Targeting asset prices 
One extreme view to attribute a more prominent role to asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy 
is to include asset prices in the consumer price index used to define the policy objective.21 The general 
idea is to secure stable prices of current but also future consumer goods by targeting a “cost-of-life” 
index.  Assets  are  a  claim  to  future  consumption  and  it  has  been  argued  that  the  asset  price  today 
should be a reasonable proxy for future prices of consumer goods. Today there is something close to 
a consensus among economists and central bankers that targeting financial asset prices is a bad idea. 
The  ECB  has  recently  provided  an  overview  over  the  main  arguments  in  a  recent  Monthly  Bulletin 
article22, so I will constrain myself in listing the arguments against asset price targeting. First, in reality 
asset prices are a bad proxy for future CPI inflation, as asset price changes are driven by changes in 
fundamentals and not only inflation expectations. Second, targeting asset prices would increase risk 
taking by private agents in anticipation of the asset price stabilizing attempts of monetary policy. This 
is  the  well  known  moral  hazard  argument.  Third,  with  rational  forward-looking  private  agents,  there 
exists the possibility of a circular relationship between monetary policy and asset prices. Asset prices 
would  partly  determine  monetary  policy,  while  simultaneously  expected  future  monetary  policy 
determines  today’s  asset  prices.  As  a  consequence,  inflation  could  be  purely  determined  by  self-
fulfilling  market  expectations  and  thus  become  extremely  volatile.  This  problem  is  known  under  the 
heading  “inflation  indeterminacy”.  Fourth,  if  the  central  bank  targets  CPI  inflation  by  means  of  a 
successful monetary policy strategy taking into account all indicators of inflationary pressure (including 
signals from asset prices), targeting asset prices directly would amount to double counting inflationary 
pressure  derived  from  asset  prices.  Fifth,  the  weight  for  asset  prices  in  a  combined  price  index  is 
ambiguous. The weight for asset prices could be extremely large if based on traditional expenditure 
shares. Using the relative usefulness to forecast CPI inflation the weight would be much smaller. The 
                                                      
19  Schwartz (1995). 
20  E.g. Bordo and Wheelock (1998), Goodfriend (2000), Greenspan (2002). 
21  Alchian and Klein, (1973). 
22  Monthly Bulletin, April, 2005, see Box 4. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 5
methodological discussion has not yet converged. And finally, central banks’ lack sufficient control of 
asset prices. In the long run asset prices are driven by fundamental factors and not monetary policy. 
Pricking asset price bubbles 
The  focus  of  serious  academic  debate  has  moved  away  from  this  approach  more  recently,  but  the 
view  that  central  banks  should  act  decidedly  against  suspected  asset  price  bubbles  occasionally 
surfaces  among  market  observers.  The  roots  of  this  position  can  be  traced  back  to  the  so-called 
“liquidationist”  view,  which  was  widely  entertained  by  mainstream  economists  in  the  context  of  the 
heated debate over the stock market boom of the 1920s in the US. The view had some prominent 
advocates  within  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  who  substantiated  their 
inclination for a strong policy reaction to market  dynamics on the grounds that the central bank, by 
acting  decidedly,  would  force  liquidation  of  the  most  stretched  positions  without  dealing  further 
damage  on  sound  investment  strategies  and  the  economy  more  broadly.  While  often  advanced  by 
economists  who  are  otherwise  most  distrustful  of  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  manage  economic 
events, this position is now widely rejected by today’s profession.23 The monetary policy instrument is 
just a too blunt tool to allow the type of surgical intervention that the “pricking” of the bubble would 
require. 
Leaning against the wind 
The  leaning  against  the  wind  principle  describes  a  tendency  to  cautiously  raise  interest  rates  even 
beyond the level necessary to maintain price stability over the short to medium run, when a potentially 
detrimental asset price boom is identified. The basic assumption behind the leaning against the wind 
principle is a non-linearity best described as an asymmetric effect of positive and negative asset price 
shocks. A negative shock is likely to have a larger effect than a positive one. The reasons are that 
credit constraints can depend on the value of collateral and that in case of a financial crisis the whole 
financial  intermediation  process  can  in  the  worst  case  completely  fail.  The  central  bank  conducts  a 
slightly  tighter  policy  in  order  to  better  ensure  price  stability  over  extended  horizons  by  possibly 
containing the future growth of the bubble - or at least not to accommodate it - than it would otherwise 
if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions. By doing so 
the central bank would tolerate to be significantly below its definition of price stability. This behaviour 
has  been  compared  to  buying  an  insurance  against  a  potentially  harmful  asset  boom-bust  cycle, 
where  the  insurance  premium  to  be  paid  is  some  additional  tightening  leading  to  a  lower  level  of 
inflation than would be required by the monetary policy strategy.24 
Proponents  of  the  leaning  against  the  wind  policy  have  typically  been  very  careful  to  mention  the 
strong informational requirements concerning the properties of the bubble. Leaning against the wind is 
advisable  only  when  first,  the  probability  that  the  bubble  anyhow  bursts  in  the  near  future  is  small, 
second, the future growth of asset prices is sufficiently interest sensitive and third, the efficiency losses 
rise  strongly  with  the  size  of  the  bubble.  In  particular  the  need  to  carry  out  “small”,  “sufficiently 
sensitive”  and  “strong”  constitutes  a  severe  challenge  for  the  practical  implementation  of  a  leaning 
against the wind policy.25 
It should be mentioned that “leaning against the wind” has the advantage that it can to some degree 
ameliorate the moral hazard problem of the purely reactive approach to asset price boom-bust cycles. 
By reacting more symmetrically - being tighter in booms as well as looser in busts - the central bank 
would discourage excessive risk taking, and thereby reduce overinvestment already during the boom. 
This  in  turns leads  to  a  smaller  level of  indebtedness  and  less  severe consequences  of  a  possible 
future burst. 
Thus despite this property, the leaning against the wind principle faces some other intricate issues. 
First  of  all,  bubbles,  and  asset  price  misalignments  in  general,  may  have  their  roots  in  underlying 
structural  imbalances.  Policies  designed  to  effectively  deal  with  these  structural  causes,  such  as 
prudential regulation or changes to the tax code, could be optimal and preferred in many cases. One 
                                                      
23  E.g. Greenspan (2002). 
24  See Bordo and Jeanne (2002), Borio and Lowe (2002), Borio, English and Filardo (2003) but also Weber (2005). 
25  Bordo and Jeanne (2002), Gruen, Plumb and Stone (2003). 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2005
should also take into account the effects of and to what extent a leaning against the wind policy can 
affect the markets. For example, it could be argued that for a small open economy leaning against the 
wind with regard to equity price bubbles is infeasible. With globalised equity markets, it is unlikely that 
the central bank of a small open economy would have the clout to affect domestic share prices against 
a global trend. On the other hand, a disorderly market reaction to a policy intervention can never be 
completely ruled out, even in cases where the policy is implemented gradually over an extended time 
horizon 
In my opinion, while compelling in many theoretical aspects, in practice - barring the progress of recent 
research findings on the prediction of financial crises mentioned earlier - it is likely that circumstances 
will  be  rare  that  a policy maker will  embark with confidence  on  an explicit  leaning  against  the wind 
policy. 
Asset prices and the ECB Monetary Policy Strategy 
In the previous section I have discussed an array of possible strategies a central bank could follow in 
the presence of suspected asset price bubbles. They range from the complete non-intervention to an 
almost systematic reaction to asset price developments. Reasonable alternatives for policy makers are 
only  the  two  relatively  more  moderate  suggestions.  Eventually  it  all  boils  down  to  the  question  of 
whether the reaction to asset prices should be limited to their impact on consumer price inflation via 
the regular transmission mechanism channel or whether - accounting for effects of a boom-bust asset 
price cycle may have on the soundness of the financial system and thus price stability in the medium 
to  long  run  -  a  central  bank  should  occasionally  consider  to  follow  the  leaning  against  the  wind 
principle. Informational requirements, the specifics of the asset price misalignment and the underlying 
structural relationships of the economy will determine the feasibility and optimality of each of these two 
options. 
The  ECB’s  primary  objective  is  unambiguously  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  The  Governing 
Council  aims  at  an  HICP  inflation  rate  of  below  and  close  to  two  percent  with  a  medium  term 
orientation. 
I mentioned though that boom-bust cycles in asset prices do exist and can potentially harm the entire 
economy,  especially  via  the  effect  on  the  financial  system.  Maintaining  price  stability  in  times  of 
financial  crises  is  a  very  difficult  task.  It  is  thus  reasonable  that  the  monetary  authority  monitors 
carefully unusual asset price developments at an early stage. As discussed a moment ago, allowing 
some  short-term  deviation  from  price  stability  in  order  to  better  ensure  price  stability  over  more 
extended horizons might be - under very restrictive assumptions - the optimal policy to follow.26 The 
principle  behind  it should not  be  misunderstood  as a  systematic reaction  to  asset  price  booms, but 
rather  as  a  selective  response  based  on  the  careful  analysis  of  all  the  available  information.  With 
respect to the ECB monetary policy strategy, the important point to note is the following: The ECB’s 
monetary  policy  strategy  does  allow  for  taking  into  account  boom  developments  without  any 
amendments to the strategy and without providing any additional role to asset prices. Let me be more 
precise on this point.27 
The ECB’s two-pillar strategy rests on a broad analytical framework, which is well suited to detect risks 
to price stability and to the economy as a whole. It will also help to identify the underlying distortions in 
asset  prices.  The  ECB  singles  out  money  in  its  monetary  analysis  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that 
monetary growth and inflation are correlated in the long term. However, the monetary analysis also 
contributes to assessing the extent to which excess creation of liquidity and over-extension of credit 
can be a driving force behind excessively valued assets. Detecting and understanding this link helps 
the  ECB  form  an  opinion  on  whether  an  observed  movement  in  monetary  aggregates  and  their 
counterparts might already reflect the inflating of an asset price bubble. It is then clear that a case by 
case analysis based on sound information on the monetary variables (mainly broad money and credit), 
on the counterparts of monetary aggregates (including the net external asset position of monetary and 
financial institutions) and on the related functioning of the asset market is indispensable. 
                                                      
26  This has been previously acknowledged in Issing (2003a, 2003b). 
27  See also the April 2005 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 7
In this respect the ECB’s strategic framework has in my view important advantages compared to an 
inflation targeting strategy. The ECB strategy permanently and comprehensively captures longer run 
risks to price stability within its monetary analysis. In the inflation targeting framework - to the contrary 
-  reacting  to  potential  asset  price  booms  will  always  have  the  flavour  of  introducing  an  exceptional 
escape clause in the strategy. Proponents of inflation targeting have recommended to simply extend 
the horizon of the inflation forecast beyond the standard one to two year policy horizon. I doubt that 
serious inflation forecasts can be derived at this horizon given the uncertainty surrounding asset price 
boom periods.28 Thus I fully share the view that the longer horizon in inflation targeting is basically a 
substitute for a more structured assessment of risks to price stability.29 This risk assessment is part of 
the ECB’s monetary analysis. 
In order to maintain the effectiveness and credibility of monetary policy, it is important to foster the 
public  understanding  of  the  implications  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy.  The  fact  that  our 
monetary analysis uses a comprehensive assessment of the liquidity situation that may, under certain 
circumstances provide early information on developing financial instability is an important element in 
this endeavour. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  Experience  with  past  asset  price  boom  episodes  tells  us  that  we  should  be  very 
careful  in  calling  a  boom,  which  is  observable,  a  bubble.  Such  labelling  will  always  contain  a 
substantial  degree  of  arbitrary  judgment.  Nevertheless,  empirical  evidence  also  reveals  that  it  is 
possible  to  find  characteristics  of  potentially  dangerous  asset  price  boom  developments,  which  are 
useful from a policy maker’s point of view to identify risks to long run price stability. The methodologies 
to identify those threatening booms certainly need to be refined. In particular, we have to know more to 
which  extent  we  can  rely  on  empirical  analyses  which,  out  of  necessity  or  lack  of  sufficient  recent 
boom-bust  cycles,  have  to  pool  information  from  various  boom  episodes,  happening  in  different 
countries under very specific and furthermore time-varying financial systems. 
Not all boom or bubble episodes are threatening financial stability. Policy makers should not fall into 
the  fallacy  of  attempting  to  eliminate  all  risk  from  the  financial  system.  Either  they  would  be 
unsuccessful  (moral  hazard)  or  they  are  likely  to  hamper  the  appropriate  functioning  of  a  market 
economy where risk taking is of the essence. 
With  regard  to  the  optimal  monetary  policy  response  to  asset  price  bubbles,  I  would  argue  that  its 
informational requirements and its possible - and difficult to assess - side effects are in reality very 
onerous.  Empirical  evidence  confirms  the  link  between  money  and  credit  developments  and  dismal 
asset price booms. Thus a comprehensive monetary analysis will detect those risks to medium and 
long run price stability. The fact that the ECB’s monetary policy strategy has this property is in my view 
a significant advantage in light of the current challenges facing modern times central banks. 
I fully advocate transparency in terms of a central banks assessment of risks to financial stability and 
with  regard  to  its  strategic  thinking  on  asset  price  bubbles  and  monetary  policy.  The  fact  that  our 
monetary analysis uses a comprehensive assessment of the liquidity situation that may, under certain 
circumstances, provide early information on developing financial instability is an important element in 
this endeavour. 
The perfect outlet as regards the risks is a publicly available financial stability review, which the ECB 
now  issues  every  semester.  The  perfect  occasion  for  explaining  the  strategy,  could  very  well  be  a 
lecture in one of the major financial centres of the world. Thank you very much for your attention and 
for giving me this opportunity. 
Annex: Comparison of high- versus low-cost booms for selected variables 
The graphs below show the evolution of four synthetic indicator variable aimed at characterising the 
typical  pattern  of  a  high-  versus  low-cost  asset  price  boom.  Specifically,  the  indicator  variables 
                                                      
28  See e.g. Goodhart and Huang (1999) regarding the volatility of the money multiplier in crises periods. 
29  Borio (2005). 
8 
 BIS Review 44/2005
summarise  information  on  real  estate  prices,  real  investment,  real  money  growth  and  real  credit 
growth. The data used to construct these synthetic indicator variables correspond to quarterly series 
for a sample of 17 OECD countries30, covering the period 1970-2003. An asset price boom is defined 
as a period in which the aggregate real asset price index31 is continuously more than 11% above its 
trend. Each period, the trend32 is recomputed using only the information available up to that period. In 
this way, the booms are observed as perceive in ‘real time’. 
Overall, 32 asset price boom periods have been identified. Asset price booms that were followed by a 
sharp drop in real GDP growth rates are labelled as high-cost booms while those that were succeeded 
by a relatively mild slowdown in real growth are labelled as low-cost booms33. 15 booms have been 
considered high-cost booms and 17 have been considered low-cost booms. 
For each boom, seven periods are defined according to their relative position to the beginning or to the 
end of the boom. These periods represent an aggregation of four quarters except for the peak period, 
which corresponds to a single quarter: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Pre2 starts 2 years before the boom, 
Pre1 starts 1 year before the boom, 
B1 is the first year of the boom, 
Peak is the quarter where the difference between the aggregate asset price index and its 
trend is at its maximum, 
Last is the last year of the boom, i.e., the last quarter of the boom plus the three previous 
quarters, 
Post1 is the first year after the end of the boom, 
Post2 is the second year after the boom. 
• 
• 
As an example, the following boom has been identified for the Spanish economy between 1986:2 and 
1991:2:  
 Spain: boom and corresponding periods
Pre2 
Pre1 
B1 
Peak 
Last 
Post1 
Post2 
1984:2 - 1985:1 
1985:2 - 1986:1 
1986:2 - 1987:1 
1989:2 
1990:3 - 1991:2 
1991:3 - 1992:2 
1992:3 - 1993:2 
                                                      
30  Australia,  Belgium,  Canada,  Switzerland,  Germany,  Denmark,  Spain,  Finland,  France,  Italy,  Japan,  Netherlands,  New 
Zealand, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom and United States. 
31  Source: BIS. The index is computed as a weighted average of equity, residential real estate and commercial real estate 
prices, where the weights are based on the relative share of those assets in the private sector’s wealth. 
32  The trend is estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter with a smoothing parameter of 100,000. 
33  High-cost booms are those booms that were followed by a drop of more than 2.5 percentage points in annualised terms in 
average real growth (comparing the three years following the boom with the average growth during the boom), as long as 
the average post-boom growth is below 2.5%. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 9
Proceeding like this, 15 Pre2 periods, 15 Pre1 periods, 15 B1 periods and so on are obtained for the 
high-cost booms. The low-cost booms have 17 Pre2 periods, 17 Pre1 periods, 17 B1 periods and so 
on.  Subsequently,  the  median  values  of  the  synthetic  indicator  variable  have  been  determined  for 
each period (Pre2, Pre1, B1, etc.) across all high-cost booms on the one hand and across all low-cost 
booms  on  the  other  hand.  Specifically,  we  have  computed  the  median  values  for  four  synthetic 
variables characterising the evolution of the rates of growth in real estate prices, real investment, real 
money growth and real credit over low and high-cost asset-price booms. The patterns of the computed 
median values are depicted on the graphs. 
A bar indicates that the distribution of growth rates in high-cost booms is significantly different34 from 
the distribution of growth rates in low-cost booms for the considered period at the 20% (low bar), 10% 
(medium bar) or 5% (tall bar) significance level. In the graphs, the vertical axis represents annualised 
percentage points, while the horizontal axis displays the seven periods considered. 
                                                        
34  The differences between high- and low-cost booms in each period of the boom have been tested using the Wilcoxon/Mann-
Whitney test. 
10 
 BIS Review 44/2005
  BIS Review 44/2005 
 11
