Jaime Caruana: The Basel II initiative 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the IIF Spring Membership Meeting, Madrid, 31 March - 1 April 2005. 
 I would like to begin first by thanking for his kind introduction. It is an honour for me to participate once 
again in an event sponsored by the Institute for International Finance. It is doubly a pleasure for me to 
do so here in the city of Madrid.  
Although  the  title  of  this  session  is  “regulation  and  consolidation  in  the  financial  industry”,  I  will  not 
speak about consolidation in my intervention, because I believe that the role of the banking supervisor 
in such issues is minor compared to the role of the market.  
Structural  changes  in  the  financial  sector,  such  as  consolidation,  should,  in  my  opinion,  be 
market-driven phenomena that respond to market needs - such as economies of scale, IT synergies, 
the benefits of diversification, gaining access to a larger client base, etc. 
This is particularly relevant in the EU context, where we are aiming for a truly single market. In this 
respect,  I  support  all  the steps  the  Commission  is  taking  to  remove  remaining  internal  barriers  and 
restrictions in pursuit of this goal. 
The banking supervisor’s role in issues related to consolidation is tightly defined by both the letter and 
spirit  of  EU  banking  legislation.  Our  task  is  confined  to  ensuring  that  structural  changes  do  not 
undermine the soundness and “supervisability” of banking institutions, and that bank shareholders are 
suitable. 
So, with this in mind, let me turn to the main topic that I would like to discuss, which is the Basel II 
initiative. 
When the IIF met in Madrid last July, the Basel Committee had just released the text of the revised 
capital framework. The publication of Basel II marked a critical milestone in our efforts to improve the 
risk-sensitivity of bank capital requirements while providing incentives to strengthen the quality of risk 
management.  
I think that on this occasion the meeting of the IIF has been preceded by another milestone in our work 
in  relation  to  the  new  capital  framework.  A  successful  meeting  of  the  Basel  Committee  concluded 
yesterday. Among other things, we dealt with the double default and trading book issues, on the basis 
of  the  work  undertaken  in  close  collaboration  with  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions. I think this teamwork between IOSCO and BCBS can also be perceived as a landmark 
in the area of cooperation among supervisors. 
Let me therefore start by talking about this work strand. Then I will try to clarify some aspects of the 
calibration exercise and, finally, I will address implementation issues of Basel II. 
When we were in Madrid last summer, I mentioned  that supervisors were very interested in finding 
practical  and  prudent  solutions  to  the  treatment  of  certain  exposures  under  Basel  II.  These  include 
exposures subject to double default effects, or the likelihood that both a borrower and a guarantor will 
default at the same time. Likewise, supervisors and bankers have long understood that we needed to 
address a small number of issues closely related to trading activities to avoid inconsistencies.  
The  Basel  Committee  wanted  to  ensure  that  our  approaches  to  double  default  and  selected 
trading-related exposures were sound and balanced. As a result, we have been very pleased to work 
closely  with  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  to  engage  both  banks  and 
securities firms in our review of these special matters. 
The Basel Committee and IOSCO are very close to reaching agreement on a paper that will outline 
the  structure  of  these  proposals.  We  intend  to  publish  the  paper  in  a  few  days,  for  a  fast-track 
consultation with the industry. The paper will address five topics in particular, namely,  
• 
First, the treatment of counterparty credit risk for over-the-counter derivatives, repo-style and 
securities financing transactions;  
Second, the treatment of double-default effects for hedged transactions, in relation to trading 
book, but also banking book, exposures;  
 BIS Review 23/2005 
 1
  Third,  the  short-term  maturity  adjustment,  under  the  internal  ratings-based  approach,  for 
some trading book-related items;  
Fourth, a limited number of improvements to the current trading book regime, especially with 
respect to the treatment of specific risk; and  
Fifth, the design of a specific capital treatment for unsettled and failed transactions. 
• 
We  did  not  intend  to  overhaul  the  capital  rules  for  trading  book  exposures,  but  rather  to  seek  to 
address narrowly a handful of concerns that relate either to potential inconsistencies that could arise 
with the new treatment for banking book assets or to a limited number of issues that have arisen since 
the adoption of the Market Risk Amendment. 
I  cannot  comment  on  the  proposals,  given  that  they  have  not  yet  been  formally  approved  by  both 
organisations.  As  far  as  the  Basel  Committee  is  concerned,  this  approval  was  given  yesterday, 
obviously pending the approval of IOSCO, which will study it in a few days’ time. I can tell you that, in 
my personal opinion, the proposals appear to be prudent, balanced and appropriately sensitive to risk. 
Moreover,  I  believe  that  they  support  our  goal  to  encourage  continued  improvement  in  the 
measurement and management of these exposures. 
The rapid progress that we achieved here largely reflects the contributions that the IIF, its members, 
and many others in the industry provided in the discussions with the various working groups. For that, I 
would like to express my thanks to the IIF and its members.  
I  look  forward  to  continuing  our  discussions  on  the  solutions  proposed  in  the  coming  weeks.  I  am 
confident  that  we  will  then  be  able  to  finalise  the  rules  by  early  July  so  that  national  rule-making 
processes and banks’ own preparations can incorporate them in time for Basel II’s implementation. 
I’d  like  to  mention  one  other  area  of  preparations  that  will  affect  banks  directly:  the  recalibration 
exercise. 
In order to establish a common data set on which to base this review, the Committee has decided to 
begin the recalibration exercise in autumn this year.  
We recognise that the recalibration exercise will demand resources from both banks and supervisors. 
The IIF expressed clearly to us this concern. In this regard I would like to make two comments. 
First, we discussed this issue yesterday in our meeting and decided to publish a newsletter clarifying 
some  elements  of  the  proposed  work  that  I  hope  will  address  these  concerns.  In  this  newsletter, 
available on the BIS website, we underline several ideas. 
The  Committee  thinks  that  this  early  recalibration,  in  the  spring  of  2006,  will  give  banks  and 
supervisors more time to reflect and will facilitate implementation. 
In order to ensure that the envisaged review is based on recent and high-quality data, the Committee 
will  undertake  a  so-called  fifth  impact  study  between  October  and  December  2005,  three  months 
earlier than previously envisaged. 
The calibration of the revised Framework will be discussed in spring 2006 on the basis of QIS 5 data. 
As  we  are  conscious  of  the  workload  of  this  exercise,  the  Committee  does  not  intend  to  set  data 
requirements or timeframes for the parallel calculation that will be conducted in 2006. So there is no 
duplication of work. 
In  addition  to  that,  in  countries  in  which  a  QIS  4  has  been  conducted,  the  QIS 5  might  be  either  a 
partial update of the QIS 4 or a new exercise.  
Finally in terms of the schedule, to enable banks to make early preparations for the impact study, the 
Committee intends to provide banks with workbooks for the QIS 5 in July. 
This is in relation to the calibration. The second point I wanted to make is related to this but is of a 
more general nature. I agree that much is changing today in a short span of time. The wide range of 
standards that are evolving in parallel represents a drain on the limited resources that banks have to 
keep pace with these changes.  
In this respect, and especially in relation to our work on Basel, I see some merit in concentrating, at 
least  for  a  while,  on  completing  our  current  regulatory  work,  and  on  ensuring  the  quality  and 
consistency  of  its  implementation.  This  will  allow  us  all  a  period  to  digest  the  framework  we  have 
designed. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2005
Let  me  conclude  with  a  few  words  on  the  third  topic:  implementation  of  Basel  II.  I  have  just  two 
remarks. 
On validation, we have recently published six principles that will guide our future work. We have also 
published a working paper entitled: “Studies on the Validation of Internal Rating Systems”  
Although  validation  is  foremost  the  responsibility  of  banks,  supervisors  must  have  a  thorough 
understanding  of  validation  in  order  to  ensure  the  overall  integrity  of  banks’  activities  in  this  area.  I 
think these principles set out clearly what supervisory expectations are, and should provide a useful 
guide to the industry.  
Our work on validation will accelerate over the coming months, although our focus will be more on 
sharing  and  cataloguing  information  and  approaches,  and  not  on  trying  to  develop  a  prescriptive 
method. Close dialogue with the industry in our work will be of great importance. 
Let me finish by saying that we, the supervisory community, continue to devote significant resources 
and efforts to improving the consistency of cross-border implementation.  
Consequently,  the  excellent  dialogue  between  supervisors,  organisations  such  as  the  IIF,  and  the 
industry  more  broadly,  must  continue  in  the  coming  months  and  years  ahead.  I  welcome  the 
discussions that we have been having, both inside and outside this conference, and look forward to 
hearing more of your thoughts and perspectives. 
BIS Review 23/2005 
 3
