Kishori J Udeshi: The pursuit of financial stability 
Speech by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 7th Money and 
Finance Conference organised by Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR), Mumbai, 
10 February 2005. 
Acknowledgements for inputs are due to Shri Ajit Mittal, GM, DBS, CO, RBI and Shri Muneesh Kapur, Director, DEAP, RBI. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  address  this  gathering  at  the  7th  Annual  Conference  on  Money  and 
Finance  in  the  Indian  economy  organised  by  the  Indira  Gandhi  Institute  of  Development  Research 
(IGIDR).  Issues  related  to  monetary  policy  and  financial  sector  continue  to  attract  a  lot  of  research 
interest all over the world and this is all the more true for emerging economies like India which are 
gradually integrating with the rest of the world. Accordingly, the initiatives taken by the IGIDR to hold 
annual  conferences  on  the  topic  of  Money  and  Finance  to  bring  together  researchers  and 
policymakers are indeed welcome.  
With growing financial openness, globalisation and liberalisation, financial stability issues have come 
to  the  forefront.  These  issues  have  ranged  from  discussions  on  basic  issues  of  the  definition  of 
financial  stability  itself  to  issues  of  measurement,  issues  of  choice  of  instruments  to  achieve  the 
objective  of  financial  stability  and  even  issues  on  the  degree  of  activism  that  central  banks  should 
adopt in pursuing this objective.  
Traditionally, it has been believed that monetary stability leads to financial stability. However, as the 
events  of  the  1990s  show,  it  need  not  necessarily  be  the  case.  While  there  are  complementarities 
between these two objectives, especially in the long run, the same need not hold in the short-run. A 
stable macroeconomic environment - low and stable inflation, sustained growth and low interest rates - 
can  generate  excessive  optimism  about  the  future  economic  prospects  and  often  the  risks  are 
downplayed.  Accordingly,  episodes  of  financial  instability  often  have  their  origins  in  environment  of 
macroeconomic  stability.  Thus,  macro  economic  stability  need  not  necessarily  always  place  an 
economy  in  financial  stability  in  the  medium/long  term  and  central  banks,  therefore,  now  bestow  a 
more  focussed  attention  to  the  objective  of  maintaining  financial  stability.  Historically,  central  banks 
have  been  concerned  with  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  albeit  not  at  the  same  time 
(Crockett, 2004). What is rather unique since the 1990s has been a simultaneous pursuit of price and 
financial stability by central banks. 
Forces affecting financial stability 
The basic forces affecting financial stability are the quickening pace of technological innovation and 
the  growing  acceptance  of  market  processes  as  basic  determinant  of  resource  allocation.  Due  to 
sectoral distinctions getting blurred, financial intermediaries have the ability to effectively compete in 
sectors beyond their domain by deconstructing and recombining risks. Further, the source of financial 
disturbances has become more unpredictable mainly due to integration of financial markets. Financial 
liberalisation  has  led  to  the  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates,  cutting  across  not  only  various 
financial  sectors  such  as  banking  and  insurance,  but  also  a  number  of  countries.  Therefore,  a 
contagion  means  the  problems  of  distant  economies  can  become  problems  of  our  own.  The 
progressive  opening  up  of  the  economies  to  external  flows  since  1990s  has  led  to  massive 
cross-border capital flows and volatile exchange rates. Sharp movements in exchange rates can have 
an  adverse  impact  upon  the  balance  sheets  of  both  financial  and  non-financial  entities.  This  is 
especially  true  for  emerging  economies  as  they  usually  need  to  resort  to  borrowing  in  foreign 
currencies.  
If we recall the banking crisis and the resultant financial crisis of Latin America (IMF 2004), we can 
broadly categorise the trigger points as:  
• 
A boom in credit to the private sector, for both investment and consumption (Mexico, 1994; 
and Colombia, 1999). A particular form of boom and bust cycle is generated by the end of 
hyperinflationary episodes (Bolivia, 1986); 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
    Wholesale liberalization in the absence of an appropriate and effective prudential regulatory 
framework  (Mexico,  1994;  and  Chile,  1984).  It  is  worth  stressing,  however,  that  highly 
regulated systems have also suffered crises (Peru, 1987); 
Direct  effects  of  fiscal  difficulties  on  the  domestic  banking  system,  a  factor  that  seems  to 
have become an increasingly important source of strain on Latin American banks (Argentina, 
2001); 
Contagion  and  spillovers,  where  a  crisis  in  one  country  induces  economic  agents  to 
reassess their expectations and thus reduce investment in other countries (Argentina, 1995), 
or where a crisis in one country has a direct effect on economic conditions in another country 
(Uruguay, 2001); 
Terms  of  trade  shocks  and  movements  in  real  exchange  rates  (Venezuela,  1994;  and 
Ecuador, 1998); and 
Political instability, unrest, and, in some cases, civil conflict.  
Inappropriate and ineffective prudential regulation and supervision; 
Inefficacy of bank intervention and resolution;  
Policy-induced distortions, and, in particular, government influence over public sector banks; 
Poor structure and composition of government finances; 
Inadequate accounting practices, property rights, and corporate governance; and 
Inefficiency of the judicial system and poor observance and enforcement of laws.  
• 
Deficiencies  in  the  following  areas  have  detracted  from  good  banking  practices  and  increased 
vulnerability to crisis in some Latin American countries:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Financial markets are different from other markets and therefore, greater liberalisation goes along with 
deeper  supervision  and  higher  degree  of  regulation.  This  is  because  in  financial  markets  the  herd 
mentality catches up fast making markets volatile. Any destabilisation in financial markets affects even 
those  who  are  not  in  financial  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  financial  markets  can  drive  the  real 
economy. Central banks, therefore, need to pursue a multifaceted approach towards ensuring financial 
stability through (i) payments system oversight, (ii) contingency planning against market disruption, (iii) 
lender  of  last  resort  (LOLR),  (iv)  share  in  procedures  for  financial  regulation  and  (v)  analysis  and 
communication  through  reports  such  as  Financial  Stability  Reviews  (FSRs)  (Goodhart,  2004).  The 
importance assigned by central banks nowadays to the objective of financial stability is evident from 
the fact that a number of central banks have started publishing FSRs, giving their assessment of the 
health of the financial sector and its ability to withstand various shocks. The European Central Bank is 
a recent addition to this growing list of central banks that come out with regular FSR-type reports. 
At  the  global  level,  crisis  prevention  initiatives  have  prominently  centred  around  strengthened  IMF 
surveillance and include a number of aspects: data dissemination, greater transparency, development 
of standards and codes, constructive involvement of the private sector, Sovereign Debt Restructuring 
Mechanism (SDRM) and introduction of facilities like Contingent Credit Line (CCL). 
Financial stability: an Indian perspective 
In India too, financial stability has emerged as a key consideration in the conduct of monetary policy 
since the 1990s, consequent to the structural reforms initiated in the early 1990s, the gradual opening 
up  of  the  Indian  economy  and  the  transformation  of  the  financial  system  from  a  planned  and 
administered  regime  to  a  market-oriented  financial  system.  As  observed  by  Governor  Dr.  Reddy, 
contextually, financial stability in India would mean (a) ensuring uninterrupted settlements of financial 
transactions  (both  internal  and  external),  (b)  maintenance  of  a  level  of  confidence  in  the  financial 
system amongst all the participants and stakeholders and (c) absence of excess volatility that unduly 
and adversely affects real economic activity (Reddy, 2004b).  
The overall approach of the Reserve Bank to maintain financial stability is three-pronged: maintenance 
of overall macroeconomic balance; improvement in the macro-prudential functioning of institutions and 
markets;  and  strengthening  micro-prudential 
through  regulation  and 
supervision.  Monetary  stability  is  an  important  precondition  for  financial  stability  and,  therefore,  the 
institutional  soundness 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
towards  maintaining 
most significant contribution that monetary policy can make to financial stability is through maintaining 
low and stable inflation. Since the second half of the 1990s, inflation has been brought down to an 
average of five per cent per annum compared to an average of around 8-9 per cent per annum in the 
preceding two and a half decades. The reduction in inflation since the early 1990s has also enabled 
inflation  expectations  to  stabilise.  Low  and  stable  inflation  expectations  increase  confidence  in  the 
domestic financial system and, thereby contribute in an important way to the stability of the domestic 
financial system.  
Second, a number of measures have been taken to widen, deepen and integrate various segments of 
the financial markets in order to strengthen price discovery mechanism, lower the transaction costs 
and  enhance  the  liquidity  in  the  markets.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  recognised  that  the  capacity  of 
economic  agents  in  developing  economies  to  manage  volatility  in  all  prices,  goods  or  foreign 
exchange is highly constrained and there is a legitimate role for non-volatility as a public good (Reddy, 
2004a). Accordingly, ensuring orderly conditions in the financial markets is an important aspect of the 
Reserve  Bank's  approach 
financial  stability.  Operating  procedures  and 
instruments of monetary policy have evolved over time to meet these objectives. For instance, with 
persistent capital flows, a new facility in the form of Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) was put in 
place  effective  April  2004.  The  MSS  has  provided  the  Reserve Bank  greater  flexibility  in  its  market 
operations. Similarly, India's exchange rate policy of focusing on managing volatility with no fixed rate 
target, while allowing the underlying demand and supply conditions to determine the exchange rate 
movements  over  a  period  in  an  orderly  way  has  stood  the  test  of  time.  Prudent  external  sector 
management  with  a  cautious  approach  to  capital  account  liberalisation  has  been  an  important 
component  of  macroeconomic  policies  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Overall,  the  Reserve  Bank's 
approach  is  to  minimise  volatility  in  the  financial  markets  and  minimise  knee-jerk  reactions,  while 
focusing on price stability and the underlying inflation. The objective has been to ensure that there are 
no avoidable uncertainties in policy, while mitigating undue pressures on the functioning of markets 
without undermining market efficiency. 
A robust financial system is often characterised by smooth and secure payment systems and a word 
here  about  the  several  initiatives  undertaken  by  RBI  towards  lifting  the  Indian  payment  system  to 
global  standards  would  be  in  order.  While  clearing  houses  were  strengthened  with  MICR  clearing 
processes,  electronic  clearing  initiatives  were  undertaken  through  promotion  of  Electronic  Clearing 
Services  (ECS),  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (EFT),  establishment  of  an  exclusive  secured  private 
network (INFINET) which serves as private geteway to the Indian financial system. A Real Time Gross 
Settlement  System  (RTGS)  has  been  operationalised  as  an  effective,  quick  and  secure  system  for 
inter  bank  funds  transfers.  Introduction  of  Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS),  a  Centralised  Funds 
Management System (CFMS) and the Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS) are other key 
components  that  were  put  into  the  payment  system.  All  these  measures  have  quickened  the 
settlement processes, reduced risks in settlements and built confidence in the payment and settlement 
systems.  
In  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability,  effective  regulatory  and  supervisory  initiatives  along  with  a 
calibrated approach to financial sector liberalisation have a critical role to play. The Indian approach 
towards financial sector reforms has been based on pancha sutra or five principles (Reddy, 1998): (a) 
cautious and appropriate sequencing of reform measures; (b) introduction of norms that are mutually 
reinforcing;  (c)  introduction  of  complementary  reforms  across  sectors  (most  importantly,  monetary, 
fiscal and external sector); (d) development of financial institutions; and, (e) development of financial 
markets.  The  reforms  have  aimed  at  enhancing  productivity  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  sector, 
improving the transparency of operations and ensuring that it is capable of withstanding idiosyncratic 
shocks.  
Regulatory measures  
Keeping  in  pace  with  times,  various  regulatory  prescriptions were  being  issued  by  the  central  bank 
from time to time. These steps are taken to basically ensure banking stability vis-à-vis exposures and 
risks. I shall outline some of the key measures: 
• 
• 
Capital adequacy norms at 9% which is higher than the 8% international norm 
Income Recognition and Asset Classification (IRAC) norms 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
  Exposure  norms  –  individual  and  group  norms  15%  and  40%,  respectively  with  additional 
10% in case of infrastructure funding. 
Cap on foreign currency borrowing and lending as well as policy measures on hedging of 
such foreign currency loans 
Cap on Capital market and sensitive sector exposures 
Building up of Investment Fluctuation Reserve (IFR) to a minimum of 5% by March 2006. 
• 
• 
As a result of improvements in the regulatory and supervisory framework, the degree of compliance 
with Basel Core Principles has generally been high, and observed areas of weaknesses, primarily with 
respect to country risk guidelines have been addressed. Consolidated accounting for banks has been 
introduced  along  with  a  system  of  Risk-Based  Supervision  (RBS)  for  intensified  monitoring  of 
vulnerabilities. A scheme of Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) was introduced effective December 2002 
to undertake 'structured' and 'discretionary' actions against banks exhibiting vulnerabilities in certain 
prudential/financial parameters. With liberalisation, financial conglomerates are emerging. Banks have 
accordingly  been  advised  to  prepare  and  disclose  consolidated  financial  statements  and  prepare 
consolidated prudential reports. The inter-regulatory coordination has also been streamlined with the 
establishment  of  a  monitoring  system  in  respect  of  Systemically  Important  Financial  Intermediaries 
(SIFIs),  coupled  with  the  establishment  of  three  Standing  Technical  Committees  constituted  by  the 
High Level Coordination Committee on Financial and Capital Markets (HLCCFCM) to provide a more 
focused inter-agency forum for sharing of information and intelligence. 
A  major  initiative  towards  preventing  crisis  has  been  the  strengthening  of  the  effectiveness  of 
surveillance  and  incorporating  a  fresh  perspective  to  its  analysis  and  policy  recommendations.  To 
identify  the  strengths  and  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  system  (which  includes  banks,  financial 
institutions, NBFCs, Primary dealers, and markets – forex, debt, money/call, and capital), a half yearly 
review  based  on  financial  soundness  indicators  (also  known  as  macro-prudential  indicators  MPI)  is 
undertaken.  The  MPI  review  comprises  both  aggregated  micro-prudential  indicators  (AMPIs)  of  the 
health of individual financial institutions and macroeconomic indicators (MEIs) associated with financial 
system soundness.  
This macro approach to financial supervision has helped the policy makers to refine their regulatory 
stance so as to achieve the fine balance between growth and financial stability. For instance, thanks to 
exhaustive  data  being collected  under off-site surveillance,  Reserve  Bank  could  closely  monitor  the 
ratio  of  gross  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  to  total  loans  which  was  at  a  high  of  15.7  per  cent  for 
schedule  commercial  banks  (SCBs)  at  end-March  1997.  This  ratio  witnessed  a  marked  decline  to 
7.2 per  cent  at  end-March  2004.  Net  NPLs  also  witnessed  a  significant  decline,  driven  by  the 
improvements  in  loan  loss  provisioning,  which  comprises  over  half  of  the  total  provisions  and 
contingencies. Also, based on the data on the maturity patterns of banks’ assets and liabilities and on 
the unrealised gains on the investment portfolios, RBI could regularly gauge the impact of rising bond 
yields  on  the  banks’  balance  sheets  after  taking  into  account  the  cushion  available,  both  for  the 
system as a whole and for the individual banks. We thus identified the outliers in the system on the 
basis of their capacity to withstand interest rate shock and sensitized them to take corrective steps. 
From financial stability perspective, issues of ownership, size and governance in banks are extremely 
relevant.  In  view  of  the  importance  of  corporate  governance  in  banks,  we  issued  guidelines  for 
effective corporate governance and also identified the criteria for determining the fit and proper status 
of owners and directors. It was also considered necessary to lay down a comprehensive framework of 
policy on ownership and governance in banks in a transparent manner. Accordingly, we have placed 
in public domain a draft paper on ‘A comprehensive policy framework for ownership and governance in 
private sector banks’. The Reserve Bank has adopted a consultative approach, encouraging a debate 
on  this  issue  and  the  draft  is  being  reviewed  on  the  basis  of  the  feedback  received  from  various 
quarters.  
The stability of a financial system can be achieved only when institutions and markets function on the 
basis of informed decisions. In India, the banking system has witnessed greater levels of transparency 
and standards of disclosure. The range of disclosures have gradually been expanded over the years 
and  presently  includes  a  host  of  indicators  relating  to  capital  adequacy  (Tier  I  and  Tier  II  capital 
separately),  NPAs,  Government  shareholding,  movements  in  NPAs,  exposure  to  sensitive  sectors 
(capital market, real estate and commodities), movements in provisions for NPAs and investments as 
also  information  on  corporate  debt  restructuring.  These  are  being  further  enhanced  to  incorporate 
asset-liability management, risk management policies, concentrations, connected lending, evaluation 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
of  investment  in  subsidiaries,  various  performance  measures  and  indicators  thereof.  Banks  are 
providing  information  on  various  indicators  in  the  form  of  notes  to  accounts  and  schedules  in  their 
balance  sheets.  Guidelines  in  regard  to  Fair  Practices  Code  for  Lenders  were  framed  and  the 
banks/all-India FIs have been advised to adopt these guidelines. The Reserve Bank has been taking 
several  steps  from  time  to  time  to  enhance  the  transparency  in  banks’  operations  by  prescribing 
comprehensive requirements for disclosure in tune with the international best practices. In view of the 
added emphasis on the role of market discipline under Basel II and with a view to enhancing further 
transparency, banks have been advised on October 19, 2004 that all cases of penalty imposed by the 
Reserve Bank as also strictures/directions on specific matters including those arising out of inspection 
will be placed in the public domain with effect from November 1, 2004.  
Conclusion 
To conclude, ensuring an acceptable degree of financial stability is a never-ending process.  
Looking ahead, the vulnerability to real sector shocks has the potential to significantly affect financial 
stability  in  India.  The  major  sources  of  shocks  in  India  are  very  sharp  increases  in  oil  prices  and 
extraordinary monsoon failures and other natural calamities with consequent impact on the agricultural 
sector, spilling over to other sectors of the economy. Therefore, the weight to financial stability in India 
is higher than in many other countries. 
Financial stability has moved to centre-stage nationally as well as in discussions relating to the future 
of the global monetary and financial system. Several factors have brought this about: the disturbing 
intensity  and  frequency  of  financial  crises  in  the  decade  gone,  the  move  to  strengthen  domestic 
financial  systems  under  Basel  II  and  the  unfinished  quest  for  the  appropriate  international  financial 
architecture for crisis prevention and management. Unlike in some countries where the responsibility 
for financial stability has been located in an independent authority, our approach has been to exploit 
the  synergies  that  exist  between  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  the  function  of  financial 
regulation.  Accordingly,  financial  stability  in  India  is  an  integral  responsibility  of  the  Reserve  Bank. 
Appropriate  governance  has  enabled  us  to  mitigate  areas  of  conflict  of  interest  even  as  we  have 
reaped the benefits of (i) a deep understanding of the dynamics of India’s financial sector – which, in 
essence, has evolved around the Reserve Bank over the years – (ii) oversight of money, debt and 
foreign exchange markets and (iii) the accumulation of the technical skills associated with regulation 
and supervision. The experience with the tumultuous 1990s has shown that our approach has stood 
the test of time in ensuring a stable, vibrant and well-functioning financial system in the country. We 
have  a  well-capitalised  financial  system  even  by  international  standards,  with  low  levels  of  loan 
delinquency  despite  our  prudential  standards  being  set  tighter  than  international  standards.  Our 
financial markets are orderly and smoothly functioning and the ability of our financial intermediaries to 
deal in various segments of the financial market spectrum is improving almost continuously. Periodic 
monitoring and self-assessment of the quality of financial supervision is buttressed by external audits, 
including  by  the  IMF.  In  the  years  ahead,  we  will  continue  to  vigorously  pursue  the  objective  of 
financial  stability  by  developing  and  refining  our  approach,  modulating  the  pace  and  sequencing  of 
regulatory function with the financial dynamics and benchmarking ourselves against international best 
practices  so  that  our  financial  institutions  emerge  as  global  players  and  India  becomes  the 
international financial centre of the new millennium.  
BIS Review 9/2005 
 5
