European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 13 January 
2005. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  the  first  press 
conference  of  2005  and  extend  our  best  wishes  to  you  for  the  new  year.  Let  me  also  take  this 
opportunity to say that all our thoughts are with the victims of the recent flood disaster and with their 
families in the countries concerned and around the world. 
I will now report on the outcome of today’ s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which was 
also  attended  by  Mr  Juncker,  in  his  joint  capacity  as  President  of  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  of  the 
Eurogroup, and Mr Barroso, President of the European Commission. Commissioner Almunia was also 
invited to attend. 
While short-term inflationary pressures persist, they have recently diminished somewhat, mainly due 
to the decline in oil prices from the peaks seen in October. At the same time, there is currently no 
significant evidence that underlying domestic inflationary pressures are building up in the euro area. 
Accordingly,  we  have  left  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged  at  their  historically  low  levels. 
However, upside risks to price stability over the medium term remain, and continued vigilance is of the 
essence with regard to those risks. 
I  shall  now  explain  our  assessment  in  more  detail,  turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis.  Eurostat 
yesterday  released  a  new  estimate  for  real  GDP  growth  in  the  third  quarter.  At  0.3%  quarter  on 
quarter, it confirmed the previous estimate. While information on the fourth quarter is still incomplete, 
the  latest  macroeconomic  data  and  survey  evidence,  although  mixed,  appear  to  suggest  ongoing 
moderate growth. 
Looking ahead, the conditions remain in place for economic growth to proceed. On the external side, 
global growth is expected to remain robust. The strength of global demand should help to sustain euro 
area exports. On the domestic side, investment should be supported by the very favourable financing 
conditions  in  the  euro  area,  improved  corporate  earnings  and  greater  business  efficiency  as  firms 
continue to restructure. Moreover, private consumption is likely to evolve in line with the development 
of  real  disposable  income.  Consumption  would  also  be  supported  if  uncertainties  surrounding  the 
extent and pace of fiscal consolidation and structural reform in the euro area were reduced. 
Downside  risks  to  the  economic  outlook  stemming  from  oil  price  developments  have  diminished 
somewhat over recent weeks. As regards exchange rates, we confirm our position, expressed when 
the euro rose sharply, that such moves are unwelcome and undesirable for economic growth. 
Turning to prices, annual HICP inflation was 2.3% in December according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, 
up  from  2.2%  in  November.  Annual  HICP  inflation  rates  of  above  2%  are  likely  to  persist  over  the 
coming  months,  notwithstanding  the  recent  oil  price  decline.  Looking  further  ahead,  however,  the 
available information indicates that, barring further adverse shocks, HICP inflation will fall below 2% in 
the course of 2005. Moreover, the latest indicators do not suggest that underlying domestic inflationary 
pressures are building up in the euro area. Wage increases remain contained, against the background 
of ongoing moderate economic growth and weak labour markets. In the context of what is a broadly 
favourable outlook for price developments over the medium term, upside risks to price stability need to 
be  taken  into  account.  Given  past  oil  price  rises,  there  is  a  continued  need  to  avoid  second-round 
effects in wage and price-setting throughout the economy. Responsibility on the part of social partners 
remains  very  important.  Moreover,  developments  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  require 
close monitoring. Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm our previous assessment. 
Monetary and credit growth strengthened in the second half of 2004, largely as a consequence of the 
prevailing low level of interest rates. Given the strength of monetary dynamics over the past few years, 
there remains significantly more liquidity in the euro area than is required to finance non-inflationary 
growth.  Overall,  the  monetary  analysis  points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to 
longer term. At the same time, the combination of high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could 
in some countries become a source of unsustainable price increases in property markets. 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 1
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  suggests  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  are 
contained but upside risks to price stability over the medium term need to be monitored closely. In this 
context, it is crucial that there is no spillover from current short-term developments in consumer price 
inflation to long-term inflation expectations. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis supports the 
case  for  continued  vigilance  with  regard  to  the  materialisation  of  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. 
With  regard  to  both  fiscal  policies  and  structural  reforms,  the  governments  and  institutions  of  the 
European Union will have to confront many important challenges in the course of 2005. 
Foremost among these challenges is the need to strengthen public finances by correcting excessive 
deficits  swiftly  and  returning  to  a  path  of  vigorous  fiscal  consolidation.  Moreover,  throughout  the 
European Union there is a need to address the considerable challenges that population ageing poses 
to existing pension and social security systems. 
There is also a need to now bring the ongoing discussions surrounding the European fiscal framework 
to a convincing conclusion which builds trust and confidence. The existing fiscal framework enshrined 
in the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact is a cornerstone of Economic and Monetary Union and 
thus  of  central  importance  for  anchoring  expectations  of  fiscal  discipline.  The  Governing  Council  is 
convinced  that  improvements  in  the  implementation  of  the  Pact  are  possible.  At  the  same  time,  it 
reiterates  its  position  that  it  would  be  counterproductive  to  change  the  Regulations,  dilute  the  3% 
deficit limit or weaken the excessive deficit procedure. 
Turning  to  structural  policies,  the  forthcoming  mid-term  review  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  provides  an 
opportunity to give renewed impetus to structural reform in the euro area, as called for by the recently 
published  Kok  Report.  We  strongly  support  a  reform  agenda  which  focuses  on  raising  employment 
growth, fostering investment and stimulating innovation and productivity. Progress in this direction will 
not only enhance the underlying growth potential of the euro area economy over the medium term, but 
will also help to bolster consumer and business confidence over a shorter horizon. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2005
