Rakesh Mohan: Communications in central banks - a perspective 
Address  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of 
SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Mumbai, 9 September, 2005. 
The annexes and references for this speeech are available on the RBI’s website at www.rbi.org.in. 
the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  at 
the 
 Introduction 
I. 
Communication  is  part  of  the  professional  hazards  that  central  bankers  face  as  a  routine. 
The  responses  as  well  as  measures  are  mostly  ‘measured’.  Financial  markets  watch  our 
pauses, and some punctuation marks in the text of a statement have the distinct possibility of 
getting transmitted through the movement of a few points in the yield curve. Faced with such 
grave consequences that can be measured in millions of rupees or dollars, communication in 
central banking becomes really a very serious matter. 
Is  it  true  for  central  banking  only?  Perhaps  not:  after  all,  communication  in  general  is  a 
complex  process.  While  we  all  attempt  to  communicate  among  ourselves  all  the  time, 
nonetheless, the expression of intentions in oral or written mode often do not get transmitted 
correctly to the reader or listener. Words have different connotations - so have paragraphs or 
lengthy documents. The reader or listener often ascribes motives to expressions used and a 
wedge is created between what is said and what is perceived. What a person perceives is 
often  very  dependent  on  what  she  expects  to  hear,  or  she  wants  to  hear.  It  interesting  to 
refer to what William Poole has noted in context of central bank communication,  
“Accurate communication requires settled meanings for words. For any given word, we can 
consult a dictionary and we usually discover that each English word has several meanings, 
which  can  be  quite  different.  There  is  no  dictionary  in  which  we  can  look  up  the  several 
meanings of a paragraph. The meaning of a policy statement — preferably only one — must 
be established by the central bank, through consistent practice over time and through more 
extended discussion of what the language means” (Poole, 2003). 
Furthermore,  expression  of  intention  is  not  a  one-off  affair;  on  the  contrary  there  are 
elements  of  incrementality  in  communication  and  reputation  plays  a  role.  Illustratively,  my 
children often start reacting to any directions only after a reminder: their normal reaction to 
my  directions  is  to  see  whether  I  was  serious  to  begin  with.  My  credibility  is  constantly  at 
stake. 
Communication in central banking is a far more difficult process. It is not that long ago that 
central  banking  was  shrouded  in  mystery.  Books  like  “Secrets  of  the  Temple”  (Greider, 
1989), and expressions like “monetary mystique” (Goodfreind, 1985) bear testimony to this. It 
was in fact widely believed that communication from the Central Bank needs to be couched 
in terms of “constructive ambiguity”, a term coined by Chairman Gerry Corrigan of the New 
York  Fed.  One  is  reminded  of  what  Alan  Greenspan  said,  “The  undeniable,  though 
regrettable, fact is that the most effective policymaking is done outside the immediate glare 
of the press" (Greenspan, 2002). 
It was felt that earlier that policy effectiveness depended on the degree of surprise with which 
the market was taken by central bank policy announcements. In fact, it is quite remarkable to 
note that prior to 1994 the target Federal Funds Rate was not even announced by the US 
Federal  Reserve:  the  market  was  left  to  infer  the  rate  from  the  timing,  sequence  and 
magnitude of its open market operations (Woodford, 2005). Now, however, the U.S. Federal 
Reserve  not  only  announces  its  current  target  Fed  Fund  Rate  but  also  provides  a  clear 
indication  of  the  likely  trajectory  of  future  interest  rates.  Such  has  been  the  revolution  in 
Central Bank communication practice over the last ten to fifteen years. 
   1/9 
Since  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s  the  widely  perceived  iron  wall  of  central  banks’ 
communication  has  become  much  thinner,  along  with  the  fall  of  the iron  curtain.  From  the 
current vantage point we can clearly discern three reasons for this change: 
• 
First, the clamour for and attainment of central bank independence has imposed a 
great  degree  of  responsibility  on  the  central  banks  –  a  major  one  being  the 
attainment of transparency in communication. 
Second, adoption of inflation targeting by a number of central banks since the 1990s 
made  effective  communication  an  integral  part  of  policy  making.  Monetary  policy 
committees were formed and minutes started being published.  
Third, the innovations in information and communication technology made the speed 
and  form  of  communication  from  central  banks  quite  revolutionary.  From  the  print 
medium and television the new entrants of transmission have been the web-sites of 
the central banks and the wire agencies like Reuters and Bloomberg. 
  This change in thinking has occurred with the enhanced perception that "central banks affect 
the  economy  as  much  through  their  influence  on  expectations  as  through  any  direct, 
mechanical  effects  of  central  bank  trading  in  the  market  for  overnight  cash"  (Woodford, 
2005), or through their specific announcements on the intervention rate. Woodford goes as 
far  as  to  say  that  "Central  Banking is  management  of  expectations".  When  a  central  bank 
changes its intervention / policy rate, its effectiveness in influencing key variables such as the 
inflation  rate  depends  crucially  on  its  effect  on  other  financial  market  prices  such  as  the 
exchange rate, equity prices and the longer term interest rates. Thus, apart from the specific 
action related to the overnight policy rate, the central bank has to use all the means at its 
disposal to achieve its policy aims. Now that direct credit controls, or other quantitative direct 
instrument  are  not  available,  and  that  financial  markets  have  deepened  even  in  our 
countries, effective communicative of central bank policy objectives, instruments and action 
has gained prominence. 
In  fact,  presently  there  is  now  perhaps  an  abundance  of  information  that  gets  transmitted 
from the Central Banks to the public. This goes to the extent that the  Economist (July 22, 
2004) recently raised the question: “Do communicative central banks make financial markets 
lazy?” and concluded that, “It’s not always good to talk.” 
The  issue  at  hand  for  our  countries  relates  to  our  understanding  of  the  depth  and 
sophistication of our financial markets and of the public at large. Should our communication 
strategies  be  similar  to  that  of  our  counterparts  in  more  developed  countries?  Should  our 
mode  of  monetary  policy  making,  e.g.  inflation  targeting,  be  similar  to  the  current  vogue 
elsewhere? How confident can we be of our powers of modeling and forecasting? These are 
the questions that we have to deal  with and to  then fashion our communication strategies 
accordingly. 
It  is  in  this  context  that  I  attempt  to  review  the  rationale,  forms  and  practices  of 
communication in central banking and try to evaluate the Indian experience in this address. 
The  rest  of  the  address  is  orgranised  as  follows.  Section  II  looks  into  the  general  issues 
relating  of  communication  in  central  banks.  Section  III  presents  the  Indian  practices  and 
some of my personal reflections in this regard. Section IV gives the concluding observations. 
Necessity of Communication from the Central Bankers 
II. 
The issue of communication in central banks is intimately interlinked with the mandate of the 
central bank. The more complex is the mandate of the central bank, the more difficult as well 
as more important is the communication. Illustratively, if the mandate of the central bank is 
either  inflation  targeting  or  exchange  rate  targeting  (as  in  a  currency  board  arrangement) 
then  the  objective  of  central  bank  is  amply  clear  to  the  public.  Hence  communication  is 
necessary  to  express  the  commitment  of  the  central  bank  which  is  reflected  through 
   2/9 
continuous action to maintain its credibility for achieving these objectives. On the contrary, if 
the mandate is complex as it is, for example, for the US Federal Reserve and the Reserve 
Bank  of  India,  then  the  objectives  may  not  be  clear.  Moreover,  even  if  the  objectives  are 
known, when there are multiple objectives there could be lack of clarity among the relative 
weights and the changing relative weights of these objectives. In all such cases, the central 
bank needs to communicate the objectives on a continuous basis. Thus, benefit of central 
bank  communication  depends  crucially  on  the  adopted  policy  approach  (Bernanke,  2004). 
Specifically if the central bank follows a simple feedback policy, then the private sector can 
easily infer its future policies. In that case, there is no necessity of extensive communication 
by the central bank except when the central bank decides to deviate substantially from the 
rule.  Central  bankers  in  modern  times  hardly  follow  a  simple  feedback  rule  –  all  central 
banks, including the inflation targetors, take into account a wealth of information in deciding 
the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  and  follow  what  is  termed  as  the  ‘forecast-based 
approach’. In this case, the public are not able to infer the likely course of policy so easily 
and need guidance about the central bank’s perception of outlooks, risk assessments, and 
objectives. Clear and transparent communication plays an important role in this case. 
The need for communication from the central banks also comes from another distinct source. 
Since the early 1990s, there is an increasing emphasis on central bank independence. In a 
democratic polity, a good deal of trust is placed in the central bank. Various countries in the 
world have attained varying degrees of independence of their central banks. In this context, 
questions of accountability and transparency are often raised. Communication is at the heart 
of accountability. There is, thus, a need to understand motives and procedures. When the 
political  authorities  give  a  clear  mandate  to  the  central  banks  in  bestowing  independence 
then the communication policy of the central bank is reasonably clear. A crucial issue about 
communication policy is when and whom to communicate. Interestingly, when a central bank 
is not independent, then it can communicate only to the controlling authority. In case of an 
independent central bank the communication has to go to various actors, viz., (a) public, (b) 
legislature or executive, (c) market participants. The mode and method of communication to 
the participants would be distinctly different for these three entities.  
In  a  globalised  world,  it  is  not  possible  to  formulate  monetary  policy  independent  of 
international  developments.  Monetary  policy  formulation  has,  thus,  became  more  complex 
and  interdependent  (Mohan,  2002).  Furthermore,  in  a  globalised  world  with  increasing 
communication  from  the  regulatory  clubs  like  BIS  or  IMF,  sophistication  of  the  staff  is 
perhaps not too different among the countries. The question, however, is: how sophisticated 
is  the  audience  in  understanding  delicate  nuances  of  the  announcements  of  the  central 
banks.  In  fact,  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  will  crucially  depend  on  how  well  the 
public and market participants understand the central bank signals. A related question is: do 
the central banks need to communicate to different agents differently? What is good for the 
public may not be good for the market participants. After all, “the markets thrive on volatility, 
while the public dislike it quite intensely” (Blinder et al., 2000).  
Monetary  policy  is  most  effective  when  markets  anticipate  it  correctly.  Thus,  a  general 
consensus  in  the  literature  is  that  more  is  the  transparency,  better  it  is.  More  open  public 
disclosure  of  central  bank  policies  may  enhance  the  efficiency  of  markets,  through  the 
following two channels: 
• 
First, greater information about how a central bank makes policy decisions helps to 
reduce financial speculation. 
Second,  clearer  decision  rules  help  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  markets,  and,  thus, 
enhance the predictability of future movements of financial assets. 
 Furthermore, as the rational expectations literature has taught us that the effects of a given 
policy action have to be defined within a treatment of policy expectations. It is argued that an 
assumption about public understanding of the future course of policy is a precondition for any 
coherent  analysis  of  current  policy.  Monetary  policy  is  no  exception  to  this  general  rule. 
   3/9 
Besides,  this  literature  also  showed  that  monetary  authorities  cannot  utilize  the  short-run 
trade-off  by  “fooling”  the  public  systemically,  and  thereby  established  the  necessity  of 
transparency in communication of central banks.  
The forex market, because of its special nature, could be an exception to this general rule of 
‘more  the  merrier’  in  case  of  transparency.  Communication  in  the  area  of  exchange  rate 
policy is special due to a number of reasons (Blinder et al., 2000). First, apart from central 
banks, governments in a number of cases have joint responsibility for exchange rate policy. 
Second, in case of some exchange rate arrangements (such as, pure pegs and pure floats), 
the  need  for  central  bank  communication  is  absent.  Third,  in  the  some  instances  where 
central  banks  decide  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  pursuit  of  monetary 
goals, secrecy may be defensible on the grounds of effectiveness. I shall turn to this issue in 
the Indian context in somewhat greater detail. 
Another  general  issue  is  despite  the  multiplicity  of  objectives  there  is  only  one  instrument 
with the central banks, viz., a variant of the short term interest rate. Central banks all over the 
world try to change the short term interest rates on the assumption that it will influence the 
medium and long term interest rates - after all it is the medium and long term rates that affect 
expectations  and  asset  prices  (Blinder,  1998).  To  a  large  extent,  this  happens  through 
explanations or forecasts. The effectiveness of these will crucially depend on the degree of 
sophistication of the financial market participants and the interlocutors.  
The extent of transparency in central bank communication has been dictated by the norms of 
openness  in  the  body-politic  as  well.  Illustratively,  Bank  of  England  (BoE)’s  information 
dissemination  is  governed  by  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  2000  of  the  U.K.  This  Act 
places  an  obligation  on  public  authorities  to  adopt  and  maintain  a  publication  scheme. 
Furthermore, with effect from January 2005, the Act provides a general right of access to all 
types of recorded information held by public authorities and sets out exemptions from that 
right.  Similarly,  in  the  U.S,  as  per  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  one  can  request 
information from the Fed. 
Do central banks talk in an obscure language? Is communication an exercise in obfuscation? 
Many of the central banks have traditionally been portrayed as ‘tight-lipped, secretive, and 
cryptic’. It is often alleged that central bank executives use complicated words to convey little 
meaning. Blinder and others have alleged that, “Chairman Alan Greenspan is credited with 
raising  Fedspeak  to  a  high  art  …  even  characterizing  his  own  way  of  communicating  as 
mumbling with great incoherence” (Blinder et al, 2000). In one particular incident, Chairman 
Greenspan is reported to have told a US senator, who claimed to have understood what the 
chairman had just said, that “in that case, I must have misspoken”. 
Notwithstanding such allegations, there have been great moves in fostering transparency in 
central communication in recent years. A case in point is the publication of minutes of the 
Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England. According to the Bank of England Act, 
1998, the BoE is supposed to "publish minutes of the MPC meeting before the end of the 
period of 6 weeks beginning with the day of the meeting." Until October 1998 the minutes 
were  published  about  five  weeks  after  the  meeting.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
announced  in  1998  that  it  would  publish  the  minutes  of  its  monthly  meetings  on  the 
Wednesday of the second week after the meetings take place. Apart from the Minutes, they 
publish the voting pattern of the individual members as well. 
Besides, central banks are increasingly learning to communicate ‘perception of uncertainty’, 
as  different  from  ‘ambiguity’.  In  terms  of  communication  there  are  various  ways  to  tell  the 
public that ‘we do not know for certain’, which are clearly preferable to couching a statement 
in ambiguous language. Illustratively, the BoE publishes its growth or inflation forecasts with 
a differing margin of error – what  is popularly called the “fan chart”. The fan chart with its 
increasing lighter shade (at the outward direction) is a mode which clearly communicates the 
extent of uncertainty and the degree of ignorance of the forecaster.  
   4/9 
Another important hallmark of modern communication is the emerging roles of web-sites and 
wire  agencies.  While  the  speed  of  communication  is  still  slightly  slower  than  light,  wire 
agencies put the communication from the central banks on an almost real time basis. This 
has  great  ramifications  on  the  transmission  of  news  and  formation  of  expectation  in  the 
financial markets.  
Having delineated the general principles let me now turn to the Indian specifics on central 
bank communication. 
Communication in RBI 
III. 
I have already pointed out that more complex is the mandate for the central bank more is the 
necessity of communication. The Indian case would perhaps approximate that of a complex 
objective.  After  all,  apart  from  pursuing  monetary  policy,  financial  stability  is  one  of  the 
overriding  concerns  of  the  RBI.  Within  the  objective  of  monetary  policy,  both  control  of 
inflation  and  providing  adequate  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy  so  as  to 
foster growth are equally important. This apart, Reserve Bank acts as a banking regulator, 
debt  manager,  government  debt  market  regulator  and  currency  issuer.  Faced  with  such 
multiple tasks and complex mandate, there is an utmost necessity of clearer communication 
on the part of the Reserve Bank of India.  
What  do  we  need  to  communicate?  In  a  central  bank,  there  is  necessity  of  three  kinds  of 
communication, viz., (a) policy measures, (b) reasons behind such policy measures and (c) 
analysis of the economy. RBI is engaged with all these three kinds of communication. In fact, 
by  international  standards  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  has  a  fairly  extensive  and 
transparent  communication  system.  The  bi-annual  policy  statements  have  traditionally 
communicated the Reserve Bank’s stands on monetary policy in the immediate future of six 
months to one year. As of July this year, we have now begun a system of quarterly reviews 
in addition to the bi-annual statements. The present practice of attaching a review of macro 
economic  developments  to  the  annual  policy  and  mid  term  review,  and  to  the  quarterly 
reviews  gives  an  expansive  view  of  how  the  central  bank  sees  the  economy.  In  the  
bi-annual  policy  meetings  with  the  leading  bankers,  the  Governor  while  announcing  the 
policy explains the rationale behind the measures at length. These policy meetings are not 
one-way traffic. Each banker present in the meeting interacts with the Governor to express 
his or her reaction to the policy announcement. After the policy announcement is over, the 
Governor addresses a press conference in the afternoon. The Deputy Governor in–charge of 
the  Monetary  Policy  Department  normally  gives  live  interviews  to  all  the  major  television 
channels on the same day. Governor also gives interviews to print and electronic media over 
the  next  few  days  after  the  monetary  policy  announcement.  The  only  thing  we  still  do  not 
have is a live telecast of Governor’s monetary policy announcements. 
Apart  from  these  policy  statements  communication  of  RBI  policy  takes  place  through 
speeches  of  the  Governor  and  Deputy  Governors.  These  speeches  are  devoted  to  issues 
concerning the economy as well as articulation of the RBI’s policies. Interestingly, globally it 
has  been  found  that  the  speeches  of  the  Governors  of  the  central  banks  have  been  an 
important determinant of the movement of the term structure of interest rates as changes in 
the repo rate (Fracasso, Genberg and Wyplosz, 2003). 
The  typical  mode  in  which  RBI’s  policy  is  communicated  to  the  regulated  entities  is 
departmental  circulars.  Depending  on  the  domain  of  operations  the concerned department 
will issue a circular which then is placed in the website without any delay. A typical complaint 
about  the  circulars  is  often  that  they  are  written  in  the  language  that  is  not  easily 
comprehensible, and one needs to translate them into normal understandable language. But 
that  is  a  complaint  against  any  formal  statement  couched  in  semi-legal  language.  I  do 
believe, however, that  we can all do a much better job of writing circulars in plain English 
shorn of tedious jargon. 
   5/9 
The other major mode of dissemination of RBI policy as well as its views on the economy is 
its Reports. Over the years these Reports have turned out to be more analytical, transparent 
and forward looking in their outlook. The two statutory reports of the Bank, the Annual Report 
and the Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India have evoked immense interest 
among the public, market participants as well as in academia. The theme based Report on 
Currency and Finance is a platform to articulate the research findings on an issue of topical 
interest.  RBI  Occasional  Papers  has  also  emerged  as  a  professional  journal  of  refereed 
research output of the RBI staff. 
Over the years Committee Reports have emerged as another plank of communication from 
RBI.  The  plethora  of  committees  formed  by  the  RBI  tries  to  communicate  to  the  financial 
sector participants or markets. Interestingly, many of these committees are conceptualized 
during the process of either the annual or the mid-year Review of monetary policy, so that by 
the  time  of  the  next  policy  its  recommendations  are  available  for  consideration  or  for 
implementation.  While  the  general  public  is  quite  cynical  about  the  formation  of  any 
committee, as long as the authorities are serious about a transparent acceptance or rejection 
of  the  recommendations  of  the  committees,  they  remain  a  major  vehicle  of  the  collective 
policy thinking.  
An important feature of the RBI communication policy is the almost real-time dissemination of 
information through its web-site. The results of the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of the 
day are posted in the web-site by 12.30 P.M of the same  day, by 2.30 P.M the reference 
rates numbers are also placed in the web-site. By the next day morning the press release on 
money  market  operations  are  out.  Every  Saturday  by  12  noon  the  weekly  statistical 
supplement is placed in the web-site, giving a fairly detailed recent data-base on the RBI and 
the financial sector. By the first of every month, the RBI Bulletin of the month is out. All the 
regulatory and administrative circulars of different Departments are placed on the web-site 
within half an hour of its finalization. I think such a high speed of dissemination is possible 
due to the professional skills of the internal staff of the RBI.  
Another significant step towards transparency of monetary policy implementation is formation 
of  various  Technical  Advisory  Committees  (TACs)  in  the  RBI  with  representatives  from 
market participants, other regulators (like SEBI or IRDA) and experts. Over the years, three 
such Technical Advisory committees have emerged – one on the money, forex and G-Sec 
markets,  the  other  on  regulation,  and  a  recent  one  on  monetary  policy.  These  fora  act  as 
platforms where RBI comes to know about the needs of market players and where the RBI is 
able to communicate its stand on these issues that may not be strictly feasible in the formal 
modes  of  circulars.  Many  of  the  agenda  notes  prepared  for  these  meetings  form  the 
background  of  the  bi-annual  monetary  policy  announcements.  These  apart,  the  Resource 
Management  Discussions  before  the  Annual  Policy  act  as  another  mode  of  a  two-way 
communication between management of commercial banks and RBI management. Meeting 
with the State Finance Secretaries is another platform of communication. 
I  have  tried  to  give  a  quick  run-down  of  the  various  means  and  modes  of  communication 
strategy and policy of the RBI. Needless to say, in tune with the global trends the RBI too has 
become more transparent, articulate and fast in communicating its policies and views on the 
economy. Nevertheless, questions remain. What else could have been done? Could the RBI 
have done better? What are impediments and hazards of communication in a central bank? 
How fast does the market react to central bank’s announcements? Let me now turn to some 
of these issues.  
How  fast  does  the  central  bank  communication  influence  the  market?  An  interesting 
illustration  of  the  impact  of  central  bank  communication  is  perhaps  the  episode  in  stock 
market on May 17, 2004. On this day, in the wake of change of Government, stock markets 
in India witnessed a record fall in price, which triggered the index-based circuit breaker twice 
during the day. The index-based circuit breaker triggered for the first time at 10:16 AM when 
the Sensex touched a low of 4516. When trading resumed after one hour at 11:15 AM, the 
   6/9 
Sensex opened at 4448 before touching the day's low of 4227 at 11:19 AM – which triggered 
the circuit breaker for around two hours. In normal circumstances, the Reserve Bank does 
not take a view about the stock market. However, when confronted with the possibility of a 
spill-over in money, G-Sec and forex markets RBI intervened on that day and two separate 
press releases were issued by the Bank indicating, (a) constitution of an internal Task Force 
under  the  Executive  Director,  Financial  Market  Committee  to  monitor  the  developments  in 
financial markets, and (b) assuring availability of Rupee and Forex Liquidity (Annex). Thus, it 
was communicated that RBI was keeping in touch with major settlement banks and the stock 
exchanges  to  ensure  that  payment  obligations  on  the  exchanges  were  met  and  gave 
assurance  of  selling  dollars  through  agent  banks  in  order  to  augment  supply  or  intervene 
directly to meet any demand supply imbalances. These press releases were placed on the 
web-site around 2.00 P.M, but were released to wire agencies half an hour earlier and were 
flashed  in  all  the  tickers  by  1.30  P.M.  Trading  had  resumed  by  that  time  at  1:16  PM; 
subsequent  to  the  flashing  of  the  press  release,  the  market  witnessed  a  quick  recovery, 
before closing at 4505. Whereas I am not claiming the entire recovery in the sensex on that 
day to be solely due to the communication from the RBI, it is important to understand the role 
and  power  of  such  communications  when  there  are  occasions  when  central  bank 
communication can have immediate impact on the market - that too on a market that is not 
strictly under its jurisdiction. 
Central  Bank  communication  has  its  flip  side  too.  The  modern  day  paparazzi-syndrome 
haunts  central  bankers  as  well.  I  am  sure  that  many  of  the  central  bankers  must  have  at 
some  point  of  time  must  have  bitterly  surprised  to  find  in  the  next  day’s  newspaper  some 
statement that was ascribed to him or her – whereas the truth could be entirely opposite. Let 
me illustrate this with a personal experience – one among the few I have experienced during 
my  stay  in  RBI.  On  August  14,  2004  I  was  at  the  Annual  Citibank-Fitch  Debt  Market 
Conference.  On  my  entry  I  was  chased  by  the  journalists  and  one  of  the  questions  I  was 
asked  was  about  the  future  rate  of  inflation.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection  I  said  that  the 
present  rise  in  inflation  was  predominantly  driven  by  supply-shocks  and  that  we  were 
monitoring  the  developments  carefully.  To  my  utter  surprise,  a  pink  paper  in  the  next  day 
(i.e., August 15, 2004) reported a story with the photographs of the President of India and 
mine side by side, with the following catch lines: 
• 
“President APJ Abdul Kalam said on Saturday that sustaining a high eight per cent 
growth and containing inflation, now at 7.61 per cent, were the major challenges for 
the country.” 
“Meanwhile,  Reserve  Bank  (RBI)  deputy  governor  Rakesh  Mohan  on  Saturday 
reiterated that the authorities were expecting inflation to fall to the earlier levels of 
five per cent.” 
 The story implied that a Deputy Governor of the RBI differed with the President of India on 
the stance of inflation on the eve of the Independence Day! However, I was absolutely in a 
catch-22  situation  and  was  unable  to  issue  a  letter  of  protest  as  it  would  have  given  the 
signal that the RBI is expecting the inflation to go up. Such are the travails of central bank 
communication! 
Similar experience is often found in interpretation of various reports and policy statements. I 
am  told  that  in  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  instituted  a  media  “lock-up” 
arrangement in which the media can read key reports of the Bank of Canada and write their 
stories prior to the official publication time. There are regular media briefings during this lock-
up period, where officials can deal with technical questions and clarify other issues (purely on 
an  unattributed  basis)  for  the  media.  In  Canada  such  practice  have  resulted  in  a  clear 
improvement in the in the quality of the reporting. I am aware that in RBI as well, the Reports 
are released to the media a day earlier to the release date but without any technical briefing. 
Perhaps  we  can  think  of  introducing  this  media  lock-up  arrangement  inclusive  of  technical 
   7/9 
briefing  in  RBI.  This  could  reduce  the  work  of  issuing  rejoinders  about  some  perceived 
misgiving on central bank policies. 
In common parlance, often central communication is seen in an insider-outsider context. It is 
assumed that central bank communication refers to what the central bank chooses to tell the 
general  public,  market  participants,  experts,  or 
the 
communication internally? Or, to borrow from the management literature, how do we “sell the 
brand  inside”  (Mitchell,  2001)?  While  information  is  doled  to  the  employees  in  form  of 
memos,  news  letter,  many  an  occasion  the  employees  of  an  organization  are  unable  to 
realize the uniqueness of the brand. Central banks are no exception to this general trend of 
the corporate world. The policy and research wings of the RBI would need to pay particular 
attention to the dissemination and effective communication of the RBI policies to internal staff 
and play a pro-active role. I put forward the following ideas in this context: 
• 
the  media.  What  happens 
to 
It would be useful in this context to arrange internal seminars / talks in all regional 
offices  and  training  colleges  of  the  RBI  after  monetary  policy  announcements  or 
publication of important Reports – whether regular (e.g., Annual Report or Report on 
Currency & Finance) or Committee Reports. 
Another idea could be to release FAQs (frequently asked questions) on any policy 
matter in the website. There could be educational resources as well as done in FED 
(such as, “In Plain English: Making Sense of the Federal Reserve”, or material on 
personal financial education). 
Still  another  idea  could  be  to  introduce  a  working  paper  series  with  a  clear 
disclaimer that ‘these are the finding of the individual researcher and not of the RBI’. 
The  unfortunate  thing  about  the  domestic  Press  is  that  they  often  choose  to 
disregard the disclaimer, and start ascribing any research finding to the RBI.  
Finally, many of the internal notes of various departments are of immense analytical 
value; subject to the caveats of confidentiality (which I am sure would be exceptions 
rather 
internally. 
than  rules),  many  such  notes  could  be  made  available 
Departmental sites in the RBI Intranet could be effectively utilized in this.  
   While  the  management  normally  makes  policy  statements  to  the  outside  world,  in  an 
increasingly liberalizing economy, staffs often act as ambassadors of the institution – in that 
sense internal communication could act as a conduit for external communication as well. 
A look at the communication policy of the central banks in advanced countries brings out two 
important features. Many of the central banks have a monetary policy committee with some 
form or the other, and many of them have an inflation report and a financial stability report. 
The question is how far do we need them? While the Inflation Report is a hallmark of many 
inflation targeting economies, it is by no means universal – the same is also true for financial 
stability  report.  Nevertheless,  a  critical  question  in  this  context  is  publication  of  the  central 
bank’s  forecasts.  Almost  all  central banks  have  some  internal  forecasts  about  the  inflation 
and  growth  rate  of  the  economy.  The  inflation  targeting  countries  tend  to  attach  heavy 
emphasis  on  the  publication  of  forecasts.  These  forecasts  are  based  on  some  economic 
models, and buttressed by the policy maker’s expectation of future. Thus, when and if, we 
think in favour of introducing an inflation report for India, we need to sort out the prerequisite 
of a detailed macro model as well as commitment to a band of inflation – not just a point of 
time (which in any way is announced in the bi-annual policy statements), bur a path for the 
year(s) to come. As far as financial stability report is concerned, it is heartening to note that 
Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2003-04 has introduced a chapter on this 
topic.  As  the  Report  on  Trend  and  Progress  of  Banking  in  India  is  a  statutory  report,  the 
question arises whether we need to introduce an additional financial stability report, or we 
need to couch the contents of this report suitably, so that it effectively becomes the financial 
stability report. 
   8/9 
As far as the monetary policy committees are concerned, it may be noted that the Advisory 
Group on ‘Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies’ (for the Standing Committee on 
International  Financial  Standards  and  Codes),  with  Shri  M.  Narasimham  as  Chairman  and 
Shri S.S. Tarapore as a member, recommended setting up of a monetary policy committee in 
RBI.  
Consequently, in order to further strengthen the consultative process in monetary policy, the 
RBI  has  set  up  a  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Monetary  Policy  in  July  2005  with 
external experts in the areas of monetary economics, central banking, financial markets and 
public finance. The Technical Advisory Committee comprises the Governor as the Chairman, 
the Deputy Governor in charge of Monetary Policy as an internal member, and four external 
members  in  the  committee.  Other  Deputy  Governor(s)  and  any  expert  depending  on  the 
requirement of the subject will be special invitees. The Committee would meet at least once 
in  a  quarter.  The  Technical  Advisory  Committee  is  a  right  step  towards  enhanced 
transparency for communication from the RBI. 
Concluding Observations 
IV. 
Central  Bank  communication  has  come  a  long  way.  From  the  secretive  central  bankers, 
allegations are now made that they are talking too much. Central banks have become more 
transparent  and  today  there  is  abundance  of  material  about  the  central  banks’  intended 
action plan. 
What is the message then? While nobody doubts that necessity and transparency of central 
banks  communication,  the  question  is  how  do  we  go  about  it?  In  conclusion,  I  can  do  no 
better  but  to  quote  from  Adam  Posen  of  the  Institute  of  International  Economics,  who 
succinctly summarized the need for central bank communication: 
“Think of the relationship between a central bank and the attentive public as analogous to the 
relationship between a married couple. Good communication is key if the relationship is to 
cope well with the bumps and bruises of everyday life. While familiarity removes the need for 
too  much  explicitness  in  communication,  changing  surroundings  and  personal  needs  over 
time make it dangerous to take too much previous understanding for granted. Presumably, 
the  relationship  is  for  the  long-term,  and  day-to-day  misunderstandings  do  not  imperil  the 
relationship, but they can make it less pleasant or mutually beneficial" (Posen, 2002, p. 3). 
 
   9/9 
