Caleb M Fundanga: Supervision of non-bank financial institutions 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the opening ceremony of a 
MEFMI/ACBF/IMF  -  East  Afritac  Regional  Workshop  on  “Supervision  of  non-bank  financial 
institutions”, Lusaka, 14 February 2005. 
 The Executive Director, MEFMI, Dr. Maruping 
The Executive Director, Africa Capacity Building Foundation 
Representative from the IMF 
Distinguished Workshop Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
On behalf of the Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute for Eastern and Southern Africa 
(MEFMI), the African Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF) and the East African Technical Assistance 
Centre (AFRITAC), I wish to welcome you all to this important workshop and to the beautiful city of 
Lusaka.  May  I  also  welcome  our  distinguished  resource  persons  and  thank  them  for  accepting  our 
invitations. I hope their participation will enrich the deliberations of this workshop as well as enhance 
the knowledge of the participants. Having perused through your programme, I noticed that you have a 
tight schedule. However, I urge all of you to find time in your busy schedule to visit some interesting 
places  that  the  city  of  Lusaka  has  to offer,  including  shopping  malls,  museums,  cultural villages,  to 
mention but a few. 
Allow  me  also  to  thank  the  Executive  Director  of  MEFMI,  Dr.  Maruping,  for  having  invited  me  to 
officiate  at  this  regional  workshop  on  “Supervision  of  non-bank  financial  institutions”.  I  am  reliably 
informed  that  this  workshop  is  organised  by  MEFMI,  in  conjunction  with  the  IMF  through  the  East 
AFRITAC and the ACBF. The workshop is indeed timely as it is aimed at building sustainable capacity 
for  effective  financial  sector  supervision  at  a  time  when  our  region  is  beset  with  a  lot  of  non-bank 
financial institutions that are financially constrained. I, therefore, wish to commend these organisations 
for their collaborative efforts and hope that the cooperation exhibited by these institutions through the 
sponsorship of this workshop will not just end here, but will also grow from strength to strength. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The  liberalisation  and  continued  reforms  of  the  financial  sectors  in  our  countries  has  brought 
interesting challenges to supervisors and regulators, alike. Of particular importance, are the reforms 
currently taking place in the areas of regulation and supervision of financial institutions. As you are 
well  aware,  in  a  liberalised  environment  financial  institutions  play  a  critical  role  in  the  allocation  of 
resources  through  intermediating  between  those  with  surplus  resources  (depositors)  and  those  in 
need of resources (investors). In view of the foregoing, effective and efficient supervision is crucial to 
limit the risk of loss to depositors, henceforth maintaining public confidence in the financial system. 
In  response  to  the  liberalised  environment,  there  has  been  a  proliferation  of  linkages  between 
institutions  operating  in  various  segments  of  the  financial  sector  and  a  growing  number  of  financial 
mergers and acquisitions, thus creating, in the process, huge financial conglomerates. For instance, 
banks and insurance companies are searching for growth through the diversification of their activities 
in such a way that they can no longer be considered as homogeneous institutions falling within the 
scope of one economic sector and one supervisory system! These conglomerates aim to exploit the 
synergies that exist among banking, insurance and investment.  
This market evolution towards huge financial conglomerates, with integrated product development is 
slowly  blurring  the  traditional  boundaries  between  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  supervision  of  these  institutions,  on  the  other.  In  spite  of  these  trends  in  the 
international  financial  markets,  regrettably,  supervisory  systems,  in  our  sub-region,  are  mainly 
structured along the traditional boundaries demarcating banks, insurance companies, investment and 
micro-finance institutions. These integration changes represent major challenges to the supervisors of 
the different sectors, especially as the financial institutions become more complex in their structures 
and operations.  
BIS Review 12/2005 
 1
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  the  sluggish  growth  of  our  economies  in  the  sub-region  has  also 
created a difficult operating environment for financial institutions, especially banks. As a result, this has 
contributed to the mushrooming of non-bank financial institutions, such as, micro-finance. It is a fact 
that the financial sector in our sub-region is dominated by commercial banks, which have continued to 
service only a small section of the population. The majority of the people are denied access, largely, 
due  to  numerous  reasons,  including  perceived  risks,  high  costs  involved  in  dealing  in  small 
transactions and the inability to provide marketable collateral for loans.  
It  is  against  this  background  that  financial  sector  supervision  should  also  be  directed  at  financial 
institutions  that  pose  the  greatest  risks,  such  as,  non-bank  financial  institutions.  In  this  regard,  the 
adoption of the risk-based approach allows the supervisor to devote more supervisory effort to those 
areas that have a high-risk profile.  
This therefore, entails that supervisory authorities should shift their focus from the traditional Capital, 
Assets, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, and interest rate Sensitivity (CAMELS) approach to a more 
risk-based approach. A risk-based supervisory approach would involve the identification of key risks, 
the level of these risks and the key risk areas. After identifying these risk factors, a comprehensive 
supervisory framework with appropriate resources is then assembled to mitigate the risks. The amount 
of resources required is dependent on the level and intensity of the perceived risk. However, suffice to 
mention that this does not mean that the risk-based supervisory approach ignores the strengths of the 
CAMELS approach, but rather addresses the weaknesses by putting more emphasis and resources 
on areas with potentially higher risk. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
As many of us are aware, financial sector operations have become complex nowadays, as they entail, 
among others, managing financial, market and operational risks, which depend, to a large extent, on 
public  confidence  in  the  financial  system.  In  this  regard,  proper  supervision  is  critical  to  minimising 
risks as well as ensuring the stability of the financial sector and engendering public confidence. This 
justifies  the  need  for  effective  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  operations  of  banks  and  non-bank 
financial institutions compared to other business operations.  
Further,  with  the  increase  in  non-bank  financial  institutions,  their  level  of  risk  has  also  risen. 
Accordingly,  the  sheer  size  of  the  sector  is  of  systemic  importance,  hence,  effective  and  efficient 
regulation and supervision is required to stem any systemic risks.  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am happy to note that this workshop is addressing, in greater details, issues relating to the regulation 
and  supervision  of  the  non-bank  financial  sector,  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  is  safe, 
secure and efficient. 
As  I  conclude  therefore,  I  wish  to  urge  the  workshop  participants  to  participate  actively  in  the 
deliberations and use this opportunity to tap from the vast experience of the resource persons. I have 
every reason to believe that this workshop will provide you with the opportunity to share experiences 
and  enhance  your  knowledge  of  issues  pertaining  to  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  non-bank 
financial sector.  
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my honour and privilege to declare this regional 
workshop officially open. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2005
