Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Il Sole 24 Ore 
English  translation  of  an  interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, Frankfurt, 16 March 2005. 
 [Question] International competition has grown over the past few years. Europe's competitors 
are no longer just the United States and Japan. Many emerging economies, especially in Asia, 
are now highly competitive. There is a lively debate going on in many circles about Europe's 
economic decline.  
[Answer] I believe that Europe needs to redouble its efforts to become more competitive. Failure to do 
so would be very costly. The ECB fully subscribes to the substance of the Lisbon agenda (the aim of 
which is to turn the European Union into the most competitive market in the world by 2010 – Il Sole-24 
Ore editor's note) and to the European Commission's wish to press on in this direction, in line with the 
recent report on the same issue put together by former Netherlands Prime Minister Wim Kok. A good 
deal has been done, but we believe that a great deal more can still be done. 
[Question] Everyone is stressing the need to introduce further structural reforms.  
[Answer]  The  lag  that  has  built  up  between  Europe  and  the  United  States  in  terms  of  productivity 
growth since the mid-1990s is partially due to a lack of structural reform. It is not our intention to play 
down  the  difficulties  in  reforming  the  economy  or  in  persuading  society  of  the  need  for  what  are 
sometimes  unpopular  measures,  but  we  also  know  that  new  reforms  will  help  to  boost  economic 
growth,  European  prosperity  and  employment.  In  this  sense,  the  ECB  backs  governments  and  all 
social partners in their efforts to introduce these measures. 
[Question] The ECB prefers to look at the euro area as a whole, but not all member countries 
are in the same situation. Some of the larger countries are particularly behind in the race for 
greater productivity.  
[Answer] You are right. The Governing Council of the ECB has to look at the region as a whole, in the 
same way as the Federal Reserve System in the United States looks at the US economy rather than 
at the economies of Massachusetts or California. That said, each individual European economy has its 
assets and its liabilities. 
[Question] In that connection, what are your views on Italy?  
[Answer] Italy has numerous qualities, including a very inventive and creative productive sector and 
dynamic small and medium-sized enterprises. But I will not pretend that it does not also have its weak 
points. Among these I could mention the increase in the unit labour cost, which has not helped the 
economy's competitiveness over the past few years. 
[Question] For a long time Italy was able to stay competitive through the devaluation of its own 
currency.  Now,  with  the  euro,  that  strategy  can  no  longer  be  pursued  and  its  economic 
difficulties are more apparent.  
[Answer] The birth of the euro has put an end to intra European currency crises, exchange markets 
and interest rates market tensions and bond market risk premia. It has enabled Italy, as well as the 
other eleven economies, to enjoy a historically low cost of money. This is a considerable advantage 
that should be fully recognised. Before the introduction of the single currency, we explained that in the 
Monetary  Union  indicators  of  competitiveness,  as  for  example  unit  labour  costs,  would  be  very 
important  to  monitor  in  order  to  ensure  the  success  of  individual  national  economies.  It  is  very 
important  to  introduce  economic  reforms  today  precisely  to  reduce  the  unit  labour  cost  through 
appropriate labour productivity progress. 
[Question] But in many countries there is growing concern over international competition at a 
time  when  the  implementation  of  economic  reforms  is  also  triggering  uncertainty  on  the 
welfare  front.  Some  days  ago  the  European  textile  industry  called  on  the  European 
Commission  to  levy  duties  on  Chinese  goods.  What  do  you  think  of  that  option?  Can  the 
introduction of duties make up for the lack of flexibility in the exchange rate?  
[Answer] I will of course respect the division of responsibilities amongst the European institutions: it is 
up  to  the  Commission  and  the  Council  to  make  their  judgment.  As  regards  the  ECB  we  see 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
international  trade  as  an  important  element  which  has  contributed  to  global  growth  and  prosperity. 
Since World War II open trade has functioned as an effective win win game. And it is true that the very 
rapid development of the big emerging economies, in particular in Asia, is a new important challenge 
for all the industrialised economies and calls for equally rapid adaptation of Europe to this new global 
deal.  
[Question] In recent weeks the ECB has been stressing the fact that in Europe not much use is 
being made of the new technologies that could help to boost the economy's productivity. Can 
you explain the reasoning behind your concerns?  
[Answer]  There  are  a  number  of  signs  that  are  suggesting  that  the  IT  revolution  has  not  yet 
materialized in the European labour productivity progress. In the United States it occurred between 
mid 1990’s with the disappearance of the so-called “Robert Solow paradox” (“Computers are found 
everywhere but in the productivity data” – Il Sole-24 Ore editor's note). So we are convinced that fresh 
efforts  are  needed  in  Europe  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  IT  revolution  and  to  foster  research  and 
technological innovation. Scientific and technological progresses today are remarkable and are calling 
for  renewing  the  production  process  not  only  in  the  manufacturing  sector  but  also  in  the  services 
industry. I trained as an engineer, and from that point of view too I am amazed when I see how fast 
scientific progress has been in recent years. 
[Question]  Yet  Europe  has  made  considerable  efforts  in  this  field  over  the  past  few  years. 
Some countries are out in the forefront in terms of Internet and mobile phone use. Why do you 
believe that the euro area still lags behind?  
[Answer]  We  suspect  that  the  IT  revolution  is  taking  its  time  to  materialize  because  Europe  has  to 
reckon  with  goods,  services  and  labour  markets  that  are  still  not  very  flexible,  or  in  any  case  less 
flexible  than  in  other  economies.  We  are  convinced  that  less  flexible  economies  and  companies 
benefit less and later from scientific progress. Moreover, I would add that Europe is unfortunately not 
yet  at  the  heart  of  technological  and  scientific  innovation.  So,  in  that  sense,  we  have  to  renew  our 
efforts  in  research,  innovation  and  the  economy  of  knowledge,  while  at  the  same  time  making  our 
economic fabric more flexible. 
[Question] But some countries in Europe are managing better than others.  
[Answer] That is true. There are countries where the virtuous cycle of economic reform, IT revolution 
and  increased  productivity,  growth  and  employment  have  taken  root.  I  would  mention  the 
Scandinavian  countries  and  Ireland  in  particular.  From  that  point  of  view,  there  is  no  need  to  look 
outside the Union: There is no lack of reference points in Europe and in the euro area that can be 
taken as effective benchmarks for those countries that are having greater difficulty in pursuing reform. 
[Question]  Many  people  in  Europe  are  convinced  that  in  the  current  context  –  not  only  the 
economic context but also the social context – a more flexible Stability and Growth Pact would 
be useful. That issue is at the heart of a debate among the EU's Member States right now.  
[Answer] This is a very important issue. You know the position of the ECB’s Governing Council which 
has been expressed already a year ago. The proposal of improving the efficiency of the preventive 
arm of the Pact is a good one and we supported it from the very beginning. But we think that as far as 
the corrective arm of the Pact is concerned it is important to fully preserve the nominal benchmark of 
3% deficit and the integrity of the excessive deficit procedure. The Commission proposes. The Council 
will decide. It was, and it is, our duty to say what we think taking into account the crucial importance of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  for  the  cohesion  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  In  any  case, 
whatever the decision is we will be faithful to our mandate and maintain price stability.  
[Question] In this context of low growth and low output, the fact that the population is ageing 
plays an important role too. Is that a factor that the ECB takes into consideration?  
[Answer]  That  is  a  very  important  feature.  In  many  euro  area  countries  we  are  seeing  a  gradual 
increase in the less dynamic and less active part of the population, which in general leads to a fall in 
consumption and investment with the resultant negative effect on the economy. That is another reason 
why reforms of the health and pension systems and the labour market are crucial. In some countries, 
specific policies have been adopted to correct this demographic trend.  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
[Question] Of course, low growth in productivity also has an impact on inflation.  
[Answer]  Of  course.  Low  growth  in  productivity  means  higher  unit  labour  costs.  Cost-generated 
inflation tends to rise, and that certainly does not make the ECB's task any easier, given that our job is 
to maintain price stability within the Monetary Union. 
[Question] On the subject of inflation, the ECB has estimated the euro area's non-inflationary 
potential growth rate to be between 2.0% and 2.5%. Can you confirm that estimate?  
[Answer] The ECB relies in this field also on assessments of market economists’ consensus and on 
analyses conducted by other major international organizations. We have noticed that this estimate has 
been revised downwards recently. If I were to mention a figure today, I would say that a number of 
estimates are getting closer to 2% than to 2.5%. 
[Question]  Drawing  to  a  conclusion  this  structural  analysis  of  the  European  economy's 
problems, allow me to ask you one more question on the economic climate. What is the ECB's 
forecast for growth in Europe in 2005? Is the monetary institute optimistic?  
[Answer] We are neither optimistic nor pessimistic. Rather we are realistic and humble in front of facts 
and figures. The ECB's economists have revised downwards their growth projections for 2005 (from 
1.4%-2.4%  to  1.2%-2.0%  –  Il  Sole-24  Ore  editor's  note)  as  a  consequence  of  the  slowdown  in  the 
second  half  of  2004.  There  have  recently  been  signs  of  greater  dynamism  in  investments  and  in 
internal demand. We will have a clearer picture of the situation with the figures for the first quarter of 
2005. I would say for the time being that we can stand by our diagnosis of continued moderate growth 
in the euro area. 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 3
