Lucas Papademos: Financial structures, credit growth and house prices 
in the new EU Member States - policy challenges on the road to the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Conference held by Latvijas Banka, Riga, 19 September 2005. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this conference organised by Latvijas Banka, in a 
country that has played such an important role as a major trading centre in European history. 
Initially, that role partly reflected its geographic location on one of the oldest trading routes in 
Europe  –  the  so-called  “Route  from  the  Vikings  to  the  Greeks”,  which  was  used  to  trade, 
among other things, Latvian amber – a route dating back to the times of the Ancient Greeks 
and  the  Roman  Empire.  And  then  later,  the  city  where  we  have  gathered  today,  Riga, 
became  one  of  the  most  significant  members  of  the  Hanseatic  League,  which  controlled 
trade on the bustling Baltic Sea in the 14th and 15th centuries. Today, Latvia has a modern 
and  dynamic  economy,  again  occupying  an  important  position  in  European  trade,  having 
achieved  a  remarkable  transition  towards  a  successful  market  economy  after  gaining 
independence in 1991. 
Trade and finance have always gone hand in hand. Therefore, it is no surprise that just as 
the Latvian  economy has undergone an impressive transformation, so too has the Latvian 
financial  system.  Latvia  has  made  substantial  progress  in  the  development  of  its  financial 
structure  and  has  created  the  institutional  and  legal  frameworks  necessary  to  support  a 
market-oriented financial system.1 Today, its financial markets are developing rapidly in new 
directions and are providing valuable services to both households and the corporate sector, 
underpinning the functioning of a modern high-growth economy.  
As I am addressing a distinguished audience with expert knowledge of the Latvian economy, 
I consider it appropriate to take a broader and more comprehensive view, and look at the 
development of the financial sector not only in Latvia, but in the new EU Member States as a 
whole. After an overview of certain salient features characterising the financial structures of 
these  countries,  I  will  concentrate  on  two  issues  that  have  recently  received  considerable 
attention  from  both  policy-makers  and  the  media:  strong  credit  growth  and  rapidly  rising 
house prices. This will bring me to the focal point of my remarks: the challenges arising from 
these developments and the appropriate policy responses. 
Features of the financial structures in the new Member States  
II.  
Many of you have witnessed at first hand the remarkable transformation of the economies 
and  financial  systems  of  the  new  Member  States  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  over  the 
past decade. The convergence of the financial structures of these economies with those of 
Western  Europe  has  also  been  significant.  The  modernisation  of  a  country’s  financial 
structure – that is, of the whole set of financial markets, instruments and institutions – is of 
crucial  importance  for  actual  and  potential  economic  growth,  and  has  received  a  lot  of 
                                                 
1   See European Central Bank, “Financial Sectors in EU Accession Countries”, July 2002. 
   1/7 
attention from both academics and policy-makers.2 Financial structures differ from country to 
country,  reflecting  the  influence  of  various  factors  and  of  different  traditions;  but  those 
structures also change over time as the processes of economic development and financial 
integration evolve. Looking at the financial structures of the new EU Member States today, 
five key characteristics are apparent.  
First, the overall degree of financial depth in the Central and Eastern European countries is 
still lower than in the euro area. This applies in particular to financial intermediation by banks 
and to the household sector. For example, bank financing represents a much smaller share 
of  GDP  than  in  the  euro  area.3  It  may  be  argued  that  if  the  low  degree  of  financial 
intermediation persists, this could impede the efficient channelling of savings to investment, 
and that further financial reforms would therefore be needed. 
Second, the capital markets in these countries remain relatively underdeveloped. As a result, 
the issuance of quoted equity and debt securities by non-financial corporations in order to 
finance their investments and operations is not as important as in the euro area. This may 
come  as  a  surprise,  given  that  the  stock  markets  in  the  new  EU  Member  States  have 
experienced  very  strong  and,  indeed,  accelerating  growth  over  the  past  few  years.  The 
average annual returns on equity in most of these countries have outperformed significantly 
those of the stock markets in the euro area. On the one hand, the substantial increases in 
equity prices in the new Member States may have reflected a rise in the fundamental values 
of the shares. On the other hand, this development may also reflect supply constraints: the 
limited issuance of new equity by firms and the relatively small number of companies listed. 
For example, the share of the five biggest listed companies in total market capitalisation and 
turnover is very high in most of the new EU Member States. Thus, since liquidity in these 
markets is relatively low, price movements in a small number of companies might influence 
to a relatively large extent the overall price level of the stock market.  
Overall,  financing  through  banks  remains  the  dominant  form  of  intermediation  and  a  key 
feature of the financial structure in the majority of the new Member States. That said, equity 
financing has grown steadily over the past few years, even though the amount of corporate 
funds raised through capital markets remains rather limited. Furthermore, financial account 
data,  which  have  been  collected  and  compiled  by  the  ECB  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
new Member States, indicate that, in terms of amounts outstanding, shares and other equity 
are an important source of financing for non-financial corporations, mainly owing to the large 
contribution  of  non-quoted  equity.  This  form  of  equity  financing,  for  example  family  capital 
invested in small companies, also contributes to the large share of equity financing of euro 
area non-financial corporations.4 For the six new Member States for which data on unquoted 
equity is available, its share in total equity financing is 80% or more.  
Third, in the new EU Member States we observe a significant degree of foreign involvement 
in  the  financial  sector  in  terms  of  ownership,  financing  and  investment.  This  is  particularly 
visible in the banking sector, which is predominantly under foreign ownership in practically all 
of  those  countries.  But  it  also  extends  beyond  that.  For  example,  a  substantial  share  of 
                                                 
2   See,  for  example,  B.  Amable  and  J.-B.  Chatelain,  “Can  Financial  Infrastructures  Foster  Economic 
Development?”, Journal of Development Economics, 64(2), April 2001, pp. 481-498; J. Bonin and P. Wachtel, 
“Financial Sector Development in Transition Economies: Lessons from the First Decade”, Financial Markets, 
Institutions  &  Instruments,  12(1),  February  2003,  pp.  1-66;  and  L.  Ndikumana,  “Financial  Development, 
Financial Structure, and Domestic Investment”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 24(2), June 2005, 
pp. 651-673. 
3   With the exception of Cyprus and Malta, which are in this respect somewhat more comparable with the euro 
area. 
4   ECB Monthly Bulletin, “Characteristics of corporate finance in the euro area”, February 2001, pp. 37-50. 
   2/7 
government and enterprise financing comes from abroad and many major firms are listed on 
stock exchanges outside these countries.  
Fourth,  most  new  EU  Member  States  have  experienced  significant  consolidation  in  the 
number  of  financial  institutions,  particularly  banks.  This  process  has  contributed  to  the 
soundness and stability of these countries’ banking sectors. Consolidation has also affected 
stock  markets.  For  example,  the  three  Baltic  stock  markets  recently  merged  with  the 
Scandinavian OMX markets and use a common trading platform.  
Finally,  it  is  clear  that  in  several  new  Member  States,  further  improvements  in  the  legal 
frameworks and market infrastructures may be needed in order to establish more transparent 
and efficient financial markets. This also applies to the greater transparency of counterparties 
in  financial  transactions,  which  would  undoubtedly  promote  the  further  integration  of  these 
countries’ financial markets with those in the euro area.  
From this overview, it is evident that, despite the significant progress made in previous years, 
the convergence process of the financial structures of the new EU Member States with those 
of the euro area is not yet complete. I will come back to this issue – and how we see the road 
ahead for the new Member States – later. At this stage, allow me to address two issues that 
are very topical for both the Latvian economy and several other new Member States: strong 
credit growth and rapidly rising house prices.  
Credit growth 
III.  
Let me start, on the question of credit markets, by pointing to three characteristic facts. First, 
dynamic  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  can  be  observed  in  a  number  of  the  new  EU 
Member  States,  well  above  the  average  rate  in  the  euro  area.  The  growth  of  credit  to  the 
private sector has been especially strong in the Baltic countries and Hungary, where it has 
reached annual rates of between 30% and 50% in recent years. In other countries, such as 
the  Czech Republic  and  Slovakia,  the  rate  of credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  has  been 
more moderate, but has picked up recently, while in Poland it has slowed down considerably, 
following  peaks  reached  around  the  turn  of  the  decade.  Second,  credit-to-GDP  ratios  in 
Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  still  remain  well  below  the  euro  area  level.  Third, 
credit  expansion  has,  in  most  of  these  countries,  been  financed  by  both  domestic  and 
external sources. In the early stages of credit expansion, a rise in domestic savings, partly 
reflecting  increased  confidence  in  banking  systems  and  the  overall  financial  deepening  of 
these economies, was a particularly important source of banks’ financing. Subsequently, as 
interest  rates  have  declined  and  the  propensity  to  consume  has  increased,  banks  have 
progressively relied more on external sources.  
Looking at the sectoral breakdown of credit growth, it is fairly clear that the main driver of 
credit  dynamics  has  been  loans  to  households  –  largely  in  the  form  of  mortgage  lending. 
Intense competition in this market segment has encouraged banks to substantially expand 
their  lending  to  households.  By  contrast,  bank  credit  growth  to  the  corporate  sector  has 
lagged behind. This can be partly explained by the fact that an important share of investment 
by  the  non-financial  corporate  sector  has  been  financed  by  retained  earnings  and  foreign 
capital, including credit from banks in other countries and foreign direct investment.  
Another  striking  –  and  potentially  worrying  –  feature  of  credit  growth  in  some  of  the  new 
Member  States  is  the  high  share  of  foreign  currency-denominated  loans.  These  loans  are 
mostly  euro-denominated,  although  loans  in  other  currencies  have  also  been  gaining  in 
importance recently. They have typically been granted to non-financial corporations, though 
also  to  households  in  the  Baltic  countries  and  Poland.  Borrowing  in  foreign  currency  has 
been driven by lower borrowing costs and stimulated by the financial liberalisation in some 
countries  prior  to  EU  entry.  The  majority  of  foreign  currency  loans  are  held  by  larger 
multinational firms, which generate the greater part of their revenues in foreign currency, and 
can therefore also be considered as a hedging instrument. In general, borrowing in foreign 
   3/7 
currency  has  been  more  widespread  in  countries  with  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  or 
exchange rate targets, particularly the Baltic countries. Nevertheless, the external net liability 
position of the banking sectors of most Central and Eastern European countries continues to 
be limited, with the exception of Estonia and Latvia, where the external net liability positions 
reached levels corresponding to 23% and 17% of GDP respectively at the end of 2004. 
House prices 
IV.  
As  you  are  well  aware  from  the  Latvian  experience,  rapid  credit  growth  has  gone  hand  in 
hand  with  strong  increases  in  house  prices,  especially  in  certain  segments  of  the  housing 
market,  such  as  apartments  in  major  cities.  That  said,  the  picture  is  quite  diverse  across 
countries, and it is difficult to discern general patterns. Some countries, including the Baltic 
countries,  have  experienced  double-digit  increases  in  house  prices,  whereas  in  others,  for 
example  the  Czech  Republic,  house  price  developments  have  been  more  moderate.  In 
general,  however,  house  prices  in  many  new  Member  States  have  risen  more  strongly  in 
recent years than the average in the euro area, albeit admittedly from a much lower base. 
Moreover,  housing  construction  is  picking  up  throughout  the  region,  reflecting  buoyant 
housing demand. Of course, property prices have also increased at a fast pace over the past 
few  years  in  several  euro  area  countries,  as  well  as  in  other  countries  around  the  world, 
notably the United States and the United Kingdom. So this phenomenon is not characteristic 
only of the new EU Member States. 
When discussing trends in house prices, it is important to keep in mind a number of specific 
features of the housing markets of the new Member States. I am thinking in particular of the 
generally  high  –  and  still  rising  –  degree  of  owner-occupancy  or  the  fact  that  institutional 
arrangements  associated  with  more  developed  housing  markets,  such  as  the  legal 
framework,  the  easy  transfer  of  property,  the  different  types  of  available  insurance,  good 
valuation  methods  or  alternative  forms  of  mortgage  finance,  are  still  in  a  rather  embryonic 
stage in some countries. This may explain why the volume of transactions relative to the total 
housing stock is still relatively limited in many new Member States. That said, it is a positive 
development  that  in  several  countries  considerable  efforts  are  being  made  to  improve  the 
institutional arrangements and the financial services on offer. 
How  can  we  explain  the  observed  house  price  developments?  Very  favourable  financing 
conditions and perceptions among households that house prices are likely to continue to rise 
in the future have contributed significantly to strong housing demand. The supply side of the 
housing market, as recently suggested by indicators such as building permits granted and 
the number of housing completions, has partly and gradually responded to the strong price 
signals. If the supply of new houses continues to increase, this will alleviate some pressure 
on the market and contribute to a moderation in house price increases. 
Policy challenges 
V.  
From  this  tour  d’horizon  of  the  salient  features  of  financial  structures  and,  in  particular,  of 
credit and housing markets, I see a number of pertinent policy questions arising: How should 
we assess the risks to financial stability that may be associated with these developments and 
market  characteristics?  What  are  the  main  challenges  for  policy-makers,  that  is,  for 
governments, central banks and supervisory authorities? What are the issues to watch out 
for  concerning  the  evolution  of  financial  structures  in  the  years  to  come?  Let  me  provide 
some answers to these questions. 
I  shall  start  with  the  potential  implications  of  rapid  credit  growth  and  strong  increases  in 
housing prices for financial stability in the new EU Member States. Strong credit expansion 
can be a cause for concern, not least because banking crises have often been preceded by 
episodes of excessive credit growth. This statement is supported by theoretical arguments 
and extensive empirical research. That said, I should stress that a banking crisis is not the 
   4/7 
increased 
inevitable consequence of an episode of excessive credit expansion. However, a number of 
theoretical explanations have been put forward to elucidate why credit booms are associated 
with  a  higher  probability  of  banking  distress,  notably  the  procyclicality  of  bank  lending 
behaviour. Risks may be underestimated during the expansionary phase of the credit cycle, 
thereby resulting in a lowering of credit standards and of the average “quality” of borrowers. 
This may lead to higher credit losses when the next economic downturn occurs. Risks may 
also  be  underestimated  as  a  consequence  of 
the  so-called  “financial  accelerator” 
mechanism,  whereby  over-optimism  about  future  returns  may  boost  asset  valuations  and 
thus firms’ net worth, which then feeds back into higher investment and credit demand and a 
further increase in asset prices.  
So much for the theory: what should be our concern in the specific circumstances of the new 
Member States? First, there is a danger that rapid credit expansion may strain banks’ ability 
to monitor and assess risks properly. This is especially relevant for the new Member States, 
where banks’ credit risk assessment is burdened by measurement difficulties in forecasting 
potential  future  credit  losses,  owing  to  the  lack  of  sufficiently  long  credit  histories.  This 
problem may be even more pronounced in the case of market segments that were previously 
underserviced,  such  as  households  and  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  Second,  the 
relative  importance  of  foreign  currency  lending  for  the  domestic  private  sector  in  some 
countries  may  have 
the  vulnerability  of  households  and  unhedged  
non-financial corporations to adverse exchange rate movements. Third, since mortgage loan 
contracts in several new Member States typically have floating interest rates, rising interest 
rates would have a negative impact on households’ debt-servicing ability in those countries.  
Furthermore, since mortgage lending has been the major growth area in most new Member 
States, the evolution of house prices – as mentioned before – is, of course, a relevant factor 
which requires careful monitoring. The upward trend in real estate prices can be expected to 
continue over the medium and longer term, partly as a result of the gradual convergence with 
price  levels  in  the  “old”  EU  Member  States.  However,  it  would  be  comforting  to  think  that 
such a “natural” development would not result in excessive and unsustainable house price 
increases. In this respect, it would be useful to monitor the extent to which strong mortgage 
lending and house price increases may lead to mortgage equity withdrawals, which in turn 
may stimulate consumption even more and thus fuel further GDP and credit growth.  
When  assessing  the  balance  of  risks  to  financial  stability,  a  number  of  mitigating  factors 
should also be taken into account. To begin with, credit risk should be contained, because 
the  ratio  of  the  debt-servicing  burden  of  firms  and  households  relative  to  income  is  still 
considerably  lower  than  in  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  a  favourable  growth  outlook  and 
improving  prospects  for  household  disposable  income  which  are  associated  with  the 
catching-up  process,  and  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment,  are  likely  to  make  it 
easier  for  private  sector  borrowers  to  service  their  debts.  In  addition,  the  improved 
profitability of banks in most new Member States has helped them to maintain a solid capital 
base,  which  should  also  improve  their  shock-absorbing  capacity.  Finally,  the  ratio  of  
non-performing loans to total loans has, in most countries, decreased or remained at a low 
level over the past few years. Let me stress, however, that banks’ asset-quality indicators are 
typically backward-looking. Since risks may build up during the boom phase, a deterioration 
in  credit  quality  may  become  visible  only  with  a  significant  time  lag  if  general  economic 
conditions worsen. As most new Member States have been enjoying relatively high rates of 
economic growth in recent years, the resilience of loan portfolios to negative output shocks 
remains untested until now. 
Notwithstanding  the  overall  positive  near-term  outlook  for  financial  stability  in  the  new 
Member States, potential risks implied by rapid credit growth call for continued vigilance by 
national  authorities.  Reflecting  these  concerns,  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities 
have taken several measures in response to rapid credit growth. The most commonly applied 
measures can be classified under the category of “moral suasion”. These include enhanced 
central  bank  communication  concerning  the  risks  related  to  fast  credit  expansion,  through 
   5/7 
Financial  Stability  Reports  or  by  other  means,  and  recommendations  made  by  prudential 
supervisors aiming to increase banks’ risk awareness. In some countries, the tightening of 
monetary policy, for example in Latvia, and fiscal measures aiming to reduce the incentives 
for borrowing, such as those introduced in Estonia, have also been used to moderate credit 
growth. Nonetheless, these measures have not yet proved sufficient to moderate the pace of 
credit  growth  in  the  Baltic  countries,  which  has  remained  very  high  through  the  middle  of 
2005.  Financial  regulation  and  prudential  supervision  should  therefore  ensure  that  sound 
asset quality is maintained. Furthermore, fiscal policy can also contribute to macroeconomic 
stability and thus help to moderate volatility in financial markets.  
Finally, let me address one issue that is somewhat “closer to home”. Since robust bank credit 
growth may continue in the period leading up to the accession of some new Member States 
to the euro area and even in the years following the adoption of the euro, it is pertinent to 
consider whether this could have a bearing on the euro area as a whole in the future. Given 
the  strong  ownership  and  other  links  between  euro  area  banks  and  banks  in  the  new 
Member States, it could be argued that there might be a risk transmission channel within the 
EU.  However,  bearing  in  mind  that  banking  sectors  in  new  Member  States  represent  a 
relatively  small  fraction  of  the  total  assets  of  euro  area  banking  groups,  such  a  potential 
contagion risk seems rather limited.  
The outlook for financial structures and the risks to financial stability 
VI.  
What  is  the  outlook  for  financial  structures  and  what  are  the  potential  risks  to  financial 
stability in the coming years? Broadly speaking, the expected catching-up of the economies 
of the new Member States in financial and real terms is likely to have two main implications 
for  their  financial  structures.  First,  it  is  expected  to  lead  to  a  deepening  of  financial 
intermediation and a further development of capital markets to levels comparable to those of 
the  euro  area.  Second,  it  is  likely  to  promote  an  increased  role  for  non-bank  financial 
intermediaries, such as pension funds and life insurance companies, whose presence is very 
limited  when  compared  with  the  euro  area  countries.  As  a  result,  financial  sector  balance 
sheets are expected to expand substantially in most of the new Member States over the next 
decade. Similarly, bond and stock markets are likely to develop significantly, along with life 
insurance companies and pension funds. Against this background, a key policy challenge in 
the new Member States is to safeguard the soundness of the banking system and the robust 
and stable development of financial markets. 
In  fact,  there  are  several  potential  stresses  that  could  arise  as  financial  systems  expand, 
especially in an environment of capital mobility and financial market integration. Experience 
in a number of emerging market economies has shown that financial market exuberance can 
drive risk premia on external debt and domestic financial instruments to levels lower than are 
warranted  by  fundamentals.  Under  such  circumstances,  strong  capital  inflows,  rapid  credit 
growth  and  buoyant  asset  prices  may  lead  to  episodes  of  sizeable  real  exchange  rate 
appreciation – with potentially serious repercussions for the real economy if expectations are 
at some point not fulfilled. It is important to guard against such potential risks. After all – to 
paraphrase slightly what Larry Summers once said – “the new finance is like a highway. It 
gets you to where you are going better and faster, but the accidents may be worse.” 
Concluding remarks  
VII.  
Let  me  conclude.  Our  review  of  the  financial  structures  in  the  new  Member  States  has 
showed  that  substantial  progress  towards  convergence  with  the  euro  area  has  been 
achieved,  but  also  that  there  is  still  a  need  to  improve  the  financial  infrastructure  and  to 
strengthen the legal framework. I highlighted two major issues which are currently attracting 
our attention in a number of Member States: robust credit growth and rapidly rising house 
prices. While these developments could pose, in certain circumstances, significant risks to 
   6/7 
financial stability, we see such risks as being rather modest at this juncture, bearing in mind 
that  the  situation  varies  considerably  from  country  to  country.  Nevertheless,  it  is  important 
that  authorities  and  market  participants  be  vigilant  and  take  measures  that  can  help  to 
reduce the likelihood of risks materialising and increase the resilience of the financial system. 
To  this  end,  the  implementation  of sound  macroeconomic policies  is key  –  particularly  the 
implementation  of  prudent  fiscal  policies  that  can  contribute  to  moderating  unsustainable 
aggregate  demand  increases  and  contain  large  current  account  deficits.  Fiscal  measures 
should also aim to eliminate tax distortions that can fuel property price dynamics. Moreover, 
the further strengthening of supervisory mechanisms and practices and the enhancement of 
the risk management methods employed by banks will help both to limit some potential risks 
and to improve the shock-absorbing capacity of the financial system. What should be clear, 
however, is that supervisory authorities cannot take financial stability for granted. The British 
statesman and political theorist Edmund Burke once remarked that you can never plan the 
future by the past. This is an observation that should not be forgotten, particularly in the fields 
of financial stability and prudential supervision, and especially given the fact that the modern 
financial history of the new Member States is still rather short. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
   7/7 
