Jean-Pierre Roth: Economic prospects for 2005 in a subdued European 
environment 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the “Les Rencontres au Château” meeting, Sierre, 22 February 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Although  the  Swiss  economy  expanded  by  almost  2%  in  2004,  this  was  not  sufficient  to  reduce 
unemployment significantly. Hopes for an improvement in this respect are thus focused on this year. 
However,  they  might  unfortunately  remain  unfulfilled  once  again.  At  the  end  of  2004,  there  were 
already  signs  of  a  slowdown  in  growth  caused  by  the  weak  dollar  and  persistently  high  oil  prices. 
These factors also played a key role in the National Bank's decision to leave interest rates unchanged.  
Overall, the international economy developed in line with expectations during the first two months of 
2005: the US and Asia saw further growth, while Europe was confronted with increased difficulties. 
The US economy is burdened with high budget deficits and the current account deficit. In Asia, the 
Chinese economy is booming, whereas Japan is still struggling to find its way back to the growth path. 
The monetary situation in Asia, too, appears less than stable.  
In  Europe,  the  economic  environment  presents  a  rather  dim  picture.  Germany,  Italy  and  the 
Netherlands are expected to see rather modest growth, while the outlook for France is more upbeat. 
The  UK  is  the  exception:  since  the  mid-1990s,  the  country  has  emerged  as  the  growth  model  for 
Europe.  
For  Switzerland,  the  sluggish  development  in  Europe  is  especially  regrettable,  as  the  Swiss  export 
sector usually serves as the engine for economic recovery. All in all, Switzerland's export industry is 
well positioned to benefit from higher demand from abroad. Switzerland has been able to reduce its 
production costs per unit in the past few years, and the Swiss franc even depreciated slightly versus 
the euro since the launch of the single currency. As regards domestic demand, consumer sentiment 
remains  satisfactory  overall,  but  this  should  not  be  expected  to  stimulate  growth  decisively.  While 
construction activity is robust, it has lost some of its momentum. Investment in equipment is still brisk, 
and the recent modest slowdown should not last too long.  
On the whole, the Swiss economy is still on its growth trajectory, but it lacks stimuli from abroad. This 
situation  is  the  same  as  the  one underlying  the  National  Bank's  interest  rate decision  of  December 
2004. Even though Switzerland is particularly affected by the lacklustre performance of the European 
economy, overall prospects are not gloomy. Growth in the rest of the world remains dynamic, and this 
is expected to benefit Europe in due course. For Switzerland, a growth rate of 1.5-2% is still realistic. 
With the Swiss economy thus continuing to grow below its potential, the labour market will not see any 
sustained improvement. 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
