Stanley Fischer: The relationship between economic growth and science and 
technology 
Remarks by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Rehovot Conference for 
Science and Technology, Rehovot, 9 June 2005. 
 Esteemed Minister of Finance, Mayor of Rehovot, President of the Weizmann Institute, President of 
the Israel Academy of Sciences and the Humanities, Director General of the Ministry of Science and 
Technology, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen: 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today, especially since this important event, the first Rehovot 
Conference for Science and Technology, is being held at this eminent and illustrious institution, the 
Weizmann Institute. 
When the organizers of the conference asked me for a topic on which I would lecture today, I decided 
to  speak  about  the  topic  of  “Is  Economics  a  Science?”  Later  on,  I  realized  that  the  Academy  of 
Science and the Humanities had already made a decision about this matter when it chose my friend, 
Professor  Menahem  Yaari,  to  be  its  president.  I  concur with  the Academy,  of course:  economics  is 
indeed a science! 
Therefore, I will speak today not about the theme that appears in the conference program but rather 
about several results of economic research on the relationship between economic growth and science 
and technology. In this matter, it is natural to begin with work performed by the Nobel Prize laureate, 
Professor Robert Solow, almost fifty years ago. It is possible to write a production function showing 
that the level of production is the result of levels of use of factor inputs - especially of labor and capital 
- and of the level of technology. Solow asks, “What did greater use of labor and capital contribute to 
growth  in  the  United  States  in  the  1909-1949  period,  and  how  much  did  technological  progress 
contribute to growth during that time?” His famous answer was that more than 80 percent of growth 
during  that  period  traces  to  the  technological  changes  in  the  economy  during  those  years.  Solow’s 
answer was robust enough to have withstood many tests since then. 
In Solow’s work, the level of technology is an exogenous factor, meaning that it is determined outside 
the economy. In the 1960s, economists began to investigate the origins of the technological level, but 
in the 1970s, when immense macroeconomic problems began to crop up in almost every corner of the 
world, we economists turned our attention to problems other than growth. Since the 1980s, economic 
research has made a focused and intensive attempt to include the factors that affect the increase in 
productivity,  within  the  framework  of  economic  models,  in  what  is  known  as  “the  new  theory  of 
economic growth.” 
The results of this new theory of economic growth are spelled out at length in an excellent book that 
my  friend,  Professor  Elhanan Helpman,  published  in  2004  under  the  title  The  Mystery of  Economic 
Growth. 
Allow me to present several of the main findings in capsule form: 
1. 
International  comparison  shows  that  the  main  result  of  Solow’s  work  is  correct.  There  is 
evidence that the differences in total productivity among countries - differences that originate 
in  different  levels  of  technology  -  explain  more  than  60  percent  of  the  differences  among 
these countries in per-worker income and growth rates. 
Although growth has its ups and downs in the course of the economic cycle, the average 
growth rate of the global economy has been accelerating over time. By inference, the rate of 
increase in technological level in global economies has also been accelerating over time. 
Education  plays  an  important  role  in  explaining  the  differences  in  growth  rates  and 
per-worker income from country to country and over time. 
One important result: society earns a much higher return on an investment in research and 
development than the investor earns. 
Allow  me  to  insert  a  parenthetical  remark.  There  is  a  substantial  difference  between  the 
marginal  improvement  of  existing  technologies  and  the  development  of  new  technologies 
that can serve many purposes - what we call multipurpose technologies. These are general-
2. 
3. 
4. 
 BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
purpose  technologies  -  such  as  mechanization,  electrification,  and  computerization  -  from 
which  other  technologies  derive  many  uses.  The  contribution  of  these  technologies  to 
productivity is large and long-lasting. However, it can take many years for an economy to 
assimilate multipurpose technologies. Furthermore, at the beginning of the process the rate 
of productivity growth in a given economy may even decline as the new technology crowds 
out antiquated technologies. Fifteen years ago, this led Robert Solow to postulate that the 
computer revolution is taking place in every part of the economy except for the productivity 
data. This situation, however, began to change in the middle of the 1990s. 
Economists emphasize the importance of the openness of an economy for its growth rate. 
There is no economy in the world, in the modern era, that has managed to grow rapidly over 
a lengthy period without increasing its exports and its imports steeply. 
5. 
And on the technology side, countries have become interdependent due to the crossing of knowledge 
among them. 
It has been found the more a country’s trading partners invest in research and development, the more 
the  country’s  total  productivity  will  increase.  It  is  encouraging  to  see  how  greatly  less-developed 
countries  are  benefiting  from  the  R&D  investments  of  the  industrialized  countries.  These  results, 
however,  have  a  negative  side:  the  investment  in  technological  innovations  may  widen  the  gap 
between rich countries and poor ones. 
How  can  this  outcome  be  prevented?  Only  by  making  a  focused  effort  to  rise  to,  and  stay  at,  the 
forefront of global technology. And how can this be accomplished? By investing in education and by 
providing support for general and applied science-including research and development. This, however, 
is  a  complicated  thing.  Almost  everywhere  in  the  world,  direct  government  intervention  in  R&D  is 
regarded as a failure. There are two exceptions - Finland and Israel. The Office of the Chief Scientist 
in our country has been a success - even though it is necessary to continue investigating the factors 
that are responsible for our success and to draw inferences for possible changes in the future. 
Let me sum up this part of my remarks: 
1. 
2. 
Increasing productivity is crucial for sustainable economic growth. 
Being at the forefront of knowledge and of technological innovation is crucial for economic 
growth. 
Countries that wish to stay at these forefronts must make sure that their pool of technological 
knowledge expands steadily. 
Evidence from around the world speaks clearly about the importance for Israel of enhancing 
human capital in education and technological infrastructure, so that we stay at the forefronts 
of knowledge and technological innovation. These will lead to increases in productivity and 
per-capita growth. To bring this about, it is important to establish a correct set of incentives 
and  a  correct  institutional  structure.  It  is  important  to  develop  a  set  of  incentives  that  will 
promote  education,  with  emphasis  on  technological  education,  for  the  entire  population. 
Concurrently, it is important to create various forms of incentives for processes that promote 
innovation and invention. 
If I may, I would also like to address the relationships between growth and inequality and 
between inequality and poverty. The first result in regard to the relationship between growth 
and  inequality  is  called  the  Kuznets  curve.  The  data  in  Kuznets’  possession  led  him  to 
believe that inequality rises at the beginning of the growth process and afterwards starts to 
fall. However, the data available back then were very scanty. It is now clear that there is no 
simple relationship between growth and inequality. The reason for this is simple: a. Inequality 
may  be  influenced  by  means  of  economic  policy,  including  the  education  system.  b. The 
relationship also depends on the origins of the growth, for example, the kind of technological 
progress on which the growth is based. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
As  for  the  difference  between  reducing  inequality  and  reducing  poverty,  we  have  to  realize  that 
poverty may decline even as inequality rises. This is happening, for example, in China. There may be 
a  short-term  substitution  relationship  between  reducing  poverty  and  reducing  inequality.  If  such  a 
relationship exists, then society has to decide where it wishes to be in the short term. 
I conclude by quoting remarks that my late friend, Professor Yoram Ben-Porath, wrote in 1986 in a 
book titled The Israeli Economy: Maturing Through Crisis: “The potential is there. Israel has a reservoir 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2005
of human capital and a scientific infrastructure that can be used to increase productivity and expand 
exports.  Its  national  determination,  used  to  achieve  political  independence  and  self-defense,  could 
also be harnessed to achieve economic independence. Thus, economic maturity may still prove to be 
a starting point for a new phase of sustained growth”. 
In fact, we are already on the right path. If we stay on it, we will be able to attain our potential fully and 
to take up a position alongside the most developed countries in the world. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 3
