Ishrat Husain: Economy of Pakistan - an overview  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Expo  2005 
Conference, Karachi, 3 February 2005. 
 Pakistan was one of the few developing countries that had achieved an average growth rate of over 
5 percent  over  a  four  decade  period  ending  1988-89.  Consequently,  the  incidence  of  poverty  had 
declined from 40 percent to 18 percent by the end of the 1980s. Table I lays down the main economic 
and social indicators in 1947 and compare them with 2004. The overall picture that emerges from a 
dispassionate examination of these indicators is that of a country having made significant economic 
achievements  but  a  disappointing  record  of  social  development.  The  salient  features  of  Pakistan’s 
economic history are: 
• 
• 
• 
Pakistan is self sufficient in most food production. 
Per capita incomes have expanded more than six-fold in US Dollar terms. 
Pakistan has emerged as one of the leading and successful producers of cotton and cotton 
textiles. 
Pakistan has developed a highly diversified base of manufactured products for domestic and 
world markets. 
Physical infrastructure network has expanded with a vast network of gas, power, roads and 
highways, ports and telecommunication facilities. 
  These  achievements  in  income,  consumption,  agriculture  and  industrial  production  are  extremely 
impressive and have lifted millions of people out of poverty levels. But these do pale into insignificance 
when  looked  against  the  missed  opportunities.  The  largest  setback  to  the  country  has  been  the 
neglect of human development. Had adult literacy rate been close to 100 instead of close to 50 today, 
it is my estimate that the per capita income would have reached at least US$1200 instead of US$640. 
Pakistan’s  manufactured  exports  in  the  1960s  were  higher  than  those  of  Malaysia,  Thailand, 
Philippines  and  Indonesia.  Had  investment  in  educating  the  population  and  upgrading  the  training, 
skills  and  health  of  the  labour  force  been  up  to  the  level  of  East  Asian  Countries  and  a  policy  of 
openness to world market would have been maintained without any break, Pakistan’s exports would 
have been at least US$100 billion instead of paltry US$13-14 billion. Had the population growth rate 
been reduced from 3 percent to 2 percent, the problems of congestion and shortages in the level of 
infrastructure  and  social  services  would  have  been  avoided,  the  poor  would  have  obtained  better 
access to education and health and the incidence of poverty would have been much lower than what it 
is today. 
But as if this neglect of human development was not enough, the country slacked in the 1990s and 
began to slip in growth, exports, revenues, and development spending and got entrapped into external 
and domestic indebtedness. This was due to both fundamental structural and institutional problems as 
well  as  to  poor  governance  and  frequent  changes  in  political  regimes.  With  short  life  spans, 
succeeding governments were hesitant, if not outright unwilling to take tough and unpopular economic 
decisions to set the economy right. Moreover, the average lifespan of two to three years was clearly 
inadequate for implementing meaningful policy or institutional changes. The external environment had 
also become unfavorable after the event of May 1998, when Pakistan conducted its first nuclear test. 
The aftermath of this test led to further economic isolation of Pakistan and a considerable erosion of 
confidence  by  domestic  and  non-resident  Pakistanis.  Economic  sanctions  were  imposed  against 
Pakistan by the western governments. By the late 1990s Pakistan had entered almost a critical state 
of paralysis and stagnation in its economy particularly in its external sector. There was a significant 
drop in workers’ remittances, export growth was negative, IMF programme and World Bank assistance 
were suspended, bilateral donors had terminated their aid while debt payments due were in far excess 
of the liquid foreign exchange resources the country possessed. Pakistan was almost at the brink of 
default on its external payments. Economic growth was anemic, debt ratios were alarmingly high, and 
the incidence of poverty had once again risen to 32 percent. 
It was at this stage that the military government under General Pervez Musharraf assumed power in 
October  1999.  The  initial  period  was  devoted  by  the  economic  team  of  the  new  government  in 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
managing the crisis and making sure that the country avoided default. A comprehensive programme of 
reform was designed and implemented with vigour and pursued in earnest, so as to put the economy 
on the path of recovery and revival. The military government did not face the same constraints and 
compulsions as the politically elected governments. It was therefore better suited to take unpopular 
decisions  such  as  imposing  general  sales  tax,  raising  prices  of  petroleum,  utilities  and  removing 
subsidies so badly needed to bring about fiscal discipline and reduce the debt burden. The IMF and 
the  World  Bank  were  invited  to  enter  into  negotiations  on  new  stand-by  and  structural  adjustment 
programmes. 
Although  the  canvas  of  reform  in  Pakistan  was  vast  and  corrective  action  required  on  a  number  of 
fronts,  there  was  a  conscious  effort  to  focus  on  achieving  macroeconomic  stability,  on  certain  key 
priority  structural  reforms  and  improving  economic  governance.  The  structural  reforms  included 
privatization, financial sector restructuring, trade liberalization, picking up pace towards deregulation of 
the  economy  and  generally  moving  towards  a  market-led  economic  regime.  A  stand-by  IMF 
programme was put in place in November 2000, which was successfully implemented followed by a 
three-year  Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Facility  (PRGF),  which  was  successfully  completed  in 
December 2004. It is a matter of pride that Pakistan decided not to draw down the last two tranches 
although it was eligible to do so. The IMF has also decided that Pakistan will not be subject to the 
usual post-program monitoring due to its good economic standing. 
Pakistan’s  economic  turnaround  during  the  last  five  years  is  even  more  impressive  because  the 
country was faced with a critical and fragile regional and domestic environment with constant threats 
to security (a result of playing key role as a frontline state in the war against terrorism) a prolonged 
and severe drought, tensions with India and high oil prices. 
Macroeconomic stability: 
Macroeconomic stability has been achieved through reduction in fiscal deficit, acquiring a surplus on 
the current account balance of payments, lowering of inflation, and a transformation of external debt 
profile.  These  have  been  brought  about  partially  through  the  support  of  international  financial 
institutions  and  the  Paris  Club  bilateral  creditors  which  significantly  eased  the  external  payments 
position that had been a major and consistent risk to the economy since 1998. 
Fiscal  deficit  was  reduced  by  pursuing  a  combination  of  four  set  of  policy  measures  (i)  mobilizing 
additional tax revenues (ii) reducing subsidies to public enterprises and corporations and (iii) bringing 
about a significant decline in debt servicing payments and (iv) containing defence expenditures. 
Monetary  policy  was  kept  reasonably  tight  during  the  first  two  years  with  money  supply  growth  at 
about  9  percent.  Expansion  in  private  sector  credit,  in  the  subsequent  years,  did  not  put  much 
pressure as the government borrowing was limited to a manageable level. As the monetary conditions 
improved the interest rate came down gradually to a single digit and demand for credit by the private 
businesses picked up resulting in higher capacity utilization in manufacturing and increased industrial 
production. 
External  debt  management  focused  on  (a)  reprofiling  of  the  stock  of  official  bilateral  debt,  (b) 
substituting  concessional  loans  for  non-concessional  from  international  financial  institutions,  (c) 
pre-paying expensive loans and (d) liquidating short term liabilities. Debt ratio was thus reduced from 
100 percent of GDP to 60 percent in five years time. 
Trade  policy  in  Pakistan  has  been  categorized  by  the  World  Bank  as  one  of  the  least  restrictive  in 
S. Asia along with Sri Lanka and this policy has gradually provided incentives to exporters to increase 
their market share in the global markets. Exchange rate policy was pursued to maintain stability in the 
foreign exchange markets while at the same time keeping the competitiveness of Pakistani exports 
intact.  Large  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  played  an  important  role  in  stabilizing  the  exchange 
rate. 
Current  account  has  turned  around  from  chronic  deficit  to  a  surplus,  mainly  due  to  renewed  export 
growth  and  resurgence  of  workers’  remittances.  Inflation  rate  during  the  last  four  years  remained 
below  4  percent.  External  debt  burden  has  been  reduced  in  absolute  terms  from  US$38  to  US$35 
billion  and  as  a  proportion  of  GDP  from  62.5%  to  46%.  The  risk  of  default  on  external  debt,  which 
loomed large on the horizon in 1999 and 2000, was mitigated and the country's capacity to service its 
restructured  debt  has  considerably  improved.  Table  II  shows  the  changes  in  the  key  economic 
indicators between October 1999 and October 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
Structural reforms - privatization, deregulation, liberalization: 
The Musharraf Government actively pursued an aggressive and transparent privatization plan whose 
thrust was sale of assets in the oil and gas industry as well as in the banking, telecommunications and 
energy  sectors,  to  strategic  investors,  with  foreign  investors  encouraged  to  participate  in  the 
privatization process. This plan was followed by the elected Government under Prime Minister Jamali 
and by the present Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz. 
To  demonstrate  the  seriousness  of  the  government  in  encouraging  foreign  investment  flows  in 
Pakistan;  there  has  been  a  major  and  perceptible  liberalization  of  the  foreign  exchange  regime. 
Foreign investors can now bring in and take back their capital, remit profits, dividends and fees etc., 
without any restrictions. Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI) can also enter and exit the market without 
any  restrictions  or  prior  approvals.  In  the  Karachi  Stock  Exchange  with  a  market  capitalization  of 
US$33 billion, over 650 listed companies showed average returns of 15 per cent that were higher than 
those  in  most  emerging  countries.  This  makes  Pakistan  an  attractive  place  to  invest  for  foreign 
portfolio investors. As part of this liberalization, non-residents and residents are allowed to maintain 
and operate foreign currency deposit accounts, and a market-based exchange rate in the inter-bank 
market is at work. 
The financial sector too, has been restructured and opened up to competition. Foreign and domestic 
private banks currently operating in Pakistan have been able to increase their market share to more 
than  80  percent  of  assets  and  deposits.  The  interest  rate  structure  has  been  deregulated  and 
monetary  policy  uses  indirect  tools  such  as  open  market  operations,  discount  rates  etc.  Domestic 
interest rates on lending have dropped to as low as 5 percent from 20 percent substantially reducing 
financial costs of businesses. 
Central to the economic reforms process has been a clear progression towards deregulation of the 
economy.  Prices  of  petroleum  products,  gas,  energy,  agricultural  commodities  and other  key  inputs 
are  determined  by  market.  Imports  and  domestic  marketing  of  petroleum  products  have  been 
deregulated  and  opened  up  to  the  private  sector.  The  markets  do  not  always  function  effectively. 
Independent  regulatory  agencies  have  been  set  up  to  protect  the  interests  of  consumers  and 
end-users of utilities and public services. 
Tax reforms: 
Taxation reform has figured prominently on the government's agenda, as this is another area where 
the business community has innumerable grievances and dissatisfaction with the arbitrary nature of 
tax administration. Tax reforms are aimed at broadening the tax base, bringing in tax evaders under 
the  tax  net,  minimizing  personal  interaction  between  tax  payer  and  tax  collector,  eliminating  the 
multiplicity  of  taxes  and  ultimately  reducing  the  tax  rate  over  time.  A  massive  survey  and 
documentation  drive  was  undertaken  to  widen  the  tax  base,  extend  incidence  to  all  sectors  of  the 
economy and develop the data for purposes of assessment. Universal self assessment system has 
been introduced for tax collection whereby the returns submitted by the tax payers are taken as final 
settlement of their tax liabilities. Only a random sample of returns is picked up for audit. This system 
has been welcomed by the tax payers. The Central Board of Revenue (CBR) is being restructured to 
improve tax administration including taxpayer facilitation. 
Tariff reforms 
Pakistan made significant efforts in liberalizing its trade regime during the 1990s. The maximum tariff 
rate  has  declined  from  225  percent  in  1990-1  to  25  percent;  the  average  tariff  rate  stands  at  just 
11 percent compared to 65 percent a decade ago. The number of duty slabs has also been reduced to 
four.  Quantitative  import restrictions  have  already  been eliminated  except  those relating  to  security, 
health, public morals, religious and cultural concerns. The number of statutory orders that exempted 
certain  industries  from  import  duties  has  been  phased  out  by  June  2004  and  import  duties  on 
4,000 items were reduced. These measures have brought down effective rate of protection, eliminated 
the  anti-export  bias  and  promoted  competitive  and  efficient  industries.  A  number  of  laws  have  also 
been promulgated to bring the trade regime in conformity with World Trade Organization regulations. 
These include antidumping and countervailing measures intellectual property rights. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
Financial sector reforms 
Financial sector has made the farthest progress by transforming itself into a market oriented, private 
sector dominated sector performing efficient intermediation. The regulatory and supervision functions 
of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  have  been  significantly  strengthened,  and  strict  enforcement  of 
prudential regulations have led to widespread recapitalization and a consequent improvement in the 
efficiency and profitability of banking system. More than 80 percent of banking assets are now owned 
and managed by the private sector. 
The ratio of net Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) to total advances in Pakistan has been brought down to 
less  than  5  percent  through  a  variety  of  strategic  measures.  An  asset  management  company,  the 
Corporate  and  Industrial  Restructuring  Corporation  (CIRC),  has  taken  over  a  large  volume  of 
non-performing loans of NCBs and DFIs at a discount and disposed them off to third party buyers. 
Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) have been restructured through mergers and acquisitions, 
closure, liquidation and reorganization. Auction of Pakistan Investment Bond (PIB) for tenures of five 
to  ten  years  government  paper  and  a  burgeoning  corporate  bond  market  has  begun  to  emerge 
bringing  together  long  term  institutional  investors  and  borrowers  interested  in  long  term  sources  of 
financing. 
Economic governance: 
The  most  dramatic  shift  introduced  by  the  military  government  is  in  promoting  good  economic 
governance. Transparency, consistency, predictability and rule-based decision-making have begun to 
take  roots.  Discretionary  powers have been significantly  curtailed.  Freedom of  press  and  access  to 
information has had a salutary effect on the behaviour of decision makers. 
Pakistan’s history provides ample evidence that foreign enterprises have never been expropriated or 
taken  over  by  any  government  during  the  last  57  years.  Even  when  the  Z.A.  Bhutto  government 
nationalized domestic manufacturing, banks, insurance companies, etc. the foreign companies were 
exempted  and  left  untouched.  Thus,  the  risk  of  expropriation  of  foreign  capital  is  almost  zero  in 
Pakistan. 
Foreign investors are treated at par with domestic investors for purposes of equity ownership, access 
to domestic financial market, tax and tariff regime and legal rules and regulations. This level playing 
field is one of the strong and distinctive features that make Pakistan an investor-friendly country.  
The other pillars of good governance are, (a) devolution of power to the local governments who will 
have  the  administrative  and  financial  authority  to  deliver  public  services  to  all  citizens,  and  (b)  an 
accountability process which will take to task those indulging in corruption through a rigorous process 
of detection, investigation and prosecution. 
The  cornerstone  of  the  governance  agenda  is  the  devolution  plan  which  transfers  powers  and 
responsibilities, including those related to social services from the federal and provincial governments 
to  local  levels.  This  plan  was  put  into  effect  in  2001.  The  development  effort  at  the  local  level  is 
expected  to  be  driven  by  priorities  set  by  elected  local  representatives,  as  opposed  to  bureaucrats 
sitting  in  provincial  and  federal  capitals.  Devolution  of  power  will  thus  strengthen  governance  by 
increasing  decentralization,  transparency,  accountability  of  administrative  operations,  and  people’s 
participation in their local affairs. 
Other  essential  ingredients  for  improving  economic  governance  are  the  separation  of  policy  and 
regulatory functions, which were earlier combined within the ministry. Regulatory agencies have been 
set up for economic activities such as banking, finance, aviation, telecommunications, power, oil, gas 
etc.  The  regulatory  structures  are  now  independent  of  the  ministry  and  enjoy  quasi-judicial  powers. 
The Chairman and Board members enjoy security of tenure and cannot be arbitrarily removed. They 
are  not  answerable  to  any  executive  authority  and  hold  public  hearings  and  consultations  with 
stakeholders. 
The National Accountability Bureau (NAB) has been functioning quite effectively for the last five years 
as  the  main  anti-corruption  agency.  A  large  number  of  high  government  officials,  politicians  and 
businessmen have been sentenced to prison, subjected to heavy fines and disqualified from holding 
public office for twenty-one years on charges of corruption after conviction in the courts of law. Major 
loan  and  tax defaulters were  also  investigated,  prosecuted  and  forced  to  repay  their overdue  loans 
and taxes. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
Despite these positive outcomes and their impact on the business community and other stakeholders, 
within  the  country  as  well  as  abroad,  the  incidence  of  poverty  is  still  quite  high  and  unemployment 
rates are worrisome. The challenge therefore for the next phase of the reform process is to accelerate 
growth rate and reduce poverty and unemployment. 
Concluding remarks: 
Pakistan today meets most of the essential requirements that the foreign businesses and investors are 
looking  for.  Macroeconomic  stability,  deep-rooted  structural  reforms,  high  standards  of  economic 
governance,  outward  looking  orientation,  liberalized  trade  and  investment  regime,  easy  access  to 
policy makers, low production costs, sophisticated financial sector and its location as a regional hub 
make it a highly attractive country for business and investment. 
Investors’ concerns about security, law and order are being addressed and the situation is improving 
gradually. But the negative perception that prevails about Pakistan abroad due to the hype created by 
the median can only be removed if the potential businessmen and investors visit Pakistan and make 
onthe- spot assessment for themselves. 
Long-term structural change and growth 
Table  
  1947 
1970 
2004 
In million 
GDP (current m.p.) Rs. billion 
GDP (US$)billion 
Per Capita Income (Constant Rs.) 
Per Capita Income (US$) 
Per Capita Income (Current Rs.) 
Production Index 
Fiber Production Index 
Water Availability (MAF) 
Wheat Production (m. tons) 
Rice Production (m. tons) 
Cotton Production (m. bales) 
Fertilizer per ha. Crop (kg) 
Manufacturing Production Index 
Steel Production (000 tons) 
Cement Production (000 tons) 
Chemical Production (000 tons) 
Sugar Production (000 tons) 
Cloth Production (000 Sq. meter) 
Per Capita Electricity Generation (Index) 
Per Capita Electricity (kwh) 
Road Length (km) 
Area under Canal Irrigation(mill. ha) 
Natural Gas billion cu. Meters 
Road Vehicles per 1000 Persons 
Telephone Connections per 1,000 Persons
TV Sets per 1,000 Persons 
Population   
Income 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
 
 
 
Consumption 
 
 
 
Social Indicators  Primary Enrolment Rate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Population per Doctor 
Population per Nurse 
Literacy Rate 
Infant Mortality Rate 
Total Fertility Rate 
Population with Access to Safe Water 
Under Five Mortality Rate   
33 
58 
3.8 
1,638 
85 
405 
100 
100 
55 
3.3 
0.7 
1.1 
0 
100 
0 
292 
0 
10 
60 
151 
10.8 
2,541 
170 
809 
219 
172 
76 
7.3 
2.4 
3.0 
23 
2346 
0 
2656 
130 
610 
151 
5,458 
92.5 
5,767 
640 
37,495 
591 
866 
97 
20 
5 
10 
212 
17,047 
2203 
12,957 
6 
758 
4021 
29,581  60,544  657,887
9,924 
1000 
520 
1950 
63 
50,367  72,153  255,856
22.0 
26.1 
33 
33.4 
26.3 
84 
7.9 
0 
1 
0.4 
0 
5 
2.9 
3 
2.5 
1.5 
22 
 23,897 
4,231 
369,318 13,141 
1,397 
3,261 
11 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
20 
117 
6.3 
25 
181 
54 
80 
4.0 
90 
102 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 5
 Changes in key macronomic indicators 
Table – II 
 October 1999 
 October 2004 
GDP Growth Rate 
Inflation 
Fiscal Deficit/GDP 
Current Account/GDP 
Public Debt/GDP 
External Debt/GDP 
Interest 
Payments/Govt.Revenues 
Remittances 
Exports 
Tax Revenues 
Rupee-Dollar Parity 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Foreign Exchange Reserves 
Poverty Incidence 
4.2% 
5.7% 
-6.1% 
-4.1% 
100% 
52% 
50% 
6.4% 
4.6% 
-2.4% 
+1.4% 
68% 
37% 
25% 
US$ 88 million per 
US$ 300 million per 
month 
US$ 7.8 billion 
Rs. 391 billion 
Depreciating 
US$ 472 million 
US$ 1.6 billion 
33% 
month 
US$ 13 billion 
Rs. 600 billion 
Stable 
US$ 950 million 
US$ 12.0 billion 
Data not available but 
perhaps rising 
Rs. 161 billion 
Change in the 
Indicator 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Negative 
Poverty Related Expenditure 
Unemployment 
Note:  All  indicators  in  Column  1  pertain  to  1998-99  or  October  1999.  All  indicators  in  Column  2  pertain  to  2004-05  or  end 
October 2004. 
Positive 
Negative 
Rs. 133 billion 
6% 
8% 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2005
