David Dodge: Recent review of the Canadian economy 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Finance Committee, Ottawa, 19 April 2005. 
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  committee  twice  a  year,  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  These 
meetings help us keep Members of Parliament and, through you, all Canadians informed about the 
Bank’s views on the economy, and about the objective of monetary policy and the actions we take to 
achieve it. 
Last Thursday, we released our April Monetary Policy Report. In the report, we said that the global 
economy  has  been  unfolding  largely  as  expected,  and  the  outlook  for  the  Canadian  economy  is 
essentially unchanged from that in January’s Monetary Policy Report Update. 
The  Canadian  economy  continues  to  adjust  to  global  economic  developments.  This  was  also  an 
important theme last October when Paul and I appeared before this Committee. These developments 
include  the  realignment  of  currencies  in  response  to  global  imbalances,  the  higher  prices  of  both 
energy and non-energy commodities, and growing competition from emerging-market economies. 
In Canada, we are seeing more evidence of sectoral adjustments to these global developments. Many 
Canadian commodity-producing sectors are expanding. However, firms in some other sectors that are 
exposed to international trade are facing pressure from the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and 
from foreign competition. On balance, net exports have been a drag on the economy. But with robust 
domestic  demand,  some  sectors  -  such  as  retail,  wholesale,  and  housing  -  have  been  growing 
strongly. 
The Bank expects Canada’s economy to grow by about 2 1/2 per cent in 2005 and 3 1/4 per cent in 
2006, with growth this year and next coming primarily from strength in domestic demand. To continue 
to  support  aggregate  demand,  we  decided  to  leave  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  unchanged  at 
2.5 per cent on 12 April. 
The Bank continues to judge that the economy is operating slightly below its production capacity, and 
we expect that it will move back to full capacity in the second half of 2006. Core inflation is projected to 
return to 2 per cent around the end of 2006. Based on the scenario implied by oil-price futures, total 
CPI inflation is expected to remain slightly above 2 per cent this year, and to move slightly below 2 per 
cent  in  the  second  half  of  2006.  In  line  with  this  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation,  a  reduction  of 
monetary stimulus will be required over time. 
This outlook is subject to both upside and downside risks and to uncertainties. The risks include the 
pace of expansion in Asia and the prices of oil and non-energy commodities. A further risk relates to 
the  resolution  of  global  current  account  imbalances.  Should  these  imbalances  persist,  the  risk  of  a 
disorderly  correction  would  grow  over  time.  Most  of  the  uncertainties  with  respect  to  the  Canadian 
outlook  relate  to  how  the  economy  is  adjusting  to  the  relative  price  changes  associated  with  major 
global developments. 
Monetary policy continues to facilitate the adjustment process by aiming to keep inflation at the 2 per 
cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity. 
Mr. Chairman, Paul and I now will be happy to answer the committee’s questions. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
