Xiang Junbo: Deepening financial reform to create a favorable environment for 
enterprises 
Speech  by  Mr  Xiang  Junbo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Euro  Finance 
China Conference 2005, Shanghai, 9 November 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning. It’s a pleasure to be here today to participate in the Euro Finance China Conference. In 
recent  years,  China  has  been  enjoying  a  rapid  economic  growth,  gradually  pushing  forward  its 
financial reform, and continuously pursuing the opening-up policy. Against this background, there have 
been  significant  changes  in  the  business  environment  of  multi-national  enterprises.  It  is  of  vital 
importance for us to discuss the issues regarding Cash, Treasury and Risk Management, which is the 
theme  of  this  conference  to  facilitate  an  improved  business  pattern  and  efficiency  for  multi-national 
enterprises.  
As  we  know,  economy  and  finance  serve  complementary  to  each  other.  An  equilibrium  and  rapid 
development  of  national  economy  is  needed  to  create  a  favorable  external  environment  for  the 
deepening of financial reform. While the introduction of various financial reform measures contributes 
to a better business climate for micro-economic participants.  
China  has  been  maintaining  a  stable  and  rapid  economic development  momentum  in  recent  years, 
and has achieved marked success in many sectors; new progress has been made in the course of 
opening up, which guaranteed a smooth conduct of financial reform.  
First and foremost, national economy witnessed a steady and quality growth. With the GDP growth of 
2005 expected to register at 9.4 %, China’s annualized GDP growth rate during “ the Tenth 5-Year 
Plan Period ” is likely to average at 8.8%, representing an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points over 
that of “ the Ninth 5-Year-Plan Period”, while the volatility of economic growth is likely to be controlled 
within a band of 2 percentage points, 0.5 percentage points lower compared with that recorded for the 
“Ninth 5-Year Plan Period”. Generally, China has enhanced the capability for economic growth, and is 
much more resilient against fluctuations with heightened economic stability.    
Secondly, employment continued to scale up. Employment has become an increasingly pressing issue 
for China due to its large population. During “the Tenth 5-Year Plan Period”, newly created jobs in the 
urban areas increased from 7.89 million in 2001 to 9.8 million in 2004. And the figure is expected to 
exceed 9 million this year, which to certain extent will ease the unemployment pressure. 
Thirdly, consumption has been steadily upgraded. During “the Tenth 5-Year Plan Period”, per capita 
disposable  income  of  the  urban  and  rural  residents  is  expected  to  increase  by  9.5%  and  5% 
respectively  a  year  on  average.  The  continuous  and  rapid  income  growth  expanded  household 
consumption, fostering a shift of consumption from focusing on satisfying basic needs to that seeking 
to live a comfortable life.  
Fourthly, social security system was further improved.  A sound social security system constitutes the 
basis  of  maintaining  a  stable  social  and  economic  development.  During  “the  Tenth  5-Year  Plan 
Period”, China’s social security system has further been consolidated, with the pilot program of urban 
social  security  system  further  developed  with  notable  progresses  achieved  in  terms  of  building 
pension,  unemployment,  and  the  medical  care  security  system.  Efforts  have  also  been  made  to 
explore a security system committing minimum protection for residents in the rural areas. 
Fifthly, external sector recorded a rapid development. After the accession into WTO, China engaged 
itself  more  deeply  and  broadly  in  the  international  arena  in  terms  of  division  of  labor.  The  shift  of 
international  industries  stimulated  the  substantial  growth  of  processing  export.  China’s  rapid 
industrialization  and  urbanization  process  combined  with  the  factors  such  as  abundant  labor  forces 
and  cheap  prices,  etc,  created  new  opportunities  for  international  manufacturing  industry.  FDI  also 
maintained rapid growth.  
Sixthly, agricultural production remained stable. China’s grain production experienced large fluctuation 
in the past several years. The shrinkage of grain production and the rise of grain prices once exerted 
negative influences on the economic development. Thanks to the concerted efforts, grain production 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 1
of this year started to rebound, removing the supply-demand gap, which has contributed to the stability 
of grain production and prices. 
In  the  context  of  a  sustained  and  rapid  development  of  national  economy,  China  has  continuously 
introduced various measures to speed up the share holding restructuring of the wholly stated owned 
commercial banks, to foster an improved financial market, to conduct the reform on RMB exchange 
rate  regime,  and  to  advocate  the  construction  of  financial  eco-system,  etc.  All  these  measures  will 
definitely impose profound influences on the business environment of enterprises.  
First,  the  share  holding  reform  of  the  State-owned  commercial  banks  has  helped  establish  credit 
discipline, which could gradually reduce the enterprises’ reliance on the banking system for finance. In 
recent  years,  China  has  consistently  pursued  the  principles  to  establish  a  standard  corporate 
governance structure and to transform the operational mechanism. Through the deepening of internal 
reform, and backed by the favorable government policies and financial support, the restructuring aims 
to develop a new system and new mechanism required by the modern financial institutions. So far, the 
Bank  of  Communications  has  successfully  completed  IPO,  China  Construction  Bank  also  was 
successfully  listed  in  HK  Stock  Exchange  on  October  27.  The  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of 
China has completed their share holding restructuring. The credit business of commercial banks will 
be more rationalized on one hand with the gradually improved corporate governance structure and the 
strengthened  external  supervision,  on  the  other  hand,  commercial  banks  have  to  adopt  cautious 
stance for their business expansion due to the rigid requirement on capital adequacy ratio. Against this 
background,  enterprises  are  encouraged  to  explore  new  financing  channels  instead  of  overly 
depending  on  bank  loans  for  financing  needs.  Meanwhile,  financial  innovations  are  advocated  to 
mitigate potential risks in the economic and financial operations. 
Secondly,  financial  market  was  further  improved,  facilitating  the  market  access  of  enterprises,  and 
making it possible to rationalize the financing structure. We speeded up the development of financial 
market  especially  the  inter-bank  bond  market  in  order  to  address  the  waning  direct  financing 
proportion  and  to  diversify  financing  channels  for  enterprises  while  further  steps  were  taken  to 
implement 
the  commercial  bank  share  holding  restructuring.  Highlighting  market  principles, 
institutional  investors  were  cultivated  in  the  course  of  inter-bank  bond  market  development  while 
priority attention was paid to preventing new risks. With major measures in place, qualified enterprises 
were  allowed  to  issue  short-term  financial  bills  in  the  inter-bank  bond  market;  foreign-funded 
commercial  banks  with  RMB  business  license  can  join  bond  underwriters'  syndicate  to  provide 
underwriting  services  in  the  inter-bank  bond  market;  International  development  agencies  were 
approved to issue RMB bonds in the national inter-bank bond market; Pan-Asia Bond Index Fund and 
ABF  China  Bond  Index  Fund  have  been  launched  in  the  inter-bank  bond  market;  Bond  forward 
transaction has been introduced; Efforts have been made to improve information disclosure system, 
and  strengthen  market  disciplinary  mechanism.  etc.  The  adoption  of  these  measures  signified  an 
important  step  forward  to  enhance  the  influence  of  financial  market  as  well  as  its  role  in  resource 
allocation; Enterprises could enjoy the access to broader financing channels, and favorable conditions 
were  created  to  prevent  them  from  exposing  to  risks.  At  the  same  time,  these  measures  lay  a 
foundation for the rapid development of financial derivative products. 
Thirdly,  better  exchange  risk  management  of  enterprises  is  required  by  the  RMB  exchange  rate 
regime  reform.  On  July  21  this  year,  the  PBC  announced  to  reform  the  exchange  rate  regime  by 
moving  into  a  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  based  on  market  demand  and  supply  with 
reference to a basket of currencies. This reform is a self-initiated action consistent with the reality of 
China’s market economy situation. In the short term, some less competitive enterprises are bound to 
face  intensified  pressures.  In  this  case,  the  enterprises  should  lose  no  time  to  learn  and  master  all 
possible instruments to hedge foreign exchange risks and to become more adaptable to the floatation 
and movement of exchange rate. However, in the long run the adjustment of the exchange rate will 
provide  incentives  for  these  enterprises  to  transform  their  operational  mechanisms,  strengthen  their 
self-innovative capability, accelerate economic restructuring, shift growth patterns of foreign trade, and 
upgrade  the  overall  efficiencies  of  national  economy.  It  is  also  conducive  to  achieving  a  basic 
equilibrium of the trade balance in goods and services, strengthening the independence of monetary 
policy, and enhancing the preemptiveness and effectiveness of financial macro control policies. 
Fourthly, 9 reform measures on foreign exchange capital management were launched on a trial basis 
in Pudong district Shanghai with the purpose to create a favorable policy environment for multinational 
enterprises.  Previously,  taking  the  facilitation  of  trade  and  investment,  and  the  improvement  of 
exchange market construction into consideration as the basic principle, reform on foreign exchange 
management was spearheaded in an innovative, gradual and controllable way as required in Pudong 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2005
District of Shanghai by introducing the 9 policy measures, steps will be taken to conduct centralized 
management of foreign exchange capital in the domestic market, centralize the management of RMB 
capital,  deal  with  cross-border  capital  operation,  streamline  the  procedures  of  trade  revenue  and 
expenditure  in  foreign  exchange,  streamline  the  procedures  under  non-trade  item,  pursue  financial 
innovation, and establish a monitoring and assessment system. The introduction of these policies is 
bound  to  facilitate  the  centralized  foreign  exchange  management  of  multi-national  enterprises, 
enhance their regional headquarters’ capability of foreign exchange management, it also marks great 
significance  to  expand  cross-border  capital  utilization  of  enterprises,  support  domestic  enterprises’ 
overseas  investment,  encourage  banks  to  conduct  derivative  products  innovation,  and  to  create  a 
favorable policy environment concerning foreign exchange management. 
Fifthly, financial eco-system was improved, laying a solid foundation for the sustained development of 
various  enterprises.  The  concept  of  financial  ecology  construction  initiated  by  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China has received nation-wide attention recently. Financial ecologic situation will not only affect the 
transmission of monetary policy, efficiency of resource allocation, financial stability and development, 
but also directly take effects on the operation and transaction costs of enterprises as well. A sound 
financial ecologic environment comprises not only comprehensive and integrated institution building on 
a macro basis, but also improvements in micro infrastructures related to corporate governance, credit 
culture  both  for  individuals  and  enterprises,  bank-enterprise  relationship,  intermediary  services,  etc. 
With regard to the financial ecology construction, great efforts have been made to enhance the legal 
system building, engaging in the research, deliberation and draft work on some related clauses in the 
“Property Law”, “ Enterprises Insolvency Law” and the “Criminal Law” in terms of property right and 
financial  claim  protection  and  the  definition  of  financial  crimes.  On  the  other  hand,  a  nation-wide 
publicity  campaign  concerning  financial  ecology  construction  has  been  launched  to  create  a  sound 
institutional  and  public  environment,  so  as  to  ensure  various  enterprises  develop  on  an  equitable 
basis.      
These financial reform measures not only stressed the market-based orientation of China’s financial 
reform, but also reflected the goals of our reform to create a favorable environment for enterprises. 
The People’s Bank of China will continue to push China’s financial reform forward in a steady manner, 
guaranteeing a better monetary and financial environment for enterprises. 
Taking  future  development  trend  into  consideration,  China’s  economy  is  expected  to  enter  a  stage 
characterized by steady growth. Currently China is speeding up its urbanization and industrialization 
process with corresponding growth in investment and demand. Consumption is expected to expand 
further  due  to  the  large  population;  steady  increase  of  household  income  and  an  upgraded 
consumption structure will also benefit consumption; and favorable external environment will continue 
to serve a strong engine for China’s economic growth. All these positive factors will provide a sound 
macro economic environment for the deepening of financial reform. 
Now I would like to share my insights with you on the financial reform and development trend closely 
related to the development of enterprises. 
First,  continue  to  pursue  a  sound  monetary  policy.  In  2006,  China  will  continue  with  its  sound 
monetary policy, measures will be taken to maintain the steady growth of money and credit, monetary 
policy will play a greater role in keeping RMB value stable and managing the equilibrium of money and 
credit  aggregates.  Based  on  the  changes  of  economic  and  financial  situation,  PBC  will  maintain 
appropriate  growth  of  money  and credit  by  using  a mix  of  monetary  policy  instruments  in  a  flexible 
manner and controlling the scale of policy. Efforts will be made to provide quality financial services to 
enterprises  by  strengthening  the  coordination  between  RMB  and  foreign  currency  policies,  and 
improving  the  formation  mechanism  of  RMB  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate.  In  the  future,  on  one 
hand  the  PBC  will  make  adjustments  of  the  exchange  rate  band  when  necessary  in  line  with  the 
market development as well as the economic and financial situations. At the same time, the PBC will 
exercise due responsibility to conduct management and adjustment of the RMB exchange rate based 
on market supply and demand so as to safeguard a more flexible exchange regime on a market basis 
and to ensure that the RMB exchange rate is basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. On 
the other hand, it’s not enough by the exchange rate alone to keep the equilibrium of BOP due to the 
price  rigidity  existed  in  some  aspects  of  China’s  economy.  Continuous  internal  economic  policy 
adjustments  are  needed  to  strengthen  the  coordination  between  various  macro  policies,  expand 
consumption, and ensure a balanced development between economic restructuring and the BOP.  
Secondly,  Actively  promote  the  construction  of  financial  market.  Currently,  the  financing  structure, 
featuring  high  proportion  of  indirect  financing  and  low  proportion  of  direct  financing,  remains  to  be 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 3
rationalized. Financial risks are too much concentrated in the banking sector, which weakens the role 
of market in resource allocation and results in the high financial leverage ratio of enterprises. Such a 
financing  structure  has  also  brought  about  difficulties  in  the  conversion  of  savings  into  investment, 
asset  and  liability  management  and  risk  control.  Prime  attention  will  be  paid  to  developing  direct 
financing  products  and  risk  management  instruments,  further  promoting  financial  innovation  and 
market system construction. Financial bonds issued by commercial banks as a new liability instrument 
will  be  launched  on  a  timely  basis  to  improve  the  status  of  maturity  mismatch  between  asset  and 
liability. Efforts will also be made to actively develop institutional investors, and expand the scope of 
investors.  The  market  infrastructure  will  be  strengthened  to  create  a  sound  legal  and  technical 
environment  for  the  development  of  financial  market.  More  financial  derivative  products  will  be 
gradually  introduced  in  line  with  the  market  situation,  while  the  monitoring,  analysis  and  regulation 
concerning  market  risks  will  be  intensified  to  ensure  a  sound,  effective  performance  of  financial 
market.  
Thirdly, speed up the reform of financial institutions. Under the overall guidance of financial system 
reform,  China  will  continue  to  conduct  the  share  holding  restructuring  of  wholly  state  owned 
commercial  banks  by  introducing  various  measures  to  transform  their  operational  mechanism  and 
improve corporate governance. The overhauling of policy banks will escalate to transform them into 
development financial institutions with strong competitiveness and financial viability in accordance with 
the requirements of the market economy. Comprehensive financial reform will be carried out in rural 
areas, steps will be taken to deepen the reform of RCCs, and some pioneering work will be launched 
to  explore  an  effective  pattern  to  combine  policy  and  commercial  financial  support  for  the  rural 
economy.  Participation  of  social  capital  in  the  restructuring  of  small  and  medium-sized  financial 
institutions will be encouraged. With strengthened supervision and capital base, financial institutions 
with  various  ownership  structures  will  be  cultivated.  Deposit  insurance  system  will  be  improved  in 
order to develop a deposit insurance system compatible with Chinese situation.  
I would also like to take this opportunity to give you a brief introduction of the People’s Bank of China 
Shanghai Head Office. The PBC Shanghai Head Office was established on August 10 this year; its 
establishment  will  promote  the  development  of  Shanghai  as  an  international  financial  center,  take 
advantage of the first-hand contacts with the financial markets, and enable the central bank to better 
serve the financial markets. As an integral part of the PBC Headquarters, the PBC Shanghai Head 
Office will perform its functions under the guidance and authorization of the PBC Headquarters, and is 
mainly responsible for the implementation and management of part of the central bank’s business. The 
goal is to build Shanghai Head Office into “Two Platforms, One Window and One Center”, namely, the 
platforms for the open market operation and the monitoring of financial markets, an important window 
for  international  exchange  and  cooperation,  and  a  center  for  some  financial  services  and  related 
researches  and  development  work.  By  far,  the  construction  of  Shanghai  Head  Office  is  undergoing 
smoothly, I hope through joint efforts by all relevant parties, Shanghai Head Office will play an active 
role  in  boosting  financial  market  construction,  promoting  the  efficiency  of  central  bank’s  financial 
services, and creating a better financial environment for enterprises. 
Finally, I wish this conference a complete success. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2005
