Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy and the cyclical situation 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a meeting 
with local authorities and the business community, Kapp, 23 November 2005.  
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 2 November, Inflation 
Report 3/05 and on previous speeches. 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The economic situation 
The cyclical upturn in the Norwegian economy continues. Overall capacity utilisation in the economy 
has increased. After a period of very low consumer price inflation, there are prospects that inflation will 
again rise at a faster pace. Interest-rate setting since this spring has been oriented towards a gradual 
increase in the interest rate – in small, not too frequent steps – towards a more normal level. On the 
basis  of  the  analysis  in  Inflation  Report  3/05,  this  strategy  still  appears  to  provide  a  reasonable 
balance between the objectives of monetary policy.  
The reduction in Norges Bank’s key rate through 2003 and into 2004 resulted in low interest rates. At 
the beginning of the recovery, falling interest rates and expectations of low real interest rates ahead 
fuelled private consumption.  
A  weaker  krone  exchange  rate  and  the  international  recovery  stimulated  traditional  merchandise 
exports. Moreover, fixed investment in the petroleum sector has expanded sharply, which has led to 
rising  demand  for  goods  and  services  supplied  by  mainland  enterprises.  Mainland  fixed  investment 
also picked up after a period.  
Since  the  recovery  started,  quarter-on-quarter  mainland  GDP  growth  has  averaged  3½  per  cent 
annualised.  Growth  has  been  steady.  The  economic  upturn  has  continued  this  year.  On  balance, 
demand is expected to remain relatively high in the near term. Expectations of continued low albeit 
rising  interest  rates  and  real  income  growth  should  support  growth  in  household  consumption  and 
fixed investment ahead. Brisk investment growth in the petroleum industry, moderate wage growth and 
high  profitability  in  many  enterprises  suggest  further  investment  growth  in  the  mainland  enterprise 
sector. The economic upturn is now broadly based.  
In  manufacturing,  the  order  backlog  is  at  a  record-high  level,  which  implies  continued  production 
growth over the next quarters. Statistics Norway’s business tendency survey for manufacturing points 
in the same direction. Activity has remained buoyant in the construction sector for a long period. New 
orders in this industry are rising, which points to a further increase in production. Growth in turnover in 
property management and commercial services has increased to a high level. Higher activity in goods-
producing  industries  and  the  prospect  of  solid  growth  in  household  demand  provide  a  basis  for 
continued  growth  in  service  industries.  However,  cost  levels  in  the  Norwegian  business  sector  are 
high. This challenge may become more visible when the upturn slows.  
The  output  gap  is  a  measure  that  expresses  our  assessment  of  total  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy. The output gap is defined as the percentage difference between actual output and potential 
output. Potential output indicates the level of output that is consistent with price and cost stability. The 
estimate for the output gap is uncertain, partly because the level of potential output is unobservable 
and  must  be  estimated.  Since  official  statistics  on  overall  activity  in  the  economy  are  not  available 
immediately and are subsequently revised, the level of actual output will be uncertain.  
Our overall assessment is that capacity utilisation has picked up over the past two years and is now 
slightly higher than normal. In our estimation of the output gap, the result of technical calculations is 
compared with other sources of information about capacity utilisation in the economy. Information from 
Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  may  indicate  that  overall  mainland  capacity utilisation  is close  to a 
normal level. However, there are signs of bottlenecks in production in some sectors of the economy. 
For example, capacity utilisation in the construction sector is very high, particularly in the southwest 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
region  of  the  country.  There  are  signs  of  some  skills  shortages  in  the  construction  industry,  in 
manufacturing and in some service industries.  
Even though growth in the Norwegian economy has been high for a long period, substantial labour 
shortages have not yet emerged in the economy as a whole. The increase in the number of employed 
has been relatively low throughout the upturn. Employment has shown a smaller rise than in previous 
cyclical upturns in the 1980s and 1990s. Both official statistics and Norges Bank’s regional network 
indicate that many enterprises have been reluctant to recruit new  employees. There are now some 
signs of a change in this attitude. Growth in LFS employment has picked up in recent months. A larger 
share of the contacts in our regional network are considering increasing their workforces and fewer are 
considering a reduction.  
In the first quarters of the current upturn productivity growth was high, measured as GDP per person-
hour. The number of person-hours worked gradually increased substantially, particularly because of 
the sharp fall in sickness absence through 2004. However, the use of overtime has also increased to a 
fairly  high  level.  This  may  indicate  that  the  use  of  resources  is  somewhat  higher  than  implied  in 
isolation  by  the  level  of  employment  and  unemployment.  Nor  do  wage  developments  point  to  any 
substantial pressures. So far, there are few signs of an acceleration in real wage growth.  
The use of foreign labour has increased in the year that has passed since the enlargement of the EU. 
The scope is relatively moderate, but appears nonetheless to have reduced bottleneck tendencies in 
some  industries  where  demand  has  increased  sharply.  Traditionally,  many  workers  from  our 
neighbouring countries have contributed when the labour market in Norway has been tight. In 2001, 
close  to  30  000  persons  resident  in  Sweden  were  employed  in  Norway  for  all  or  part  of  the  year. 
Swedes who have registered as residents in Norway come in addition.  
An increased supply of labour from new EU member states to Norwegian enterprises will result in a 
higher-than-normal increase in potential output for a period.  
Many  of  the  foreign  workers  work  for  a  shorter  period  in  Norway  without  being  employed  in  a 
Norwegian  enterprise.  Examples  include  foreign  contractors  and  self-employed  in  the  construction 
industry who carry out various building projects in Norway, as well as others who carry out other types 
of projects. Aker Kværner, for example, has contracted 300 consultants based in India to work on the 
Ormen Lange project in northwest Norway. An increase in the use of these short-term contracts will 
appear as an increase in Norway’s service imports, and increases the supply of goods and services 
without drawing on domestic resources.  
The  latest  Directorate  of  Labour  figures  show  that  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  was  3.4  per 
cent  in  October.  Statistics  Norway’s  Labour  Force  Survey  (LFS),  however,  presents  a  somewhat 
weaker picture of unemployment. Registered unemployment is on the decline in all regions. The fall in 
unemployment has been relatively moderate in Region Inland, although this is partly because the level 
of unemployment was already low.  
As I mentioned earlier, the reports from Norges Bank’s regional network provide important information 
for Norges Bank’s analysis of the Norwegian economy. Information about the state of the Norwegian 
economy  is  available  earlier  than  information  provided  by  official  statistics,  and  it  is  useful  to  have 
closer contact with business and industry throughout the country.  
The main impression from the latest round of interviews is that demand and output are rising in all 
sectors. The market outlook is reported to be positive, and the enterprises Norges Bank has contacted 
indicate that growth will be at least as strong six months ahead as it is now. The figures show that 
capacity  utilisation  in  the  business  sector  is  gradually  increasing.  Some  petroleum-related  activities 
and parts of the construction sector are experiencing capacity problems, but so far, the pressure on 
factors  of  production  does  not  seem  to  be  particularly  high  in  other  industries.  All  industries  report 
plans for moderate to solid growth in investment. In tandem with the economic upturn, employment is 
also rising throughout the private sector, with in general little evidence of wage pressures.  
Developments  in  Hedmark  and  Oppland  counties  are  largely  consistent  with  the  overall  picture  for 
Norway. The industry structure in Hedmark and Oppland does not differ substantially in most sectors 
from the country as a whole. The exception is the primary industries, which play a far more important 
role in these two counties than in the rest of the country. The largest farming areas in Norway are to 
be  found  in  Hedmark  and  Oppland,  and  employment  is  high  in  the  primary  industries.  The  share 
employed in the public sector is also somewhat higher than in Norway as a whole. Unemployment has 
also been markedly lower in the inland region than in most other regions in recent years.  
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
According to the most recent reports, the economic situation in the region is favourable. Participating 
companies  report  rising  employment  and  solid  growth  in  all  industries.  In  retail  trade  and  in  the 
construction sector, activity is brisk and increasing, with a somewhat wait-and-see approach to future 
developments.  Growth  in  manufacturing  has  slowed  slightly,  but  is  likely  to  stabilise.  Investment  is 
rising in all sectors. Enterprises in the region envisage a slight rise in prices in the period ahead.  
Inflation  has  edged  up  since  the  beginning  of  2004.  In  October,  the  year-on-year  rise  in  consumer 
prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) was 1.2 per cent. Adjusted 
for the estimated direct effect of the interest rate fall on house rents, the rise in prices is estimated at 
1.3 per cent in October. Total consumer prices (CPI) rose by 1.8 per cent in the same period.  
Prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  rose  by  2.0  per  cent  in  the  twelve  months  to 
October  this  year.  The  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  consumer  goods  exposed  to 
international competition has been very low this year. In October, prices for these goods were 0.2 per 
cent higher than in the same month one year earlier. This probably reflects the strong competition that 
Norwegian producers of consumer goods encounter from international operators. At the same time, 
domestic demand is being stimulated by low interest rates, and in some industries capacity utilisation 
is  providing  a  basis  for  higher  margins.  Service  prices,  which  showed  little  rise  last  year,  have 
increased again this year. In many industries, including the airline industry, where price competition is 
strong, low profitability has led to an increase in prices. High oil prices have also resulted in increased 
prices, for example for transport services.  
On  the  basis  of  the  pay  increases  agreed  upon  in  this  year’s  wage  settlement,  combined  with  the 
estimates for wage drift and wage carry-over, annual wage growth is projected at around 3½ per cent 
this year. This is somewhat lower than the average for the past ten years. The relatively low level of 
inflation implies, however, that real wage growth is in line with the average for the past ten years.  
Prices for imported consumer goods are still falling from the level prevailing one year earlier. Sharply 
rising production capacity in the world economy as a result of high investment levels in many low-cost 
countries has led to subdued price increases for many internationally traded goods. The dismantling of 
trade barriers has also boosted imports of consumer goods from countries with low cost levels. For 
example, clothing imports from these areas have increased markedly in the past few years. This has 
contributed to a significant fall in clothing prices.  
Clothing imports are not the only imports from low-cost countries that have exhibited strong growth. 
The  share  of  our  imports  from  these  countries  also  seems  to  be  rising  for  other  goods,  such  as 
audiovisual equipment, furniture and white goods. This is pushing down the rise in prices for imported 
consumer goods.  
Structural changes in world trade have been important for the Norwegian economy, not least for the 
rise in prices for imported goods and services. We assume that the shift in imports towards low-cost 
countries will continue, with an attendant dampening effect on inflation. This effect will be countered by 
the increase in prices for oil and other commodities that is expected to result in a somewhat higher rise 
in producer and export prices among our trading partners.  
Monetary policy and the economic outlook in Norway and abroad 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. This is also the most important contribution monetary policy 
can make to sound economic developments in the long term. Low and stable inflation provides the 
economy with a nominal anchor. This contributes to predictability for those who take decisions about 
saving  and  investment  today,  although  the  result  of  those  decisions  depends  on  how  the  economy 
develops  in  the  future.  In  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  Norges  Bank  operates  a  flexible  inflation 
targeting  regime,  so  that  weight  is  given  to  both  variability  in  inflation  and  variability  in  output  and 
employment. Flexible inflation targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary 
policy, which is to keep inflation on target and provide an anchor for inflation expectations, and the 
more short-term objective of stability in the real economy.  
Monetary policy influences the economy with long and variable lags. This means we must look ahead 
when  setting  interest  rates.  I  would  therefore  like  to  comment  briefly  on  some  international 
developments  that  are  important  to  the  Norwegian  economy  and  the  assumptions  concerning 
developments in Norway on which Norges Bank’s assessments are based. The developments I will be 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
describing are based on the analysis in Inflation Report 3/05 and the Executive Board’s assessments 
following the monetary policy meeting at the beginning of November.  
Prospects for global growth are still favourable. Among many of our trading partners, economic policy 
is oriented towards increasing activity. This will to some extent counteract the dampening effect of high 
oil  prices.  Domestic  demand  among  main  trading  partners  such  as  the  euro  area  and  Sweden  is 
expected to edge up somewhat next year. For our trading partners as a whole, economic growth is 
expected to increase somewhat from 2005 to 2006. In the years ahead GDP for an average of our 
trading partners is expected to grow by around 2½ per cent.  
Very high growth in demand for oil contributed to rising oil prices in 2004 and the first half of 2005. Oil 
prices  have  also  been  influenced  by  international  incidents,  such  as  terror  actions  and  Hurricanes 
Katrina  and  Rita  that  resulted  in  extensive  damage  both  to  installations  that  produce  crude  oil  and 
natural  gas  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  to  refineries  in  the  area.  Last  summer,  North  Sea  oil  prices 
(Brent Blend) generally ranged between USD 55-60 per barrel, and in August prices were approaching 
USD 70 per barrel. Oil futures have also increased. Since the beginning of October, oil prices have 
fallen back somewhat, and the price of North Sea oil has been below USD 55 per barrel for the past 
few days. The price fall primarily reflects slower growth in oil demand in many markets. This may be a 
sign that oil prices have reached a limit in terms of how high prices can be without having a noticeable 
impact on oil demand and other economic activity.  
Rising or persistently high oil prices may gradually dampen growth among our most important trading 
partners. The slowdown may occur gradually, and will not necessarily be particularly pronounced.  
It appears that high oil prices are resulting in somewhat higher consumer price inflation among several 
of  our  trading  partners  than  assumed  earlier.  There  are  clear  signs  that  consumer  prices  are 
increasing more rapidly in the US, the UK and to a certain extent in the euro area.  
So far, high energy prices have had a limited impact on other consumer prices. Core inflation in the 
US and the euro area has shown little increase so far. In the UK, however, core inflation is now more 
than 1.5 per cent and seems to be on the rise. So far, moderate wage growth in both Europe and the 
US suggests that employees have not been compensated for the rise in energy prices. If the increase 
in oil prices is perceived as long-lasting, this may result in higher inflation expectations, higher wage 
demands and a more pronounced pass-through to other prices.  
Over the past few months, key rates have been raised in the US, Canada and New Zealand, while the 
UK key rate has been reduced by 0.25 percentage point. Key rates remain low among many of our 
trading  partners.  Market  participants  seem  to  expect  a  gradual  increase  in  key  rates  in  the  period 
ahead,  and  at  a  somewhat  faster  pace  than  expected  last  summer.  Towards  the  end  of  2006,  key 
rates in the US and the UK are expected to be around 4½ per cent. For the euro area and Sweden, 
key  rates  are  expected  to be considerably  lower,  at a  little  less  than 2¾  per cent and 2½  per  cent 
respectively.  
In recent months, global long-term interest rates have also edged up again somewhat. This reflects 
stronger inflationary impulses as a result of high energy prices. Market participants’ long-term inflation 
expectations,  measured  as  the  difference  between  nominal  and  real  government  bond  yields,  have 
shown a small increase since last summer.  
Low  interest  rates  and  expectations  of  continued  low  real  interest  rates  are  sustaining  the  cyclical 
upturn  in  Norway.  In  addition  to  buoyant  growth  in  other  countries,  terms-of-trade  gains  and  higher 
demand in the petroleum industry are important driving forces behind the upturn. Capacity utilisation in 
the economy has picked up and is now probably higher than its normal level.  
High oil prices have a different impact in Norway than in oil-importing countries. A rise in oil prices 
improves our terms of trade. Moreover, as a result of persistently high oil prices and expectations that 
oil prices will remain high, investment in the petroleum sector may reach record levels this year. The 
investment intentions survey for the petroleum sector points to very high growth.  
In  our  projections,  we  have  assumed  that  fiscal  policy  will  have  a  cyclically  neutral  impact  on  the 
economy next year. For 2007, our projections are based on the assumption that fiscal policy will be 
consistent with the fiscal rule, while fiscal policy for 2008 will provide some stimulus to total demand 
and output, although somewhat less than a mechanical application of the fiscal rule would imply. High 
oil prices will particularly be reflected in a sharp rise in the Petroleum Fund’s total capital.  
After a period of very low consumer price inflation, there are prospects that inflation will again rise at a 
faster pace. Nevertheless, there are considerable differences in the rise in prices across goods and 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2005
services.  On  the  one  hand,  Norway  is  still  benefiting  from  the  growing  liberalisation  of  world  trade. 
Imports from countries where the price level is lower than in Norway are increasing, resulting in a fall 
in prices for a number of consumer goods. On the other hand, higher production in large countries 
such as China and India has led to higher prices for energy products. As a result, the overall rise in 
consumer prices has edged up both at home and abroad.  
The projections in the Inflation Report are based on an interest rate path that in the Executive Board’s 
assessment provides a reasonable balance between the objectives of monetary policy. Previously, we 
based  our  analysis  on  various  technical  assumptions  concerning  future  interest  rates.  One  such 
assumption  was  market  interest  rate  expectations.  As  from  Inflation  Report  3/05,  we  now  base  our 
projections on an interest rate path that we consider reasonable. This gives Norges Bank more active 
ownership  of  the  projections  that  are  presented  and  of  the  uncertainty  we  believe  surrounds  these 
projections.  
The  arguments  favouring  a  very  low  interest  rate  in  Norway  are  to  some  extent  less  relevant.  The 
outlook and analyses suggest a gradual increase in the interest rate towards a more normal level, but 
we expect the adjustment to occur in small, not too frequent steps.  
Output growth is high and may in isolation suggest a more rapid increase in the interest rate ahead. 
This would reduce the risk of bottlenecks in the economy with rising cost inflation and continued debt 
build-up. On the other hand, raising the interest rate more rapidly would increase the risk of a stronger 
krone, which could prevent inflation from reaching the target of 2.5 per cent.  
The projections indicate that the interest rate will rise by about 1 percentage point in the course of the 
next year. This is consistent with expectations in the money and foreign exchange market. At the 2-3 
year horizon, we expect a further, gradual rise in the interest rate. Norges Bank’s projected interest 
rate slightly further ahead is somewhat higher than forward rates in the financial market, but market 
rates in Norway and other countries may have been pushed down by extraordinary factors in the world 
economy.  
Norges  Bank  has  assumed  that  money  market  rates  among  our  trading  partners  will  also  increase 
gradually over the next three years. The interest rate path in Norway and abroad may be consistent 
with an approximately unchanged krone exchange rate.  
With interest rate developments as outlined above, CPI-ATE inflation is projected to increase gradually 
from about 1½ per cent today to close to 2 per cent at the beginning of 2007. There are prospects that 
inflation will increase further and reach the target of 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2008. With a 
gradual reduction in unemployment, Norges Bank expects wage growth to pick up after a period. At 
the  same  time,  profit  margins  are  expected  to  edge  up  in  pace  with  rising  demand  and  capacity 
utilisation. With continued low interest rates, output growth is likely to be above trend again next year. 
Even though a gradual increase in the interest rate will result in somewhat weaker growth impulses 
after a period, monetary policy will still be expansionary.  
The output gap, which is a measure of capacity utilisation in the economy, is estimated to be positive 
this year and increase to about 1 per cent in 2006. A gradual increase in the interest rate towards a 
more normal level will probably result in lower growth in demand for goods and services after a period. 
Growth in household disposable income will probably be reduced, and growth in housing investment 
will slow. Growth in corporate fixed investment will gradually slacken in pace with other demand and 
output. Capacity utilisation may in time be brought down somewhat and stabilise. This will curb the rise 
in inflation, so that it stabilises close to target.  
The economic outlook we have described, including the projected interest rate path, is based on the 
information Norges Bank currently has concerning the domestic and global economies and on Norges 
Bank’s  view  of  how  the  economy  functions.  Experience  shows  that  the  economy  is  exposed  to 
disturbances that may result in other developments. In recent years, the unexpected fall in inflation, 
the  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices  and  wide  fluctuations  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  are  events  that  were 
difficult  to  capture  in  advance  in  Norges  Bank’s  projections.  The  origins  of  such  disturbances  may 
often lie outside Norway. The assessment of our near future and our current situation may change as 
time passes and as more accurate statistics become available. The functioning of the economy could 
also change.  
Monetary policy is oriented towards stabilising inflation and output growth. If unexpected disturbances 
arise and new information concerning the functioning of the economy emerges, the Executive Board 
must assess whether a different interest rate path may be more appropriate in order to achieve our 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 5
objectives.  The  interest  rate  outlook  may  therefore  change  over  time.  The  fan  charts  illustrate  the 
uncertainty that can be expected based on recent history.  
The  Executive  Board  discussed  the  main  content  of  Inflation  Report  3/05  before  the  report  was 
published. On the basis of the analysis and the Executive Board’s discussion, the Board assessed the 
consequences  for  the  future  interest  rate  path  and  approved  the  monetary  policy  strategy  for  the 
period to the next Inflation Report in March.  
The interest rate path presented in the Inflation Report will, in the assessment of the Executive Board, 
provide a reasonable balance between the objective of bringing inflation up to target and the objective 
of  stabilising  developments  in  output  and  employment,  conditional  on  the  information  Norges  Bank 
had at the time the Report was published.  
The interest rate may gradually – in small, not too frequent steps – be brought back towards a more 
normal  level.  The  objective  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  target  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations 
nevertheless implies that monetary policy remains expansionary.  
In the assessment of the Executive Board, the sight deposit rate should lie in the interval 2-3 per cent 
in the period to the publication of the next Inflation Report in March 2006, conditional on economic 
developments that are broadly in line with the projections.  
In the press release following the Executive Board’s meeting on 2 November, the following factors of 
uncertainty were highlighted:  
•  Stronger trade shifts and increased labour market competition may result in lower price and 
wage  inflation  and  weaker  pressures  in  the  economy.  In  isolation,  this  would  imply  less 
frequent interest rate changes.  
•  We have little experience of such low interest rates over a long period. There is a risk that an 
interest rate that is kept low for a longer period may lead to expectations of a persistently low 
interest rate. This might result in a higher-than-projected rise in output and inflation and would 
in isolation suggest a faster interest rate increase.  
•  Developments in the global economy are uncertain. Our projections are based on favourable 
growth prospects in other countries and continued high oil prices. Different developments in 
global growth and in oil prices would result in a different path for the Norwegian economy. 
Interest rate setting must also be assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit. 
Wide fluctuations in these variables may constitute a source of instability in demand and output in the 
somewhat longer run. Safeguarding financial stability implies that the interest rate should be brought 
up towards a more normal level. If developments in the economy are in line with the baseline scenario, 
it is likely that financial developments in banks and enterprises will be favourable.  
As mentioned above, however, developments ahead are uncertain and the Norwegian economy may 
be exposed to shocks. Uncertainty with regard to financial stability in the longer term is mainly related 
to the historically high household debt burden and to changes in asset prices. Long periods of a sharp 
rise  in  debt,  asset  prices  and  investments  may  give  rise  to  instability  and  problems  in  the  financial 
system at a later stage. We have observed this phenomenon both in Norway and in other countries.  
The  trend  we  have  seen  in  household  borrowing  in  recent  years  is  not  sustainable  over  time.  The 
current interest rate level is very low compared with the level that over time must be considered more 
normal. Borrowers and lenders would probably be wise to bear this in mind.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2005
