Franz-Christoph Zeitler: Strategies for combating counterfeit money in 
Germany 
Presentation by Dr Franz-Christoph Zeitler, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 2005 Currency Conference, Montréal, 5 October 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen I am pleased to welcome you to my presentation on “Strategies for 
combating counterfeit money in Germany”. I hope my lecture will live up to your expectations 
and provide you with an insight into some interesting new aspects of this issue.  
1. 
Unexpected demand in cash – combating counterfeits as a pillar of confidence  
On  the  surface,  the  title  of  my  presentation  appears  to  refer  to  some  technical  issues 
connected with the work of our central bank. Viewed more closely, however, I think it reflects 
the  main  overall  objective  of  central  banking,  which  is  to  promote  our  virtual  commodity 
consisting of confidence and credibility.  
One of the guiding principles of monetary policy is that “money matters”. This underlines the 
significance of the money supply for medium-term price developments. And although cash 
only  makes  up  a  small  part  of  the  money  supply  that  is  relevant  to  monetary  policy,  the 
principle that “cash matters” is also important.  
Contrary to many forecasts at the time when the euro was launched, cash continues to be 
very popular. Over the past few years, currency in circulation in the euro area has hit double-
digit annual growth rates and thus increased much more than the quantitative models based 
on economic growth and the rise in cashless payments led us to expect. The net issuance of 
banknotes by the Eurosystem went up from some €220 billion shortly after the introduction of 
euro banknotes and coins in 2002 to around €524 billion at the end of the second quarter of 
2005. The Bundesbank alone recorded a growth of €34 billion, or 20%, in the net issuance of 
banknotes in 2004. This disproportionately sharp rise is also due partly to the Bundesbank’s 
important role as the “hub” for the supply of euro cash outside the Eurosystem.  
Cash therefore remains in demand. Just as books and newspapers have their place in the 
age  of  the  internet  and  television,  cash  will  likewise  retain  its  importance  in  the  age  of 
‘cybermoney’. This is also supported, for instance, by the fact that, according to our findings, 
the  share  of  cash  used  in  European  foreign  travel  has  increased  sharply  since  the 
introduction of euro banknotes and coins despite the risk of loss and theft: from around 30% 
in 2001 to some 53% in 2004.  
It is often claimed that one of the reasons for the increase in currency in circulation is the 
growth  of  the  shadow  economy.  It  is  important  here  not  to  confuse  cause  and  effect:  The 
shadow economy has not arisen because of the existence of banknotes and coins. Rather, 
the shadow economy has its origin in various different factors and, among other things, is 
reflected  in  the  use  of  cash  and  incidentally  in  cashless  payments  as  well.  Increasingly, 
therefore,  measures  are  also  being  taken  at  international  level,  including  measures  to 
prevent the illegal channelling of banknotes and coins into the legal economy.1 Furthermore, 
a shadow economy also exists in countries with high inflation rates where cash only plays a 
minor role as a “value store”. 
                                                 
1   See the standards of the “Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering”. 
   1/6 
As I see it, however, the crucial cause of the unbroken demand for cash is the psychological 
factor, ie people’s preference for cash as opposed to cashless means of payment, such as 
credit and smart cards. In the abstract world of financial instruments (including derivatives), 
cash  is  “physically  tangible”  and  serves  as  a  firm  anchor  on  which  people  can  place  their 
confidence  in  a  currency  –  confidence  which  is  based  on  a  high  level  of  security,  data 
protection and, above all, price level stability.  
The confidence placed in a currency is ultimately dependent on its stability. However, people 
rightly expect their currency to provide not just security against depreciation but also security 
of the cash in circulation – in other words, banknotes and coins that are of good quality and, 
in particular, protected against counterfeiting.  
The Eurosystem has therefore also identified this as a major core task of the central banks in 
its decision on “Establishing Principles and Objectives for the Eurosystem’s Role in the Cash 
Cycle”  (Governing  Council  decision  of  16  December  2004).  While  many  are  involved  in 
fulfilling this task, the (ultimate) responsibility for this is borne by the central banks.  
In a similar way to price stability, where people talk about “perceived inflation”, it is likewise 
important  when  preventing  counterfeiting  to  ensure  that  no  “perceived  insecurity”  arises  in 
the  population.  The  Bundesbank  therefore  attaches  great  importance  to  combating 
counterfeit money and pursues what might be termed a “multi-dimensional” strategy based 
on different levels. 
I  would  like  to  proceed  by  giving  you  a  short  outline  of  the  individual  elements  of  this 
strategy.  First,  however,  let  us  take  a  brief  look  at  the  current  counterfeiting  situation  in 
Germany.  
Counterfeiting situation  
2. 
In 2004 81,000 counterfeit banknotes were detected in Germany, while the total in the euro 
area  amounted  to  approximately  594,000.2  In  the  euro  area  there  are  currently  about  60 
counterfeited  banknotes  per  1  million  banknotes  in  circulation.  This  compares  with  an 
average  figure  for  Germany  of  19  per  1  million  banknotes.  This  nevertheless  remains  a 
challenge for the Bundesbank as indicated by the fact that the figure for the D-Mark was only 
ten counterfeited banknotes for every 1 million banknotes in circulation.  
What can we do to strengthen the security of our currency? 
3.  
Three main strategies: Information, commitment and involvement in the cash 
cycle, and improvement of security features  
I think there are three main strategies to be deployed:  
- 
Firstly, regularly informing the public about the security features, which is part of the 
daily  work  of  our  branches  in  the  different  parts  of  the  country.  This  is  important 
because even the highest developed security items are of little value if they are not 
known, not used or are too difficult to be used by the general public. To this end I 
think that our familiar checking routine, the “feel-look-tilt” test (with the stress being 
on “feel” and “tilt”), offers a very practical and convincing explanation of our “level 
one” security items.  
                                                 
2   Equivalent  to  a  counterfeit  money  share  of  13.6%.  Share  of  currency  in  circulation:  Value  approximately 
39.8%, volume about 41.7%. 
   2/6 
  The second strategy is the Bundesbank’s commitment and involvement in the cash 
cycle and cash processing, with a focus on authenticity and fitness check as well as 
close cooperation with the police forces.  
The third strategy to strengthen the level of security of our currency is to improve 
counterfeit  deterrence  features  which  prevent  banknote  reproduction,  and  to 
develop highly sophisticated security features – security items on three levels: 
for the general public  
for professional use  
for central bank purposes only 
• 
• 
• 
 
To return to the first strategy, it is obviously important to know who needs what information. 
Last  year  the  ECB  conducted  a  survey  to  find  out  how  much  professional  cash  handlers 
knew about euro banknotes, where they got their information from and when they received 
their  most  recent  update.  One  of  the  major  conclusions  is  that  professional  cash  handlers 
have only little knowledge of security features and that they focus on classical features such 
as watermark, intaglio print or security thread. The slogan “feel-look-tilt”, which should remind 
them of several security features, is hardly known, and the terminology in brochures is often 
too  technical.  On  the  other  hand,  people  do  want  more  information,  so  it  is  the  task  of  a 
central bank to offer this in an appropriate way. We see counterfeit prevention as an ongoing 
requirement.  Regular  updates  of  information  with  respect  to  the  techniques  used  by 
counterfeiters are crucial. For this reason we have decided to play a proactive role and to 
offer  target  group-specific  training  sessions.  Although  addressed  primarily  to  professional 
cash handlers, anybody may attend such a training. Furthermore, the Bundesbank is also on 
hand  with  appropriate  information  on  this  topic  at  public  exhibition  trade  fairs  and  similar 
events.  As  Germany  has  approximately  82.5  million  inhabitants  and  about  48,000  bank 
branches,  we  cannot  offer  training  centrally.  We  therefore  involve  the  staff  from  our 
branches, which provides us with a total pool of 200 trainers who are themselves trained by 
our central office’s counterfeit experts. Training sessions are held at our branches, although 
our trainers can also visit interested companies at their premises on request. 
We also constantly encourage our branches to hold “open days” in order to give members of 
the general public the opportunity to improve their skills in recognising counterfeit money.  
This  offer  meets  with  a  high  take-up  among  professional  cash  handlers  and  the  general 
public:  We  conduct  almost  100  training  sessions  per  month,  each  of  them  attracting  an 
average of 20 participants. 
There  are  many  media  which  can  be  used  for  spreading  information  and  publicising  our 
“product”  (the  training).  It  is  important  that  we  are  able  to  deliver  unbiased  and  correct 
information, decreasing the likelihood of exaggeration in the press and avoiding any public 
overreaction such as shopkeepers refusing to accept a specific denomination.  
Last  but  not  least  we  support  the  developers,  manufacturers  and  vendors  of  counterfeit 
detection  devices  by  offering  detection  tests  for  their  machines  free  of  charge  at  our 
premises.  The  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  have  introduced  common  standards  for 
these tests, including a harmonised test pack of counterfeit and genuine banknotes. The test 
results  will  be  published  on  a  joint  Eurosystem  website  which  will  be  accessible  to 
everybody.  We  also  expect  further  improvement  of  these  devices  thanks  to  competition 
between the manufacturers.  
The second strategy for combating counterfeits is to be involved in the cash cycle and to co-
operate closely with the police forces. 
On the European and international level a discussion is taking place about the possibility and 
feasibility  of  “outsourcing”  cash  processing.  It  goes  without  saying  that  each  central  bank 
   3/6 
must decide on this issue for itself and that the question as to whether it is better for cash 
processing  to  be  organised  publically  or  to  what  extent  private  responsibility  is  to  be 
preferred cannot be answered by a simple “yes” or “no”. It can only be answered by means 
of co-operation between central banks and the private sector, which must each play their part 
as efficiently as possible.  
The  Bundesbank  has  reorganised  its  structure  and  downsized  the  number  of  its  branches 
from some 130 to 613 at present and 47 by the end of the restructuring process in 2007. We 
are  not  doing  this  in  order  to  withdraw  from  cash  processing  but  instead  to  enhance  our 
effectiveness (at least as far as banknotes are concerned).  
Tests within the Eurosystem have shown that banknotes in circulation in Germany achieved 
the  highest  quality  thanks  to  a  sufficient  return  frequency  of  banknotes  to  our  branches. 
According to estimates, the Bundesbank has a share of around 35% in counterfeit banknote 
identification  despite  the  fact  that  its  branches  are  only  in  the  second  or  third  line  of 
counterfeit money detection and the volume it processes has already passed through traders 
and  possibly  also  banks  and/or  cash-in-transit  companies.  The  Bundesbank’s  share  in  the 
detection of counterfeit coins is even larger: Some 50% are discovered by the branches of 
the Bundesbank despite the fact that it has recently reduced coin processing and restricted 
its activities to random checks. 
From time to time, there are public calls for the introduction of some kind of compensation as 
an incentive to those discovering counterfeit money.  
This is, of course, not possible for obvious reasons, as it would mean that the central bank 
was  subsidising  the  sale  of  counterfeit  money.  Although  the  main  focus  of  combating 
counterfeiting in terms of its proportional value is on banknotes, we must not lose sight of 
counterfeit coins either, especially since the coins in the euro area have a high value.  
Another  requirement  for  combating  counterfeits  effectively  is  good  co-operation  with  the 
police.  Our  police  forces  have  online  access  to  the  relevant  databases.  CMS  is  the 
Counterfeit Monitoring System, a database hosted by the ECB in which all euro counterfeits 
–  banknotes  and  coins  –  can  be  found,  including  classification  details,  descriptions  and 
images.  We  supply  valuable  information  about  the  technical  characteristics  of  imitated 
security features.  
As currency counterfeiting is increasingly becoming an internationally organised crime, the 
EU  has  established  a  European  police  force  –  Europol  –  which  benefits  from  the  same 
support  as  that  mentioned  above.  Alongside  Europol  and  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  direct 
contacts to foreign police forces are established with the support of our national police. 
Details on the improvement of security features  
4. 
Our third strategy refers to the improvement of security features. Here we are at the front line 
of  economic  and  technological  developments.  The  experience  to  be  gained  by  the 
Bundesbank  from  the  first  euro  series  is  that  while  there  is  a  large  number  of  level  2  and 
level 3 features, there is a lack of effective level 1 features for the general public in everyday 
situations. (Level 1: general public, level 2a: verification aid and human sense, level 2b: retail 
detectors  yes/no,  level 2c:  cash  machine  centres,  level  3:  machine  authentication  features 
exclusively for NCBs/ECB.)  
                                                 
3   61 branches and 17 operating units (part of the branches) as at 30 September 2005. 
   4/6 
There is therefore a strong need to develop overt security features for the second series of 
euro banknotes that are self-explanatory and self-verifying.4  
Firstly,  we  must  improve  and  continue  to  develop  existing  security  features  in  order  to 
achieve better quality and ensure resistance to counterfeiting.  
Today,  intaglio  printing  uses  new  engraving  technology  and  enhanced  artwork  and 
scientific techniques to produce a range of unique security benefits. The following overview 
contains  some  examples  of  applications  of  this  advanced  engraving  technology:  - 
Multitonality: A very different appearance of the same colour can be achieved by varying the 
thickness of the ink layer. 
- 
- 
Fine line printing: very fine details within images or text (microtext).  
High  tactility  areas:  high  relief  that  everybody  can  feel  on  the  banknote  (eg 
enhanced tactility areas for the visually handicapped). 
 
In  addition,  enhanced  optically  variable  inks  (OVI)  have  been  developed.  For  instance, 
colour shifting effects can be combined with three-dimensional and moving effects within one 
ink.  
Furthermore,  special  security  threads  and  foils  with  transparent  and  opaque  areas  can 
show very brilliant effects in colour (switch) and gloss.  
Secondly, the “intelligent” combination of security elements allows the creation of new and 
more  complex  effects.  Registered  intaglio  overprints  of  silkscreen  printed  motifs,  special 
offset  printed  patterns  and  diffractive  foils  can  enhance  the  security  of  existing  elements. 
Furthermore, blind embossing of other printed features produces layered, variable images.  
Nevertheless, for the next series of euro banknotes we need at least one new level 1 security 
feature that can be used by the ordinary citizen in everyday situations. For instance, there 
are the newly developed “transparent window” techniques which allow the authenticity of a 
banknote to be checked quickly by simply altering the background and without giving one’s 
business partner the impression of mistrust, as would certainly be the case if one were to 
hold up the banknote to the light to check the watermark. 
Finally,  efforts  have  been  made  to  use  new  technologies  areas  and  to  adopt  them  for 
banknotes. One potential solution for the future would be eg to have banknotes with liquid 
crystal  displays  for  a  variable  alternating  display  of  digits  and  letters  in  combination  with 
power generating devices (for instance solar cells). A liquid crystal display (LCD) could, for 
example, allow a hidden text or image to be revealed by simply touching the banknote. Other 
potential areas of interest are “nano” and laser technology.  
I hope to have provided you with an insight into some interesting new aspects of this topic. I 
also hope to have fulfilled my other aim which was to give you the correct impression that 
counterfeit money really is a key issue for the Bundesbank.  
Despite all these measures, however, no hopes should be nurtured that they will provide a 
definitive  solution  to  the  problem  of  counterfeiting.  The  same  principle  applies  as  with 
weapons and defence weapons: the latest sword calls for the latest shield. Or to put it within 
the context of today's day and age: the most modern missile calls for the most modern anti-
missile  system.  Preventing  and  combating  counterfeits  remains  an  ongoing  task  for  the 
central banks.  
                                                 
4   Self-explanatory function: clear and easy to understand without the need for extra information, eg colour shift 
inks; self-verifying function: a hidden feature becomes visible through the “verifier”, a special device integrated 
in the banknote such as fresnel lenses or polarisers. 
   5/6 
In  the  ancient  world,  the  famous  Athen’s  statesman  Pericles  ensured  the  prevention  of 
counterfeiting. At that time of precious metal currencies, this involved combating the filing or 
snipping  off  of  the  edges  of  gold  coins,  which  is  why  Pericles  made  use  of  unique  coin 
stamps  in  order  to  prevent  this.  It  is  therefore not  without good  reason  that  an  EU  project 
aimed  at  combating  the  counterfeiting  of  banknotes  and  coins  has  been  given  the  name 
“Pericles”. 
 
   6/6 
