Niklaus Blattner: IT in the financial sector - aspects of regulation and 
supervision 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  8.  Berner  Tagung  für  Informationssicherheit  (8th  Conference  on  Information 
Security), Berne, 29 November 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  completeness,  integrity,  traceability  and  constant  availability  of  data  that  has  been  securely 
processed  are  essential  in  order  for  the  financial  system  to  function  smoothly.  The  Swiss  Federal 
Banking  Commission  (SFBC)  supervises  banks  and  securities  dealers  domiciled  in  Switzerland.  Its 
microprudential supervision focuses on the individual financial institution, in particular with regard to 
the protection of creditors and investors. By contrast, it is the task of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) to 
contribute to the stability of the financial system, i.e. it is engaged in macroprudential oversight.  
Banking legislation provisions governing the IT organisation requirements of a financial intermediary 
do not explicitly address the topic of information security, but rather focus on the notion of “proper and 
rightful conduct of business”. For the SFBC, information security is merely one concern among others. 
In one of its circulars it has, however, addressed several critical areas in greater detail, e.g. on the 
topic of external data management and outsourcing. The SNB’s mandate is limited to the payment and 
securities  settlement  systems.  In  its  oversight  function,  the  SNB  focuses  on  systems  which  might 
constitute a potential threat to the stability of the Swiss financial system.  
The  SNB’s  objectives  with  regard  to  information  security  include  the  following:  security  policy  and 
organisation,  physical  and  staff  security,  system  operation,  system  development  and  maintenance, 
communication and information exchange and – last but not least – business continuity management. 
Similar  to  the  SFBC,  the  SNB  basically  pursues  a  dualistic  approach,  i.e.  it  relies  primarily  on  the 
results of internal and external audits.  
Any  supplemental,  cross-system  measures  must  be  jointly  coordinated  and  synchronised  by  all  the 
major  players.  The  steering  group  “Business  Continuity  Planning”  (BCP),  headed  by  the  SNB, 
assumes  this  function  and  examined  the  business  continuity  plans  developed  in  the  individual 
companies. The report reveals that a great deal of progress has been made with regard to the BCP 
efforts  of  the  systemically  relevant  infrastructures  and  their  major  participants.  Moreover,  the  report 
contains concrete requirements for the different players and identifies room for improvement in various 
respects. One measure, which has meanwhile already been implemented, concerns the creation of an 
alarm and crisis organisation that spans the entire financial sector.  
The  final  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn  is  that  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  individual  company  to 
ensure  information  security.  Regulation,  oversight  and  supervision  play  only  a  secondary  role. 
Information  security  deserves  to  be  accorded  appropriate  priority  by  every  board  and  every 
management, regardless of whether the company is a global player or a small savings bank. 
BIS Review 81/2005 
 1
