Alan Bollard: Imbalances in the New Zealand economy 
Address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to New Zealand Credit 
and Finance, Rotorua, 14 October 2005. 
 Introduction  
1.  
The New Zealand economy has grown strongly over the past four years. Initially concentrated in the 
export  sector,  this  expansion  gradually  shifted  toward  the  domestic  economy.  While  a  sustained 
expansion in economic activity is obviously pleasing, we have also seen some significant ‘excesses' 
develop in the economy. Productive resources have become severely stretched, which has led to an 
increase  in  inflation  pressures.  There  has  also  been  a  widening  in  New  Zealand's  current  account 
deficit -- the difference between what the country earns overseas from its exports and investments and 
what  it  pays  for  its  imports  and  the  investments  foreigners  have  in  New  Zealand.  These  two 
developments largely share a common underlying driver -- very strong growth in spending, particularly 
by the household sector, much of which has been debt-financed. 
2.  
Looking at the imbalances 
Figure 1 : Current account deficit reaches 8% of GDP 
 
 Some  of  the  drivers  of  the  recent  current  account  deficit  are  not  necessarily  a  cause  for  major 
concern.  New  Zealand  has  been  undergoing  a  strong  business  investment  cycle  which  has 
necessarily meant high demand for imports of capital goods, which we can't or don't produce locally. 
Investment is obviously necessary for sustaining future growth in activity. The profits paid on foreign 
investment in New Zealand have also been growing, due to the relative strength of many parts of the 
economy. 
   1/7 
Figure 2 : Businesses importing capital goods 
 
 But while some components of the current account simply mirror cyclical strength in the economy and 
the efforts of businesses to increase their long-term productive capacity, the widening deficit has also 
reflected very strong spending on part of the household sector. At a time when government and the 
business  sector  have  increased  their  savings  (with  growing  fiscal  surpluses  and  higher  profits), 
household savings has continued to decline. 
During the past few years, we have seen very sharp rises in house prices in New Zealand, reflecting 
strong demand by New Zealanders and overseas investors alike. Associated with this buoyancy in the 
housing market has been a strong tendency among many households to ‘unlock' housing equity built-
up through capital gains to fund consumption. This often involves borrowing more against the equity in 
the home. Rising house prices have boosted the perceived wealth of home-owners and, along with an 
increased access to debt, have underpinned very strong consumption spending. Strong consumption 
spending  has  in  turn  fuelled  much  of  the  demand  for  imports  that  has  led  to  a  widening  of  
New Zealand's trade deficit.  
In  effect,  we  have  seen  a  continued  decline  in  the  New  Zealand  household  savings  rate  --  the 
proportion of current income that households put aside to invest for future consumption. Statistics New 
Zealand figures suggest that on average households in New Zealand do not actually save anything 
out of current income but instead dis-save to the tune of around 12 per cent of income per annum. Of 
course, there is plenty of room to debate whether this is the most relevant or accurate saving statistic.1 
But  comparative  figures  show  that,  typically,  households  in  most  developed  countries  save  at  least 
some of their current income. It is clear that the New Zealand household sector stands out as having 
one of the lowest savings rates of any OECD country.  
                                                      
1   For  example,  the  blurred  boundary  between  households  and  firms  these  days  might  suggest  that  total  private  savings, 
including  by  firms,  is  more  relevant.  Another  issue  is  that  saving  is  measured  as  the  difference  between  income  and 
consumption, making it prone to measurement error in either of those aggregates. 
   2/7 
Figure 3 : Household credit growing faster than income 
 
 It is possible that households' expectations of the capital gains from housing have been so strong that 
many households have seen scope to unlock recent capital gains, whilst still expecting to be able to 
build up their equity sufficiently over the long-run to meet their savings goals. If so, they would have 
seen  little  need  to  save  anything  out  of  current  income.  Obviously  the  success  of  this  strategy  will 
depend on the extent to which house prices do in fact continue to rise from here. The Reserve Bank 
has  noted  several  times  in  the  past  few  years  that  some  households  may  have  had  unrealistic 
expectations in this regard; indeed a fall in house prices cannot be ruled out. In Australia house prices 
today are, if anything, lower than they were a year ago, certainly so in Sydney. 
We are also conscious that there may be subtle changes occurring around what households regard as 
an  acceptable  target  level  of  wealth  in  retirement.  This  may  be  driving  current  consumption  and 
savings  decisions.  Traditionally,  the  bequest  motive  has  been  a  driver  of  many  New  Zealanders' 
savings  strategies.  Some  baby-boomers  may  be  opting  to  spend  more  of  their  accumulated  wealth 
during  their  lifetime  and  not  make a significant  bequest.  It  is  also  possible  (but  hard  to  gauge)  that 
some households have viewed the recent increase in government savings (i.e. fiscal surpluses) as a 
sign that they can afford to save less themselves. 
Figure 4 : Households consuming from debt 
 
     3/7 
Recourse to debt-financing has been an important part of the process. Despite an Official Cash Rate 
that  has  been  high  by  international  standards,  households  appear  to  have  been  very  willing  to 
increase debt levels to fund their housing and consumption activity. Strong competition among home 
loan  providers  --  which  has  meant  lower  home  loan  rates  than  might  otherwise  be  the  case  --  has 
certainly done little to discourage households in this regard. In some cases, interest rates for fixed-rate 
home loans appear to have been priced below the all-up cost of lending, as lenders have competed 
for  market  share.  Lenders  have  clearly  seen  home  loans  as  a  relatively  low  risk  activity  and  have 
priced loans accordingly. 
Figure 5 : Effective mortgage rate 
 Household behaviour is not the only influence on the current account. The rise in the exchange rate 
over the past few years has reflected rising commodity prices, New Zealand's strong relative growth 
performance  and  our  correspondingly  higher  interest  rate  structure  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  world. 
The high exchange rate has reinforced the widening of the current account deficit, placing pressure on 
export  sector  revenues,  whilst  making  imports  relatively  cheaper.  Although  the  factors  behind  the 
appreciating  exchange  are  easy  to  identify,  what  has  been  surprising  has  been  the  continued 
willingness of investors to continue investing in New Zealand dollars through the likes of Eurokiwi and 
Uridashi2  issues  notwithstanding  a  growing  consensus  that  the  exchange  rate  has  reached 
unsustainable levels. Over the past year alone, we have seen an additional $20 billion of such issues, 
and demand has continued to remain very strong in recent months. Flows into these two particular 
products were larger than was the case for any other currency. 
                                                      
2  
Zealand   Bulletin, 68/3, September 2005. 
 
See Drage, D, A Munro and C Sleeman `An update on Eurokiwi and Uridashi bonds', Reserve Bank of New 
   4/7 
Figure 6 : NZD since float 
 New Zealand is not the only country to have experienced a widening of its current account deficit in 
recent  years.  A  number  of  others,  including  the  US  and  Australia  have  also  experienced  widening 
deficits. Strong household demand has likewise been an important driving factor behind the increases 
although,  as  in  the  case  of  New  Zealand,  not  necessarily  the  only  factor.  However,  New  Zealand 
stands  out  in  one  important  respect.  Over  time,  current  account  deficits  have  to  be  financed  either 
through  equity  investment  by  foreigners  or  by  borrowing  from  overseas.  New  Zealand's  foreign 
liabilities currently outweigh its foreign assets to the tune of $124 billion (81 per cent of GDP) a much 
higher net liability position than in virtually any other developed country. This reflects our long history 
of running current account deficits.  
 
Figure 7 : New Zealand's net international investment position 
 
  The adjustment process 
3.  
Currently standing at 8 per cent of GDP, New Zealand's current account deficit is at levels that cannot 
be sustained indefinitely. Doing so would imply a continued increase in New Zealand's indebtedness, 
   5/7 
and debt servicing costs, relative to the income available to service that debt (i.e. its GDP). History 
tells us that at some point the deficit will ‘correct' back to lower levels.  
The  process  of  current  account  correction  is  likely  to  involve  some  combination  of  an  expenditure 
reduction  through  lower  domestic  demand  and  expenditure  switching  away  from  imported  goods 
towards locally produced goods and services. It is also likely to involve an increase in exports. Such 
adjustments  are  likely  to  be  prompted  by  a  lower  exchange  rate  and/or  higher  interest  rates.  The 
transition  to  a  lower  current  account  deficit  effectively  means  reducing  New  Zealand's  reliance  on 
foreign savings and increasing the saving we do ourselves. For the household sector, which has been 
relying heavily on debt in order to finance spending, this adjustment process may not be painless. A 
correction in the housing market -- a slowing in house price inflation or even an outright fall in prices -- 
is likely to be part of this process.  
A  reduction  in  the  exchange  rate  from  its  current  high  level  is  likely  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the 
adjustment process. Significant parts of the export sector, such as manufacturing and services have 
been under pressure, while those supplying local markets have faced considerable competition from 
falling import prices. There also appears to be a growing sense among analysts and commentators 
that  the  exchange  rate  is  materially  overvalued  and  that  a  substantial  fall  is  both  desirable  and 
inevitable at some stage in the next couple of years.  
No  one  can  reliably  predict  when  the  exchange  rate  will  decline  nor  what  path  it  is  likely  to  take. 
Factors outside our control -- including the path of the US dollar -- could have a significant bearing on 
developments.  It  should  also  be  emphasised  that  even  once  the  exchange  rate  begins  to  fall,  an 
increase in exports and a reduction in imports will not occur instantaneously. Export markets take time 
to rebuild and consumer buying patterns take time to respond to changes in relative prices.  
Although  projecting  when  the  exchange  rate  may  begin  to  head  lower  is  a  difficult  task,  the  likely 
precursors for such an adjustment seem clear. As the current account deficit continues to increase, 
one would expect the foreign providers of capital to re-assess the relative exchange rate risk attached 
to  their  investments  in  New  Zealand  dollar  assets,  increasingly  recognising  that  the  exchange  rate 
cannot  be  sustained  at  current  levels.  In  addition,  a  slowing  domestic  economy  is  likely  to  see 
expectations of future returns on such investments being revised down.  
Why is the Reserve Bank concerned about all of this? 
4.  
The Reserve Bank's interest in the current account deficit, and its associated macro-economic effects, 
stems from our key areas of responsibility: 
• 
Our role in helping to maintain macro-economic stability. The Bank is required to maintain 
price  stability  whilst  avoiding  unnecessary  instability  in  interest  rates,  exchange  rates  and 
output; and  
Our financial stability role. The Bank is obliged to make sure the financial system remains 
resilient in the face of imbalances (such as a large current account deficit and growing debt 
levels) and subsequent adjustments that might occur. 
 We will say more about our financial stability role when we release our next Financial Stability Report 
in November. While we believe the New Zealand financial system is well placed to weather strains that 
may be borne by its customers, we will be monitoring the risks closely as we go forward. 
On the price stability front, we are required to maintain inflation within the 1 to 3 per cent target band 
‘on average over the medium term'. That task has been particularly challenging of late due to several 
factors: 
• 
As noted, household demand has remained very strong over recent times, despite relatively 
firm  monetary  policy  settings.  Consequently,  inflation  pressures  have  remained  strong  in 
many parts of the domestic economy, including housing and construction.  
The  recent  sharp  rise  in  world  oil  prices  is  putting  upward  pressure  on  inflation  as  higher 
petrol prices ‘at the pump' and the effects of higher fuel prices risk becoming entrenched in 
inflation  expectations.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  expecting  these  increases  to  exert  a 
dampening  effect  on  household  and  business  demand.  Estimating  the  balance  of  these 
effects is difficult.  
    6/7 
 The likelihood of a more expansionary fiscal policy over the coming period has the potential 
to  add  inflation  pressure  in  what  remains  a  rather  stretched  economy.  A  growing  fiscal 
surplus has clearly made higher levels of government expenditure affordable in the longer 
term. However, in the short-term, a more expansionary fiscal stance also has the potential to 
aggravate the current account deficit as well as increasing the work monetary policy has to 
do  in  order  to  contain  inflation.  These  pressures  will  need  to  be  borne  in  mind  as  the 
incoming government considers its fiscal options. 
We are conscious that the eventual adjustment of the high current account deficit could make the job 
of maintaining price stability more difficult in these circumstances. In the short-term, an exchange rate 
adjustment has the potential to boost inflation via its direct effect on tradables prices. How problematic 
this might be for monetary policy would largely depend on the timing and magnitude of the exchange 
rate adjustment, which is something over which the Bank has little control. A falling exchange rate in 
the  context  of  continued  strength  in  domestic  spending  would  tend  to  generate  stronger  inflation 
pressures. Conversely, the inflationary effects of an exchange rate decline that occurred following a 
cooling in domestic demand are likely to be more easily managed.  
As far as possible, the Bank will not stand in the way of an exchange rate adjustment, accepting that a 
short-term boost to tradables inflation may be an unavoidable consequence of adjustment. Clearly, a 
more  orderly  and  gradual  exchange  rate  adjustment  would  pose  less  of  a  challenge  for  monetary 
policy.  However,  whatever  the  adjustment  path,  our  job  will  be  to  focus  on  medium-term  inflation 
stability. The extent to which monetary policy will need to continue leaning against domestic inflation 
pressures will largely depend on the spending and savings behaviour of households.  
Conclusion 
5.  
Strong household demand associated with a buoyant residential property market has contributed to an 
increase in inflation pressures and a widening of New Zealand's current account deficit. The Reserve 
Bank remains focussed on ensuring that the inflation outlook remains consistent with the medium term 
target whilst recognising the macro-economic adjustments that are likely to occur in the face of a large 
and  unsustainable  current  account  deficit.  We  are  concerned  to  see  that,  as  far  as  possible,  such 
adjustments occur in as orderly a manner as possible. 
 
   7/7 
