Zhou Xiaochuan: Learn lessons from the past for the benefit of future 
endeavour 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the China Bond Market 
Development Summit, Beijing, 20 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  attend  the  China  Bond  Market  Development  Summit.  Let  me  focus  on  China’s 
corporate debt and briefly summarize lessons from past experiences. 
Corporate bond includes, among others, enterprise debt. The development of enterprise bond market 
has always had the attention of many. In the past, we made quite some mistakes in this field. Thus our 
corporate bond market has been very sluggish. Compared with some other financial instruments, and 
in  the  backdrop  of  a  high  savings  rate  and  high  proportion  of  M2  in  GDP,  China’s  corporate  bond 
market has been developing very slowly, and its role in economic growth has been rather limited. Such 
lack  of  development has also  distorted  financing structure  and produced considerable  implicit  risks, 
whose consequences may be grave for social and economic development. Of course, past setbacks 
and mistakes had their roots in the specific circumstances of that time, i.e. in the early days of the 
transition when the economy was more planned than market-driven and market economy had yet to 
establish itself as a way of thinking and a general environment. Therefore, a review of the past is not 
to  find  fault  with  anybody,  but  to  draw  lessons.  The  Decisions  on  Several  Issues  of  Improving  the 
Socialist Market Economic System adopted by the 3rd Plenum of the 16th CPC Central Committee 
has  provided  for  enhancing  direct  financing,  establishing  a  multi-layered  capital  market  system, 
expanding  debt  market  and  encouraging  the  growth  of  institutional  investors.  Only  by  thoroughly 
understanding and clearly analyzing the problems and mistakes in the past, can we find an effective 
solution and implement the Decisions in a concrete manner.  
Problems in enterprise bond development 
I. 
A number of serious mistakes were made in the early days of enterprise bond development, i.e. from 
the end of 80s until the first half of 90s. As a result, the development was wrought with setbacks and 
never fully recovered. A thorough discussion on this issue is necessary. Here, I made a list of a dozen 
mistakes.  
1. 
Issue  quota  and  number  of  issuers  were  planned  and  allocated.  Enterprise  bond  was  not 
issued on a market basis. For example, quota was allocated by the government to the next 
level of government, from the state to the province, and then to the localities. 
Administrative  allocation  of  issue  quota  usually  followed  a  principle  of  helping  the  poor. 
Enterprises in difficulties or poorly managed were more likely to get quota.   
The absence of a bond rating system made it impossible for investors to get a clear idea of 
risks.   
Information  was not  disclosed  to  the  investors.  On  the  one  hand,  accounting standards  in 
China  were  not  up  to  the  international  standards.  Neither  accounting  practice  by  the 
enterprises nor external audit was proper and provided little information. One the other hand, 
information disclosure was not emphasized. Thorough analysis of the disclosed information 
was part of the decision making process. 
Price was set administratively and price ceiling was controlled. Such pricing did not factor in 
risks and made effective risk management by issuers and buyers impossible.  
Administrative  rules  required  bank  guarantee  for  enterprise  bond  issue.  This  is  closely 
related  to  the  problems  mentioned  just  now.  Since  bond  issue  quota  was  administratively 
allocated  and  price  controlled,  and  neither  information  disclosure  nor  credit  rating  was 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 1
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
available, bank guarantee seemed to be the natural solution. However, once guaranteed by 
a bank, the product was no longer a standard enterprise debt. 
Bond was issued to individual investors, whereas the international practice is to institutional 
investors  with  analyzing  capability,  i.e.  qualified  institutional  investors.  Individual  investors 
usually do not have sufficient market analysis ability or risk bearing capability. 
Effective  constraint  by  market  was  not  established.  Market  mechanism  can  constrain  the 
issue and transaction of corporate bond because investors form a judgment on and choose 
from products. That is, it is up to the market to determine what enterprise debts fare well and 
what don’t, prices of products and consequences of default. If the market does not exercise 
effective constraint, we will have to use administrative and supervisory means for constraint, 
ensuing  a  series  of  problems.  Alongside  market  constraint,  a  transaction  mode  should  be 
established for OTC to play a dominant role, to enable measuring of counter party risks and 
flexibilities in price judgment. 
Investor education was not sufficient. To a large extent, many investors at that time treated 
enterprise  bond  as  a  variation  of  savings  product. Whenever default  occurred,  they  would 
bring the problem to government agencies and request redemption from underwriters. 
A proper bankruptcy law was absent. In case of default, the existing Bankruptcy Law cannot 
use bankruptcy as the last resort of deterrence to restrain the enterprise in question. As a 
result, creditors’ rights and interests as provided for by the Bankruptcy Law usually cannot 
be protected. In case of bankruptcy, at least the residual assets of the failed enterprise can 
be claimed. But in China, the reality is many enterprises’ residual assets disappeared without 
a  trace  and  some  enterprise  issuers  disappeared  without  going  through  any  legal 
procedures.  
Underwriter’s  role  was  not  properly  defined.  In  the  past,  underwriting  and  redeeming  was 
planned  and  thus  became  the  target  of  administrative  intervention.  An  underwriter,  which 
was expected to provide redemption, was liable when the enterprise failed to do so. In fact, 
the roles of the underwriter, sales agent, redemption agent and that of the redemption body 
are different and have different legal implications. These definitions were not clearly provided 
for, giving rise to many difficult problems later on. 
When a default case was handled, the approach was more about administrative intervention. 
More often than not, default of an issuing enterprise was not dealt with according to market 
principle. Rather, through administrative intervention, the underwriter was requested to make 
a follow on offering. Thus, default obligations of the issuing enterprise were transferred to the 
underwriter and bogged the latter down.  Recently, some securities companies have incurred 
problems  and  undergone  liquidation  or  restructuring.  The  causes  of  these  cases  can  be 
traced back to historical burden of defaulted enterprises.  
An analysis of the past mistakes  
II. 
The  above  mistakes  are  inter-related.  We  should  look  at  them  in  a  comprehensive  manner,  and 
identify major themes of analysis. To me, there are three major themes: 
The first is people’s mindset. When the economy was in transition, command economy mentality was 
at play in our economic sphere. We tended to follow the planned economy approach to deal with any 
problems. Thus, when first emerged, some problems did not get proper attention. Some elements of 
our previous approach, such as administrative allocation of quota, price control, mis-definition of roles, 
lack of information, and handling of default, were products of command economy mindset. People did 
not know enough about how a market economy would operate or the environment it would need. More 
study and efforts should have been made then. Today, when looking at issues, we should try our best 
not to simplify them and avoid a repetition of command economy approach. 
The second is about logic. Ultimately, a series of mistakes related to enterprise bond was caused by 
lack of institutional design in market operation. Normally, the intended buyer of corporate bond is QIBs 
(qualified institutional buyers), who are strong in market analysis and risk taking. Corporate bond issue 
usually  follows  a  simple  procedure  and  can  be  done  quickly.  Individual  investors,  weak  in  market 
analysis  and  risk  taking,  tend  to  rely  on  government.  Therefore,  governments  may  require  bank 
guarantee  for  bond  issue.  Also,  lack  of  pricing  ability  may  cause  administrative  pricing.  In  case  of 
default,  individual  investors  lacking  proper  means  of  self-protection  tend  to  hold  the  government 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2005
accountable; the  government  in  turn  may  make  the underwriter  take  over  the  responsibility  through 
administrative intervention. A follow-on issue thus takes place, giving rise to many distortions and even 
more serious consequences. If we had QIBs as corporate bond investors, these inter-related problems 
would have been avoided. From a logic point of view, identifying a proper investor base is the key.  
When launching a new financial product, we should take individual investors into account and aim at 
diversifying  their  investment  choices.  However,  not  all  products  are  suitable  to  these  investors.  We 
need  to  develop  or  introduce  financial  products  for  them.  In  the  future,  more sophisticated  financial 
derivatives are likely to be introduced. But, these products are not at all suitable choices of individual 
investors. 
In  developed  countries,  corporate  debts  are  mainly  issued  to  QIBs  and  mostly  transacted  through 
OTC.  Counter  party  risks  are  emphasized  and  the  two  parties  decide  the  price.  A  small  amount  of 
high-grade bonds with low default risks are transacted at organized exchanges. Organized exchanges 
usually impose a volume limit on corporate bond transaction. Large volume is all done through OTC.  
Take  the  U.S.  market,  a  highly  developed  bond  market,  as  an  example.  Institutional  investors  hold 
about  90%  of  outstanding  bond  and  individual  investors  hold  the  balance.  These  very  wealthy 
individuals, more like institutional investors in nature, usually hold high-grade corporate debt. A very 
small amount of low-grade bond is in the hand of individual investors because bonds are downgraded 
as a result of declining corporate performance. 
From a logical point of view, QIBs and OTC are the defining features of corporate bond market. If we 
fail to follow this logic, things will get problematic.  
The third is about environment. Corporate debts need an appropriate eco-environment, which includes 
institutional set-up, such as good laws and regulations (that provide clear legal definition), an improved 
accounting system (that provides all the necessary information to investors without misleading them), 
regulation of information disclosure, and improved bankruptcy law, etc. 
If we have the right mindset, logic and environment, without a heavy dose of control, QIBs and OTC 
transaction will foster the development of corporate debt, because market will exercise fairly strong 
constraint.  Supervisory  workload  will  be  lighter  as  well.  When  SMEs,  innovative  and  start-up 
enterprises issue bond by a large scale, the supervisors will have to work harder because some of 
innovative SMEs go public after relying on bond financing in its early stage of development. Often the 
process suffers from lack of transparency, no disclosure and cover-ups. The story of junk bond in the 
U.S. can provide some reference in this regard. 
Possible solutions 
III. 
A clear understanding of the problems helps us to find solutions.  
First  of  all,  we  must  adopt  a  market-oriented  way  of  thinking.  If  the  past  practice  of  allocation, 
administrative approval and intervention continues, the prospect of bond market will not look bright. At 
the same time, old-fashioned command economy mindset must be put aside when we analyze what 
went  wrong.  Some  cited  non-fundamental,  minor  or  even  secondary  problems  as  the  root  cause. 
Therefore, it is helpful to thoroughly discuss and understand these questions in a meeting like today’s. 
Second, we need to get the logic right when solving problems. The best starting-point is to have QIBs 
and OTCs, so that institutions with strong analytical and risk management capability can play a big 
role. This will simplify administrative approval and control because it relies on information disclosure 
and market restraint, rather than the judgment of approving authority. Guarantee by commercial banks 
is  not  necessary  either.  Even  in  the case of worsening  performance  or  default  of  issuing company, 
institutional investors have the capacity to make a judgment and manage the risks in due time. The 
government does not need to worry too much about them. 
Third, strengthening environmental and institutional setting and improving eco-environment. We have 
to do this job continuously. Indeed, things have improved greatly, but we still need to work hard on it. 
In recent years, our accounting standards have been more and more consistent with international best 
practice; requirements on disclosure and disclosure oversight have been enhanced; the Bankruptcy 
Law is being amended and expected to better protect creditors’ interests. 
In  short,  a  key  starting  point  is  to  develop  QIBs  and  OTC  as  the  best  way  to  foster  market 
development. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 3
In this regard, a related matter is SMEs financing. People have come to understand the importance of 
developing SMEs and paid a lot of attention to their financing difficulties. How to look at this issue? We 
should avoid simplifying it. Usually there are two ways to develop bond market and provide SMEs with 
financing. 
One  is  to  develop  external  constraint  and  bring  commercial  banks’  attention  to  SMEs.  International 
experiences  have  shown  that,  when  large  companies  and  high-quality  enterprises  increasingly  use 
bond market financing, banks will naturally provide financing services to SMEs. That is to say, market 
differentiation is a result of competition.  At the moment, commercial banks lend to large and well-run 
enterprises  as  a  way  to  improve  asset  quality  and  reduce  NPLs.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  this 
approach.  However,  once  large  and  well-run  enterprises  has  a  preference  for  bond  market, 
commercial  banks  will  get  the  signal,  divert  more  of  their  resources  to  study  SMEs  financing  and 
establish a SMEs department. 
Another  way  is  to  issue  SMEs  bond.  Such  bond  is  usually  high-yield  and  high-risk  bond.  Without 
sufficient preparation, without a proper investor base and pricing mechanism, issuing SMEs bond is 
likely to be problematic. This is related to the general awareness of corporate debt.  Is it feasible to 
launch  non-investment-grade  products  at  the  early  stage  of  market  development?  This  is  the 
sequencing issue of corporate bond market development. Should we develop low-grade bond after a 
high-grade corporate bond market is fully developed or foster the growth of both at the same time? We 
need to do more research. Many countries in the world have yet to have a mature SMEs bond market. 
Even in the U.S., which seems to be a success story, the Michael Milken incident had both positive 
and negative impacts. I think this experience deserves a careful study if we are to develop a SMEs 
bond market. 
In conclusion, bond market represents the direction of market development and we have to make our 
best  effort  to  get  the  job  done.  One  precondition  is  to  have  a  thorough  understanding  of  past 
experiences. I welcome comments on my remarks and look forward to a lively discussion.  
4 
 BIS Review 76/2005
