John Hurley: Innovation and productivity in Ireland 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
to Leinster Society of Chartered Accountants, Leinster, 13 October 2005.  
 Introduction 
Thank you Chairman for inviting me to address your members here today.  Ladies and gentlemen I 
would like to take this opportunity to talk about one of the key economic challenges of today, namely 
the importance of improving productivity performance in Ireland.  Productivity is a critical ingredient of 
long-term living standards and the overall growth of the economy.  In particular, I want to focus today 
on  the  importance  of  research  and  development  and  innovation  which  are  key  determinants  of 
productivity growth and competitiveness.   
Productivity performance in europe   
To  put  this  in  context,  allow  me  first  to  say  a  few  words  about  economic  performance  in  Europe, 
particularly relative to the United States.  Per-capita output in the EU-15 is currently about 70 per cent 
of the US level, roughly the same as it was 30 years ago.  It is estimated that about one third of the 
difference in per-capita GDP between the US and EU can be explained by lower employment rates, 
one third by shorter working hours, and one third is attributable to lower labour productivity.   
Following  several  decades  of  strong  growth,  productivity  levels  in  the  EU  came  close  to  matching 
those in the US during the mid-1990s.  However, Europe has performed relatively poorly over the past 
decade and the negative productivity differential vis-à-vis the US economy has widened.  During the 
first  half  of  the  1990s,  for  example,  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  area  averaged  around  
2¼  per  cent  per  annum,  above  the  corresponding  rate  of  increase  in  the  US  which  was  around  
1¼  per cent per  annum.   However, over  the  past decade,  productivity  growth  in  the  euro area  has 
fallen to around 1¼ per cent on average while the US improved its productivity performance to around 
2½ per cent per annum.  The failure of productivity levels to catch up with those in the US represents 
a  crucial  challenge  for  European  policy  makers,  particularly  given  changing  patterns  of  global 
competition and the ageing of the population in EU countries.   
It is sometimes pointed out that part of the productivity differential between the US and Europe is due 
to methodological or measurement issues, including how labour input is measured and the greater use 
of quality-adjusted pricing for output growth for IT products in the US.  While these might explain some 
of the difference, the decline in EU productivity growth and the assessment that productivity growth 
has fallen behind the US are facts, regardless of the way productivity growth is measured.   
The underperformance of the EU economy was recognized in the Lisbon Agenda which outlined an 
ambitious range of related goals to be achieved by 2010 with the overall objective of transforming the 
European Union into “the most competitive and knowledge based economy in the world capable of 
sustainable  economic  growth  with  more  and  better  jobs  and  greater  social  cohesion”.    While  some 
progress has been made over the past five years, it is clear that many of the targets set at Lisbon will 
be difficult to achieve.   
The failure to meet the Lisbon targets has been partly due to the weaker global economic environment 
during the first half of the decade but also partly due to a lack of urgency among Member States in 
implementing the necessary reforms to improve the functioning of markets.  In particular, this requires 
the  discipline  of  competition  to  spur  efficiency  and  innovation.    The  Lisbon  strategy  itself  was  too 
broad, with an overload of objectives and targets.  If the Lisbon Agenda is to get back on track and the 
EU is to realise its full growth potential, the pace of reform has to be stepped up at both European and 
national levels.  A more rigorous prioritisation is also required, with increased focus on those areas 
where the impact on productivity growth and employment is likely to be greatest, a point that has been 
accepted by the European Council.   
   1/4 
Ireland’s productivity performance       
For individual Member States this means taking ownership of the Lisbon reforms.  This can involve 
national  governments  providing  support  for  agreed  trans-national  measures,  such  as  opening  up  a 
European  market  for  services,  including  financial  services  and  services  of  network  industries,  or 
implementing  domestic  measures  such  as  promoting  entrepreneurship  and  innovation.    Some 
countries  have  achieved  more  progress  in  terms  of  implementing  effective  economic  reforms  than 
others.    Ireland’s record,  for  example,  has  been relatively  good although  there  are still  some  areas 
where  improvements  are  necessary.    For  example,  innovation  and  R&D  are  low  by  international 
standards  while  levels  of  competition  need  to  be  improved  in  parts  of  the  services  sector.    Before 
discussing this in some more detail, I would like to turn briefly to Ireland’s productivity performance to 
date. 
Productivity growth in Ireland over the past half-century, and the past 15 years in particular, has been 
impressive by international standards.  Labour productivity growth rates, measured as GNP per hour 
worked, were well above the European average during the 1980s and the highest in Europe during the 
1990s.   It is now widely accepted, by the way, that GNP measures of productivity growth are a more 
meaningful measure of domestic economic performance than GDP measures because they exclude 
the  substantial  profit  outflows  of  foreign-owned  firms.    A  number  of  factors  contributed  to  high 
productivity  growth  in  this  country  during  the  1990s  including  inward  FDI  flows  in  high-technology 
sectors and past investments in education and physical capital, which boosted the technological and 
innovative capacity of the Irish economy.   
While, at a sectoral level, productivity growth over the past 15 years has been particularly strong in the 
manufacturing sector, this finding needs to be interpreted with caution for a number of reasons.  First, 
high  productivity  in  Irish  industry  is  largely  a  result  of  extremely  high  productivity  levels  in  a  small 
number  of  foreign-owned  firms,  mainly  in  the  Pharmaceuticals  and  ICT  sectors.    These  high 
productivity  levels  largely  reflect  rewards  for  R&D  effort  and  marketing  by  the  parent  company  and 
should more correctly be attributed as a return to factors of production in the country of ownership.  
Productivity  growth  and  levels  have  been  much  weaker  in  many  other  sectors  of  the  economy, 
including the more traditional manufacturing sectors and many parts of the services sector.   
Second, productivity growth in the manufacturing sector has slowed quite significantly over the past 
two years – from over 14 per cent in 2002 to around 3½ per cent last year.  Indeed, on a year-on-year 
basis, productivity growth in manufacturing was actually negative during the first half of 2005.   
Turning to the economy as a whole, productivity levels, measured as GNP per worker, are now only 
slightly ahead of the EU-15 average which means that we lag behind the US and many of the higher 
productivity  European  economies.    As  a  result,  there  is  still  plenty  of  scope  for  productivity 
improvements relative to these countries.  The latest data produced by the CSO show that in the first 
half  of  this  year,  economy-wide  productivity  growth  was  negative.    This  partly  reflects  weaker 
productivity growth in manufacturing and also partly the changing composition of Irish output growth 
towards a higher concentration of output in services and construction – which are generally associated 
with quite low productivity.  Having said that, the extent of the productivity slowdown during the first 
half, as revealed in the preliminary CSO estimates, was surprising and is being analysed by the Bank.  
As more data for this year become available, we will get a clearer picture of what’s happening.   
Given  that  Ireland  is  now  one  of  the  higher-wage  economies,  productivity  improvements  across  all 
sectors,  including  services,  will  be  essential  if  Ireland  is  to  be  competitive  in  the  global  economy.  
Empirical  studies  carried  out  by  the  OECD  and  other  international  organisations  have  identified  a 
number of key drivers of productivity growth including macroeconomic stability, human and physical 
capital  formation,  competition  in  markets  for  goods  and  services,  entrepreneurship  and  innovation.  
The European Central Bank’s commitment to low inflation and the fiscal requirements of the Stability 
and Growth Pact provide a framework for macroeconomic stability in the euro area.   Public policy at a 
national level can also have an important role in improving productivity performance by establishing 
framework conditions that are supportive of entrepreneurship, competition and innovation.   
R&D and innovation in Ireland 
This brings me to the subject of innovation and the importance of increasing the level of R&D carried 
out in this country.  The link between R&D and innovation on the one hand and productivity growth on 
the other has been well established.  In terms of indicators of innovation performance, Ireland is one of 
the  leading  producers  and  exporters  of  high-technology  products  in  the  world,  due  mainly  to  the 
   2/4 
presence of high-technology foreign firms in the economy.  The economy also performs reasonably 
well in innovation-related human-capital indicators, including the number of science and engineering 
graduates and the percentage of the workforce with third level qualifications.  However, the economy 
performs  less  well by  international standards  in  other  key  areas,  including R&D  and  patent  activity, 
investment in ICT and the availability of venture capital for high-technology enterprises. 
There  are  clear  indications  that  R&D  activity  in  Ireland  has  picked  up  in  recent  years.    Business 
expenditure  on  R&D  increased  by  9  per  cent  between  2001  and  2003,  during  which  period  R&D 
expenditures were declining in many developed economies due to the slowdown in the global R&D 
investment.  However, overall expenditure on R&D in Ireland in 2003, at around 1.2 per cent of GDP 
or 1.5 per cent of GNP, was still below the EU and OECD averages and well short of the Lisbon target 
of 3 per cent set by the European Council for the EU as a whole.  By international standards, Ireland 
also ranks quite low in terms of the number of researchers involved in R&D activity and the number of 
patents registered in either Europe or the US.  In the foreign sector of the economy, which contributed 
so  significantly  to  the  strong  productivity  performance  of  the  economy  during  the  1990s,  there  is  a 
stark  contrast  between  the  high-tech  nature  of  output  and  the  low  level  of  R&D  carried  out  in  this 
country.  Data released by Forfás show that the R&D intensity of foreign firms in Ireland, that is R&D 
spending as a percentage of output, is not only very low by international standards but also less than 
in Irish-owned firms.  This reflects the fact that multinational firms still tend to undertake most of their 
R&D  activity  in  the  home  rather  than  the  host  country.    However,  there  is  evidence  that  the  R&D 
expenditures  of  multinationals  have  been  increasing  in  some  countries  –  indeed  there  have  been 
recent  high-profile  examples  of  US  firms,  primarily  in  the  ICT  and  Biopharmaceutical  sectors, 
establishing R&D facilities in this country.   
In order to remain competitive and move the economy up the value-added chain, it will be essential to 
increase further the amount of R&D carried out in this country and improve the innovative capacity of 
the economy.   There are a number of ways in which higher R&D activity can impact on productivity.  
First, domestic R&D can have a direct positive impact on the productivity of indigenous firms.  Second, 
there  is  evidence  of  positive  spillovers  and  technology  transfers  from  R&D  active  multinationals  to 
domestic producers.  Third, empirical evidence shows that an economy’s ability to absorb imported 
technology and to benefit from the spill-over effects of the R&D activities of multinational firms will be 
enhanced  by  the  R&D  activity  and  human  skills  of  indigenous  firms.    And  finally,  R&D  active 
multinationals  in  the  Irish  economy  have  been  shown  to  be  less  footloose,  more  embedded  in  the 
domestic economy and create better jobs than non-active R&D firms.   
Selective  state  supports  for  R&D  activity  can  be  justified  by  the  positive  spill-overs  that  innovation 
gives  rise  to  and  already  a  range  of  grants  and  tax  incentives  are  available  to  promote  R&D.   
However, the experience of other countries shows that government cannot on its own artificially boost 
the level of innovation.  Instead R&D scale must grow organically.  The primary role of government 
should be to create the necessary framework conditions to support innovation, both for domestic and 
foreign firms.   
A number of government measures have already been taken in this regard.  An effective R&D and 
innovation structure has been established with the Programme for Research in third-level institutions, 
the  appointment  of  a  Chief  Science  Adviser,  the  launch  of  Science  Foundation  Ireland  and  various 
research programmes aimed at increasing third level research and promoting co-operation between 
third level research institutions and the business sector.  Only last month, the Government announced 
that it had approved a proposal from IDA Ireland to fund the establishment of a National Institute for 
Bioprocessing, Research and Training.  Recent announcements of major R&D investments by leading 
multinational  companies  in  the  Biopharmaceuticals,  ICT  and  services  sectors  as  well  as  the 
establishment of innovation centres by major indigenous food companies show that we are already 
moving in the right direction in terms of increasing R&D activity among both foreign and indigenous 
firms in Ireland.     
Ireland’s national R&D action plan includes a number of specific targets for the country to achieve by 
2010, including increasing total spending on R&D to 2.5 per cent of GNP, doubling the number of both 
indigenous  and  foreign-owned  companies  with  minimum  scale  R&D  and  increasing  the  number  of 
indigenous  and  foreign-owned  companies  performing significant  R&D.       Other  targets  relate  to  the 
number  of  researchers  and  R&D  performance  in  the  higher  education  and  public  sectors.    While 
specific R&D targets can be useful in terms of increasing innovative capacity, two points to remember 
about them are:  
   3/4 
First,  research  targets  measured  in  terms  of  inputs,  such  as  the  amount  of  money  spent  or 
researchers  employed,  do  not  substitute  for  the  effectiveness  of  innovation,  which  would  ideally  be 
measured by some output measure and its positive impact on productivity.  And second, a national 
innovation  policy  must  operate  within  a  strict  cost/benefit  framework,  particularly  since  smaller 
economies lack resources to fund all fields of research at high levels.  
While gross spending on R&D of 2.5 per cent of GNP by 2010 is below the target set for the EU as a 
whole, it is an ambitious target given Ireland’s relatively low starting level.  Nevertheless, the longer-
term target should be to raise R&D expenditure in this country above the European average.   
Apart from providing a stable macroeconomic environment and ensuring high standards of competition 
and an appropriate regulatory regime, the main challenges for Ireland in terms of increasing innovation 
will be: 
• 
To  increase  the  number  of  researchers  in  science,  engineering  and  technology,  both  by 
funding advanced research degrees and making Ireland an attractive location for world-class 
researchers; 
To continue to strengthen co-operation between third-level institutions and high-technology 
firms; 
To  increase  the  availability  of  venture  capital  and  equity  capital  to  high-technology 
enterprises, particularly for SMEs; 
To 
increase 
linkages  between 
suppliers; and 
To ensure by our education and training that the domestic workforce is sufficiently skilled to 
enable the economy to absorb innovation developed elsewhere. 
technologically-intensive  multinationals  and  domestic 
    While these are difficult challenges, they are essential if Ireland is to become one of the leading R&D 
performers  in  the  European  Union.    Increasing  the  amount  of  innovation  carried  out  in  this  country  
means  not  only  encouraging  indigenous  firms  to  increase  their  R&D  activity  but  also  continuing  to 
attract technology-intensive multinational firms, increasing the amount of R&D activity carried out by 
these  multinationals  in  Ireland  and  ensuring  the  diffusion  of  the  technology  embedded  in  foreign 
multinationals through the rest of the economy.   
In  conclusion,  Ireland’s  past  productivity  performance  has  been  quite  good  and  the  productivity 
potential  of  the  Irish  economy  remains  favourable.   What  I have  been  pointing  out  today  are areas 
where we need to do better in light of the recent slowdown in productivity.  For a mature economy like 
Ireland,  innovation  in  relation  to  both  products  and  processes  is  a  key  determinant  of  long-run 
productivity growth and, therefore, living standards.  Much has been done in recent years to increase 
the amount of R&D carried out in this country and improve the innovative capacity of the economy and 
there  is  clearly  scope  for  further  improvements  in  this  regard.    This  will  be  essential  if  Ireland  is  to 
enhance  its  productivity  potential  and  maintain  a  competitive  edge  in  the  changed  global  economic 
environment. 
 
   4/4 
