Ardian Fullani: Basel II, its implications, opportunities and challenges ahead 
for Albania and Southeastern Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Southeastern  European 
Financial Forum, the Second Edition, Bucharest, Romania, 11 November 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentleman, 
The topic to be discussed at this forum is certainly timely. You need not look any further than news 
headlines to understand why risk management matters so much. Several events remind us that when 
banks lack the commitment to manage their risk prudently, they will fail to uphold their responsibilities 
to their shareholders and public at large. Consequently, the cost to society can be high and the impact 
on the economy devastating.   
Sound corporate governance comes about only when there is a genuine commitment to do the right 
thing  and  to  manage  risks  in  whatever  form  they  may  arise.  Risk  managers  must  provide  timely, 
objective  and  accurate  information  to  their  management.  In  turn,  senior  management  and  board  of 
directors  need  to  make  sure  that  there  is  an  atmosphere  of  transparency  within  the  firm,  one  that 
promotes healthy and disciplined risk taking.  
In  order  to  improve  understanding  and  management  of  risk,  the  Basel  Committee  has  been 
formulating  regulatory  approaches  to  foster  a  safe  and  sound  banking  system  and  greater  stability 
within financial sector. It has become clear, though, that the 1988 Accord and many of its amendments 
have become outdated and overtaken by advances in the banking and the financial sector, and other 
economic developments. As a consequence, the Basel Committee has come up with a new proposal 
known as Basel II. This proposal is intended to be more risk sensitive than the 1988 Accord, in order 
to  provide  a  better  alignment  and  calibration  of  regulatory  capital  and  capital  adequacy  with  the 
underlying  economic  risks  that  banks  face.  Categorizing  debtors  into  a  fewer  risk  ‘buckets’  was 
certainly  a  progress  in  1988,  but  it  open  the  gap  between  the  regulatory  risk  measurement  of  any 
given  transaction  and  its  actual  economic  risk.  This  favours  high  risk  loans  over  the  low  risk  ones, 
given  the  100%  risk  weight  charged,  irrespective  of  the  risk  profile  of  firms  receiving  the  loan. 
Consequently, it adversely affects the accuracy of assessing capital requirements and allocation. The 
most concerning side-effect has been the distortion of financial decision-making which is, loans and 
investments made on basis of regulatory constraints rather than genuine economic opportunities.  
The  new  Basle  II  accord  tries  to  improve  on  these  issues  by  encouraging  banks  to  become  more 
sophisticated  in  their  risk  assessment  and  aligning  more  rigorously  regulatory  requirements  with 
internal risk measurement methodologies. It is important to recognize that the application of the New 
Accord  is  principally  intended  for  large  international  banks,  which  are  complex  institutions  usually 
operating in developed countries. Therefore, Basel II has often been questioned about its implications 
and appropriateness for banking in emerging market economies, and it is on this point that I would like 
to focus my remarks.  
In principle, the three-pillar structure of the New Accord provides more precise directions to regulators 
to  strengthen  bank  supervision  and  incentives  to  banks  to  become  more  sophisticated  in  risk 
management. Implementation of Basel II eliminates “one size fits all” methodology to assess risks and 
offers instead a wide range of methods to evaluate risks based more on failure likelihood.  But the 
supervisory authorities in several emerging markets and many developing economies are concerned 
that Basel II puts a challenge they cannot meet. 
Probably our greatest concern relates to the need of the standardized approach to rely on external 
rating agencies for calculating minimum capital requirements. Currently domestic rating agencies are 
totally absent in Albania and not well developed as in many other non-OECD countries. On the other 
hand,  in  most  of  our  economies  many  small  enterprises  cannot  afford  to  be  clients  of  international 
rating agencies. Since borrowers unrated from rating agencies will be assigned a 100% risk according 
to Basel II, initially most domestic credits may end up under this 100% category. This could reduce risk 
sensitivity of the new system brining it close or similar to that of Basel I.  
On the other hand, Albanian banks hold a significant share of government treasury bills and notes. 
Actually,  under  Basel  I  to  this  exposure  of  the  banking  system  denominated  in  local  currency  is 
assigned 0% risk independently whether credit risk of the sovereign debt is rated or not.  Under Basel 
BIS Review 81/2005 
 1
II, standardized approach, it is possible that sovereign debt is assigned a risk weight between 0% to 
150%,  most  likely  100%  since  it  falls  under  unrated  category.  This  means  that  banking  system  in 
Albania  may  have  to  increase  capital  allocation  to  comply  with  the  minimum  level  of  the  capital 
adequacy ratio. 
An important intention of Basel II is to strengthen market discipline by developing a set of information 
disclosure  requirements.  In  our countries  there  is  plenty  of  room  for  improvement  in  this  respect  to 
allow market participants to assess key information on risk exposure, risk assessment process, and 
hence capital adequacy. This is important since it increases public pressure on banks to have a better 
performance in assessing and monitoring risk. However, in short run information disclosure might also 
have some adverse implication, say in Albania. Let me explain myself better on this issue. Public is 
usually more sensitive to  bad news than positive developments. In countries like Albania, reactions 
between good or bad news are even more asymmetric than in mature market economies. Public in 
Albania is particularly over-reactive toward grim news on banking sector or on a certain bank while 
tend to ignore what falls in the positive side. This could be due to both historical factors, e.g. the crisis 
of financial system in 1997, and culture factors e.g. low level of bank business understanding, e.g. the 
overreaction  of  public  to  the  introduction  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Law  in  2002.  This  means  that 
enhanced  information  disclosure  required  by  Basle  II,  could  be  problematic  if  not  supported  by  a 
proper public understanding.  
That’s  why  I  feel  a  bit  concerned  about  the  effectiveness  and  appropriateness  of  an  immediate 
implementation  of  Basle  II.  Therefore  a  more  gradual  approach  may  be  necessary.  This  approach 
could  take  the  form  of  an  interim  standard  between  Basel  I  and  Basel  II  that  could  offer  banks  in 
emerging market economies some of the benefits of Basel II without having to face a prohibitive cost. 
This means that Basel II adoption should not be made mandatory in financial assessments (of WB, 
IMF for example)  and countries should be left with the option to keep Basel I.   
EU banking directives are mandatory for our countries that opt to join EU. As Basel II elements are 
embedded in EU Directives, and as our countries are making progress toward integration in the EU, 
we shall be faced with the challenges of Basle II implementation. I’d like to point out three challenges 
in particular.  
Albania as many other East European Countries host a considerable number of foreign banks. These 
consist mostly of branches or subsidiaries of banks from EU countries which eventually may have to 
implement the new system including its most advanced elements if their head offices decide to adopt it 
throughout the network for consistency and competitiveness reasons. Bearing in mind there is a high 
degree of standardization in the risk management practices of a banking group - which is, same risk 
management  techniques  being  applied  uniformly  throughout  the  group  -  the  host  country  banking 
supervision might choose to rely entirely on the validation conducted by the home country supervision, 
provided that the adequacy of the model fits local conditions. If this is not the case, the host country 
supervision will probably have to rely on its own assessment of Internal Ratings Based (IRB) models. 
However,  the  latter  raises  two  other  sensitive  issues.  First,  the  feasibility  of  IRB  application  is 
complicated by the lack of reliable data on at least a full business cycle. Second, it requires training 
and preparation of banking supervisors with new rules, and thereby to improve their ability to examine 
and evaluate IRB approaches for consistency, integrity and accuracy in order to properly measure risk, 
otherwise,  the  whole  capital  allocation  system  could  become  faulty.  On  the  other  hand,  this  new 
environment  calls  for  better  cooperation  and  coordination  across  countries’  banking  supervision  in 
order to avoid over regulating banks and to save resources. 
The  second  challenge  relates  to  the  need  of  developing  our  own  domestic  rating  industry  for 
assessing borrowers. This is indispensable to gain the potential cost reduction of intermediation out of 
the implementation of the new system. It will make possible for some borrowers to obtain better ratings 
and consequently better risk weights compared to the actual 100% unrated system. However, this is 
not an easy task by any mean. Rating agencies should satisfy several criteria in order to be eligible. 
These  criteria,  as  you  might  already  be  aware  of  comprise  experience,  freedom  from  external 
influence,  publicly  available  assessments,  requirements  to  disclose  assessment  models  and 
approaches, sufficient resources and finally validation or recognition by supervisory authorities in our 
countries. 
Third  but  certainly  not  the  least,  the  new  system  poses  a  challenge  to  all  banks  to  improve  their 
capacities  in  order  to  comply  with  the  new  framework  to  successfully  compete  and  survive.  Banks 
should  start  adopting  a  more  dynamic  and  forward  looking  approach  to  the  evaluation  of  risk  and 
 provisions  since  under  a  risk  sensitive  approach  there  is  always  the  risk  of  pro-cyclicality1,  which 
means bank capital ratios are likely to fluctuate more over the course of business cycles. 
In spite of the above challenges, in Albania we have already started addressing some of these issues. 
First,  by  making  sure  that  we  have  consolidated  the  achievements  of  our  supervisory 
 
function by completing the requirements of Basel I. We are glad that the good progress has 
been confirmed also by the FSAP assessment during their mission in February-March, this 
year.  Certain  recommendations  related  with  requirements  about  consolidated  supervision, 
will be followed very attentively; 
Second,  we have  been pushing  already  our supervisory process  and  the  banks,  toward a 
more risk oriented attitude. At the same time we intend to keep a higher minimum level of 
capital adequacy ratio than the European standards, in order to provide for some cushion for 
other forms of risk like operational risk; 
Third,  we  try  to  gain  as  much  as  possible  out  of  the  experience  and  knowledge  of  other 
countries in the region, which are in a more advanced stage in their efforts of adopting Basel 
II requirements either partly or fully. We have also the privilege of being close to the euro 
area member countries, like Italy and Greece, with their banks playing an important role in 
our  financial  system.  This  gives  us  the  possibility  to  benefit  out  of  expertise  of  the 
supervisory authorities of these countries, in the process of adopting new requirements; 
Fourth, we have expanded our cooperation with other “peer” countries in the region, as the 
variety of problems found in our countries is very similar and the experience sharing in this 
respect, is very practical; 
Fifth, we are trying to promote an environment where issues of Basel II are being discussed 
in  a  professional  level.  We  are  not  focusing  only  on  directly  involved  parties  (including 
government, other supervisory authorities of the financial market) but also on relevant clients 
of the banking and the financial sector.  
   Concluding, I would like to stress that Basel II represents a logical and appropriate successor to Basel 
I. It embeds recent and past lessons and gives excellent directions to financial system and supervision 
authorities how to move ahead. On the other hand, its implementation may be a bit too ambitious and 
a difficult task for our countries. Therefore it is in our interest to find ways to make it more suitable to 
our needs by following a gradual approach rather than jeopardising its success through an uninformed 
adoption. 
                                                      
1   According to Basel II, the assessment of the borrower’s credit risk will depend on the performance of the economy, whether 
it is in a upward or downward trend. In the worst case, when the economy will be wholly swept in recession, banks will have 
automatically either to increase the level of capital, or shift towards less risky assets, that most intuitively calls for a slow 
down to provide loans thus engendering credit crunch and further recession. 
