Philipp Hildebrand: SNB’s performance against the background of financial 
market developments 
Introductory remarks by Dr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 15 December 2005. 
 Developments in the financial markets 
The international financial markets have been dominated in recent months by four key developments. 
Long-term capital market yields have improved; the equity markets have, on the whole, exhibited very 
positive developments; the US dollar has continued the uptrend which set in at the beginning of this 
year; and the gold price has climbed sharply. 
The movements of the past few months in the international capital markets are largely attributable to 
economic developments and US monetary policy. Long-term dollar interest rates climbed significantly 
in the second half of the year thanks to the robust economic climate, the positive outlook in the US and 
the  continued  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  A  rise  in  yields  was  also 
observed  outside  the  US.  The  spread  between  US  and  European  capital  market  rates,  however, 
remained considerable. This is not least reflected in the differing business cycle phases of the US and 
European  economies.  Despite  the  improved  economic  outlook  and  higher  oil  prices,  inflation 
expectations have, on the whole, remained moderate on both sides of the Atlantic. 
The  three  major  economic  areas  –  US,  Japan  and  Europe  –  exhibited  divergent  equity  market 
developments.  While  the  US  equity  market  largely  maintained  its  sideways  trend,  the  European 
indices firmed substantially. Having recovered from its low in early 2003, Japan’s equity market also 
made  a  marked  recovery.  The  increase  in  optimism  with  regard  to  the  economy  and  the  highly 
favourable earnings situation of companies were major contributing factors to the rise in equity prices 
in Europe and Japan. The Swiss equity market – as measured by the SPI – is now trading once again 
at its peak level of September 2000. Looking at the developments since 1995, it becomes apparent 
that the Swiss equity market has strengthened far more significantly than equivalent foreign markets 
(cf. graph 1). 
In  the  forex market,  the  dollar’s  recovery  continued,  with  the greenback  benefiting  from  the  cyclical 
interest rate lead in the US, which has made dollar investments in all maturities rather more attractive. 
A number of market analysts believe that the Homeland Investment Act, which offers tax breaks to US 
corporations if they repatriate their foreign earnings held abroad before the end of this fiscal year, has 
boosted the dollar. Despite the fact that in the second half of the year the US current account deficit 
climbed higher still – to over 6% of GDP – and thus reaching an all-time high, the global imbalances 
did  not  appear  to  destabilise  the  greenback.  On  the  whole,  however,  the  real  exchange  rates  are 
trending very close to their long-term averages (cf. graph 2). 
Against the background of a robust global economy, commodity prices rose yet further, with oil and 
gold being in particularly strong demand. However, if energy resources and gold are excluded from the 
equation, raw material prices in dollar terms are at a similar level to the beginning of 2004. While the 
price of oil receded from its high-water mark in the wake of Hurricane Katrina to back within the region 
of USD 60 a barrel, the gold price is trading at a 24-year high of over USD 500 an ounce. A number of 
factors  have  contributed  to  this  increase  in  price.  The  physical  demand  for  gold  has  intensified 
significantly,  rising  by  about  40%  this  year  alone  in  India,  which  is  the  largest  market.  Increased 
demand  at  the  central  banks  of  emerging  countries  and  in  oil-producing  countries  is  also  being 
reported. Moreover, the currently low real interest rates push down the opportunity costs of interest-
free investments, such as gold. Given, too, that the gold market is largely illiquid, even small shifts in 
demand can trigger serious price effects. In view of the fact that implicit inflation expectations are still 
firmly anchored – according to inflation-protected bonds and surveys – inflation fears can hardly be 
considered to be the main driver behind this gold price increase. 
SNB’s performance 
Taking  into  consideration  the  development  of  the  gold  price,  the  SNB  yielded  an  average  annual 
return  of  just  below  1%  on  its  assets  between  1980  and  2005  (end  of  September).  While  interest-
BIS Review 86/2005 
 1
bearing  assets  posted  a  higher  average  yield  during  this  period,  the  SNB  had  to  settle  for  overall 
losses  in  gold.  The  annual  yield  –  including  the  gold  price  movements  –  fluctuated  very  strongly 
between minus 25% and plus 20%. 
For the assessment of future developments in earnings, these figures are only of limited significance, 
however.  The  level  and  spread  of  our  earnings  are  determined  by  the  balance  sheet  total,  the 
structure of the assets and the achievable financial market yields. Since these measures change over 
time, it is rather difficult to estimate the long-term earnings potential of the SNB. 
At the end of 2004, the National Bank’s assets amounted to CHF 118 billion. After distribution of the 
proceeds  from  the  gold  sales  in  spring  2005,  the  invested  funds  contracted  by  CHF  21  billion. 
Furthermore, higher profit distributions to the Swiss Confederation and the cantons should deplete the 
existing  distribution  reserve  by  2012,  thus  decreasing  our  assets  by  a  further  CHF  10  billion  as 
compared  with  the  end  of  2004.  From  today’s  perspective,  this  leaves  the  SNB  with  assets  in  the 
region of CHF 85 billion. 
At present, the National Bank’s assets comprise 25% Swiss franc investments, 45% foreign exchange 
reserves and 30% gold. Foreign currency investments generate interest and dividend income. Given 
the globally low inflation rates, the nominal interest income is currently substantially lower than in the 
1980s and 1990s. In addition, the valuation of bond and equity portfolios, foreign exchange positions 
and gold holdings at market prices result in valuation gains and losses. Meanwhile, the interest income 
on Swiss franc assets – primarily repos – is marginal. In 95% of cases, the massive fluctuations in our 
income can be attributed to the fluctuating values in gold and foreign exchange positions. Experience 
has shown that valuation gains and losses on financial investments tend to level out again in the long 
term. 
Based on these conditions, we thus estimate the earnings potential of our assets to be between 2% 
and 3%, which translates into an income of between CHF 1.7 and CHF 2.5 billion per annum on the 
total assets of CHF 85 billion. Given the fluctuations in the exchange rate and gold price, however, the 
earnings  generated can  deviate  greatly  from  this  amount.  For  instance,  the  marked  increase  in  the 
gold price this year has resulted in valuation gains of roughly CHF 8 billion to date. Should the gold 
price drop back next year to its end-2003 level, however, this would lead to a valuation loss of over 
CHF 7 billion. Long-term income estimates should not be based on such unusual gains and losses. 
Some of the income is allocated to provisions, thereby ensuring the growth of the currency reserves 
necessary  for  monetary  policy.  This  allocation  (currently  approximately  CHF  1  billion  per  annum) 
should  be  made  in  proportion  to  nominal  GDP  growth.  After  deduction  of  the  SNB’s  operating 
expenses  of  currently  CHF  250  million,  roughly  CHF  1  billion  remains  for  distribution  to  the 
Confederation and cantons. Based on the assumptions regarding the earnings potential of our assets, 
we can expect a distributable annual profit to be somewhere in this region in the foreseeable future. 
Once the existing distribution reserve has been depleted, we will most likely have to reduce our profit 
distributions significantly.  
Cosa initiative 
The  people’s  initiative  “National  Bank  profits  for  the  Old  Age  and  Survivors'  Insurance  Fund 
(AHV/AVS)” – better known as the Cosa initiative – proposes allocating the SNB’s profits which remain 
after  deducting  the  CHF  1  billion  for  the  cantons  to  the  Old  Age  and  Survivors’  Insurance  Fund 
(AHV/AVS). An obligation of this kind would impact on the National Bank’s independence, putting it 
under political pressure to distribute higher profits, which in turn would only be possible were the SNB 
to  expand  the  money  supply,  reduce  the  currency  reserves  or  take  greater  risks.  This  would 
undermine the SNB’s credibility and freedom of action as well as compromise the stability of the Swiss 
franc. The National Bank’s most important task is to conduct monetary policy geared towards price 
stability. In order to do this, we have to be able to take monetary policy decisions – even in difficult 
situations – without political pressure or the obligation to generate a return. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
 3
BIS Review 86/2005 
 