Joseph Yam: The Asian Bond Fund initiative 
Keynote remarks by Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Global 
Bond Summit, Hong Kong, 14-16 November 2005. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very glad to have the opportunity to speak at this Global Bond Summit, all 
the more so because it is being held here in Hong Kong and because development of a deep and 
liquid bond market in Asia is a subject that is very close to my heart. 
2. It has been suggested that I should talk specifically about the Asian Bond Fund (ABF) initiative. I am 
happy to do so not only because ABF is an important initiative for promoting the development of bond 
markets in the region but also because of the active involvement of the HKMA in the past three to four 
years in the project, including chairing the EMEAP Working Group that gave birth to it. But I cannot, of 
course, speak for the eleven central banks and monetary authorities comprising the EMEAP group, 
but only for the HKMA, and so my comments today are those of the HKMA. 
Asian finance 
3. Let me begin at the more macro level and draw your attention to one aspect of Asian finance that 
has always struck me as odd, and this is how financial integration in Asia is lagging behind economic 
integration. With over half of total trade in Asia being intra-regional trade, and with this proportion still 
on  an  increasing  trend,  economies  in  the  region  are  becoming  increasingly  interdependent  among 
themselves, arguably more so than each of them depends on the developed economies in Europe and 
America.  By  comparison,  the  degree  of  financial  integration  in  Asia  is  disproportionately  low.  For 
example, all of the Asian economies have probably lent more individually to the United States than 
they have collectively to other Asian economies. 
4. Whether we like it or not, we now find ourselves in the unenviable position of holding a substantial 
part  of  our  savings  in  the  financial  liabilities  of  an  economy  that  does  not  save,  fearing  that  a 
diversification of a small part of such holdings might lead to a sharp fall in the value of the rest, thus 
shooting ourselves in the foot. We also find ourselves somewhat stuck with recycling a large part of 
our  savings  through  the  developed  markets  back  into  the  region  in  a  much  more  volatile  form, 
occasionally creating havoc in our monetary and financial systems. 
5.  We  find  ourselves  -  we  are  told  -  contributing  to  the  global  imbalance  by  saving  too  much  and 
spending too little, although those that tell us pay little attention to the fact that we do have typhoons 
and heavy rains, earthquakes and tsunamis, and we need to ensure that we are able to help ourselves 
as much as possible in case of need. They also pay little attention to the traumatic experience of the 
Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997-98  and  the  natural  inclination  to  build  up  ammunition,  in  the  form  of 
foreign currency reserves, ever since. After all, most of us are small, in terms of our economies and 
our political influence, and the reality of this world is that, when you are small, you are more likely to be 
tossed around. So we need to be more cautious in our finances. 
6. We find ourselves being held, at least partly, responsible for the dilemma currently surrounding the 
global imbalance, which has been interestingly described as a "stable disequilibrium". The description 
begs  the  questions  as  to  how  long  the  disequilibrium  will  remain  stable  and  whether  the  eventual 
adjustment path to equilibrium is likely to be an unstable one. The answers to these questions remain 
elusive. 
7.  This  obviously  is  not  a  very  comfortable  position  that  we  find  ourselves  in.  One  solution  to  this 
structural problem in Asian finance, at least to us in the HKMA, is greater Asian financial integration to 
promote the stability, integrity, diversity and efficiency of financial intermediation across jurisdictions in 
Asia.  At  the  micro  level,  an  obvious,  non-controversial  initiative  that  Asian  jurisdictions  support, 
although not necessarily for the same macro reasons that I have described, is the development of the 
domestic and the Asian bond markets, hence the EMEAP ABF initiative. 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
Asian Bond Fund 
8. As I mentioned earlier, the HKMA has the honour of chairing the EMEAP Working Group to lead the 
initiative. This began in 2002 and in June of the following year, EMEAP launched ABF1. ABF1 invests 
in a basket of US dollar-denominated bonds issued by sovereign and quasi-sovereign issuers in eight 
EMEAP  markets  -  China,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines,  Singapore  and 
Thailand. It was a small but significant step forward. Think about it for a moment: eleven very different 
economies  of  different  sizes,  with  different  economic  structures  and  stages  of  economic  and  social 
development, co-operating for the first time to set up a bond fund and lay the foundation for promoting 
the development of regional and domestic bond markets in the Asian region. 
9.  The  next,  bigger  step  was  ABF2,  which  extends  the  concept  to  bonds  denominated  in  Asian 
currencies. There are two parts to this: the Pan-Asia Bond Index Fund (PAIF) and eight Single-Market 
Funds.  The  PAIF  is  a  single  bond  fund  investing  in  sovereign  and  quasi-sovereign  local  currency-
denominated  bonds  issued  in  the  eight  EMEAP  markets,  while  the  Single-Market  Funds  invest  in 
similar  bonds  issued  in  the  individual  markets.  So  far,  the  PAIF  and  three  Single-Market  Funds  in 
Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore have been listed. The remaining five Single-Market Funds will 
also be offered to the public within the next couple of months. I am glad to see that the ABF Hong 
Kong Fund has been well received by the market, growing by over 40% since its listing in June this 
year. 
10.  The  ABF2  project  has  been  a  good  example  of  co-operation  between  the  public  and  private 
sectors.  While  this  is  an  official  initiative  with  seed  money  of  US$2  billion  provided  by  the  EMEAP 
central banks, we relied on the private sector for product design, implementation and marketing. The 
nine  fund  managers  and  the  global  custodian  for  the  nine  funds  were  selected  based  on  a  very 
competitive  process.  After  all,  the  private  sector  is  much  better  at  making  these  products  market-
oriented than central bankers. 
11. The ABF initiative has also been successful in a wider sense in a number of ways. First, it has 
helped  to  promote  product  innovation.  ABF2  Funds  by  themselves  represent  a  new  class  of  bond 
products,  which  has  helped  to  raise  the  awareness  of  Asian  bonds  among  investors.  Some  ABF2 
Funds take the form of a bond Exchange-traded Fund (ETF), which is the first of its kind in Asia. They 
are a convenient and cost effective way for regional and international investors to gain exposure to 
Asian bonds. With their low costs and low entry thresholds, the funds also facilitate retail participation 
in bond markets. ABF2 has also led to similar products and derivatives coming into the market. We 
notice  that  some  banks  have  come  up  with  their  own  Asian  bond  funds,  a  welcome  development, 
while an investment bank has issued a structured note using PAIF units as the underlying asset. 
12. Second, ABF2 has led to improvements in financial market infrastructure. The iBoxx ABF Indices, 
the  benchmark  indices  for  the  ABF2  Funds,  are  transparent  and  credible  and  compiled  by  an 
independent index provider. They can be easily replicated and customised by the private sector for 
other fixed-income products and derivatives and represent an important piece of market infrastructure 
for Asia. Moreover, since bond ETFs are a new product in Asia, in a number of cases, the linkage 
between  the  clearing  and  settlement  systems  for  debt  securities  and  that  for  equities  have  to  be 
improved in order to allow the listing and trading of a bond ETF on the stock exchange. 
13. Third, the ABF initiative has been a catalyst for regulatory and tax reforms in EMEAP markets, 
helping to remove market impediments and facilitate financial integration in the region. For example, 
the  PAIF  is  the  first  foreign  institutional  investor  to  be  granted  access  to  China's  interbank  bond 
market.  Securities  regulators  in  Malaysia  and  Thailand  have  recently  issued  new  rules  to  facilitate 
listing  of  ABF2  funds  as  bond  ETFs.  Malaysia  and  Thailand  have  exempted  non-resident  investors 
from  withholding-tax,  and  Malaysia  has  liberalised  its  foreign  exchange  administration  rules.  Both 
Malaysia and Thailand opened their domestic bond market to bonds issued by multilateral financial 
institutions such as the World Bank. 
14. Fourth, the ABF initiative has helped to standardise and harmonise documentation for this type of 
exercise. The trust deed and prospectus of the PAIF, which comply with laws and regulations of Hong 
Kong and Singapore and are in line with international standards, served as a model for the drafting of 
fund  documents  for  the  ABF2  Single-Market  Funds.  This  has  helped  to  promote  the  adoption  of 
international best practices among EMEAP economies. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
ABF and financial stability 
15. Let me turn to the other question that I have been asked specifically to address, and this is how 
the ABF initiative can contribute to financial stability in the region. I must confess that, even though the 
central banks in the region have been enthusiastic in the development of the project, the benefits of 
ABF  to  financial  stability  in  the  region  have  not  been  clearly  articulated  in  our  deliberations.  I  can 
assure  you,  however,  that  this  is  not  a  reflection  of  any  lack  of  brains  on  the  part  of  Asian  central 
bankers or because the objectives have not been clearly defined, although there may be a lack of a 
clear road map. But it should be all right, as Deng Xiaoping pointed out, to cross the river by feeling 
the stones. The lack of a clear linkage between ABF or indeed debt market development generally 
and financial stability is more a reflection of the difficulty of defining what financial stability is. 
16.  Indeed,  the  question  has  been  receiving  increasing  attention  in  the  international  financial 
community, and attempts are being made on both the academic front and among those with policy 
responsibility  to  model  financial  stability  and  integrate  it  with  the  more  traditional  macroeconomic 
analysis, in both the domestic and international dimensions. I await with keen interest the emergence 
of an authoritative analytical framework of general application. Meanwhile, I share the views of some 
that financial stability can be negatively defined as the lack of financial instability, given that it is easier 
to define what the latter is. In my opinion, when the financial system fails to function properly, in terms 
of  mobilising  savings  to  finance  economic  activities  -  the  all-important  process  of  financial 
intermediation  that  promotes  economic  growth  and  development  -  then  there  is  financial  instability. 
When, as a result of a shock to the financial system, money is suddenly not available even for the 
creditworthy fund raisers no matter how high a price they are prepared to pay, then financial stability is 
not achieved. Alternatively, when, because of a breakdown of confidence for one reason or another, 
those with surplus money are simply not willing to trust the financial system with it, by placing it with 
banks or investing in financial instruments, then financial stability is not achieved. 
17. With this somewhat inadequate analytical framework in mind, then it is clear, at least to me, that 
ABF,  by  increasing  the  diversity  of  financial  intermediation  channels,  reduces  the  probability  of 
disruption  in  the  all-important  process  of  financial  intermediation  and  the  occurrence  of  financial 
instability, thus contributing to financial stability. 
18. There is another dimension of financial stability that we have considered in our deliberations on 
ABF. Although the empirical evidence is probably difficult to establish, given the increasing degree of 
intra-regional dependence in Asia, we feel that regional savings are probably less volatile than savings 
from  the  developed  markets.  This  is  partly  also  because  the  management  of  savings  from  the 
developed  economies  is  more  sophisticated  than  that  of  regional  savings,  with  a  much  greater 
involvement of financial institutions, including hedge funds, which are a lot more nimble and probably 
also have a different perception of risks in the region. By contrast, those mobilising regional savings 
within  the  region  probably  have  a  better  understanding  of  regional  issues,  although  we  should  not 
expect them always to take account of the wider public interest in their purely commercial activity of 
fund management. Thus if ABF acts as a catalyst for a greater proportion of regional savings being 
recycled within the region, instead of through the developed markets of Europe and America, there is 
likely to be some benefit to financial stability. 
What next in ABF 
19. Let me turn to the question of "what next" in the ABF initiative. I am acutely aware of the fact that 
the HKMA is only one of eleven central banks and monetary authorities in the EMEAP group and that 
the ABF project is an EMEAP project, and not an HKMA project. As I said earlier, I cannot speak for 
EMEAP, although ABF1 and ABF2 were developed while the HKMA had the honour of chairing the 
relevant  Working  Group.  Indeed,  we  are  scheduled  to  hand  over  chairmanship  in  May  next  year, 
having exceptionally provided the chair for two consecutive two-year terms. But allow me to tell you, 
nevertheless, what we in the HKMA think could be possible directions to be explored. 
20. There are two such directions, which hopefully could lead to an ABF3. First is to enlarge the scope 
of credit acceptable to the central banks as investors, but address the problem of inadequate credit 
quality through credit enhancement or guarantee arrangements. Second is the securitisation of bank 
assets.  Both  are  familiar  concepts  to  the  financial  markets,  and  so  there  is  no  need  for  me  to 
elaborate, other than to say perhaps that we favour simple products that can be readily understood not 
just by simple-minded central bankers but also by the not-so-sophisticated investors in the region. We 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
support the EMEAP and other regional fora to further look into these ideas. And we look to the private 
sector to participate fully in this continuing effort. 
21. Let me close by going back to financial stability and say that the ABF initiative, whether it gets to 
ABF3 or ABF4 or ABFN, is not the full answer to financial stability in the region. Asia is particularly 
vulnerable to financial instability because of, principally, the size of the individual, fragmented markets, 
relative  to  international  capital,  and  the  openness  of  those  markets,  assuming  that  prudent 
macroeconomic policies are a pre-requisite that is always observed. To reduce vulnerability from those 
sources, without stepping back from maintaining open markets, we need greater financial integration 
or co-operation, and perhaps one day monetary integration. But these subjects should best be left for 
another day. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2005
