David Dodge: Improving Canada’s productivity 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Council for Public 
Private Partnerships, Toronto, 28 November 2005. 
 intangible 
inputs—such  as 
Investing in productivity 
Today I want to discuss the importance of efficiency in Canada's economy. Specifically, I'll focus on 
some of the elements that contribute to productivity growth in Canada—a subject that I've addressed 
before and that you've been hearing a lot about lately. 
Let me start by explaining what we mean when we talk about productivity. Measures of productivity tell 
us how much output we produce from the use of tangible inputs—such as skilled workers and capital 
equipment—and 
technological  advances  and  managerial  and 
entrepreneurial know-how. Productivity rises over time as we boost output by finding new and more 
efficient ways to use these inputs. 
When measuring productivity, economists often prefer to use a measure called total factor productivity, 
which includes all these inputs—capital, labour, innovation, and know-how. In practice, however, it is 
very  difficult  to  measure  total  factor  productivity.  That's  why  analysts  usually  focus  on  the  more 
commonly used and better-understood measure, labour productivity. This measure tells us how much 
output is produced per worker or per hour worked. Labour productivity has the added advantage of 
being  closer  to  measures  of  standards  of  living  and  more  directly  comparable  across  countries.  Of 
course,  labour  productivity  is  affected  by  experience  and  education,  by  the  amount  of  capital 
equipment  (notably  machinery  and  equipment)  that  is  available  to  workers,  and  by  innovation  and 
know-how.  
We  care  about  productivity  because  it  is  critical  to  our  national  standard  of  living.  There  are  other 
factors  that  affect  our  living  standards—changes  in  our  terms  of  trade  and  in  employment-to-
population  ratios,  for  instance—but  productivity  growth  is  the  main  contributor  to  sustained 
improvements in real incomes and rising standards of living over the long term. But productivity growth 
in Canada, measured as real gross domestic product per hour worked, has averaged less than 1 per 
cent per year so far in this century. Frankly, we must do better.  
The components of productivity 
But what does "doing better" actually mean? First, it means increasing the amount and the quality of 
physical  capital  per  worker—giving  employees  better  tools  to  work  with.  It  also  means  allocating 
resources more efficiently and being more innovative. In my remarks today, I'm going to focus on the 
two latter elements—efficient allocation and innovation.  
I'll start with efficient allocation. At any point in time, we allocate resources among competing uses, 
always trying to use the resources we have as efficiently as possible. The goal is to move to the point 
where, given current production practices and knowledge, we are getting the absolute most out of the 
labour and capital resources at our disposal.  
The second element of productivity is innovation. This means generating new knowledge, improving 
technology, and enhancing both the processes and the organization of production. To take advantage 
of innovation, we also need to upgrade the skills of our labour force and, in some cases, change our 
business  and  managerial  practices.  Innovation  and  skills  enhancement,  when  combined,  lead  to 
continuing growth of output per unit of input.  
For  long-term  improvements  in  productivity,  we  need  both  innovation  and  more  efficient  allocation. 
And so enterprises, sectors, and governments must follow the practices and policies that not only will 
allocate resources more efficiently, but also provide the framework to encourage innovation.  
   1/4 
Productivity through innovation 
When  we  talk  about  encouraging  innovation,  we're  talking  about  two  things.  First,  there  are  the 
incentives  to  encourage  product  innovations.  These  include  the  encouragement  of  research  and 
development (R&D) that generate the "eureka!" kind of knowledge creation that's done at universities, 
research  institutes,  and  knowledge-intensive  companies.  But  just  as  important,  although  sometimes 
overlooked, are the research and development that lead to incremental improvements in the design 
and performance of existing products.  
This  kind  of  innovation  requires  investment.  In  Canada,  we  make  quite  large  public  investments  in 
research  through  our  public  institutions.  Research  spending  by  Canadian  companies  and  private 
sector institutions, on the other hand, tends to lag that of other countries.  
But dollar amounts don't tell the whole story. Research success depends not only on the amount that 
you  invest,  but  also  on  how  efficiently  you  invest  it.  That's  why  it  is  hard  to  judge  the  innovative 
capacity of an economy or an enterprise by the raw dollars that it spends on R&D. The fact that the 
R&D budget of Apple Computer has lagged behind the computer industry average would come as a 
surprise to anyone who has a new iPod on his or her Christmas list. Others are probably in a better 
position than me to offer advice on ways to get more bang for your research buck, but this will be an 
important part of future discussions on productivity.  
The second type of incentive to encourage innovation relates to improving the processes used by an 
organization. For example, how can an organization use new technology to restructure its business 
and  managerial  practices?  And  what  incentives  drive  that  restructuring?  Well,  the  most  obvious 
incentives  are  the  need  to  maintain  a  competitive  edge,  the  desire  for  profit,  and  the  fear  of  going 
bankrupt.  That  is  why  economies  that  have  intense  competition  in  domestic  markets—from  both 
domestic  and  foreign  firms—are  the  most  innovative.  Indeed,  competition  encourages  both  product 
and process innovation.  
But innovation means taking risks. Enterprises must also be given the incentives to take those risks. 
And  they  should  be  rewarded  by  the  market  when  they  do  so.  Among  other  things,  this  requires  a 
financial system that appropriately prices the risks and potential returns being taken on by investors.  
Finally, we know that innovation is not a government-driven process: It occurs on the shop floor, in the 
start-up's  laboratory,  and  in  the  minds  of  entrepreneurs.  In  our  businesses  and  public  sector 
institutions,  we  need  to  develop  a  culture  that  encourages  both  the  "eureka!"  moments  and  the 
incremental improvements that come from the incentive to stay just one step ahead of the competition.  
Productivity through efficient allocation  
Let me now talk about improving productivity through more efficient allocation of resources. Some of 
the policies that promote better resource allocation are the same ones that encourage innovation. Let 
me mention four elements that are critical.  
First,  we  need  an  appropriate  legal  framework  of  property  rights,  including  intellectual  property  and 
contract  law.  This  framework  must  also  include  suitable  penalties  for  those  who  break  these  laws, 
breach the public trust, or commit fraud. 
Second,  labour  markets  must  operate  efficiently,  encouraging  the  flow  of  resources  from  less-
productive  to  more-productive  uses,  and  from  shrinking  sectors  to  growing  ones.  This  flexibility  is 
encouraged  through  appropriate  labour  market  policies,  education,  and  training.  I  won't  say  more 
about  this—recent  research by  the  International Monetary Fund  and  the Organisation  for Economic 
Co-operation and Development explores this issue thoroughly.  
The  third  critical  element  is  a  financial  system  that  operates  efficiently,  helping  to  allocate  scarce 
economic resources to the most productive uses, in the most effective way. In previous speeches, I 
spoke about the importance of a well-functioning financial system and about the need to support the 
efficiency  of  our  financial  institutions.  I  also  spoke  about  the  need  to  promote  efficiency  in  the 
regulation of securities markets and about the role that Canada's pension system can play.  
   2/4 
Building the right infrastructure 
The fourth key element is the construction and operation of the physical infrastructure that we need for 
economic growth and development. I will focus the remainder of my remarks on this area. This critical 
infrastructure  includes  public  assets,  such  as  highways,  public  transit  and  transportation  facilities, 
power,  waterworks  and  waste  water,  schools,  hospitals,  and  other  facilities.  It  also  includes  private 
infrastructure, such as pipelines, rail, and telecommunications networks.  
To  illustrate  why  infrastructure  is  an  important  means  of  encouraging  more  efficient  resource 
allocation, let me offer a few examples. Canada is envied around the world for its wealth of natural 
resources.  But  getting  these  natural  resources  to  market  has  always  relied  on  railways,  pipelines, 
ports, and other transportation infrastructure. Similarly, Canada's world-renowned telecommunications 
sector has grown out of huge investments in this country's land-based and satellite infrastructure.  
The clusters of industrial, manufacturing, and technology companies located in our major centres are 
there  because  our  cities  function  well,  with  quality  water,  sewer,  transportation,  and  municipal  and 
social services. These companies employ Canadians who were educated and trained by our public 
schools, colleges, and universities. And these companies are funded by individuals who are willing to 
invest their savings through a financial system that they trust.  
Clearly, infrastructure plays a key role in creating an efficient, productive economy. But today, there 
are clear signs of a public infrastructure deficit in Canada. And there is a growing concern that this 
deficit could harm Canada's productivity growth and standard of living, unless we take steps to correct 
it. 
Estimates of the magnitude of this deficit vary considerably.1 But it is generally acknowledged that the 
gap will not be reduced solely through government financing. No single means of development always 
creates the right infrastructure, so it will take a number of different solutions. Through our history, we 
have used various methods.  
We have seen private infrastructure development, encouraged by governments through land grants, 
monopoly  rights,  subsidies,  and  so  on.  In  these  examples,  the  private  sector  takes  on  the  risk  of 
financing the infrastructure, with the promise of profits down the road. Perhaps the most well known 
example of this type of infrastructure development is the Canadian Pacific Railway.  
We have also seen purely public infrastructure building, in which the government or its agencies build 
and operate the infrastructure. An obvious example is Canada's network of highways and roads.  
Some infrastructure has been built and operated entirely by private companies, under the umbrella of 
a  legal  framework  that  helps  to  protect  their  investment  and  of  a  regulatory  structure  that  helps  to 
protect the consumer. Cable television is an example of this type. 
Finally, there are public-private partnerships (PPPs). These take different forms. Many employ a mix of 
public and private funding, with the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure performed by a 
private  enterprise  on  behalf  of  the  government.  The  most  familiar  example  of  a  PPP  is  the 
Confederation Bridge between New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island. But there are still relatively 
few existing PPPs in Canada. Other countries, such as the United Kingdom and Australia, offer many 
examples of successful PPP infrastructure. Unlike most jurisdictions in Canada, these other countries 
already have a well-developed legal and regulatory framework for PPP investments.  
Each of these methods has advantages, but also problems. In the final analysis, it is all a question of 
incentives. For example, when infrastructure projects are solely publicly funded, the usual incentives 
to build and operate efficiently—the incentives to avoid bankruptcy and to make a profit—are not the 
driving motive behind the investment.  
The most efficient and timely allocation of resources for infrastructure occurs when the incentives are 
right.  And  that  framework  of  incentives  usually  includes  some  expectation  of  profit.  This  applies 
                                                      
1  
This  is  partly  due  to  varying  definitions  of  infrastructure  and  the  high  level  of  subjectivity  involved  in 
assessing  "need."  The  Government  of  Ontario,  for  example,  estimates  that  the  cost  of  correcting  past 
underinvestment and of building the public facilities that the province needs to accommodate future growth 
may exceed $100 billion.  
   3/4 
equally to decisions on what to build and to decisions regarding how to operate the infrastructure once 
it is in place.  
The hardest incentive to get right is that of proper pricing. A lack of pricing that appropriately reflects 
demand  and  supply  conditions  may  be  one  reason  why  there  have  been  relatively  few  PPP 
infrastructure  projects  in  Canada.  It  is  particularly  important  to  improve  pricing  mechanisms  for 
services  that  are  provided  through  public  infrastructure.  Governments  have  often  been  unwilling  to 
price-to-market infrastructure-based services. As a result, shortages are managed through non-price 
rationing,  such  as  rolling  electricity  blackouts,  highway  congestion,  or  waiting  lists  for  government 
documents or services. And occasionally, we get the opposite problem—an over-build of infrastructure 
that cannot be justified by demand. New technologies, such as transponders on vehicles to monitor 
road use, and meters that allow peak-hour pricing of electricity, provide new opportunities to gauge 
demand for these services, and to price them accordingly.  
Another key incentive with respect to infrastructure investment is the incentive to manage risk. Private 
financing of infrastructure through the markets tends to lead to better assessment of the risks of the 
investment, because financial markets are better able to measure and price risk. This is not to say that 
we  should  expect  the  private  sector  to  shoulder  all  the  inherent  risks  of  major  infrastructure 
investments  without  any  public  sharing  of  those  risks.  But  financing  through  markets  provides  a 
mechanism by which we can better assess the economic merits of an investment.  
The infrastructure investment climate 
These are some of the complex issues facing us as we try to eliminate Canada's infrastructure deficit. 
The timing is right to make these investments. During the early 1990s, governments had to deal with 
large fiscal deficits and they simply did not have the cash to invest in building infrastructure. That is not 
the case today. Further, over the next couple of decades as our population ages, more Canadians will 
be saving for their retirement. This added saving will boost an already growing demand for long-term 
financial assets.  
Pension  and  endowment  funds  are  now  allocating  an  increasing  share  of  their  portfolio  assets  to 
infrastructure investments, in an attempt to increase returns and better manage risk through portfolio 
diversification. These funds are increasingly looking for longer-term assets that provide a better match 
to their liabilities. So far, much of this investment has gone to projects in other countries. This is partly 
because the domestic markets for PPP in these other countries are more developed than ours.  
In  Canada,  we  currently  see  three  conditions  that  present  us  with  a  vital  opportunity.  We  have 
governments  that  are  committed  to  investing  in  infrastructure,  a  private  market  with  an  appetite  for 
longer-term financial assets, and a pent-up need for those investments in Canada. If we get this right, 
we  can  enhance  Canada's  productivity  in  two  ways.  First,  the  improved  infrastructure  can  help  to 
boost  the  productive  capacity  of  the  private  sector  and  help  to  achieve  more  efficient  resource 
allocation.  Second,  better  infrastructure  is  a  key  component  in  attracting  the  companies  and  the 
people who spearhead continuous innovation.  
Conclusion 
The Bank of Canada's mandate is to promote the economic and financial well-being of this country. 
We know that an efficient and innovative economy is critical if we are to achieve sustainable growth 
and prosperity for Canadians. 
That is why, in past speeches, I have focused on the need to have efficient financial institutions and 
markets.  The  right  infrastructure  is  also  key  to  promoting  efficiency.  And  PPP  is  a  practical  way  to 
match  the  demand  of  savers  for  long-term  assets  with  the  economy's  need  to  build  critical 
infrastructure. It is also a way to  promote the efficient operation of that infrastructure. That is why I 
have chosen to focus on this issue today.  
I know that over the course of this conference, we'll hear some innovative ideas on how to achieve 
these  goals.  Your  deliberations  are  important.  The  right  infrastructure  can  support  and  encourage 
initiatives to increase productivity. Finding innovative and reliable ways to fund this country's current 
and future infrastructure requirements is a key element of any effort to improve Canada's productivity 
and raise living standards for Canadians.  
 
   4/4 
